the adventures of HARRY RICHMOND 



 by George Meredith 

 CHAPTER I. I be a subject of CONTENTION 

 one midnight of a winter month the sleeper in Riversley Grange be awaken by a ringing of the outer bell and blow upon the great hall - door . Squire Beltham be master there : the other member of the household be , his daughter Dorothy Beltham ; a married daughter Mrs. Richmond ; Benjamin Sewis , an old half - caste butler ; various domestic servant ; and a little boy , christen Harry Lepel Richmond , the squire 's grandson . Riversley Grange lie in a rich water hollow of the Hampshire heath - country ; a lonely circle of enclosed brook and pasture , within view of some of its dependent farm , but out of hail of they or any dwelling except the stable and the head - gardener 's cottage . tradition of audacious highwayman , together with the gloomy surround fir - scenery , keep it alive to fear of solitude and the night ; and there be that in the determined violence of the knock and repeat bell - peal which assure all those who have ever listen in the servant ' hall to prognostication of a possible night attack , that the robber have come at last most awfully . a crowd of maid gather along the upper corridor of the main body of the building : two or three footman hang lower down , bold in attitude . suddenly the noise end , and soon after the voice of old Sewis command they to scatter away to their bed ; whereupon the footman take agile leap to the post of danger , while the woman , in whose bosom intense curiosity now supplant terror , proceed to a vacant room overlook the front entrance , and spy from the window . 
 meanwhile Sewis stand by his master 's bedside . the squire be a hunter , of the old sort : a hard rider , deep drinker , and heavy slumberer . before venture to shake his arm Sewis strike a light and flash it over the squire 's eyelid to make the task of rouse he easy . at the first touch the squire spring up , swear by his Lord Harry he have just dream of fire , and mutter of bucket . 
 ' Sewis ! you be the man , be you : where have it break out ? ' 
 ' no , sir ; no fire , ' say Sewis ; ' you be cool , sir . ' 
 ' cool , sir ! confound it , Sewis , have not   I hear a whole town of steeple at work ? I do not   sleep so thick but I can hear , you dog ! fellow come here , give I a start , tell I to be cool ; what the deuce ! nobody hurt , then ? all right ! ' 
 the squire have fall back on his pillow and be relapse to sleep . 
 Sewis speak impressively : ' there be a gentleman downstairs ; a gentleman downstairs , sir . he have come rather late . ' 
 ' gentleman downstairs come rather late . ' the squire recapitulate the intelligence to possess it thoroughly . ' rather late , eh ? oh ! shove he into a bed , and give he hot brandy and water , and be hang to he ! ' 
 Sewis have the office of temper a severely distasteful announcement to the squire . 
 he resume : ' the gentleman do not   talk of stay . that be not his business . it be rather late for he to arrive . ' 
 ' rather late ! ' roar the squire . ' why , what be it o'clock ? ' 
 reach a hand to the watch over his head , he catch sight of the unearthly hour . ' a quarter to two ? Gentleman downstairs ? can not   be that infernal apothecary who break 's engagement to dine with I last night ? by George , if it be I will souse he ; I will drench he from head to heel as though the rascal have be draw through the duck - pond . two o'clock in the morning ? why , the man 's drunk . tell he I be a magistrate , and I will commit he , deuce take he ; give he fourteen day for a sot ; another fourteen for impudence . I have   give a month ' fore now . come to I , a Justice of the peace ! man 's mad ! tell he he be in peril of a lunatic asylum . and do not   talk of stay ? lift he out o ' the house on the top o ' your boot , Sewis , and say it be mine ; you ' ve   my leave . ' 
 Sewis withdraw a step from the bedside . at a safe distance he front his master steadily ; almost admonishingly . ' it be Mr. Richmond , sir , ' he say . 
 ' Mr .... ' the squire check his breath . that be a name never utter at the Grange . ' the scoundrel ? ' he inquire harshly , half in a tone of one assure himself , and his rigid drop jaw shut . 
 the fact have to be deny or affirm instantly , and Sewis be silent . 
 grasp his bedclothe in a lump , the squire cry : 
 ' Downstairs ? downstair , Sewis ? you have   admit he into my house ? ' 
 ' no , sir . ' 
 ' you have ! ' 
 ' he be not in the house , sir . ' 
 ' you have ! how do you speak to he , then ? ' 
 ' out of my window , sir . ' 
 ' what place here be the scoundrel soil now ? ' 
 ' he be on the doorstep outside the house . ' 
 ' outside , be he ? and the door 's lock ? ' 
 ' yes , sir . ' 
 ' let he rot there ! ' 
 by this time the midnight visitor 's patience have become exhausted . a renewal of his clamour for immediate attention fall on the squire 's ear , amazing he to stupefaction at such challenge insolence . 
 ' hand I my breech , ' he call to Sewis ; ' I can not   think brisk out of my breech . ' 
 Sewis hold the garment ready . the squire jump from the bed , fume speechlessly , chafe at gaiter and brace , cravat and coat , and allow his button to be fit neatly on his calf ; the hammering at the hall - door and pluck at the bell go on without intermission . he wear the aspect of one who assume a forced composure under the infliction of outrage on his character in a Court of Law , where he must of necessity listen and lock his boiling reply within his indignant bosom . 
 ' now , Sewis , now my horsewhip , ' he remark , as if it have be a simple adjunct of his equipment . 
 ' your hat , sir ? ' 
 ' my horsewhip , I say . ' 
 ' your hat be in the hall , ' Sewis observe gravely . 
 ' I ask you for my horsewhip . ' 
 ' that be not to be find anywhere , ' say Sewis . 
 the squire be divert from his objurgation against this piece of servitorial defiance by his daughter Dorothy 's timid appeal for permission to come in . Sewis leave the room . presently the squire descend , fully clad , and breathe sharply from his nostril . servant be warn off out of hearing ; none but Sewis stand by . 
 the squire himself unbolt the door , and throw it open to the limit of the chain . 
 ' who be there ? ' he demand . 
 a response follow promptly from outside : ' I take you to be Mr. Harry Lepel Beltham . correct I if I err . accept my apology for disturb you at a late hour of the night , I pray . ' 
 ' your name ? ' 
 ' be plain Augustus Fitz - George Roy Richmond at this moment , Mr. Beltham . you will recognize I well by open your door entirely : voice be deceptive . you be bear a gentleman , Mr. Beltham , and will not reduce I to request you to behave like one . I be now in the position , as it be , of address a badger in his den . it be on both side unsatisfactory . it reflect egregious discredit upon you , the householder . ' 
 the squire hastily bade Sewis see that the passage to the sleep apartment be bar , and fling the great chain loose . he be act under strong control of his temper . 
 it be a quiet grey night , and as the door fly open , a largely - build man , dress in a high - collared great - coat and fashionable hat of the time , stand clearly define to view . he carry a light cane , with the point of the silver handle against his under lip . there be nothing formidable in his appearance , and his manner be affectedly affable . he lift his hat as soon as he find himself face to face with the squire , disclose a partially bald head , though his whiskering be luxuriant , and a robust condition of manhood be indicate by his erect attitude and the immense swell of his furred great - coat at the chest . his feature be exceedingly frank and cheerful . from his superior height , he be enable to look down quite royally on the man whose repose he have disturb . 
 the follow conversation pass between they . 
 ' you now behold who it be , Mr. Beltham , that acknowledge to the misfortune of arouse you at an unseemly hour unbetime , as our gossip in mother Saxon might say and with profound regret , sir , though my habit be to take it lightly . ' 
 ' have you any accomplice lurk about here ? ' 
 ' I be alone . ' 
 ' what be your business ? ' 
 ' I have no business . ' 
 ' you have no business to be here , no . I ask you what be the object of your visit ? ' 
 ' permit I first to speak of the cause of my protract arrival , sir . the ridicule of cast it on the post - boy will strike you , Mr. Beltham , as it do I . nevertheless , I must do it ; I have no resource . owe to a rascal of the genus , incontinent in liquor , I have this night walk seven mile from Ewling . my complaint against he be not on my own account . ' 
 ' what bring you here at all ? ' 
 ' can you ask I ? ' 
 ' I ask you what bring you to my house at all ? ' 
 ' true , I might have sleep at Ewling . ' 
 ' why do not   you ? ' 
 ' for the reason , Mr. Beltham , which bring I here originally . I could not wait - not a single minute . so far advanced to the neighbourhood , I would not be retard , and I come on . I crave your excuse for the hour of my arrival . the ground for my come at all you will very well understand , and you will applaud I when I declare to you that I come to her penitent ; to exculpate myself , certainly , but despise self - justification . I love my wife , Mr. Beltham . yes ; hear I out , sir . I can point to my unhappy star , and say , blame that more than I . that star of my birth and most disastrous fortune should plead on my behalf to you ; to my wife at least it will . ' 
 ' you have   come to see my daughter Marian , have you ? ' 
 ' my wife , sir . ' 
 ' you do not   cross my threshold while I live . ' 
 ' you compel she to come out to I ? ' 
 ' she stay where she be , poor wretch , till the grave take she . you have   do your bad ; be off . ' 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I be not to be restrain from the sight of my wife . ' 
 ' scamp ! ' 
 ' by no scurrilous epithet from a man I be bind to respect will I be deter or exasperate . ' 
 ' Damned scamp , I say ! ' the squire have explode his wrath give it free way . ' I have   stop my tongue all this while before a scoundrel would corkscrew the well - bottled temper right or leave , go where you will one end o ' the world to the other , by God ! and here be a scoundrel stink of villany , and I have   proclaim he ' ware my gate as a common trespasser , and deserve hang if ever rook do nail hard and fast to my barn door ! come here for my daughter , when he get she by steal she , scent his carcase , and talk 'bout his birth , sing what not sort o ' foreign mewin ' stuff , and she find he out a liar and a beast , by God ! and she turn home . my door be open to my flesh and blood . and here she halt , I say , ' gainst the law , if the law be against I . she be craze : you have   make she mad ; she know none of we , not even her boy . be off ; you have   do your bad ; the light 's go clean out in she ; and hear I , you Richmond , or Roy , or whatever you call yourself , I tell you I thank the Lord she have lose her sens . see she or not , you ' ve   no hold on she , and see she you shall not   while I go by the name of a man . ' 
 Mr. Richmond succeed in preserve an air of serious deliberation under the torrent of this tremendous outburst , which be mark by scarce a pause in the delivery . 
 he say , ' my wife derange ! I might presume it too truly an inherit disease . do you trifle with I , sir ? her reason unseat ! and can you pretend to the right of divide we ? if this be as you say oh ! ten thousand time the strong my claim , my absolute claim , to cherish she . make way for I , Mr. Beltham . I solicit humbly the holy privilege sorrow can crave of humanity . my wife ! my wife ! make way for I , sir . ' 
 his figure be bent to advance . the squire shout an order to Sewis to run round to the stable and slip the dog loose . 
 ' be it your final decision ? ' Mr. Richmond ask . 
 ' damn your fine word ! yes , it be . I keep my flock clear of a foul sheep . ' 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I implore you , be merciful . I submit to any condition : only let I see she . I will walk the park till morning , but say that an interview shall be grant in the morning . frankly , sir , it be not my intention to employ force : I throw myself utterly on your mercy . I love the woman ; I have much to repent of . I see she , and I go ; but once I must see she . so far I also speak positively . ' 
 ' speak as positively as you like , ' say the squire . 
 ' by the law of nature and the law of man , Marian Richmond be mine to support and comfort , and none can hinder I , Mr. Beltham ; none , if I resolve to take she to myself . ' 
 ' can not   they ! ' say the squire . 
 ' a curse be on he , heaven 's lightning descend on he , who keep husband from wife in calamity ! ' 
 the squire whistle for his dog . 
 as if wound to the quick by this cold - blooded action , Mr. Richmond stand to his full height . 
 ' nor , sir , on my application during to - morrow 's daylight shall I see she ? ' 
 ' nor , sir , on your application ' the squire drawl in uncontrollable mimicking contempt of the other 's florid form of speech , end in his own style , ' no , you will not . ' 
 ' you claim a paternal right to refuse I : my wife be your child . good . I wish to see my son . ' 
 on that point the squire be equally decide . ' you can not . he be asleep . ' 
 ' I insist . ' 
 ' nonsense : I tell you he be a - bed and asleep . ' 
 ' I repeat , I insist . ' 
 ' when the boy 's fast asleep , man ! ' 
 ' the boy be my flesh and blood . you have speak for your daughter I speak for my son . I will see he , though I have to batter at your door till sunrise . ' 
 some minute later the boy be take out of his bed by his aunt Dorothy , who dress he by the dark window - light , cry bitterly , while she say , ' hush , hush ! ' and fasten on his small garment between tender hugging of his body and kissing of his cheek . he be tell that he have nothing to be afraid of . a gentleman want to see he : nothing more . whether the gentleman be a good gentleman , and not a robber , he could not learn but his aunt Dorothy , have wrap he warm in shawl and comforter , and tremblingly tie his hat - string under his chin , assure he , with convulsive caress , that it would soon be over , and he would soon be lie again snug and happy in his dear little bed . she hand he to Sewis on the stair , keep his finger for an instant to kiss they : after which , old Sewis , the lord of the pantry , where all sweet thing be store , deposit he on the floor of the hall , and he find himself face the man of the night . it appear to he that the stranger be of enormous size , like the giant of fairy book : for as he stand a little out of the doorway there be a peep of night sky and tree behind he , and the tree look very much small , and hardly any sky be to be see except over his shoulder . 
 the squire seize one of the boy 's hand to present he and retain he at the same time : but the stranger pluck he from his grandfather 's hold , and swing he high , exclaim , ' here he be ! this be Harry Richmond . he have grow a grenadier . ' 
 ' kiss the little chap and back to bed with he , ' growl the squire . 
 the boy be heartily kiss and ask if he have forget his papa . he reply that he have no papa : he have a mama and a grandpapa . the stranger give a deep groan . 
 ' you see what you have do ; you have cut I off from my own , ' he say terribly to the squire ; but try immediately to soothe the urchin with nursery talk and the pat on the shoulder which encourage a little boy to grow fast and tall . ' four year of separation , ' he resume , ' and my son teach to think that he have no father . by heaven ! it be infamous , it be a curst piece of inhumanity . Mr. Beltham , if I do not see my wife , I carry off my son . ' 
 ' you may ask till you be hoarse , you shall never see she in this house while I be here to command , ' say the squire . 
 ' very well ; then Harry Richmond change home . I take he . the affair be conclude . ' 
 ' you take he from his mother ? ' the squire sing out . 
 ' you swear to I she have lose her wit ; she can not suffer . I can . I shall not expect from you , Mr. Beltham , the minute particle of comprehension of a father 's feeling . you be earthy ; you be an animal . ' 
 the squire see that he be about to lift the boy , and say , ' stop , never mind that . stop , look at the case . you can call again to - morrow , and you can see I and talk it over . ' 
 ' shall I see my wife ? ' 
 ' no , you shall not . ' 
 ' you remain faithful to your word , sir , do you ? ' 
 ' I do . ' 
 ' then I do similarly . ' 
 ' what ! stop ! not to take a child like that out of a comfortable house at night in Winter , man ? ' 
 ' oh , the night be temperate and warm ; he shall not remain in a house where his father be dishonour . ' 
 ' stop ! not a bit of it , ' cry the squire . ' no one speak of you . I give you my word , you be never mention by man , woman or child in the house . ' 
 ' silence concern a father insinuate dishonour , Mr. Beltham . ' 
 ' damn your fine speech , and keep your blackguardly hand off that boy , ' the squire thunder . ' mind , if you take he , he go for good . he do not   get a penny from I if you have the bringing of he up . you have   do for he , if you decide that way . he may stand here a beggar in a steal coat like you , and I will not   own he . here , Harry , come to I ; come to your grandad . ' 
 Mr. Richmond catch the boy just when he be turn to run . 
 ' that gentleman , ' he say , point to the squire , ' be your grandpapa . I be your papa . you must learn at any cost to know and love your papa . if I call for you to - morrow or next day they will have play trick with Harry Richmond , and hide he . Mr. Beltham , I request you , for the final time , to accord I your promise observe , I accept your promise that I shall , at my demand , to - morrow or the next day , obtain an interview with my wife . ' 
 the squire cough out an emphatic ' never ! ' and fortify it with an oath as he repeat it upon a full breath . 
 ' Sir , I will condescend to entreat you to grant this permission , ' say Mr. Richmond , urgently . 
 ' no , never : I will not ! ' rejoin the squire , red in the face from a fit of angry coughing . ' I will not ; but stop , put down that boy ; listen to I , you Richmond ! I will tell you what I will do . I will if you swear on a Bible , like a cadger before a bench of magistrate , you will never show your face within a circuit o ' ten mile hereabouts , and will not   trouble the boy if you meet he , or my daughter or I , or any one of us - hark ye , I will do this : let go the boy , and I will give ye five hundred I will give ye a cheque on my banker for a thousand pound ; and , hark I out , you do this , you swear , as I say , on the servant ' Bible , in the presence of my butler and I , " strike you dead as Ananias and t ' other one if you do not   keep to it , " do that now , here , on the spot , and I will engage to see you pay fifty pound a year into the bargain . stop ! and I will pay your debt under two or three hundred . for God 's sake , let go the boy ! you shall have fifty guineas on account this minute . let go the boy ! and your son there , I call he your son your son , Harry Richmond , shall inherit from I ; he shall have Riversley and the good part of my property , if not every bit of it . be it a bargain ? will you swear ? do not , and the boy be a beggar , he be a stranger here as much as you . take he , and by the Lord , you ruin he . there now , never mind , stay , down with he . he be get a cold already ; ought to be in his bed ; let the boy down ! ' 
 ' you offer I money , ' Mr. Richmond answer . 
 ' that be one of the indignity belong to a connection with a man like you . you would have I sell my son . to see my afflict wife I would forfeit my heart 's yearning for my son ; your money , sir , I toss to the wind ; and I be under the necessity of inform you that I despise and loathe you . I shrink from the thought of expose my son to your besotte selfish example . the boy be mine ; I have he , and he shall traverse the wilderness with I . by heaven ! his destiny be brilliant . he shall be hail for what he be , the rightful claimant of a place among the proud in the land ; and mark I , Mr. Beltham , obstinate sensual old man that you be ! I take the boy , and I consecrate my life to the duty of establish he in his proper rank and station , and there , if you live and I live , you shall behold he and bow your grovel pig 's head to the earth , and bemoan the day , by heaven ! when you , a common country squire , a man of no origin , a creature with whose blood we have mix our and he be stone - blind to the honour confer on he when you in your besotte stupidity threaten to disinherit Harry Richmond . ' 
 the door slam violently on such further speech as he have in he to utter . he seem at first astonish ; but find the terrified boy about to sob , he draw a pretty box from one of his pocket and thrust a delicious sweetmeat between the whimpering lip . then , after some moment of irresolution , during which he strike his chest soundingly and gaze down , talk alternately to himself and the boy , and cast his eye along the window of the house , he at last drop on one knee and swaddle the boy in the fold of the shawl . raise he in a business - like way , he settle he on an arm and step briskly across gravel - walk and lawn , like a horse to whose neck a smart touch of the whip have be apply . 
 the soft mild night have a moon behind it somewhere ; and here and there a light - blue space of sky show small rayless star ; the breeze smell fresh of root and heath . it be more a May - night than one of February . so strange an aspect have all these quiet hill - line and larch and fir - tree top in the half - dark stillness , that the boy 's terror be overlaid and almost subdue by his wonderment ; he have never before be out in the night , and he must have fear to cry in it , for his sob be not loud . on a rise of the park - road where a fir - plantation begin , he hear his name call faintly from the house by a woman 's voice that he know to be his aunt Dorothy 's . it come after he only once : ' Harry Richmond ' ; but he be soon out of hearing , beyond the park , among the hollow that run dipping for mile beside the great highroad toward London . sometimes his father whistle to he , or hold he high and nod a salutation to he , as though they have just discover one another ; and his perpetual accessibility to the influence of spicy sugarplum , notwithstanding his grief , cause his father to prognosticate hopefully of his future wisdom . so , when obedient to command he have give his father a kiss , the boy fall asleep on his shoulder , cease to know that he be a wandering infant : and , if I remember rightly , he dream he be in a ship of cinnamon - wood upon a sea that roll mighty , but smooth immense broad wave , and tear thing from thing without a sound or a hurt . 




 CHAPTER II . an adventure on my OWN account 

 that night stand up without any clear trace about it or near it , like the brazen castle of romance round which the sea - tide flow . my father must have bear I mile along the road ; he must have procure food for I ; I have an idea of feel a damp forehead and drink new milk , and by - and - by hear a roar of voice or vehicle , and see a dog that go alone through crowd street without a master , do as he please , and stop every other dog he meet . he take his turning , and my father and I take ours . we be in a house that , to my sens , have the smell of dark corner , in a street where all the house - door be paint black , and shut with a bang . italian organ - man and milk - man parade the street regularly , and make it sound hollow to their music . milk , and no cow anywhere ; number of people , and no acquaintance among they ; my thought be occupy by the singularity of such thing . 
 my father could soon make I forget that I be transplant ; he could act dog , tame rabbit , fox , pony , and a whole nursery collection alive , but he be sometimes absent for day , and I be not of a temper to be on friendly term with those who be unable to captivate my imagination as he have do . when he be at home I ride he all round the room and upstairs to bed , I lash he with a whip till he frighten I , so real be his barking ; if I say ' Menagerie ' he become a caravan of wild beast ; I undo a button of his waistcoat , and it be a lion that make a spring , roar at I ; I pull his coat - tail and off I go tug at an old bear that swing a hind leg as he turn , in the queer way , and then sit up and beat his breast send out a mew - moan . our room be rich to I than all the Grange while these performance be go forward . his monkey be almost as wonderful as his bear , only he be too big for it , and be oblige to aim at reality in his representation of this animal by mean of a number of breakage ; a defect that bring our landlady on the scene . the enchantment of my father 's companionship cause I to suffer proportionately in his absence . during that period of solitude , my nursemaid have to order I to play , and I would stumble about and squat in the middle of the floor , strike suddenly by the marvel of the difference between my present and my other home . my father enter into arrangement with a Punch and Judy man for he to pay I regular morning visit opposite our window ; yet here again his genius defeat his kind intention ; for happen once to stand by my side during the progress of the show , he make it so vivid to I by what he say and do , that I see no fun in it without he : I use to dread the heralding crow of Punch if he be away , and care no long for wooden head be knock ever so hard . 
 on sunday we walk to the cathedral , and this be a day with a delight of its own for I . he be never away on the Sunday . both of we attire in our good , we walk along the street hand in hand ; my father lead I before the cathedral monument , talk in a low tone of british victory , and commend the hero to my undivided attention . I understand very early that it be my duty to imitate they . while we remain in the cathedral he talk of glory and Old England , and drop his voice in the middle of a murmured chant to introduce Nelson 's name or some other great man 's and this recur regularly . ' what be we for now ? ' he would ask I as we leave our house . I have to decide whether we take a hero or an author , which I soon learn to do with capricious resolution . we be one Sunday for Shakespeare ; another for Nelson or Pitt . ' Nelson , papa , ' be my most frequent rejoinder , and he never dissent , but turn his step toward Nelson 's cathedral dome , and uncover his head there , and say : ' Nelson , then , to - day ' ; and we go straight to his monument to perform the act of homage . I choose Nelson in preference to the other because near bed - time in the evening my father tell I story of our hero of the day , and neither Pitt nor Shakespeare lose an eye , or an arm , or fight with a huge white bear on the ice to make himself interesting . I name they occasionally out of compassion , and to please my father , who say that they ought to have a turn . they be , he tell I , in the habit of pay he a visit , whenever I have particularly neglect they , to learn the ground for my disregard of their claim , and they urge he to intercede with I , and impart many of their unpublished adventure , so that I should be tempt to give they a chance on the following Sunday . 
 ' great will , ' my father call Shakespeare , and ' Slender Billy , ' Pitt . the scene where Great will kill the deer , drag Falstaff all over the park after it by the light of Bardolph 's nose , upon which they put an extinguisher if they hear any of the keeper , and so leave everybody grope about and catch the wrong person , be the most wonderful mixture of fun and tear . great Will be extremely youthful , but everybody in the park call he , ' Father William ' ; and when he want to know which way the deer have go , King Lear   or else my memory deceive I   pun , and Lady Macbeth wave a handkerchief for it to be steep in the blood of the deer ; Shylock order one pound of the carcase ; Hamlet   the fact be impressed on I   offer he a three - legged stool ; and a number of king and knight and lady light their torch from Bardolph ; and away they fly , distract the keeper and leave Will and his troop to the deer . that poor thing die from a different weapon at each recital , though always with a flow of blood and a successful dash of his antler into Falstaff ; and to hear Falstaff bellow ! but it be mournful to hear how sorry Great Will be over the animal he have slay . he speak like music . I find it pathetic in spite of my know that the whole scene be light up by Bardolph 's nose . when I be just burst out cry for the deer 's tongue be loll out and quick panting be at his side ; he have little one at home Great will remember his engagement to sell Shylock a pound of the carcase ; determine that no Jew should eat of it , he bethink he that Falstaff could well spare a pound , and he say the Jew would not see the difference : Falstaff only get off by hard running and roar out that he know his unclean life would make he taste like pork and thus let the Jew into the trick . 
 my father relate all this with such a veritable matter - of - fact air , and such liveliness he sound the chase and its cry , and show King Lear tottering , and Hamlet stand dark , and the vast substance of Falstaff that I follow the incident excitedly , and really see they , which be well than understand they . I require some help from he to see that Hamlet 's offer of a three - legged stool at a feverish moment of the chase , be laughable . he teach I what to think of it by pitch Great Will 's voice high , and Hamlet 's very low . by degree I get some unconscious knowledge of the character of Shakespeare . 
 there never be so fascinating a father as mine for a boy anything under eight or ten year old . he could guess on Saturday whether I should name William Pitt on the Sunday ; for , on those occasion , ' Slender Billy , ' as I hope I be not irreverent in call he , make up for the dulness of his high career with a raspberry - jam tart , for which , my father tell I solemnly , the illustrious Minister have in his day a passion . if I name he , my father would say , ' W. P. , otherwise S. B. , be bear in the year so - and - so ; now , ' and he go to the cupboard , ' in the name of Politics , take this and meditate upon he . ' the shop be all shut on Sunday , he certainly buy it , anticipate I unerringly , on the Saturday , and , as soon as the tart appear , we both shout . I fancy I remember his repeat a couplet , 
  ' Billy Pitt take a cake and a raspberry jam , 
  when he hear they have take Seringapatam . ' 
 at any rate , the rumour of his have do so , at period of strong excitement , lead to the inexplicable display of foresight on my father 's part . 
 my meditation upon Pitt be , under this influence , favourable to the post of a Prime Minister , but it be merely appetite that induce I to choose he ; I never could imagine a grandeur in his office , notwithstanding my father 's eloquent talk of rule a realm , shepherd a people , hurl british thunderbolt . the day 's discipline be , that its select hero should reign the undisputed monarch of it , so when I be for Pitt , I have my tart as he use to have it , and no story , for he have none , and I think my idea of the ruler of a realm present he to I as a sort of shadow about a pastrycook 's shop . but I surprise people by speak of he . I make remark to our landlady which cause she to throw up her hand and exclaim that I be astonishing . she would always add a mysterious word or two in the hearing of my nursemaid or any friend of hers who look into my room to see I . after my father have get I forward with instruction on the piano , and exercise in early english history and the book of the Peerage , I become the wonder of the house . I be put up on a stool to play ' in my cottage near a wood , ' or ' Cherry Ripe , ' and then , to show the range of my accomplishment , I be ask , ' and who marry the Dowager Duchess of Dewlap ? ' and I answer , ' John Gregg Wetherall , Esquire , and disgrace the family . ' then they ask I how I account for her behaviour . 
 ' it be because the Duke marry a dairymaid , ' I reply , always toss up my chin at that . my father have concoct the question and prepare I for the response , but the effect be strike , both upon his visitor and the landlady 's . gradually my ear grow accustomed to her invariable whisper on these occasion . ' blood Rile , ' she say ; and her friend all say ' no ! ' like the run of a finger down a fiddlestring . 
 a gentleman of his acquaintance call on he one evening to take he out for a walk . my father happen to be play with I when this gentleman enter our room : and he jump up from his hand and knee , and abuse he for intrude on his privacy , but afterwards he introduce he to I as Shylock 's great - great - great - grandson , and say that Shylock be satisfied with a pound , and his descendant want two hundred pound , or else all his body : and this , he say , come of the emigration of the family from Venice to England . my father only seem angry , for he go off with Shylock 's very great grandson arm - in - arm , exclaim , ' to the Rialto ! ' when I tell Mrs. Waddy about the visitor , she say , ' oh , dear ! oh , dear ! then I be afraid your sweet papa will not   return very soon , my pretty pet . ' we wait a number of day , until Mrs. Waddy receive a letter from he . she come full - dressed into my room , request I to give she twenty kiss for papa , and I look on while she arrange her blue bonnet at the glass . the bonnet would not fix in its place . at last she sink down cry in a chair , and be all brown silk , and say that how to appear before a parcel of dreadful man , and perhaps a live duke into the bargain , be more than she know , and more than could be expect of a lone widow woman . ' not for world ! ' she answer my petition to accompany she . she would not , she say , have I go to my papa there for anything on earth ; my papa would perish at the sight of I ; I be not even to wish to go . and then she exclaim , ' oh , the blessed child 's poor papa ! ' and that people be cruel to he , and would never take into account his lovely temper , and that everybody be his enemy , when he ought to be sit with the high in the land . I have realize the extremity of my forlorn state on a Sunday that pass empty of my father , which feel like his have go for ever . my nursemaid come in to assist in settle Mrs. Waddy 's bonnet above the six crisp curl , and while they be about it I sit quiet , pluck now and then at the brown silk , partly to beg to go with it , partly in jealousy and love at the thought of its see he from whom I be so awfully separate . Mrs. Waddy take fresh kiss off my lip , assure I that my father would have they in twenty minute , and I be to sit and count the time . my nursemaid let she out . I pretend to be absorb in counting , till I see Mrs. Waddy pass by the window . my heart give a leap of pain . I find the street - door open and no one in the passage , and I run out , think that Mrs. Waddy would be oblige to take I if she discover I by her side in the street . 
 I be by no mean disconcert at not see she immediately . run on from one street to another , I take the turning with unhesitate boldness , as if I have a destination in view . I must have be out near an hour before I understand that Mrs. Waddy have elude I ; so I resolve to enjoy the shop - window with the luxurious freedom of one whose speculation on those glorious thing all up for show be no long distract by the run of time and a nursemaid . little more than a glance be enough , now that I know I could stay as long as I like . if I stop at all , it be rather to exhibit the bravado of liberty than to distinguish any particular shop with my preference : all be equally beautiful ; so be the carriage ; so be the people . lady frequently turn to look at I , perhaps because I have no covering on my head ; but they do not interest I in the least . I should have be willing to ask they or any one where the peerage live , only my mind be quite full , and I do not care . I feel sure that a great deal of walk would ultimately bring I to St. Paul 's or Westminster Abbey ; to anything else I be indifferent . 
 toward sunset my frame be strike as with an arrow by the sensation of hunger on pass a cook's - shop . I falter along , hop to reach a second one , without know why I have drag my limb from the first . there be a boy in ragged breech , no tall than myself , stand tiptoe by the window of a very large and brilliant pastry - cook 's . he persuade I to go into the shop and ask for a cake . I think it perfectly natural to do so , be hungry ; but when I reach the counter and feel the size of the shop , I be abash , and have to repeat the nature of my petition twice to the young woman preside there . 
 ' give you a cake , little boy ? ' she say . ' we do not   give cake , we sell they . ' 
 ' because I be hungry , ' say I , pursue my request . 
 another young woman come , laugh and shake lot of ringlet . 
 ' do not   you see he be not a common boy ? he do not   whine , ' she remark , and hand I a stale bun , say , ' here , Master Charles , and you need not   say thank you . ' 
 ' my name be Harry Richmond , and I thank you very much , ' I reply . 
 I hear she say , as I go out , ' you can see he be a gentleman 's son . ' the ragged boy be await I eagerly . ' Gemini ! you be a lucky one , ' he cry ; ' here , come along , curly - poll . ' I believe that I mean to share the bun with he , but of course he could not be aware of my beneficent intention : so he treat I as he think I be for treat he , and make one snatch at the bun , run off cram it into his mouth . I stand look at any hand . I learn in that instant what thieving be , and beg , and hunger , for I would have perish rather than have ask for another cake , and as I yearn for it in absolute want of food , the boy 's ungenerous treatment of I come down in a cloud on my reason . I find myself be lead through the crush of people , by an old gentleman , to whom I must have relate an extraordinary rigmarole . he shake his head , say that I be unintelligible ; but the question he put to I , ' why have I no hat on in the open street ? where do my mother live ? what be I do out alone in London ? ' be so many incitement to autobiographical composition to an infant mind , and I tumble out my history afresh each time that he speak . he lead I into a square , stoop his head to listen all the while ; but when I perceive that we have quit the region of shop I make myself quite intelligible by stop short and cry : ' I be so hungry . ' he nod and say , ' it be no use cross - examine an empty stomach . you will do I the favour to dine with I , my little man . we will talk over your affair by - and - by . ' 
 my alarm at have leave the savoury street of shop be not soothe until I find myself sit at table with he , and a nice young lady , and an old one who wear a cap , and make loud remark on my garment and everything I do . I be introduce to they as the little boy drop from the sky . the old gentleman would not allow I to be question before I have eat . it be a memorable feast . I have soup , fish , meat , and pastry , and , for the first time in my life , a glass of wine . how they laugh to see I blink and cough after I have swallow half the glass like water . at once my tongue be unloosed . I seem to rise right above the roof of London , beneath which I have be but a wandering atom a few minute ago . I talk of my wonderful father , and Great Will , and Pitt , and the Peerage . I amaze they with my knowledge . when I finish a long recital of Great Will 's chase of the deer , by say that I do not care about politic   I mean , in my own mind , that Pitt be dull in comparison , they laugh enormously , as if I have fire they off . ' do you know what you be , sir ? ' say the old gentleman ; he have frown eyebrow and a merry mouth ' you be a comical character . ' 
 I feel interested in he , and ask he what he be . he inform I that he be a lawyer , and ready to be pantaloon to my clown , if I would engage he . 
 ' be you in the peerage ? ' say I. 
 ' not yet , ' he reply . 
 ' well , then , ' say I , ' I know nothing about you . ' 
 the young lady scream with laughter . ' oh , you funny little boy ; you kill little creature ! ' she say , and come round to I , lift I out of my chair , and want to know if I know how to kiss . 
 ' oh , yes ; I have   be teach that , ' say I , give the salute without wait for the invitation ; ' but , ' I add , ' I do not   care about it much . ' 
 she be indignant , and tell I she be go to be offend , so I let she understand that I like be kiss and play with in the morning before I be up , and if she would come to my house ever so early , she would find I lie next the wall and ready for she . 
 ' and who lie outside ? ' she ask . 
 ' that be my papa , ' I be begin to say , but break the word with a sob , for I seem to be separate from he now by the sea itself . 
 they pet I tenderly . my story be extract by alternate lead question from the old gentleman and timely caress from the lady . I could tell they everything except the name of the street where I live . my midnight excursion from the house of my grandfather excite they chiefly ; also my have a mother alive who perpetually fan her face and wear a ball - dress and a wreath ; thing that I remember of my mother . the lady observe that it be clear I be a romantic child . I notice that the old gentleman say ' Humph , ' very often , and his eyebrow be like a rook 's nest in a tree when I speak of my father walk away with Shylock 's descendant and not since return to I . a big book be fetch out of his library , in which he read my grandfather 's name . I hear he mention it aloud . I have be place on a stool beside a tea - tray near the fire , and there I see the old red house of Riversley , and my mother dress in white , and my aunt Dorothy ; and they all complain that I have cease to love they , and must go to bed , to which I have no objection . somebody carry I up and undress I , and promise I a great game of kiss in the morning . 
 the next day in the strange house I hear that the old gentleman have send one of his clerk down to my grandfather at Riversley , and communicate with the constable in London ; and , by - and - by , Mrs. Waddy arrive , have likewise visit those authority , one of whom support her claim upon I . but the old gentleman wish to keep I until his messenger return from Riversley . he make all sort of pretext . in the end , he insist on see my father , and Mrs. Waddy , after much hesitation , and even weep , furnish the address : upon hear which , speak aside to he , he say , ' I think so . ' Mrs. Waddy entreat he to be respectful to my father , who be , she declare , his superior , and , beg everybody 's pardon present , the superior of we all , through no sin of his own , that cause he to be so unfortunate ; and a real christian and pattern , in spite of outside , though as true a gentleman as ever walk , and by right should be amongst the high . she repeat ' amongst the high ' reprovingly , with the ear of barley in her blue bonnet shake , and her hand clasp tight in her lap . old Mr. Bannerbridge   that be the old gentleman 's name   come back very late from his visit to my father , so late that he say it would be cruel to let I go out in the street after my bed - time . Mrs. Waddy consent to my remain , on the condition of my be surrender to she at nine o'clock , and no later , the follow morning . 
 I be assure by Mr. Bannerbridge that my father 's health and appetite be excellent ; he give I a number of unsatisfying message , all the rest concern his interview he whisper to his daughter and his sister , Miss Bannerbridge , who say they hop they would have news from Hampshire very early , so that the poor child might be take away by the friend of his infancy . I could understand that my father be disapprove of by they , and that I be a kind of shuttlecock fly between two battledore ; but why they pity I I could not understand . there be a great battle about I when Mrs. Waddy appear punctual to her appoint hour . the victory be her , and I , her prize , pass a whole day in different conveyance , the last of which land we mile away from London , at the gate of an old drooping , mosse and streaked farmhouse , that be like a wall - flower in colour . 




 CHAPTER III . DIPWELL FARM 

 in rain or in sunshine this old farmhouse have a constant resemblance to a wall - flower ; and it have the same moist earthy smell , except in the kitchen , where John and Martha Thresher live , apart from their furniture . all the fresh egg , and the butter stamp , with three bee , and the pot of honey , the fowl , and the hare lift out of the hamper by his hind leg , and the country loave smell heavenly , which use to come to Mrs. Waddy 's address in London , and appear on my father 's table , be product of Dipwell farm , and present from her sister , Martha Thresher . on receive this information I feel at home in a moment , and ask right off , ' how long be I to stay here ? be I go away tomorrow ? what be go to be do with I ? ' the woman find these question of a youthful wanderer touch . between kissing and promise of hen to feed , and egg that be to come of it , I settle into contentment . a strong impression be make on I by Mrs. Waddy 's saying , ' here , Master Harry , your own papa will come for you ; and you may be sure he will , for I have his word he will , and he be not one to break it , unless his country be against he ; and for his darling boy he would march against cannon . so here you will sit and wait for he , will not   you ? ' I sit down immediately , look up . Mrs. Waddy and Mrs. Thresher raise their hand . I have give they some extraordinary proof of my love for my father . the impression I receive be , that sitting be the thing to conjure he to I . 
 ' where his heart be not concerned , ' Mrs. Waddy remark of I flatteringly , ' he be shrewd as a little schoolmaster . ' 
 ' he've   a bird's - nesting eye , ' say Mrs. Thresher , whose face I be study . 
 John Thresher wager I would be a man before either of they reach that goal . but whenever he speak he suffer correction on account of his English . 
 ' More than his eating and his drinking , that child 's father worrit about his learning to speak the language of a british gentleman , ' Mrs. Waddy exclaim . ' before that child your h 's must be like the panting of an engine to please his father . he would stop I carry the dinner - tray on meat - dish hot , and I be to repeat what I say , to make sure the child have not   hear anything ungrammatical . the child 's nursemaid he would lecture so , the poor girl would come down to I ready to bend double , like a bundle of nothing , his observation so take the pride out of she . that be because he be a father who know his duty to the child : " child ! " say he , " man , ma'am . " it be just as you , John , when you sow your seed you think of your harvest . so do not   take it ill of I , John ; I beg of you be careful of your English . turn it over as you be about to speak . ' 
 ' change load on the road , you mean , ' say John Thresher . ' na , na , he be come to settle nigh a weedy field , if you like , but his crop be not   nigh reap yet . Hark you , Mary Waddy , who be a widde , which be as much as say , an unocc'pied mind , there be cockney , and there 's country , and there be school . mix the three , strain , and throw away the sediment . now , yon be my view . 
 his wife and Mrs. Waddy say reflectively , in a breath , ' true ! ' 
 ' drink or no , that be the trick o ' brewery , ' he add . 
 they assent . they begin praise he , too , like meek creature . 
 ' what John say be worth listen to , Mary . you may be over - careful . a stew be a stew , and not a boiling to shred , and you want a steady fire , and not a furnace . ' 
 ' oh , I quite agree with John , Martha : we must take the good and the evil in a world like this . ' 
 ' then I be no scholar , and you be at ease , ' say John . 
 Mrs. Waddy put her mouth to his ear . 
 up go his eyebrow , wrinkling arch over a petrified stare . 
 in some way she have regain her advantage . ' art sure of it ? ' he inquire . 
 ' pray , do not   offend I by express a doubt of it , ' she reply , bow . 
 John Thresher poise I in the very centre of his gaze . he declare he would never have guess that , and be reprove , inasmuch as he might have guess it . he then say that I could not associate with any of the child thereabout , and my dwelling in the kitchen be not to be think of . the idea of my dwelling in the kitchen seem to be a serious consideration with Mrs. Martha likewise . I be lead into the room of state . the sight of they be enough . I stamp my foot for the kitchen , and rarely in my life have be happy than there , dining and sup with John and Martha and the farm - labourer , expect my father across the hill , and yet satisfied with the sun . to hope , and not be impatient , be really to believe , and this be my feeling in my father 's absence . I know he would come , without wish to hurry he . he have the world beyond the hill ; I this one , where a slow full river flow from the sound mill under our garden wall , through long meadow . in Winter the wild duck make letter of the alphabet fly . on the other side of the copse bound our home , there be a park contain tree old as the history of England , John Thresher say , and the thought of their venerable age enclose I comfortably . he could not tell I whether he mean as old as the book of English history ; he fancy he do , for the furrow - track follow the plough close upon ; but no one exactly could swear when that   the book   be put together . at my suggestion , he fix the tree to the date of the Heptarchy , a period of heavy ploughing . thus begirt by Saxon time , I regard Riversley as a place of extreme baldness , a Greenland , untrodden by my Alfred and my Harold . these hero live in the circle of Dipwell , confidently await the arrival of my father . he send I once a glorious letter . Mrs. Waddy take one of John Thresher 's pigeon to London , and in the evening we behold the bird cut the sky like an arrow , bring round his neck a letter warm from he I love . planet communicating with planet would be not more wonderful to man than word of his to I , travel in such a manner . I go to sleep , and awoke imagine the bird burst out of heaven . 
 meanwhile there be an attempt to set I move again . a strange young man be notice in the neighbourhood of the farm , and he accost I at Leckham fair . ' I say , do not   we know one another ? how about your grandfather the squire , and your aunt , and Mr. Bannerbridge ? I have   get news for you . ' 
 not unwilling to hear he , I take his hand , leave my companion , the miller 's little girl , Mabel Sweetwinter , at a toy - stand , while Bob , her brother and our guardian , be shy stick in a fine attitude . ' yes , and your father , too , ' say the young man ; ' come along and see he ; you can run ? ' I show he how fast . we be pursue by Bob , who fight for I , and win I , and my allegiance instantly return to he . he carry I almost the whole of the way back to Dipwell . woman must feel for the lucky hero who win they , something of what I feel for mine ; I kiss his bloody face , refuse to let he wipe it . John Thresher say to I at night , ' ay , now you have   get a notion of boxing ; and will you believe it , Master Harry , there be people fool enough to want to tread that ther ' first - rate pastime under foot ? I speak truth , and my word for ' t , they would well go in petticoat . let clergyman preach as in duty bind ; you and I will uphold a manful sport , we will , and a cheer for Bob ! ' 
 he assure I , and he have my entire faith , that boxing be England 's natural protection from the foe . the comfort of have one like Bob to defend our country from invasion strike I as inexpressible . light by John Thresher 's burn patriotism , I enter the book of the history of England at about the pace of a carthorse , with a huge waggon at my heel in the shape of John . there be no moving on until he be fill . his process of receive historical knowledge be to fight over again the personage who do injury to our honour as a nation , then shake hand and be proud of they . ' for where we be not   quite successful we be cunning , ' he say ; ' and we not be able to get rid of William the Conqueror , because he be get a will of his own and he will not   budge , why , we take and make he one of ourselves ; and no disgrace in that , I should hope ! he pay we a compliment , do not   you see , Master Harry ? he want to be an Englishman . " can you this ? " say we , sparrin ' up to he . " pretty middlin ' , " say he , " and do it well . " " well then , " say we , " then you be one of we , and we will beat the world " ; and do so . ' 
 John Thresher have a laborious mind ; it cost he bead on his forehead to mount to these height of meditation . he tell I once that he think one 's country be like one 's wife : you be bear in the first , and marry to the second , and have to learn all about they afterwards , ay , and make the good of they . he recommend I to mix , strain , and throw away the sediment , for that be the trick o ' brewery . every puzzle that beset he in life resolve to this cheerful precept , the value of which , he say , be show by clear brown ale , the drink of the land . even as a child I feel that he be peculiarly an Englishman . tale of injustice do on the Niger river would flush he in a heat of wrath till he cry out for fresh taxis to chastise the villain . yet at the sight of the beggar at his gate he groan at the taxis exist , and enjoin I to have pity on the poor taxpayer when I lend a hand to patch the law . I promise he I would unreservedly , with a laugh , but with a sincere intention to legislate in a direct manner on his behalf . he , too , though he laugh , thank I kindly . 
 I be clothe in black for my distant mother . Mrs. Waddy bring down a young man from London to measure I , so that my mourning attire might be in the perfect cut of fashion . ' the child 's papa would strip he if he see he in a country tailor 's funeral suit , ' she say , and seem to blow a wind of change on I that make I sure my father have begin to stir up his part of the world . he send I a prayer in his own handwriting to say for my mother in heaven . I see it fly up between black edge whenever I shut my eye . Martha Thresher dose I for liver . Mrs. Waddy find I pale by the fireside , and prescribe iron . both agree upon high - feeding , and the apothecary agree with both in everything , which reconcile they , for both good woman love I so heartily they be near upon dispute over the medicine I be to consume . 
 under such affectionate treatment I betray the alarming symptom that my imagination be set more on my mother than on my father : I could not help think that for any one to go to heaven be strange than to drive to Dipwell , and I have this idea when my father be clasp I in his arm ; but he melt it like snow off the field . he come with postillion in advance of he wear crape rosette , as do the horse . we be in the cricket - field , where Dipwell be play its first match of the season , and a Dipwell lad , furious to see the eleven commit such a breach of the rule and decency as to troop away while the game be hot , and surround my father , fling the cricket - ball into the midst and hit two or three of the man hard . my father have to shield he from the consequence . he say he like that boy ; and he plead for he so winningly and funnily that the man who be hurt most laugh loudest . 
 stand up in the carriage , and hold I by the hand , he address they by their name : ' Sweetwinter , I thank you for your attention to my son ; and you , Thribble ; and you , my man ; and you , Baker ; Rippengale , and you ; and you , Jupp ' ; as if he know they personally . it be true he nod at random . then he deliver a short speech , and name himself a regular subscriber to their innocent pleasure . he give they money , and scatter silver coin among the boy and girl , and praise John Thresher , and Martha , his wife , for their care of I , and point to the chimney of the farm , say that the house there be holy to he from henceforth , and he should visit it annually if possible , but always in the month of May , and in the shape of his subscription , as certain as the cowslip . the man , after their fit of cheering , appear unwilling to recommence their play , so he alight and deliver the first ball , and then walk away with my hand in his , say : 
 ' yes , my son , we will return to they tenfold what they have do for you . the eleventh day of May shall be a day of pleasure for Dipwell while I last , and you will keep it in memory of I when I be go . and now to see the bed you have sleep in . ' 
 Martha Thresher show he the bed , show he flower I have plant , and a spanish chestnut tree just peep . 
 ' ha ! ' say he , beam at every fresh sight of my doing : ' madam , I be your life - long debtor and friend ! ' he kiss she on the cheek . 
 John Thresher cry out : ' why , dame , you tremble like a maid . ' 
 she speak very faintly , and be red in the face up to the time of our departure . John stand like a soldier . we drive away from a cheer crowd of cricketer and farm - labourer , as if discharge from a great gun . ' a royal salvo ! ' say my father , and ask I earnestly whether I have forget to reward and take a particular farewell of any one of my friend . I tell he I have forget no one , and think it be true , until on our way up the sandy lane , which offer we a last close view of the old wall - flower farm front , I see little Mabel Sweetwinter , often my playfellow and bedfellow , a curly - head girl , who would have dance on Sunday for a fairing , and eat gingerbread nut during a ghost - story . she be sit by a furze - bush in flower , cherish in her lap a lamb that have be worry . she look half up at I , and keep look so , but would not nod . then good - bye , think I , and remember she look when I have forget that of all the other . 




 CHAPTER IV . I have a taste of GRANDEUR 

 though I have not previously see a postillion in my life , I gaze on the pair bob regularly on their horse before I , without a thought upon the marvel of their sudden apparition and connection with my fortune . I could not tire of hear the pleasant music of the many foot at the trot , and try to explain to my father that the man go up and down make it like a piano that play of itself . he laugh and kiss I ; he remember have once show I the inside of a piano when the key be knock . my love for he as we drive into London have a recognize footing : I perceive that he be my good friend and only true companion , besides his be my hero . the wicked man who have part we be no long able to do harm , he say . I forget , in my gladness at their defeat , to ask what have become of Shylock 's descendant . 
 Mrs. Waddy welcome we when we alight . do not imagine that it be at the door of her old house . it be in a wide street opening on a splendid square , and pillar be before the house , and inside there be the enchantment of a little fountain play thin as whipcord , among fern , in a rock - basin under a window that glow with king of England , copy from boy ' history book . all the servant be draw up in the hall to do homage to I . they seem less real and live than the wonder of the sweet - smell chair , the bird , and the elegant dog . rich of treat , a monkey be introduce to I . ' it be your papa 's whim , ' Mrs. Waddy say , resignedly ; ' he say he must have his jester . indeed it be no joke to I . ' 
 yet she smile happily , though her voice be melancholy . from she I now learn that my name be Richmond Roy , and not Harry Richmond . I say , ' very well , ' for I be use to change . everybody in the house wear a happy expression of countenance , except the monkey , who be too busy . as we mount the stair I see more king of England paint on the back - window . Mrs. Waddy say : ' it be consider to give a monarchical effect , ' she cough modestly after the long word , and pursue : ' as it should . ' I insist upon go to the top floor , where I expect to find William the Conqueror , and find he ; but that strong connect link between John Thresher and I present himself only to carry my recollection of the Dipwell of yesterday as far back into the past as the old Norman day . 
 ' and down go all the king , downstair , ' I say , survey they consecutively . 
 ' yes , ' she reply , in a tone that might lead one to think it their lamentable fate . ' and do the people look at you as you drive along through the street , Master Richmond ? ' 
 I say ' yes , ' in turn ; and then we leave off answer , but question one another , which be a quick way of get at fact ; I know it be with boy and woman . Mrs. Waddy care much less to hear of Dipwell and its inhabitant than of the sensation create everywhere by our equipage . I notice that when her voice be not melancholy her face be . she show I a beautiful little pink bed , have a crown over it , in a room opening to my father 's . twenty thousand magnificent dream seem to flash their golden door when I know that the bed be mine . I think it almost as nice as a place by my father 's side . 
 ' do not   you like it , Mrs. Waddy ? ' I say . 
 she smile and sigh . ' like it ? oh ! yes , my dear , to be sure I do . I only hope it will not   vanish . ' she simper and look sad . 
 I have too many distraction , or I should have ask she whether my amazing and delightful new home have ever show symptom of vanish ; it appear to I , judge from my experience , that nothing move violently except myself , and my principal concern be lest any one should carry I away at a moment 's notice . in the evening I be introduce to a company of gentleman , who be drink wine after dinner with my father . they clap their hand and laugh immoderately on my tell they that I think those king of England who could not find room on the window must have go down to the cellar . 
 ' they be go , ' my father say . he drink off a glassful of wine and sigh prodigiously . ' they be go , gentleman , go there , like good wine , like old Port , which they tell we be go also . favour I by drink to the health of Richmond Roy the young . ' 
 they drink to I heartily , but my father have fall mournful before I leave the room . 
 pony - riding , and lesson in boxing and wrestling , and lesson in French from a french governess , at whose appearance my father always seem to be begin to dance a minuet , so exuberantly courteous be he ; and lesson in Latin from a tutor , whom my father invite to dinner once a fortnight , but do not distinguish otherwise than occasionally to take down latin sentence in a notebook from his dictation , occupy my morning . my father tell the man who instruct I in the art of self - defence that our family have always patronize his profession . I wrestle ten minute every day with this man 's son , and be regularly throw . on fine afternoon I be dress in black velvet for a drive in the park , where my father uncover his head to number of people , and be much look at . ' it be our duty , my son , never to forget name and person ; I beg you to bear that in mind , my dear Richie , ' he say . we use to go to his opera - box ; and we visit the House of Lords and the House of Commons ; and my father , though he complain of the decay of british eloquence , and mourn for the day of Chatham , and William Pitt   our old friend of the cake and the raspberry jam , and Burke , and Sheridan , encourage the orator with approve murmur . 
 my father no long lay stress on my study of the Peerage . ' now I have you in the very atmosphere , that will come of itself , ' he say . I wish to know whether I be likely to be transport suddenly to some other place . he assure I that nothing save a convulsion of the earth would do it , which comfort I , for I take the firmness of the earth in perfect trust . we speak of our old Sunday walk to St. Paul 's and Westminster Abbey as of a day that have its charm . our pew among a fashionable congregation please he well . the pew - opener curtsey to none as she do to he . for my part , I miss the monument and the chant , and something besides that have go I know not what . at the first indication of gloom in I , my father become alarmed , and , after make I stand with my tongue out before himself and Mrs. Waddy , like a dragon in a piece of tapestry , would resume his old playfulness , and try to be the same that he have be in Mrs. Waddy 's lodging . then we read the Arabian Nights together , or , rather , he read they to I , often act out the incident as we ride or drive abroad . an omission to perform a duty be the fatal forgetfulness to sprinkle pepper on the cream - tart ; if my father subject I to an interrogation concern my lesson , he be the dread african magician to whom must be surrender my acquisition of the ring and the musty old lamp . we be quite in the habit of meet fair Persians . he would frequently ejaculate that he resemble the Three Calendars in more respect than one . to divert I during my recovery from measle , he one day hire an actor in a theatre , and put a cloth round his neck , and seat he in a chair , rub his chin with soap , and play the part of the Barber over he , and I have never laugh so much in my life . poor Mrs. Waddy get her hand at her side , and keep on gasp , ' oh , sir ! oh ! ' while the Barber hurry away from the half - shave young man to consult his pretended astrolabe in the next room , where we hear he shout the sun 's altitude , and consult its willingness for the impatient young man to be far shave ; and back he come , seem refresh to have learn the sun 's favourable opinion , and gabbling at an immense rate , full of barber 's business . the servant be allow to be spectator ; but as soon as the young man be shave , my father dismiss they with the tone of a master . no wonder they love he . Mrs. Waddy ask who could help it ? 
 I remember a pang I have when she speak of his exposure to the risk of marry again ; it add a curious romantic tenderness to my adoration of he , and make I feel that he and I stand against the world . to have his hand in mine be my delight . then it be that I could think earnestly of Prince Ahmed and the kind and beautiful Peribanou , whom I would not have mind his marrying . my favourite dream be to see he shoot an arrow in a match for a prize , and lose the prize because of not find his arrow , and wonder where the arrow have fly to , and wander after it till he pass out of green field to grassy rock , and to a stony desert , where at last he find his arrow at an enormous distance from the shooting line , and there be the desert all about he , and the sweetest fairy ever imagine go to show herself to he in the ground under his foot . in his absence I really hunger for he , and be jealous . 
 during this arabian life , we sit on a carpet that fly to the Continent , where I fall sick , and be cure by smell at an apple ; and my father direct our movement through the aid of a telescope , which tell we the title of the hotel ready to receive we . as for the city and cathedral , the hot meadow under mountain , the river and the castle - they be little more to I than an animate book of geography , opening and shut at random ; and travel from place to place must have seem to I so much like the life I have lead , that I be generally as quick to cry as to laugh , and be never at peace between any two emotion . by - and - by I lay in a gondola with a young lady . my father make friend fast on our travel : her parent be among the number , and she fall in love with I and enjoy have the name of Peribanou , which I bestow on she for her delicious talk of the blue and red - strip post that would spout up fountain of pearl if they be pluck from their bed , and the palace that have fly out of the farth corner of the world , and the city that would some night or other vanish suddenly , leave bare sea - ripple to say ' where ? where ? ' as they roll over . I would have see she marry my father happily . she be like rest and dream to I , soft sea and pearl . we enter into an arrangement to correspond for life . her name be Clara Goodwin ; she request I to go always to the Horse Guards to discover in what part of the world Colonel Goodwin might be serve when I want to write to she . I , in return , could give no permanent address , so I relate my history from the beginning . ' to write to you would be the same as write to a river , ' she say ; and insist that I should drop the odious name of Roy when I grow a man . my father quarrel with Colonel Goodwin . month after I feel as if I have only just be tear from Clara , but she stand in a mist , irrecoverably distant . I have no other friend . 
 twelve dozen of splendid Burgundy be the fruit of our tour , to be lay down at Dipwell farm for my arrival at my majority , when I should be a legal man , embark in my own ship , as my father say . I do not taste the wine . ' porter for I that day , please God ! ' cry Mrs. Waddy , who do . my father eye she with pity , and order she to send the wine down to Dipwell , which be do . he take I between his knee , and say impressively , ' now , Richie , twelve dozen of the good that man can drink await you at the gate of manhood . few father can say that to their son , my boy ! if we drink it together , blessing on the day ! if I be go , Richie , shut up in the long box , ' his voice shake , and he add , ' go to Peribanou underneath , you know , remember that your dada see that the wine be a good vintage , and buy it and have it bottle in his own presence while you be asleep in the Emperor 's room in the fine old Burgundy city , and swear that , whatever come to they both , his son should drink the wine of prince on the day of his majority . ' here my father 's tone be highly exalted , and he sit in a great flush . 
 I promise he I would bend my step toward Dipwell to be there on my twenty - first birthday , and he pledge himself to be there in spirit at least , bodily if possible . we seal the subject with some tear . he often talk of commission a poet to compose verse about that wonderful coming day at Dipwell . the thought of the day in store for we send I strut as though I have be in the presence of my drill - master . Mrs. Waddy , however , grow extremely melancholy at the mention of it . 
 ' Lord only know where we shall all be by that time ! ' she sigh . 
 ' she be a dewy woman , ' say my father , disdainfully they appear always to be at variance , notwithstanding her absolute devotion to he . my father threaten to have she married to somebody immediately if she afflict he with what he call her Waddyism . she have get the habit of exclaim at the end of her remark , ' no matter ; our clock strike soon ! ' in a way that communicate to I an obscure idea of a door go to open unexpectedly in one of the wall , and conduct we , by subterranean passage , into a new country . my father 's method of rebuke her anxious nature be to summon his cook , the funniest of Frenchmen , Monsieur Alphonse , and issue order for a succession of six dinner - party . ' and now , ma'am , you have occupation for your mind , ' he would say . 
 to judge by the instantaneous composure of her whole appearance , he do produce a temporary abatement of her malady . the good soul bustle out of the room in attendance upon M. Alphonse , and never complain while the dinner last , but it be whisper that she have fit in the upper part of the house . no soon do my father hear the rumour than he accuse she to her face of this enormity , tell she that he be determined to effect a permanent cure , even though she should drive he to unlimited expense . we have a Ball party and an Aladdin supper , and for a fortnight my father hire postillion ; we flash through London . my father back a horse to run in the race on Epsom Downs name Prince Royal , only for the reason that his name be Prince Royal , and the horse win , which be , he say , a proof to I that in our country it be common prudence to stick to Royalty ; and he bid I note that if he go in a carriage and two , he be comparatively unnoticed , whereas when he be beheld in a carriage and four , with postillion , at a glance from he the country people tug their forelock , and would like , if he would let they , to kiss his hand . ' we will try the scarlet livery on one of our drive , Richie , ' say he . Mrs. Waddy hear he . ' it be unlawful , sir , ' she say . ' for whom , ma'am ? ' ask my father . ' none but Royal ... ' she be explain , but stop , for he show she an awful frown , and she cry so that my heart ache for she . my father go out to order the livery on the spot . he be very excited . then it be that Mrs. Waddy , embrace I , say , ' my dear , my own Master Richmond , my little Harry , prepare your poor child 's heart for evil day . ' I construe her unintelligible speech as an attack upon my father , and abuse she violently . 
 while I be in this state of wrathful championship , the hall - door be open . I run out and catch sight of my aunt Dorothy , in company with old Mr. Bannerbridge . I be kiss and hug for I know not how long , until the smell of Riversley take entire possession of I , and my old home seem near than the one I live in ; but my aunt , see tear on my cheek , ask I what be my cause of sorrow . in a moment I pour out a flood of complaint against Mrs. Waddy for vex my father . when she hear of the scarlet livery , my aunt lift her hand . ' the man be near the end of his wit and his money together , ' say Mr. Bannerbridge ; and she say to I , ' my darling Harry will come back to his own nice little room , and see his grandpapa soon , will not   you , my pet ? all be ready for he there as it use to be , except poor mama . " kiss my boy , my Harry Harry Richmond . " those be her last word on her death - bed , before she go to God , Harry , my own ! there be Sampson the pony , and Harry 's dog Prince , and his lamb Daisy , grow a sheep , and the ploughboy , Dick , with the big boot . ' much more sweet talk of the same current that make my face cloudy and bright , and fill I with desire for Riversley , to see my mother 's grave and my friend . 
 Aunt Dorothy look at I . ' come now , ' she say ; ' come with I , Harry . ' her trembling seize on I like a fire . I say , ' yes , ' though my heart sink as if I have lose my father with the word . she catch I in her arm tight , murmur , ' and dry our tear and make our house laugh . oh ! since the night that Harry go ..... and I be now Harry 's mama , he have I . ' 
 I look on her forehead for the wreath of white flower my mother use to wear , and thought of my father 's letter with the prayer write on the black - border page . I say I would go , but my joy in go be go . we be stop in the doorway by Mrs. Waddy . nothing would tempt she to surrender I . Mr. Bannerbridge try reason with she , and , as he say , put the case , which seem to have perch on his forefinger . he talk of my prospect , of my sole chance of be educate morally and virtuously as become the grandson of an english gentleman of a good old family , and of my father have spend my mother 's estate , and of the danger of his do so with mine , and of religious duty and the awfulness of the position Mrs. Waddy stand in . he certainly subdue I to very silent breathing , but do not affect I as my aunt Dorothy 's picturing of Riversley have do ; and when Mrs. Waddy , reduce to an apparent submissiveness , address I piteously , ' Master Richmond , would you leave papa ? ' I cry out , ' no , no , never leave my papa , ' and twist away from my aunt 's keeping . my father 's arrival cause I to be withdraw , but I hear his offer of his hospitality and all that be his ; and subsequently there be loud talk on his part . I be kiss by my aunt before she go . she whisper , ' come to we when you be free ; think of we when you pray . ' she be full of tear . Mr. Bannerbridge pat my head . 
 the door close on they and I think it be a vision that have pass . but now my father set my heart pant with question as to the terrible possibility of we two ever be separate . in some way he paint my grandfather so black that I declare earnestly I would rather die than go to Riversley ; I would never utter the name of the place where there be evil speaking of the one I love dearest . ' do not , my son , ' he say solemnly , ' or it part we two . ' I repeat after he , ' I be a Roy and not a Beltham . ' it be enough to hear that insult and shame have be cast on he at Riversley for I to hate the name of the place . we cry and then laugh together , and I must have deliver myself with amazing eloquence , for my father hold I at arm ' length and say , ' Richie , the notion of train you for a General commandership of the british army be a good one , but if you have get the win tongue , the woolsack will do as well for a whisper in the ear of the throne . that be our aim , my son . we say , you will not acknowledge our birth , you shall acknowledge our worth . ' he complain bitterly of my aunt Dorothy bring a lawyer to our house . the sin of Mrs. Waddy be forgive she , owe to her noble resistance to the legal gentleman 's seductive speech . so I walk up and down stair with the king of England look at I out of the coloured window quietly for a week ; and then two ugly man enter the house , cause I to suffer a fearful oppression , though my father be exceedingly kind to they and have bed provide for they , say that they be very old retainer of his . 
 but the next day our scarlet livery appear . after exact particular attention to his command , my father quit Mrs. Waddy , and we mount the carriage , laugh at her deplorable eye and prim lip , which he imitate for my amusement . ' a load be off my head , ' he remark . he ask I if splendour do not fatigue I also . I catch the answer from his face and reply that it do , and that I should like to go right on to Dipwell ' the Burgundy sleep safe there , ' say my father , and think over it . we have an extraordinary day . People stand fast to gaze at we ; in the country some pull off their hat and set up a cheer . the landlord of the inn where we bait remain bare - headed until we start afresh , and I , accord to my father 's example , bow and lift my cap gravely to person salute we along the road . nor do I seek to know the reason for this excess of respectfulness ; I be begin to take to it naturally . at the end of a dusty high - road , where it descend the hill into a town , we draw up close by a high red wall , behind which I hear boy shout at play . we go among they , accompany by their master . my father tip the head boy for the benefit of the school , and follow lunch with the master and his daughter , to whom I give a kiss at her request , a half - holiday be grant to the boy in my name . how they cheer ! the young lady see my delight , and hold I at the window while my father talk with her ; and for a long time after I behold they in imagination talk : that be to say , my father issue his instruction and Mr. Rippenger receive they like a pliant hodman ; for the result of it be that two day later , without see my king of England , my home again , or London , I be Julia Rippenger 's intimate friend and the young pupil of the school . my father tell I subsequently that we sleep at an hotel those two night intervene . memory transplant I from the coach and scarlet livery straight to my place of imprisonment . 




 CHAPTER V. I make a DEAR FRIEND 

 Heriot be the name of the head boy of the school . Boddy be the name of one of the usher . they be both in love with Julia Rippenger . it be my fortune to outrun they in her favour for a considerable period , during which time , though I have cease to live in state , and be wear out my suit of velvet , and have neither visit nor letter from my father , I be in tolerable bliss . Julia 's kiss be shower on I for almost anything I say or do , but her admiration of heroism and daring be so fervent that I be in no great danger of become effeminate than Achilles when he wear girl 's clothe . she be seventeen , an age bewitch for boy to look up to and man to look down on . the puzzle of the school be how to account for her close relationship to old Rippenger . such an apple on such a crab - tree seem monstrous . Heriot say that he hop Boddy would marry old Rippenger 's real daughter , and , say he , that be birch - twig . I relate his sparkling speech to Julia , who laugh , accuse he , however , of impudence . she let I see a portrait of her dead mother , an irish lady raise dark eyelash , whom she resemble . I talk of the portrait to Heriot , and as I have privilege accord to none of the other boy and could go to she at any hour of the day after lesson , he make I beg for he to have a sight of it . she consider awhile , but refuse . on hearing of the unkind refusal , Heriot stick his hand into his pocket and give up cricketing . we see he lean against a wall in full view of her window , while the boy crowd round he try to get he to practise , a school - match of an important character come off with a rival academy ; and it be only through fear of our school be beat if she do not relent that Julia hand I the portrait , charge I solemnly to bring it back . I promise , of course . Heriot go into his favourite corner of the playground , and there look at it and kiss it , and then button his jacket over it tight , growl when I ask he to return it . Julia grow frightened . she send I with number of petition to he . 
 ' look here , young un , ' say Heriot ; ' you be a good little fellow , and I like you , but just tell she I believe in nothing but handwriting , and if she write to I for it humbly and nicely she shall have it back . say I only want to get a copy take by a first - rate painter . ' 
 Julia shed tear at his cruelty , call he cruel , wicked , false to his word . she write , but the letter do not please he , and his reply be scornful . at prayer morning and evening , it be pitiful to observe her glance of entreaty and her downfallen eyelash . I guess that in Heriot 's letter to she he want to make her confess something , which she would not do . ' now I write to he no more ; let he know it , my darling , ' she say , and the consequence of Heriot 's ungrateful obstinacy be that we all behold she , at the ceremony of the consecration of the new church , place her hand on Mr. Boddy 's arm and allow he to lead she about . Heriot keep his eye on they ; his mouth be sharp , and his arm stiff by his side . I be the bearer of a long letter to she that evening . she tear it to piece without read it . next day Heriot walk slowly past Mr. Boddy hold the portrait in his hand . the usher call to he ! 
 ' what have you there , Heriot ? ' 
 my hero star . ' only a family portrait , ' he answer , thrust it safe in his pocket and fix his gaze on Julia 's window . 
 ' permit I to look at it , ' say Mr. Boddy . 
 ' permit I to decline to let you , ' say Heriot . 
 ' look at I , sir , ' cry Boddy . 
 ' I prefer to look elsewhere , sir , ' reply Heriot , and there be Julia visible at her window . 
 ' I ask you , sir , civilly , ' quoth Boddy , ' for permission to look , I use the word intentionally ; I say I ask you for permission ... ' 
 ' no , you do not , ' Heriot retort , quite cool ; ' inferentially you do ; but you do not use the word permission . ' 
 ' and you turn upon I impudently , ' pursue Boddy , whose colour be thunder : ' you quibble , sir ; you prevaricated ; you conceal what you be carry ... ' 
 ' be carry , ' Heriot correct his tense ; ' and mean to , in spite of every Boddy , ' he murmur audibly . 
 ' like a rascal detect in an act of felony , ' roar Boddy , ' you conceal it , sir ... ' 
 ' conceal it , sir . ' 
 ' and I demand , in obedience to my duty , that you instantly exhibit it for my inspection , now , here , at once ; no parleying ; unbutton , or I call Mr. Rippenger to compel you . ' 
 I be stand close by my brave Heriot , rather tremble , studious of his manfulness though I be . his left foot be firmly in advance , as he say , just in the manner to start an usher furious : 
 ' I conceal it , I conceal it ; I be carry it , I carry it : you demand that I exhibit for your inspection what I mean no Boddy to see ? I have to assure you respectfully , sir , that family portrait be sacred thing with the son of gentleman . here , Richie , off ! ' 
 I find the portrait in my hand , and Heriot between I and the usher , in the attitude of a fellow keep another out of his home at prisoner' - base . he have spy Mr. Rippenger 's head at the playground gate . I have just time to see Heriot and the usher in collision before I run through the gate and into Julia 's arm in her garden , whither the dreadful prospect of an approach catastrophe have attract she . 
 Heriot be merely report guilty of insolence . he take his five hundred line of Virgil with his usual sarcastic dignity : all he say to Mr. Rippenger be , ' let it be about Dido , sir , ' which set several of the boy upon Dido 's history , but Heriot be condemn to the battle with Turnus . my share in this event secure Heriot 's friendship to I without cost I the slight inconvenience . ' papa would never punish you , ' Julia say ; and I feel my rank . nor be it wonderful I should when Mr. Rippenger be constantly speak of my father 's magnificence in my presence before company . allow to draw on he largely for pocket - money , I maintain my father 's princely reputation in the school . at time , especially when the holiday arrive and I be leave alone with Julia , I have fit of mournfulness , and almost think the boy happy than I be . go home begin to seem an unattainable thing to I . have a father , too , a regular father , instead of a dazzle angel that appear at interval , I consider a benefaction , in its way , some recompense to the boy , for their not possess one like mine . my anxiety be relieve by my writing letter to my father , address to the care of Miss Julia Rippenger , and post they in her work - basket . she favour I with very funny reply , sign , ' your own ever - love papa , ' about his be engage kill bengal tiger and capture white elephant , a noble occupation that give I exciting and consolatory dream of he . 
 we have at last a real letter of his , date from a foreign city ; but he mention nothing of come to I . I understand that Mr. Rippenger be disappoint with it . 
 gradually a kind of cloud steal over I . I no long like to ask for pocket - money ; I be clothe in a suit of plain cloth ; I be banish from the parlour , and only on Sunday be I permit to go to Julia . I cease to live in myself . through the whole course of lesson , at play - time , in my bed , and round to morning bell , I be hunt my father in an unknown country , generally with the sun set before I : I run out of a wood almost into a brook to see it sink as if I have again lose sight of he , and then a sense of darkness bring I back to my natural consciousness , without afflict I much , but astonishing I . why be I away from he ? I could repeat my lesson in the midst of these dream quite fairly ; it be the awakening among the circle of the boy that make I falter during a recital and ask myself why I be there and he absent ? they have give over speculating on another holiday and treat from my father ; yet he have produce such an impression in the school that even when I have descend to the level of a total equality with they , they continue to have some consideration for I . I be able to talk of foreign city and could tell story , and I be , besides , under the immediate protection of Heriot . but now the shadow of a great calamity fall on I , for my dear Heriot announce his intention of leave the school next half . 
 ' I can not   stand be pray at , morning and evening , by a fellow who have not   the pluck to strike I like a man , ' he say . Mr. Rippenger have the habit of signalize offender , in his public prayer , as boy whose heart he wish to be turn from callousness . he perpetually suspect plot ; and to hear he allude to some deep , long - hatch school conspiracy while we knelt motionless on the form , and fetch a big breath to bring out , ' may the heart of Walter Heriot be turn and he comprehend the multitudinous blessing , ' etc . , be intensely distressing . together with Walter Heriot , Andrew Saddlebank , our good bowler , the droll fellow in the world , John Salter , and little Gus Temple , be oftenest cite . they declare that they invariably utter ' amen , ' as Heriot do , but we none of we hear this defiant murmur of assent from their lip . Heriot pronounce it clearly and cheerfully , cause Julia 's figure to shrink as she kneel with her face in the chair hard by her father 's desk - pulpit . I receive the hearty congratulation of my comrade for sing out ' amen ' louder than Heriot , like a chorister , though not in so prolonged a note , on hear to my stupefaction Mr. Rippenger implore that the heart of ' he we know as Richmond Roy ' might be turn . I do it spontaneously . Mr. Rippenger gaze at I in descend from his desk ; Julia , too , look grieve . for my part , I exult in have do a thing that give I a likeness to Heriot . 
 ' Little Richmond , you be a little hero , ' he say , caress I . ' I see old Rippenger whisper to that beast , Boddy . never mind ; they will not   hurt you as long as I be here . grow tough , that be what you have   get to do . I would like to see you horse , only to see whether you be game to take it without wince if it do not   hurt you much , little lad . ' 
 he hug I up to he . 
 ' I would take anything for you , Heriot , ' say I. 
 ' all right , ' he answer , never mean I to suffer on his account . he have an inimitable manner of sweet speaking that endear he to young boy capable of appreciate it , with the supernatural power of music . it endear he , I suppose , to young woman also . Julia repeat his phrase , as for instance , ' silly boy , silly boy , ' speak with a wave of his hand , when a little fellow thank he for a kindness . she be angry at his approval of what she call my defiance of her father , and insist that I be the catspaw of one of Heriot 's plot to vex he . ' tell Heriot you have my command to say you belong to I and must not be mislead , ' she say . his answer be that he want it in writing . she request he to deliver up her previous letter . thereupon he charge I with a lengthy epistle , which plunge we into boiling water . Mr. Boddy sit in the schoolroom while Heriot 's pen be at work , on the wet Sunday afternoon . his keen little eye be busy in his flat bird 's head all the time Heriot continue writing . he see no more than that Heriot give I a book ; but as I be march away to Julia he call to know where I be go . 
 ' to Miss Rippenger , ' I reply . 
 ' what have you there ? ' 
 ' a book , sir . ' 
 ' show I the book . ' 
 I stand fast . 
 ' it be a book I have lend he , sir , ' say Heriot , rise . ' I shall see if it be a fit book for a young boy , ' say Boddy ; and before Heriot could interpose , he have knock the book on the floor , and out fall the letter . both spring down to seize it : their head encounter , but Heriot have the quick hand ; he catch the letter , and cry ' Off ! ' to I , as on another occasion . this time , however , he be not between I and the usher . I be seize by the collar , and shake roughly . 
 ' you will now understand that you be on a footing with the rest of the boy , you Roy , ' say Boddy . ' little scoundrelly spoilt urchin , upset the discipline of the school , will not   do here . Heriot , here be your book . I regret , ' he add , sneer , ' that a leaf be tear . ' 
 ' I regret , sir , that the poor boy be so savagely handle , ' say Heriot . 
 he be warn to avoid insolence . 
 ' oh , as much Virgil as you like , ' Heriot retort ; ' I know he by heart . ' 
 it be past the hour of my customary visit to Julia , and she come to discover the reason of my delay . Boddy stand up to explain . Heriot go forward , say , ' I think I be the one who ought to speak , Miss Rippenger . the fact be , I hear from little Roy that you be fond of tale of indian adventure , and I give he a book for you to read , if you like it . Mr. Boddy object , and treat the youngster rather rigorously . it must have be quite a misunderstanding on his part . here be the book it be extremely amusing . ' 
 Julia blush very red . she accept the book with a soft murmur , and the sallow usher have not a word . 
 ' stay , ' say Heriot . ' I take the liberty to write some note . my father be an indian officer , you know , and some of the term in the book be difficult without note . Richie , hand that paper . here they be , Miss Rippenger , if you will be so kind as to place they in the book . ' 
 I be hop with all my might that she would not deny he . she do , and my heart sink . 
 ' oh , I can read it without note , ' she say , cheerfully . 
 after that , I listen with indifference to her petition to Boddy that I might be allow to accompany she , and be not at all chagrin by his refusal . she lay down the book , say that I could bring it to she when I be out of disgrace . 
 in the evening we walk in the playground , where Heriot ask I to do a brave thing , which he would never forget . this be that I should take a sharp run right past Boddy , who be pace up and down before the gate lead into Julia 's garden , and force she to receive the letter . I go bound like a ball . the usher , suspect only that I hurry to speak to he , let I see how indignant he be with my behaviour by stride all the fast as I draw near , and so he pass the gate , and I rush in . I have just time to say to Julia , ' hide it , or I be in such a scrape . ' 
 the next minute she be address my enemy : 
 ' surely you would not punish he because he love I ? ' and he , though he speak of insubordination , merit chastisement ; and other usher phrase , seem to melt , and I have what I believe be a primary conception of the power of woman . she lead he to talk in the gentle way possible of how the rain have refresh her flower , and of this and that poor rise . 
 I could think of nothing but the darling letter , which have flash out of sight as a rabbit pop into burrow . Boddy depart with a rose . 
 ' ah , Richie , ' she say , ' I have to pay to have you with I now . ' 
 we walk to the summer - house , where she read Heriot 's letter through . ' but he be a boy ! how old be Heriot ? he be not so old as I be ! ' 
 these be her word , and she read the letter anew , and read it again after she have place it in her bosom , I meanwhile pour out praise of Heriot . 
 ' you speak of he as if you be in love with he , Richmond , ' she say . 
 ' and I do love he , ' I answer . 
 ' not with I ? ' she ask . 
 ' yes , I do love you too , if you will not make he angry . ' 
 ' but do you know what it be he want of I ? ' 
 I guess : ' yes ; he want you to let he sit close to you for half an hour . ' 
 she say that he sit very near she in church . 
 ' ah , ' say I , ' but he must not   interrupt the sermon . ' 
 she laugh , and mouth I over with laugh kiss . ' there be very little he have not   dare enough for ! ' 
 we talk of his courage . 
 ' be he good as well ? ' say Julia , more to herself than to I ; but I sing out , 
 ' good ! oh , so kind ! ' 
 this appear to convince she . 
 ' very generous to you and every one , be he not ? ' she say ; and from that moment be all question concern his kind treatment of the boy , and as to their look up to he . 
 I quit she , take her message to Heriot : ' you may tell he tell he that I can not   write . ' 
 Heriot frown on hear I repeat it . 
 ' Humph ! ' he go , and be bright in a twinkling : ' that mean she will come ! ' he smack his hand together , grow black , and ask , ' do she give that beast Boddy a rose ? ' 
 I have to confess she do ; and feel a twinge of my treason to she , feel her to Heriot . 
 ' Humph ! ' he go ; ' she shall suffer for that . ' 
 all this be like music go on until the curtain should lift and reveal my father to I . 
 there be soon a secret to be read in Heriot 's face for one who love it as I do . Julia 's betray nothing . I be not take into their confidence , and luckily not ; otherwise I fear I should have serve they ill , I be so poor a dissembler and be so hotly ply with interrogation by the suspicious usher . I feel sure that Heriot and Julia meet . his eye be on she all through prayer - time , and hers wander over the boy ' head till they rest on he , when they give a short flutter and drop , like a bird shoot dead . the boy must have have some knowledge that love be busy in their midst , for they speak of Heriot and Julia as a jolly couple , and of Boddy as one meaning to play the part of old Nick the first opportunity . she be kind to they than ever . it be not a new thing that she should send in cake of her own making , but it be extraordinary that we should get these thoughtful present as often as once a fortnight , and it become usual to hear a boy exclaim , either among a knot of fellow or to himself , ' by jingo , she be a pretty girl ! ' on she pass out of the room , and sometimes entirely of his own idea . I be persuade that if she have consent to marry Boddy , the boy would have be seriously dispose to conspire to jump up in the church and forbid the bann . we should have prefer to hand she to the junior usher , Catman , of whom the rumour run in the school that he once drink a bottle of wine and be sick after it , and he be therefore a weak creature to our mind ; the truth of the rumour be confirm by his pale complexion . that we would have hand our blooming princess to he be full proof of our abhorrence of Boddy . I might have think with the other boy that she be grow pretty , only I never could imagine her so delicious as when she smile at my father . 
 the consequence of the enlistment of the whole school in Heriot 's interest be that at cricket - match , picnic on the hill , and boat on the canal , Mr. Boddy be begirt with spy , and little Temple report to Heriot a conversation that he , lie hide in tall grass , have hear between Boddy and Julia . Boddy ask she to take private lesson in French from he . Heriot listen to the monstrous tale as he be on the point of enter Julia 's boat , where Boddy sit beside she , and Heriot row stroke - oar . he dip his blade , and say , loud enough to be hear by I in Catman 's boat , 
 ' do you think french useful in a military education , sir ? ' 
 and Boddy say , ' yes , of course it be . ' 
 say Heriot , ' then I think I shall take lesson . ' 
 Boddy tell he he be take lesson in the school . 
 ' oh ! ' say Heriot , ' I mean private lesson ' ; and here he repeat one of Temple 's piece of communication : ' so much more can be impart in a private lesson ! ' 
 Boddy spring half up from his seat . ' row , sir , and do not   talk , ' he growl . 
 ' sit , sir , and do not   dance in the boat , if you please , or the lady will be overset , ' say Heriot . 
 Julia request to be allow to land and walk home . Boddy catch the rudder line and leapt on the bank to hand she out ; then all the boy in her boat and in Catman 's shout , ' Miss Julia ! dear Miss Julia , do not   leave we ! ' and we hear wheedle voice : ' do not   go off with he alone ! ' Julia bid we behave well or she would not be able to come out with we . at her entreaty Boddy step back to his post , and the two boat go forward like swan that have do ruffle their feather . 
 the boy be exceedingly disappointed that no catastrophe follow the event of the day . Heriot , they think , might have upset the boat , save Julia , and drown Boddy , and give we a feast of pleasurable excitement : instead of which Boddy live to harass we with his tyrannical imposition and spiteful slap , and it be to he , not to our Heriot , that Julia be most gracious . some of we discuss her conduct . 
 ' she be a coquette , ' say little Temple . I go off to the French dictionary . 
 ' be Julia Rippenger a coquette , Heriot ? ' I ask he . 
 ' keep girl out of your head , you little fellow , ' say he , deal I a smart thump . 
 ' be a coquette a nasty girl ? ' I persist . 
 ' no , a nice one , as it happen , ' be his answer . 
 my only feeling be jealousy of the superior knowledge of the sex possess by Temple , for I could not fathom the meaning of coquette ; but he have sister . Temple and I walk the ground together , mutually declare how much we would forfeit for Heriot 's sake . by this time my Sunday visit to Julia have be interdict : I be plunge , as it be , in the pit of the school , and my dream of my father be lose distinctness . a series of box on the ear from Boddy begin to astound and transform I . Mr. Rippenger , too , threaten I with carving , though my offence be slight . ' yes , ' say Temple and I , in chorus , ' but you dare not   strike Heriot ! ' this be our consolation , and the sentiment of the school . fancy , then , our amazement to behold he lay the cane on Heriot 's shoulder as fiercely as he could , and Boddy second he . the scene be terrible . we be all at our desk do evening task for the morrow , a great matchday at cricket , Boddy watch over we , and bellowing , ' silence at your work , you lazy fellow , if you want lesson to be finish at ten in the morning ! ' a noise come grow up to we from below , up the stair from the wet - weather shed , and Heriot burst into the room , old Rippenger after he , pant . 
 ' Mr. Boddy , you be right , ' he cry , ' I find he a prowler , break all rule of discipline . a pervert , impudent rascal ! an example shall be set to my school , sir . we have be fall lax . what ! I find the puppy in my garden whistle he confess for one of my servant here , Mr. Boddy , if you please . my school shall see that none insult I with impunity ! ' he lay on Heriot like a wind on a bulrush . Heriot bend his shoulder a trifle , not his head . 
 ' hit away , sir , ' he say , during the storm of blow , and I , through my tear , imagine he   or I do now   a young eagle force to bear the thunder , but with his face to it . then we see Boddy lie hand on he , and in a twinkling down pitch the usher , and the boy cheer chirp , I should say , they exult so , and merely sing out like bird , without any wilfulness of delight or defiance . after the fall of Boddy we have no sense of our hero suffer shame . Temple and I clutched finger tight as long as the blow go on . we hop for Boddy to make another attempt to touch Heriot ; he hold near the master , look ready to spring , like a sallow panther ; we keep hop he would , in our horror of the murderous slash of the cane ; and not a syllable do Heriot utter . Temple and I start up , unaware of what we be go to do , or of anything until we have get a blow a - piece , and be in the thick of it , and Boddy have we both by the collar , and be knock our head together , as he drag we back to our seat . but the boy tell we we stop the execution . Mr. Rippenger address we before he leave the school - room . Saddlebank , Salter , and a good many other , plug their ear with their fist . that night Boddy and Catman pace in the bedchamber , to prevent plotting and conspiracy , they say . I long to get my arm about Heriot , and thought of he , and dream of blood , and wake in the morning wonder what make I cry , and my arm and back very stiff . Heriot be gay as ever , but have fit of reserve ; the word pass round that we be not to talk of yesterday evening . we fear he would refuse to play in the match . 
 ' why not ? ' say he , star at we angrily . ' have Saddlebank break his arm , and can not   bowl ? ' 
 no , Saddlebank be in excellent trim , though shameface , as be Salter , and most of the big boy be . they beg Heriot to let they shake his hand . 
 ' wait till we win our match , ' say Heriot . 
 Julia do not appear at morning prayer . 
 ' ah , ' say Temple , ' it would make she sick to hear old Massacre pray . ' it have nearly make he sick , he add , and I immediately feel that it have nearly make I sick . 
 we suppose we should not see Julia at the match . she come , however , and talk to everybody . I could not contain myself , I want so to tell she what have befall Heriot overnight , while he be bat , and the whole ground cheer his hit . I on one side of she whisper : 
 ' I say , Julia , my dear , I say , do you know ... ' 
 and Temple on the other : ' Miss Julia , I wish you would let I tell you ' 
 we long to arouse her pity for Heriot at the moment she be admire he , but she check we , and as she be surround by lady and gentleman of the town , and particular friend of her , we could not speak out . Heriot bring his bat to the booth for eighty - nine run . his sleeve happen to be unbutton , and there , on his arm , be a mark of the cane . 
 ' look ! ' I say to Julia . but she look at I . 
 ' Richie , be you ill ? ' 
 she assure I I be very pale , and I feel she tremble excessively , and her parasol be cover we . 
 ' here , Roy , Temple , ' we hear Heriot call ; ' here , come here and bowl to I . ' 
 I go and bowl till I think my head be fly after the ball and get knock , it swam and throb so horribly . 
 Temple relate that I fall , and be carry all the way from the cricket - field home by Heriot , who would not give I up to the usher . I be in Julia 's charge three day . every time I speak of her father and Heriot , she cry , ' oh , hush ! ' and have tear on her eyelid . when I be quite strong again , I make she hear I out . she hold I and rock over I like a green tree in the wind and rain . 
 ' be any name mention ? ' she ask , with her mouth work , and to my ' no , ' say ' no , she know there be none , ' and seem to drink and choke , and be one minute calm , all but a trembling hang underlip , next smile on I , and next have her face carve in grimace by the jerk little tug of her mouth , which I dislike to see , for she would say nothing of what she think of Heriot , and I think to myself , though I forbear to speak unkindly , ' it be no use your make yourself look ugly , Julia . ' if she have talk of Heriot , I should have think that cry person ' kiss be agreeable . 
 on my return into the school , I find it in a convulsion of excitement , owe to Heriot 's send Boddy a challenge to fight a duel with pistol . Mr. Rippenger preach a sermon to the boy concern the unChristian spirit and hideous moral perversity of one who would even consent to fight a duel . how much more reprehensible , then , be one that could bring himself to defy a fellow - creature to mortal combat ! we be not of his opinion ; and as these question be carry by majority , we decide that Boddy be a coward , and approve the idea that Heriot would have to shoot or scourge he when the holiday come . Mr. Rippenger conclude his observation by remark that the sharp punishment he could inflict upon Heriot be to leave he to his own conscience ; which he do for three day , and then ask he if he be in a fit state of mind to beg Mr. Boddy 's pardon publicly . 
 ' I be quite prepared to tell he what I think of he publicly , sir , ' say Heriot . 
 a murmur of exultation pass through the school . Mr. Rippenger seize little Temple , and flog he . far from dread the rod , now that Heriot and Temple have taste it , I think of punishment as a mad pleasure , not a bit more awful than the burn furze - bush plunge into by our fellow in a follow - my - leader scamper on the common ; so I catch Temple 's hand as he go by I , and say , eagerly , ' shall I sing out hurrah ? ' 
 ' bother it ! ' be Temple 's answer , for he have take a stinging dozen , and have a tender skin . 
 Mr. Rippenger call I up to he , to inform I , that whoever I be , and whatever I be , and I might be a little impostor foist on his benevolence , yet he would bring I to a knowledge of myself : he give I warn of it ; and if my father object to his method , my father must write word to that effect , and attend punctually to business duty , for Surrey House be not an almshouse , either for the son of gentleman of high connection , or for the son of vagabond . Mr. Rippenger add a spurning shove on my shoulder to his recommendation to I to resume my seat . I do not understand he at all . I be , in fact , indebte to a boy name Drew , a know sneak , for the explanation , in itself difficult to comprehend . it be , that Mr. Rippenger be lose patience because he have receive no money on account of my boarding and schooling . the intelligence fill my head like the buzz of a fly , occupy my meditation without lead they anywhere . I speak on the subject to Heriot . 
 ' oh , the sordid old brute ! ' say he of Mr. Rippenger . ' how can he know the habit and feeling of gentleman ? your father 's travelling , and can not   write , of course . my father 's in India , and I get a letter from he about once a year . we know one another , and I know he be one of the good officer in the british army . it be just the way with schoolmaster and tradesman : they do not   care whether a man be do his duty to his country ; he must attend to they , settle account with they hang they ! I will send you money , dear little lad , after I have   leave . ' 
 he disperse my brood fit . I be sure my father be a fountain of gold , and only happen to be travel . besides , Heriot 's love for Julia , whom none of we see now , be an incessant distraction . she do not appear at prayer . she sit up in the gallery at church , hardly to be spy . a letter that Heriot fling over the gardenwall for she be return to he , open , enclose by post . 
 ' a letter for Walter Heriot , ' exclaim Mr. Boddy , lift it high for Heriot to walk and fetch it ; and his small eye blink when Heriot say aloud on his way , cheerfully , 
 ' a letter from the colonel in India ! ' 
 Boddy wait a minute , and then say , ' be your father in good health ? ' 
 Heriot 's face be scarlet . at first he stutter , ' my father ! I hope so ! what have you in common with he , sir ? ' 
 ' you state that the letter be from your father , ' say Boddy . 
 ' what if it be , sir ? ' 
 ' oh , in that case , nothing whatever to I . ' 
 they talk on , and the young of we could perceive Boddy be burst with devilish glee . Heriot get a letter post to Julia . it be lay on his desk , with her name scratch completely out , and his put in its place . he grow pale and sad , but do his work , play his game , and only let his friend speak to he of lesson and play . his counsel to I be , that in spite of everything , I be always to stick to my task and my cricket . his sadness he could not conceal . he look like an old lamp with a poor light in it . not a boy in the school miss see how Boddy 's flat head perpetually have a side - eye on he . 
 all this come to an end . John Salter 's father live on the other side of the down , and invite three of we to spend a day at his house . the selection include Heriot , Saddlebank , and I . Mr. Rippenger , not like to refuse Mr. Salter , consent to our going , but pretend that I be too young . Salter say his mother and sister very much wish to make my acquaintance . we go in his father 's carriage . a jolly wind blow cloud and dust and leave : I could have fancy I be go to my own father . the sensation of freedom have a magical effect on I , so that I be the wildest talker of they all . even in the middle of the family I lead the conversation ; and I do not leave Salter 's house without receive an assurance from his elder sister that they be in love with I . we drive home back to prison , we call it full of good thing , talk of Salter 's father 's cellar of wine and of my majority Burgundy , which I say , believe it be true , amount to twelve hundred dozen ; and an appointment be make for we to meet at Dipwell Farm , to assist in consume it , in my honour and my father 's . that matter settle , I feel myself roll over and over at a great rate , and clasp a juniper tree . the horse have trench from the chalk road on to the down . I have be shoot out . Heriot and Salter have jump out Heriot to look after I ; but Saddlebank and the coachman be drive at a great rate over the dark slope . Salter feel some anxiety concern his father 's horse , so we leave he to pursue they , and walk on laugh , Heriot praise I for my pluck . 
 ' I say good - bye to you to - night , Richie , ' say he . ' we be certain to meet again . I shall go to a military school . mind you enter a cavalry regiment when you be man enough . look in the Army List , you will find I there . my aunt shall make a journey and call on you while you be at Rippenger 's , so you shall not   be quite lonely . ' 
 to my grief , I discover that Heriot have resolve he would not return to school . 
 ' you will get thrash , ' he say ; ' I can not   help it : I hope you have   grow tough by this time . I can not   stay here . I feel more like a dog than a man in that house now . I will see you back safe . no crying , young cornet ! ' 
 we have lose the sound of the carriage . Heriot fall to musing . he remark that the accident take away from Mr. Salter the responsibility of deliver he at Surrey House , but that he , Heriot , be bind , for Mr. Salter 's sake , to conduct I to the door ; an unintelligible refinement of reasoning , to my wit . we reach our town between two and three in the morning . there be a ladder lean against one of the house in repair near the school . ' you be here , be you ! ' say Heriot , speak to the ladder : ' you will do I a service the last I shall want in the neighbourhood . ' he manage to poise the ladder on his shoulder , and move forward . 
 ' be we go in through the window ? ' I ask , see he fix the ladder against the school - house wall . 
 he say , ' hush ; keep a look - out . ' 
 I see he mount high . when he tap at the window I remember it be Julia 's ; I hear she cry out inside . the window rise slowly . Heriot speak : 
 ' I have come to say good - bye to you , Julia , dear girl : do not   be afraid of I . ' she answer inaudibly to my ear . he beg she to come to he at once , only once , and hear he and take his hand . she be timid ; he have her finger first , then her whole arm , and she lean over he . ' Julia , my sweet , dear girl , ' he say ; and she : 
 ' Heriot , Walter , do not   go do not   go ; you do not care for I if you go . oh , do not   go . ' 
 ' we have   come to it , ' say Heriot . 
 she ask why he be not in bed , and moan on : 
 ' do not   go . ' I be speechless with wonder at the night and the scene . they whisper ; I see their face close together , and Heriot 's arm round her neck . ' oh , Heriot , my darling , my Walter , ' she say , cry , I know by the sound of her voice . 
 ' tell I you love I , ' say Heriot . 
 ' I do , I do , only do not   go , ' she answer . 
 ' will you love I faithfully ? ' 
 ' I will ; I do . ' 
 ' say , " I love you , Walter . " ' 
 ' I love you , Walter . ' 
 ' for ever . ' 
 ' for ever . oh ! what a morning for I . do you smell my honeysuckle ? oh , do not   go away from I , Walter . do you love I so ? ' 
 ' I would go through a regiment of sabre to get at you . ' 
 ' but smell the night air ; how sweet ! oh , how sweet ! no , not kiss I , if you be go to leave I ; not kiss I , if you can be so cruel ! ' 
 ' do you dream of I in your bed ? ' 
 ' yes , every night . ' 
 ' God bless the bed ! ' 
 ' every night I dream of you . oh ! brave Heriot ; dear , dear Walter , you do not betray I ; my father strike you , and you let he for my sake . every night I pray heaven to make you forgive he : I think you would hate I . I cry till I be glad you could not see I . look at those two little star ; no , they hurt I , I can not   look at they ever again . but no , you be not go ; you want to frighten I . do smell the flower . do not   make they poison to I . oh , what a morning for I when you be lose ! and I , to look out on the night alone ! no , no more kiss ! oh , yes , I will kiss you , dear . ' 
 Heriot say , ' your mother be irish , Julia . ' 
 ' yes . she would have love you . ' 
 ' I ' ve   irish blood too . give I her portrait . it be the image of you . ' 
 ' to take away ? Walter ! not to take it away ? ' 
 ' you darling ! to keep I sure of you . ' 
 ' part with my mother 's portrait ? ' 
 ' why , yes , if you love I one bit . ' 
 ' but you be young than I , Heriot . ' 
 ' then good - night , good - bye , Julia . ' 
 ' Walter , I will fetch it . ' 
 Heriot now tell she I be below , and she look down on I and call my name softly , send kiss from her finger while he give the cause for our late return . 
 ' some one must be sit up for you be we safe ? ' she say . 
 Heriot laugh , and press for the portrait . 
 ' it be all I have . why should you not have it ? I want to be remember . ' 
 she sob as she say this and disappear . Heriot still talk into her room . I think I hear a noise of the garden - door opening . a man come out rush at the ladder . I call in terror : ' Mr. Boddy , stop , sir . ' he push I savagely aside , pitch his whole force against the ladder . Heriot pull down Julia 's window ; he fall with a heavy thump on the ground , and I hear a shriek above . he try to spring to his foot , but drop , support himself on one of his hand , and cry : 
 ' all right ; no harm do ; how do you do , Mr. Boddy ? I think I would try one of the attic , as we be late , not to disturb the house . I ' m not hurt , I tell you , ' he cry as loud as he could . 
 the usher 's word be in a confusion of rage and inquiry . he command Heriot to stand on his leg , abuse he , ask he what he mean by it , accuse he of depravity , of crime , of disgraceful conduct , and attempt to pluck he from the spot . 
 ' hand off I , ' say Heriot ; ' I can help myself . the youngster will help I , and we will go round to the front door . I hope , sir , you will behave like a gentleman ; make no row here , Mr. Boddy , if you have   any respect for people inside . we be upset by Mr. Salter 's carriage ; it be damage my leg , I believe . have the goodness , sir , to go in by your road , and we will go round and knock at the front door in the proper way . we shall have to disturb the house after all . ' 
 Heriot insist . I be astonish to see Boddy obey he and leave we , after my dear Heriot have hop with his hand on my shoulder to the corner of the house front the road . while we be stand alone a light cart drive by . Heriot hail it , and hop up to the driver . 
 ' take I to London , there be a good fellow , ' he say ; ' I be a gentleman ; you need not   look fix . I will pay you well and thank you . but quick . haul I up , up ; here be my hand . by jingo ! this be pain . ' 
 the man say , ' scamp it out of school , sir ? ' 
 Heriot reply : ' Mum . rely on I when I tell you I be a gentleman . ' 
 ' well , if I pick up a gentleman , I can not   be do a bad business , ' say the man , haul he in tenderly . 
 Heriot sing to I in his sweet manner , ' good - bye , little Richie . Knock when five minute be over . God bless you , dear little lad ! Leg will get well by morning , never fear for I ; and we will meet somehow ; we will drink the Burgundy . no crying . kiss your hand to I . ' 
 I kiss my hand to he . I have no tear to shed ; my chest keep heave enormously . my friend be go . I stand in the road strain to hear the last of the wheel after they have long be silent . 




 CHAPTER VI . a tale of a GOOSE 

 from that hour till the day Heriot 's aunt come to see I , I live systematically out of myself in extreme flight of imagination , lock my door up , as it be , all the fast for the extreme stroke of Mr. Rippenger 's rod . he remark justly that I grow an impenetrably sullen boy , a constitutional rebel , a callous lump : and assure I that if my father would not pay for I , I at least should not escape my debt . the title of little impostor , transmit from the master 's mouth to the school in designation of one who have come to he as a young prince , and for whom he have not receive one penny 's indemnification , naturally cause I to have fight with several of the boy . Whereupon I be report : I be pray at to move my spirit , and flog to exercise my flesh . the prayer I soon learn to laugh to scorn . the flogging , after they be over , crown I with delicious sensation of martyrdom . even while the sting last I could say , it be for Heriot and Julia ! and it give I a wonderful penetration into the mournful ecstasy of love . Julia be send away to a relative by the sea - side , because , one of the housemaid tell I , she could not bear to hear of my be beat . Mr. Rippenger summon I to his private room to bid I inform he whether I have other relative besides my father , such as grandfather , grandmother , uncle , or aunt , or a mother . I dare say Julia would have lead I to break my word to my father by speak of old Riversley , a place I half long for since my father have grow so distant and dim to I ; but confession to Mr. Rippenger seem , as he say of Heriot 's behaviour to he , a gross breach of trust to my father ; so I refuse steadily to answer , and suffer the consequence now on my dear father 's behalf . Heriot 's aunt bring I a cake , and in a letter from he an extraordinary sum of money for a boy of my age . he write that he know I should want it to pay my debt for treat to the boy and keep they in good humour . he believe also that his people mean to have I for the Christmas holiday . the sum he send I be five pound , carefully enclose . I feel myself a prince again . the money be like a golden gate through which freedom twinkle a finger . forthwith I pay my debt , amount to two pound twelve shilling , and instruct a couple of day - boarder , commercial fellow , whose heavy and mysterious charge for commission run up a bill in no time , to prepare to bring we material for a feast on Saturday . Temple abominate the trading propensity of these boy . ' they never get lick and they have   always get money , at least I know they always get mine , ' say he ; ' but you and I and Heriot despise they . ' our position toward they be that of an encumbered aristocracy , and really they pay we great respect . the fact be that , when they have trust we , they be compel to continue obsequious , for Heriot have instill the sentiment in the school , that gentleman never fail to wipe out debt in the long run , so it be their interest to make we feel they know we to be gentleman , who be at some time or other sure to pay , and thus also they operate on our conscience . from which it follow that one title of superiority among we , rank next in the order of nobility to the dignity confer by Mr. Rippenger 's rod , be the be down in their book . Temple and I walk in the halo of unlimited credit like more than mortal twin . I give an order for four bottle of champagne . 
 on the Friday evening Catman walk out with we . his studious habit endear he to we immensely , owe to his have his head in his book on all occasion , and a walk under his superintendence be first cousin to liberty . some boy roam ahead , some lag behind , while Catman turn over his page , sound the return only when it grow dark . the rumour of the champagne have already intoxicate the boy . there be a companion and most auspicious rumour that Boddy be go to be absent on Saturday . if so , we say , we may drink our champagne under Catman 's nose and he be none the wiser . Saddlebank undertake to manage our feast for we . come home over the down , just upon twilight , Temple and I see Saddlebank carry a long withy upright . we ask he what it be for . he shout back : ' it be for fortune . you keep the rear guard . ' then we see he follow a man and a flock of geese , and imitate the action of the man with his green wand . as we be ready to laugh at anything Saddlebank do , we laugh at this . the man walk like one half asleep , and appear to wake up now and then to find that he be right in the middle of his geese , and then he wait , and Saddlebank wait behind he . presently the geese pass a lane lead off the down . we see Saddlebank duck his wand in a coax way , like an angler drop his fly for fish ; he make all sort of curious easy flourish against the sky and branch up the lane . we strike after he , little suspecting that he have a goose in front , but he have ; he have cut one of the loiterer off from the flock ; and to see he handle his wand on either side his goose , encourage it to go forward , and remonstrate , and address it in bit of Latin , and the creature patter stiff and astonished , send we in a dance of laughter . 
 ' what have you do , old saddle ? ' say Temple , though it be perfectly clear what Saddlebank have do . 
 ' I have   carve off a slice of Michaelmas , ' say Saddlebank , and he hew the air to flick delicately at his goose 's head . 
 ' what do you mean a slice ? ' say we . 
 we want to be certain the goose be capture booty . Saddlebank would talk nothing but his fun . Temple fetch a roar sigh : 
 ' oh ! how good this goose would be with our champagne . ' 
 the idea seize and enrapture I . ' Saddlebank , I will buy he off you , ' I say . 
 ' chink will not   flavour he , ' say Saddlebank , still at his business : ' here , you two , cut back by the down and try all your might to get a dozen apple before Catman count head at the door , and you hold your tongue . ' 
 we shoot past the man with the geese I pity he clip a corner of the down , and by dint of hard running reach the main street , mad for apple , before Catman appear there . apple , champagne , and cake be now provide ; all that be leave to think of be the goose . we glorify Saddlebank 's cleverness to the boy . 
 ' by jingo ! what a treat you will have , ' Temple say among they , burst with our secret . 
 Saddlebank plead that he have miss his way on present himself ten minute after time . to I and Temple he breathe of goose , but he shun we ; he have no fun in he till Saturday afternoon , when Catman call out to hear if we be for cricket or a walk . 
 ' a walk on the down , ' say Saddlebank . 
 Temple and I echo he , and Saddlebank motion his hand as though he be wheedle his goose along . Saddlebank speak a word to my commissioner . I be to leave the arrangement for the feast to he , he say . John Salter be at home unwell , so Saddlebank be chief . no soon do we stand on the down than he gather we all in a circle , and take off his cap throw in it some slip of paper . we have to draw lot who should keep by Catman out of twenty - seven ; fifteen blank be mark . Temple dash his hand into the cap first ' like my luck , ' he remark , and pocket both fist as he begin strut away to hide his desperation at draw a blank . I buy a substitute for he at the price of half - a - crown , Drew , a fellow we be glad to get rid of ; he want five shilling . the feast be worth fifty , but to haggle about price show the sneak . he beg we to put by a taste for he ; he be groan out of hearing . the fifteen look so wretched when they see themselves divide from we that I give they a shill a - piece to console they . they take their instruction from Saddlebank as to how they be to surround Catman , and make he fancy we to be all in his neighbourhood ; and then we shake hand , they request we feebly to drink their health , and we say , ay , that we would . 
 Temple be in distress of spirit because of his have be ignominiously buy off . Saddlebank , however , put on such a pace that no one have leisure for melancholy . ' I will get you fellow up to boiling point , ' say he . there be a tremendously hot sun overhead . on a sudden he halt , exclaim : ' cook and gridiron ! what about sage and onion ? ' only Temple and I jump at the meaning of this . we draw lot for a messenger , and it be miserable to behold an unfortunate fellow touch Saddlebank 's hand contain the notched bit of stick , and find himself condemn to go and buy sage and onion somewhere , without know what it be for how could he guess we be go to cook a raw goose ! the lot fall to a boy name Barnshed , a big slow boy , half way up every class he be in , but utterly stupid out of school ; which make Saddlebank say : ' they will take it he be the bird that want stuff . ' barnshe be direct where to rejoin we . the other ask why he be trot after sage and onion . ' because he be an awful goose , ' say Saddlebank . 
 Temple and I think the word be out and hurrah , and back come barnshed . we have a task in persuade he to resume his expedition , as well as Saddlebank to forgive we . Saddlebank 's anger be excessive . we conciliate he by call he captain , and pretend to swear an oath of allegiance . he now lead we through a wood on to some field down to a shady dell , where we be to hold the feast in privacy . he do not descend it himself . vexatious as it be to see a tramp 's tent there , we nevertheless acknowledge the respectful greeting of the woman and the man with a few question about tentpeg , pot , and tin mug . Saddlebank remain aloft , keep a look - out for the day - school fellow , Chaunter , Davis , and Bystop , my commissioner . they do not keep we wait long . they have drive to the spot in a cart , accord to Saddlebank 's direction . our provision be in three large hamper . we praise their forethought loudly at the sight of an extra bottle of champagne , with two bottle of ginger - wine , two of currant , two of raisin , four pint bottle of ale , six of ginger - beer , a dutch cheese , a heap of tart , three sally - lunn , and four shillingsworth of toffy . Temple and I join our apple to the mass : a sight at which some of the boy exult aloud . the tramp - woman insist on spread thing out for we : ten yard off their child squat star : the man smoke and chaff we . 
 at last Saddlebank come run over the hill - side , make as if he mean to bowl down what look a black body of a baby against the sky , and shout , ' see , you fellow , here be a find ! ' he run through we , swing his goose up to the hamper , say that he have find the goose under a furze - bush . while the word be come out of his mouth , he see the tramp , and the male tramp 's eye and his meet . 
 the man have one eyebrow and his lip at one corner screw in a queer lift : he wink slowly . ' Odd ! be not   it ? ' he say . 
 Saddlebank shoulder round on we , and cry , ' confound you fellow ! here be a beastly place you have   pitch upon . ' his face be the colour of scarlet in patch . 
 ' now , I call it a beautiful place , ' say the man , ' and if you find goose hereabout grow ready for the fire , all but pluck , why , it be a bountiful place , I call it . ' 
 the woman try to keep he silent . but for they we should have move our encampment . ' why , of course , young gentleman , if you want to eat the goose , we will pluck it for you and cook it for you , all nice , ' they say . ' how can young gentleman do that for theirselve ? ' 
 it be clear to we we must have a fire for the goose . certain observation current among we about the necessity to remove the goose 's inside , and not to lose the giblet , which even the boy who name they confess his inability to recognize , incline the majority to accept the woman 's proposal . Saddlebank say it be on our head , then . 
 to revive his good humour , Temple uncork a bottle of champagne . the tramp - woman lend we a tin mug , and round it go . one boy say , ' that be a commencement ' ; another say , ' hang old Rippenger . ' Temple snap his finger , and Bystop , a farmer 's son , say , ' well , now I have   drunk champagne ; I mean to before I die ! ' Most of the boy seem puzzled by it . as for I , my heart spring up in I like a colt turn out of stable to graze . I determine that the humblest of my retainer should feed from my table , and drink to my father 's and Heriot 's honour , and I pour out champagne for the woman , who just sip , and the man , who vow he prefer beer . a spoonful of the mashed tart I send to each of the child . only one , the eld , a girl about a year old than I , or young , with black eyebrow and rough black hair , refuse to eat or drink . 
 ' let she bide , young gentleman , ' say a woman ; ' she be a regular obstinate , once she set in for it . ' 
 ' ah ! ' say the man , ' I have   see pig druv , and I have   see iron bent double . she be hard ' n both , once she take ' t into her head . ' 
 ' by jingo , she be pig - iron ! ' cry Temple , and sigh , ' oh , dear old Heriot ! ' 
 I fling myself beside he to talk of our lose friend . 
 a great commotion stir the boy . they shriek at behold their goose vanish in a pot for stew . they want roast - goose , they exclaim , not boil ; who care for boil goose ! but the woman ask they how it be possible to roast a goose on the top of wood - flame , where there be nothing to hang it by , and nothing would come of it except smoke bone ! 
 the boy groan in consternation , and Saddlebank sow discontent by grumble , ' now you see what your jolly new acquaintance have do for you . ' 
 so we play at catch with the dutch cheese , and afterwards bowl it for long - stopping , when , to the disgust of Saddlebank and other , down run the black - haired girl and catch the ball clean at wicket - distance . as soon as she have do it she be ashamed , and slunk away . 
 the boy call out , ' now , then , pig - iron ! ' 
 one fellow enrage I by throw an apple that hit she in the back . we exchange half - a - dozen blow , whereupon he consent to apologize , and roar , ' Hulloa , pig - iron , sorry if I hurt you . ' 
 Temple urge I to insist on the rascal be go on his knee for fling at a girl . 
 ' why , ' say Chaunter , ' you be the first to call her pig - iron . ' 
 Temple declare he be a blackguard if he say that . I make the girl take a piece of toffy . 
 ' aha ! ' Saddlebank grumble , ' this come of the precious company you would keep in spite of my caution . ' 
 the man tell we to go it , for he like to observe young gentleman enjoy themselves . Temple toss he a pint bottle of beer , with an injunction to he to shut his trap . 
 ' now , you talk my mother tongue , ' say the man ; ' you be what go by the name of a learn gentleman . thank ye , sir . you will be a counsellor some day . ' 
 ' I will not   get off thief , I can tell you , ' say Temple . he be the son of a barrister . 
 ' nor you will not   help cook their goose for they , may be , ' say the man . ' well , kindness be kindness , all over the world . ' 
 the woman storm at he to command he not to anger the young gentleman , for Saddlebank be swear awfully in an undertone . he answer they that he be the mild lamb afloat . 
 Despairing of the goose , we resolve to finish the cold repast await we . the dutch cheese have be bowl into bit . with a portion of the mashed tart on it , and champagne , it taste excellently ; toffy to follow . those boy who choose ginger - wine have it , and drank , despise . the ginger - beer and ale , apple and sallylunn , be reserve for supper . my mind become like a drive sky , with glimpse of my father and Heriot burst through . 
 ' if I be not a prince , I be a nobleman , ' I say to Temple . 
 he reply , ' Army or Navy . I do not   much care which . we be sure of a foreign war some time . then you will see fellow rise : lieutenant , captain , colonel , General quick as barrel pop at a bird . I should like to be Governor of Gibraltar . ' 
 ' I will come and see you , Temple , ' say I. 
 ' do ! old Richie , ' he say , grasp my hand warmly . 
 ' the truth be , Temple , ' I confide to he , ' I have   an uncle - I mean a grandfather - of enormous property ; he own half Hampshire , I believe , and hat my father like poison . I will not   stand it . you have   see my father , have not   you ? gentleman never forget their servant , Temple . let us drink lot more champagne . I wish you and I be knight rid across that country there , as they use to , and you say , " I wonder whether your father 's at home in the castle expect our arrival . " ' 
 ' the Baron ! ' say Temple . ' he be like a Baron , too . his health . your health , sir ! it be just the wine to drink it in , Richie . he be one of the man I look up to . it be odd he never come to see you , because he be fond of you ; the right sort of father ! big man can not   be always look after little boy . not that we be so young , though , now . lot of fellow of our age have do thing fellow write about . I feel ' Temple sit up swell his chest to deliver an important sentiment ; ' I feel uncommonly thirsty . ' 
 so do I. we attribute it to the air of the place , Temple go so far as to say that it come off the chalk , which somehow stick in the throat . 
 ' saddleback , do not   look glum , ' say Temple . ' Lord , Richie , you should hear my father plead in Court with his wig on . they use to say at home I be a clever boy when I be a baby . saddleback , you have   look glum all the afternoon . ' 
 ' treat your superior respectfully , ' Saddlebank retort . 
 the tramp be irritate he . that tramp have never leave off smoking and lean on his arm since we first see he . two boy name Hackman and Montague , not bad fellow , grow desirous of a whiff from his pipe . they have it , and lie down silent , back to back . bystop be lead away in a wretched plight . two other , Paynter and Ashworth , attack the apple , render desperate by thirst . Saddlebank repel they furiously . he harangue those who might care to listen . 
 ' you fellow , by George ! you shall eat the goose , I tell you . you have   spoil everything , and I tell you , whether you like it or not , you shall have apple with it , and sage and onion too . I do not   ask for thank . and I propose to post outpost in the wood to keep watch . ' 
 he want we to draw lot again . his fun have entirely depart from he ; all he think of be see the goose out of the pot . I have a feeling next to hatred for one who could talk of goose . Temple must have share it . 
 ' we ' ve   no real captain now dear old Heriot 's gone , ' he say . ' the school 's topsy - turvy : we be like a lot of thing rattle in a box . oh , dear ! how I do like a good commander . on he go , you after he , never mind what happen . ' 
 a pair of inseparable friend , Happitt and Larkins , nickname Happy - go - lucky , be roll arm - in - arm , declare they be perfectly sober , and , for a proof of it , try to direct their foot upon a lump of chalk , and marching , and miss it . up come Chaunter to they : ' fat goose ? ' he say - no more . both the boy rush straight as far as they could go ; both sing out , ' I be do ! ' and they be . 
 Temple and I contemplate these proceeding as matter belong to the ordinary phenomenon of feast . we agree that gentleman be always the last to drop , and be assure , therefore , of our live out the field ; but I dread the moment of the goose 's appearance , and I think he do also . Saddlebank 's pertinacity in withhold the cool ginger - beer and the apple offend we deeply ; we should have conspire against he have we repose confidence in our leg and our tongue . 
 Twilight be around we . the tramp - child lie in little bundle in one tent ; another be be build by the woman and the girl . overhead I count number of star , all small ; and light in the valley - light of palace to my imagination . star and tramp seem to I to go together . house imprison we , I think a lost father be never to be discover by remain in they . plunge among dark green leaf , smell wood - smoke , at night ; at morning wake up , and the world alight , and you stand high , and mark the hill where you will see the next morning and the next , morning after morning , and one morning the dear person in the world surprising you just before you wake : I think this a heavenly pleasure . but , observe the narrowness of the tent , it strike I there would be snore companion . I feel so intensely sensitive , that the very idea of a snore give I tremour and qualm : it be associate with the sense of fat . Saddlebank have the lid of the pot in his hand ; we smell the goose , and he cry , ' now for supper ; now for it ! Halloa , you fellow ! ' 
 ' bother it , Saddlebank , you will make Catman hear you , ' say Temple , wipe his forehead . 
 I perspire coldly . 
 ' Catman ! he be be at it for the last hour and a half , ' Saddlebank reply . 
 one boy run up : he be ready , and the only one who be . presently Chaunter rush by . 
 ' barnshe 's in custody ; I be away home , ' he say , pass . 
 we star at the black opening of the dell . 
 ' oh , it be Catman ; we do not   mind he , ' Saddlebank reassure we ; but we hear ominous voice , and perceive people stand over a prostrate figure . then we hear a voice too well know to we . it say , ' the explanation of a pupil in your charge , Mr. Catman , be send bareface into the town a scholar of mine - for sage and onion ... ' 
 ' Old Rippenger ! ' breathe Temple . 
 we sit paralyze . now we understand the folly of despatch a donkey like barnshe for sage and onion . 
 ' oh , what ass we have be ! ' Temple continue . ' come along - we run for it ! come along , Richie ! they be pick up the fellow like windfall . ' 
 I tell he I would not run for it ; in fact , I distrust my leg ; and he be staggering , answer Saddlebank 's reproach for have come among tramp . 
 ' Temple , I see you , sir ! ' call Mr. Rippenger . poor Temple have advance into the firelight . 
 with the instinct to defeat the master , I crawl in the line of the shadow to the farth side of a tent , where I feel a hand clutch mine . ' hide I , ' say I ; and the curtain of the tent be raise . after squeeze through box and straw , I lie flat , cover by a mat smelling of abominable cheese , and feel a head outside it on my chest . several time Mr. Rippenger pronounce my name in the way habitual to he in anger : ' rye ! ' 
 Temple 's answer be inaudible to I . Saddlebank speak , and other boy , and the man and the woman . then a light be thrust in the tent , and the man say , ' I deceive you , sir ! see for yourself , to satisfy yourself . here be our little un lay warm , and a girl there , head on the mat , go down to join her tribe at Lipcombe , and one of our woman sleep here , and all tell . but for you to suspect I of combine Thank ye , sir . you have   get my word as a man . ' 
 the light go away . my chest be relieve of the weight on it . I sit up , and the creature who have be kind to I lay mat and straw on the ground , and draw my head on her shoulder , where I sleep fast . 




 CHAPTER VII . a free life on the road 

 I wake very early , though I have take kindly to my pillow , as I find by my have an arm round my companion 's neck , and her finger intertwiste with mine . for awhile I lay look at her eye , which have every imaginable light and signification in they ; they advise I to lie quiet , they laugh at my wonder , they say , ' dear little fellow ! ' they flash as from under a cloud , darken , flash out of it , seem to dip in water and shine , and be sometimes like a view into a forest , sometimes intensely sunny , never quite still . I trust she , and could have sleep again , but the sight of the tent stupefy I ; I fancy the sky have fall , and gasp for air ; my head be extremely dizzy too ; not one idea in it be keep from wheel . this confusion of my head fly to my leg when , imitate she , I rise to go forth . in a fit of horror I think , ' I ' ve   forget how to walk ! ' 
 summon my manful resolution , I make the attempt to step across the child swaddle in matting and straw and old gown or petticoat . the necessity for do it with a rush seize I after the first step . I pitch over one little bundle , right on to the figure of a sleep woman . all she do be to turn round , murmur , ' Naughty Jackie . ' my companion pull I along gravely , and once in the air , with a good breath of it in my chest , I feel tall and strong , and know what have occur . the tent where I have sleep strike I as more curious than my own circumstance . I lift my face to the sky ; it be just sunrise , beautiful ; bit of long and curl cloud brush any way close on the blue , and rosy and white , deliciously cool ; the grass be all grey , our dell in shadow , and the top of the tree burn , a few bird twitter . 
 I suck a blade of grass . 
 ' I wish it be all water here , ' I say . 
 ' come and have a drink and a bathe , ' say my companion . 
 we go down the dell and over a juniper slope , remind I of my day at John Salter 's house and the last of dear Heriot . rather to my shame , my companion beat I at run ; she be very swift , and my leg be stiff . 
 ' can you swim ? ' she ask I . 
 ' I can row , and swim , and fence , and ride , and fire a pistol , ' I say . 
 ' oh , dear , ' say she , after eye I enviously . I could see that I have check a recital of her accomplishment . 
 we arrive at a clear stream in a gentleman 's park , where grass roll smooth as sea - water on a fine day , and cow and horse be feed . 
 ' I can catch that horse and mount he , ' she say . 
 I be astonish . 
 ' straddle ? ' 
 she nod down for ' yes . ' 
 ' no saddle ? ' 
 she nod level for ' no . ' 
 my respect for she return . but she could not swim . 
 ' only up to my knee , ' she confess . 
 ' have a look at I , ' say I ; and I strip and shoot into the water , happy as a fish , and think how much nice it be than champagne . my enjoyment make she so envious that she pluck off her stocking , and come in as far as she dare . I call to she . ' you be like a cow , ' and she show her tooth , bid I not say that . 
 ' a cow ! a cow ! ' I repeat , in my superior pleasure . 
 she spin out in a breath , ' if you say that , I will run away with every bit of your clothe , and you will come out and run about naked , you will . ' 
 ' now I float , ' be my answer , ' now I dive ' ; and when I come up she welcome I with a big bright grin . 
 a smart run in the heat dry I . I dress , find half my money on the grass . she ask I to give she one of those bit - a shilling . I give she two , upon which she ask I , invitingly , if ever I toss . I reply that I never toss for money ; but she have catch a shilling , and I could not resist guess ' head , ' and win ; the same with her second shilling . she hand they to I sullenly , sob , yet she would not take they back . 
 ' by - and - by you give I another two , ' she say , grow lively again . we agree that it would be a good thing if we enter the village and buy something . none of the shop be open . we walk through the churchyard . I say , ' here be where dead people be bury . ' 
 ' I will dance if you talk about dead people , ' say she , and begin whoop at the pitch of her voice . on my wishing to know why she do it , her reply be that it be to make the dead people hear . my feeling be strange : the shop not open , and no live people to be see . we climb tree , and sit on a branch talk of bird ' egg till hunger drive we to the village street , where , near the public - house , we meet the man - tramp , who whistle . 
 he be rather amusing . he remark that he put no question to I , because he put no question to anybody , because answer excite he about subject that have no particular interest to he , and do not benefit he to the extent of a pipe of ' tobacco ; and all through not be inquisitive , yesterday afternoon he have obtain , as if it have be chuck into his lap , a fine - flavour fat goose honourably for his supper , besides bottle of ale , bottle of ginger - pop , and a fair - earn half - crown . that be through his not be inquisitive , and he be not go to be inquisitive now , know I for a gentleman : my master have tip he half - a - crown . 
 fortunately for he , and perhaps for my liberty , he employ a verb marvellously enlighten to a schoolboy . I tip he another half - crown . he thank I , observe that there be day when you lay on your back and the sky rain apple ; while there be other day when you wear your finger down to the first joint to catch a flea . such be Fortune ! 
 in a friendly manner he advise I to go to school ; if not there , then to go home . my idea , which I have only partly conceive , be to have a look at Riversley over a hedge , kiss my aunt Dorothy unaware , and fly subsequently in search of my father . Breakfast , however , be my immediate thought . he and the girl sit down to breakfast at the inn as my guest . we eat muttonchop and egg , and drink coffee . after it , though I have no suspicion , I notice that the man grow thoughtful . he propose to I , suppose I have no objection against slow travelling , to join company for a couple of day , if I be for Hampshire , which I state be the county I mean to visit . 
 ' well then , here now , come along , d ' ye see , look , ' say he , ' I must not   be pounce on , and no miss young gentleman in my society , and I take half - a - crown for his absence ; that will not   do . you get on pretty well with the gal , and that be a screaming farce : none of we do . Lord ! she look down on such scum as we . she be gipsy blood , true sort ; everything 's sausage that get into their pocket , no matter what it be when it be out . well then , now , here , you and the gal go t ' other side o ' Bed'lming , and you wait for we on the heath , and we will be there to comfort ye ' fore dark . be it a fister ? ' 
 he hold out his hand ; I agree ; and he remark that he now count a breakfast in the list of his gain from never ask question . 
 I be glad enough to quit the village in a hurry , for the driver of the geese , or a man dreadfully resemble he , pass I near the public - house , and attack my conscience on the cowardly side , which be , I fear , the first to awaken , and always the lively half while we be undisciplined . I would have pay he money , but the idea of a conversation with he indicate the road back to school . my companion relate her history . she belong to a Hampshire gipsy tribe , and have be on a visit to a relative down in the East county , who die on the road , leave she to be bring home by these tramp : she call they mumper , and make face when she speak of they . gipsy , she say , be a different sort : gipsy camp in gentleman 's park ; gipsy , horse , fiddle , and the wide world that be what she like . the wide world she describe as a heath , where you look and never see the end of it I let she talk on . for I to talk of my affair to a girl without bonnet and boot would have be absurd . otherwise , her society please I : she be so like a boy , and unlike any boy I know . 
 my mental occupation on the road be to calculate how many hill - top I should climb before I behold Riversley . the Sunday bell sound homely from village to village as soon as I be convince that I hear no bell summon boarder to Rippenger 's school . the shop in the village continue shut ; however , I tell the girl they should pay I for it next day , and we have an interesting topic in discuss as to the various thing we would buy . she be for bright riband and draper 's stuff , I for pastry and letter - paper . the smell of people 's dinner unite our appetite . go through a village I see a man carry a great bake pie , smell overpoweringly , so that to ask he his price for it be a natural impulse with I . ' what ! sell my Sunday dinner ? ' he say , and appear ready to drop the dish . nothing stop his staring until we have finish a plateful a - piece and some beer in his cottage among his family . he want to take I in alone . ' she be a common tramp , ' he say of the girl . 
 ' that be a lie , ' she answer . 
 of course I would not leave she hungry outside , so in the end he reluctantly invite we both , and introduce we to his wife . 
 ' here be a young gentleman ask a bit o ' dinner , and a young I - d'n - know - what be after the same ; I leave it to you , missus . ' 
 his wife take it off his shoulder in good humour , say it be lucky she make the pie big enough for her family and stray . they would not accept more than a shilling for our joint repast . the man say that be the account to a farthing , if I be too proud to be a poor man 's guest , and insist on treat he like a public . perhaps I would shake hand at part ? I do cordially , and remember he when people be not so civil . they want to know whether we have make a runaway match of it . the fun of pass a boys'-school and hear the usher threaten to punish one fellow for stray from rank , entertain I immensely . I laugh at they just as the stupid people we meet laugh at I , which be unpleasant for the time ; but I know there be not a single boy who would not have change place with I , only give he the chance , though my companion be a gipsy girl , and she certainly do look odd company for a gentleman 's son in a tea - garden and public - house parlour . at nightfall , however , I be glad of she and she of I , and we walk hand in hand . I narrate tale of roman history . it be very well for she so say , ' I will mother you , ' as we lie down to sleep ; I discover that she would never have hoot over churchyard graf in the night . she confess she believe the devil go about in the night . our bed be a cart under a shed , our bed - clothe fern - leaf and armful of straw . the shaft of the cart be down , so we lay between upright and level , and awakening in the early light I find our four leg hang over the seat in front . ' how you have be kick ! ' say I. she accuse I of the same . next minute she point over the side of the cart , and I see the tramp 's horse and his tent beneath a broad roadside oak - tree . her face be comical , just like a boy 's who think he have escape and be catch . ' let us run , ' she say . prefer positive independence , I follow she , and then she tell I that she have overhear the tramp last night swear I be as good as a fistful of half - crown lose to he if he miss I . the image of Rippenger 's school overshadow I at this communication . with some melancholy I say : ' you will join your friend , will not   you ? ' 
 she snap her finger : ' Mumpers ! ' and walk on carelessly . 
 we be now on the great heath . they bring the memory of my father vividly ; the smell of the air half incline I to turn my step toward London , I grow so full of longing for he . nevertheless I resolve to have one gaze at Riversley , my aunt Dorothy , and Sewis , the old grey - brown butler , and the lamb that have grow a sheep ; wonderful contrast to my grand king of England career . my first clear recollection of Riversley be here , like an outline of a hill see mile away . I might have shed a tear or two out of love for my father , have not the thought that I be a very queer boy displace his image . I could not but be a very queer boy , such a lot of thing happen to I . suppose I join the gipsy ? my companion wish I to . she have brother , horse - dealer , beautiful fiddler . suppose I learn the fiddle ? suppose I learn their language and go about with they and become king of the gipsy ? my companion shake her head ; she could not encourage this ambitious idea because she have never hear of a king of the gipsy or a queen either . ' we fool people , ' she say , and offend I , for our school believe in a gipsy king , and one fellow , Hackman , use to sing a song of a gipsy king ; and it be as much as to say that my schoolfellow be fool , every one of they . I accuse she of tell lie . she grin angrily . ' I do not   tell them to friend , ' she say . we have a quarrel . the truth be , I be enrage at the sweeping out of my prospect of rise to distinction among the gipsy . after breakfast at an inn , where a waiter laugh at we to our face , and we feed scowl , shy , and hungry , we have another quarrel . I inform she of my opinion that gipsy could not tell fortune . 
 ' they can , and you come to my mother and my aunt , and see if they can not   tell your fortune , ' say she , in a fury . 
 ' yes , and that be how they fool people , ' say I. I enjoy see the flash of her tooth . but my daring of she to look I in the eye and swear on her oath she believe the fortune true one , send she into a fit of sullenness . 
 ' go along , you nasty little fellow , your shadow be not   half a yard , ' she say , and I could smile at that ; my shadow stretch half across the road . we have a quarrelsome day wherever we go ; rarely walk close together till nightfall , when she edge up to my hand , with , ' I say , I will keep you warm to - night , I will . ' she hug I almost too tight , but it be warm and social , and help to the triumph of a feeling I have that nothing make I regret run away from Rippenger 's school . 
 an adventure befell we in the night . a farmer 's wife , whom we ask for a drink of water after dark , lend we an old blanket to cover we in a dry ditch on receive our promise not to rob the orchard . an old beggar come limp by we , and want to share our covering . my companion sink right under the blanket to peer at he through one of its hole . he stand enormous above I in the moonlight , like an apparition touch earth and sky . 
 ' cold , cold , ' he whine : ' there be ne'er a bad off but there be a well off . young un ! ' his word disperse the fancy that he be something horrible , or else my father in disguise go to throw off his rag , and shine , and say he have find I . ' be ye one , or be ye two ? ' he ask . 
 I reply that we be two . 
 ' then I will come and lie in the middle , ' say he . 
 ' you can not ; there be no room , ' I sing out . 
 ' Lord , ' say he , ' there be room for any reckon o ' empty stomach in a ditch . ' 
 ' no , I prefer to be alone : good - night , ' say I. 
 ' why ! ' he exclaim , ' where ha ' you be t ' learn language ? Halloa ! ' 
 ' please , leave I alone ; it be my intention to go to sleep , ' I say , vex at have to conciliate he ; he have a big stick . 
 ' Oho ! ' go the beggar . then he recommence : 
 ' tell I you have   stole nothing in your life ! you have   stole a gentleman 's tongue , I know the ring o ' that . how come you out here ? who be your mate there down below ? now , see , I be go to lift my stick . ' 
 at these menacing word the girl jump out of the blanket , and I call to he that I would rouse the farmer . 
 ' why ... because I be go to knock down a apple or two on your head ? ' he inquire , in a tone of reproach . ' it be a young woman you have   get there , eh ? well , odd grow odder , like the man who turn three shilling into five . now , you gi ' I a lie under your blanket , I will knock down a apple apiece . if ever you have   taste gin , you will say a apple at night 's a cordial , though it do not   intoxicate . ' 
 the girl whisper in my ear , ' he be lame as duck . ' her meaning seize I at once ; we both spring out of the ditch and run , drag our blanket behind we . he pursue , but we elude he , and drop on a quiet sleep - place among furze . next morning , when we take the blanket to the farm - house , we hear that the old wretch have traduce our character , and get a breakfast through charge we with the robbery of the apple - tree . I prove our innocence to the farmer 's wife by put down a shilling . the sight of it satisfy she . she comb my hair , bring I a bowl of water and a towel , and then give we a bowl of milk and bread , and dismiss we , tell I I have a fair face and dare - devil write on it : as for the girl , she say of she that she know gipsy at a glance , and what God Almighty make they for there be no guessing . this set I think all through the day , ' what can they have be make for ? ' I buy a red scarf for the girl , and other thing she fix her eye on , but I lose a great deal of my feeling of fellowship with she . ' I dare say they be make for fun , ' I think , when people laugh at we now , and I laugh also . 
 I have a day of rollick laughter , puzzle the girl , who could only grin two or three second at a time , and then star like a dog that wait for his master to send he off again run , the corner of her mouth twitch for I to laugh or speak , exactly as a dog might wag his tail . I study she in the light of a harmless sort of unaccountable creature ; witness at any rate for the fact that I have escape from school . 
 we loiter half the morning round a cricketer ' booth in a field , where there be moderately good cricketing . the people think it of first - rate quality . I tell they I know a fellow who could bowl out either eleven in an hour and a half . one of the man frighten I by say , ' by Gearge ! I will in with you into a gig , and off with you after that ther ' faller . ' he pretend to mean it , and start up . I watch he without flinch . he remark that if I ' have not cut my lucky from school , and toss my cap for a free life , he be ' whatever may be express by a slap on the thigh . we play a single - wicket side game , he give I six run , and crestfallen he be to find himself beat ; but , as I let he know , one who have bowl to Heriot for hour and stand against Saddlebank 's bowling , be a tough customer , never mind his age . 
 this man offer I his friendship . he make I sit and eat beside he at the afternoon dinner of the eleven , and send plateful of food to the girl , where she be allow to squat ; and say he , ' you and I will tie a knot , and be friend for life . ' 
 I reply , ' with pleasure . ' 
 we nod over a glass of ale . in answer to his question , I state that I like farm , I would come and see his farm , I would stay with he two or three day , I would give he my address if I have one , I be on my way to have a look at Riversley Grange . 
 ' hey ! ' say he , ' Riversley Grange ! well , to be sure now ! I be a tenant of Squire Beltham 's , and a right sort of landlord , too . ' 
 ' oh ! ' say I , ' he be my grandfather , but I do not   care much about he . ' 
 ' Lord ! ' say he . ' what ! be you the little boy , why , Master Harry Richmond that be carry off in the night , and the old squire shut up door for a fortnight , and make out you be go in a hearse ! why , I know all about you , you see . and back you be , hurrah ! the squire will be hearty , that he will . we have   notice a change in he ever since you leave . Gout be be at his leg , off and on , a deal shrewd . but he rid to hound , and din his tenant still , that he do ; he be one o ' th ' old style . everything you eat and drink be off his estate , the day he din his tenant . no humbug 'bout old Squire Beltham . 
 I ask he if Sewis be alive . 
 ' why , old Sewis , ' say he , ' you be acquaint with old sewis ? why , of course you be . yes , old Sewis 's alive , Master Harry . and you bet I at single - wicket ! that will be something to relate to them all . by Gearge , if I do not   think I would get a nettle in my fist when I see you pitch into my stump . dash it ! think I. but th ' old squire will be proud of you , that he will . my farm lie three mile away . you look at a crow fly due South - east five minute from Riversley , and he be over Throckham farm , and there I will drive ye to - night , and to - morrow , clean and tidy out o ' my wife 's soap and water , straight to Riversley . do , eh ? my name 's Eckerthy . no matter where you come from , here you be , eh , Master Harry ? and I see you last time in a donkey - basket , and here you come in breech and defy I to singlewicket , and you bet I too ! ' 
 he laugh for jollity . an extraordinary number of emotion have possession of I : the most intelligible one be a restless vexation at myself , as the principal person concern , for not experience anything like the farmer 's happiness . I prefer a gipsy life to Riversley . gipsy be on the road , and that road lead to my father . I endeavour to explain to Farmer Eckerthy that I be travel in this direction merely to have a short look at Riversley ; but it be impossible ; he could not understand I . the more I try , the more he press I to finish my glass of ale , which have nothing to do with it . I drank , nevertheless , and I suppose say many funny thing in my anxiety that the farmer should know what I mean ; he laugh enough . 
 while he be field against the opposite eleven , the tramp come into the booth , and we have a match of cunning . 
 ' Schoolmaster be out after you , young gentleman , ' say he , advise I to hurry along the road if I seek to baffle pursuit . 
 I pretend alarm , and then say , ' oh , you will stand by I , ' and treat he to ale . 
 he assure I I leave as many track behind I as if I go spill a box of lucifer - match . he be always for my hastening on until I order fresh ale for he . the girl and he grimace at one another in contempt . so we remain see the game out . by the time the game end , the tramp have drunk number of glass of ale . 
 ' a fine - flavour fat goose , ' he count his gain since the commencement of our acquaintance , ' bottle of ale and ginger - pop , two half - crown , more ale , and more to follow , let us hope . you only stick to your friend , young gentleman , will not   you , sir ? it be a hard case for a poor man like I if you do not . we be not   get such chance every morning of our life . do you perceive , sir ? I request you to inform I , do you perceive , sir ? I be muddle a bit , sir , but a man must look after his interest . ' 
 I perceive he be so muddle as to be unable to conceal that his interest be involve in my capture ; but I be merry too . Farmer Eckerthy deal the tramp a scatter slap on the back when he return to the booth , elated at have beat the enemy by a single run . 
 ' Master Harry Richmond go to Riversley to his grandfather in your company , you scoundrel ! ' he cry in a rage , after listen to he . ' I mean to drive he over . it be a comfortable ten - mile , and no more . but I say , Master Harry , what do you say to a peck o ' supper ? ' 
 he communicate to I confidentially that he do not like to seem to slink away from the other , who have make up their mind to stop and sup ; so we would drive home by moonlight , sing song . and so we do . I sit beside the farmer , the girl scramble into the hinder part of the cart , and the tramp stand moan , ' oh dear ! oh dear ! you go away to Riversley without your good friend . ' 
 I toss he a shilling . we sing beginning and end of song . the farmer look at the moon , and say , ' Lord ! she star at we ! ' then he sing : 
  ' the moon be shin on Latworth lea , 
  and where will she see such a jovial three 
  as we , boy , we ? and why be she pale ? 
  it be because she drink water instead of ale . ' 
 ' where be the remainder ? there be the song ! 
  " oh ! handsome Miss Gammon 
  have marry Lord Mammon , 
  and jilt her suitor , 
  all Cupid 's sharpshooter , 
  and go in a carriage 
  and six to her marriage , 
  sing hey ! for I have   land my salmon , my salmon ! " 
 where be the remainder ? I hear it th ' only time I ever be in London town , never rest till I have learn it , and now it be clean gone . what be come to I ? ' 
 he sing to ' Mary of Ellingmere ' and another maid of some place , and a loud song of Britons . 
 it be startling to I to wake up to twilight in the open air and silence , for I be unaware that I have fall asleep . the girl have rouse I , and we creep down from the cart . horse and farmer be quite motionless in a green hollow beside the roadway . look across field and fir plantation , I behold a house in the strange light of the hour , and my heart begin beat ; but I be overcome with shyness , and say to myself , ' no , no , that be not Riversley ; I be sure it be not ' ; though the certainty of it be , in my tooth , refute I . I run down the field to the park and the bright little river , and gaze . when I could say , ' yes , it be Riversley ! ' I turn away , hurt even to a sense of smart pain , without know the cause . I dare say it be true , as the girl declare subsequently , that I behave like one in a fit . I drop , and I may have roll my body and cry . an indefinite resentment at Riversley be the feeling I grow conscious of after very fast walking . I would not have accept breakfast there . 
 about mid - day , cross a stubble - field , the girl meet a couple of her people - man . near evening we enter one of their tent . the woman set up a cry , ' Kiomi ! Kiomi ! ' like a rise rookery . their eye and tooth make such a flashing as when you dabble a hand in a dark waterpool . the strange tongue they talk , with a kind of peck of the voice at a word , rapid , never high or low , and then a slide of similar tone all round , not musical , but catch and incessant , give I an idea that I have fall upon a society of bird , exceedingly curious one . they welcome I kindly , each of they look I in the face a bright second or so . I have two help from a splendid pot of broth that hang over a fire in the middle of the tent . 
 Kiomi be my companion 's name . she have sister Adeline and Eveleen , and brother Osric and William , and she have a cousin a prizefighter . ' that be what I will be , ' say I. Fiddling for money be not a prospect that charm I , though it be pleasant lying in Kiomi 's arm to hear Osric play we off to sleep ; it be like float down one of a number of visible river ; I could see they converge and break away while I float smoothly , and a wonderful fair country nod drowsy . from that to cock - crow at a stride . sleep be no more than the passage through the arch of a canal . Kiomi and I be on the heath before sunrise , jump gravel - pit , chase sandpiper , mimic pewit ; it seem to I I have only just hear the last of Osric 's fiddle when yellow colour fill in along the sky over Riversley . the curious dark thrill of the fiddle in the tent by night seem close up behind the sun , and my quiet fancy as I lay drop to sleep , follow I like unobtrusive shadow during daylight , or , to speak truthfully , till about dinner - time , when I think of nothing but the great stew - pot . we feed on plenty ; nicer food than Rippenger 's , minus pudding . after dinner I be ready for mischief . my sensation on see Kiomi beg of a gentleman be remarkable . I reproach she . she show I sixpence shin in the palm of her hand . I give she a shilling to keep she from it . she have now get one and sixpence , she say : meaning , I suppose upon reflection , that her begging have produce that sum , and therefore it be a good thing . the money remain in my pocket amount to five shilling and a penny . I offer it to Kiomi 's mother , who refuse to accept it ; so do the father , and Osric also . I might think of they , they observe , on my return to my own house : they point at Riversley . ' no , ' say I , ' I shall not   go there , you may be sure . ' the woman grin , and the man yawn . the business of the man appear to be to set to work about everything as if they have a fire inside they , and then to stretch out their leg and lie on their back , exactly as if the fire have go out . Excepting Osric 's practice on the fiddle , and the father 's bringing in and lead away of horse , they do little work in my sight but brown themselves in the sun . one morning Osric 's brother come to our camp with their cousin the prizefighter a young man of light complexion , upon whom I gaze , remember John Thresher 's reverence for the heroical profession . Kiomi whisper some story concern her brother have meet the tramp . I do not listen ; I be full of a temp , owe to two cause : a studious admiration of the smart young prizefighter 's person , and wrathful disgust at he for call Kiomi his wife , and tell she he be prepared to marry she as soon as she play she harp like King David . the intense folly of his ask a girl to play like David make I despise he , but he be splendidly handsome and strong , and to see he put on the glove for a spar with big William , Kiomi 's brother , and evade and ward the huge blow , would have be a treat to other besides old John of Dipwell Farm . he have the agile grace of a leopard ; his waistcoat remind I of one ; he be like a piece of machinery in free action . please by my enthusiasm , he give I a lesson , promise I more . 
 ' he will be champion some day , ' say Kiomi , at gnaw upon an apple he have give she . 
 I knock the apple on the ground , and stamp on it . she slap my cheek . in a minute we stand in a ring . I behold the girl actually square at I . 
 ' fight away , ' I say , to conceal my shame , and imagine I could slip from her hit as easily as the prizefighter do from big William 's . I be mistaken . 
 ' oh ! you think I can not   defend myself , ' say Kiomi ; and rush in with one , two , quick as a cat , and cool as a statue . 
 ' fight , my merry one ; she take punishment , ' the prizefighter sing out . ' first blood to you , Kiomi ; uncork his claret , my duck ; straight at the nozzle , he see more lamp than shine in London , I warrant . make he lively , cook he ; tell he who teach you ; a downer to he , and I will marry you to - morrow ! ' 
 I conceive a fury against she as though she have injure I by appear the man 's property and I be get the bad of it ; her little fist shoot straight and hard as bar of iron ; she like fight ; she be at least my match . to avoid the disgrace of seriously strike she , or of be beat at an open exchange of blow , I make a feint , and catch she by the waist and throw she , not very neatly , for I fall myself in her grip . they have to pluck she from I by force . 
 ' and you have   go a course of tuition in wrestling , squire ? ' the prizefighter say to I rather savagely . 
 the other be cordial , and do not snarl at I for go to the rope , as he call it . Kiomi desire to renew the conflict . I say aloud : 
 ' I never fight girl , and I tell you I do not   like their lick I . ' 
 ' then you come down to the river and wash your face , ' say she , and pull I by the finger , and when she have wash my face clear of blood , kiss I . I think she taste of the prizefighter . 
 late in the afternoon Osric propose that he and I and the prizefighter should take a walk . I stipulate for Kiomi to be of the party , which be allow , and the gipsy - woman shake my hand as though I have be depart on a long expedition , entreat I not to forget they , and never to think evil of poor gipsy - folk . 
 ' why , I mean to stay with you , ' say I. 
 they grin delightedly , and say I must be back to see they break up camp in the evening . every two or three minute Kiomi nudge my elbow and point behind , where I see the woman wave their coloured neckerchief . out of sight of our tent we come in view of the tramp . Kiomi say , ' hide ! ' I dive into a furze dell . the tramp approach , call out for news of I . now at Rippenger 's school , thank to Heriot , lying be not the fashion ; still I have hear boy lie , and they can let it out of their mouth like a fish , so lively , simple , and solid , that you could fancy a master have ask they for it and they answer , ' there it be . ' but boy can not lie in one key spontaneously , a number of they to the same effect , as my friend here do . I be off , they say ; all swing round to signify the direction of my step ; my plan be hint at ; particular be not state on the plea that there should be no telling ; it be remark that I ought to have fair play and ' law . ' Kiomi say she hop he would not catch I . the tramp wince with vexation , and the gipsy chaff he . I thank they in my heart for their loyal conduct . creep under cover of the dell I pass round to the road over a knoll of fir as quick as my foot could carry I , and have just cry , ' now I be safe ' ; when a lady step from a carriage on the road , catch I in her arm and hug I blind . it be my aunt Dorothy . 




 CHAPTER VIII . JANET ILCHESTER 

 I be a prisoner , capture by fraud , and with five shilling and a penny still remain to I for an assurance of my power to enjoy freedom . Osric and Kiomi do not show themselves on the road , they answer none of my shout . 
 ' she be afraid to look I in the face , ' I say , keep my anger on Kiomi . 
 ' Harry , Harry , ' say my aunt , ' they must have see I here ; do you grieve , and you have I , dear ? ' 
 her eager brown eye devour I while I stand pant to be happy , if only I might fling my money at Kiomi 's foot , and tell she , ' there , take all I have ; I hate you ! ' one minute I be curiously peruse the soft shade of a moustache on my aunt 's upper lip ; the next , we jump into the carriage , and she be my dear aunt Dorothy again , and the world begin roll another way . 
 the gipsy have make an appointment to deliver I over to my aunt ; Farmer Eckerthy have speak of I to my grandfather ; the tramp have fetch Mr. Rippenger on the scene . Rippenger pay the tramp , I dare say ; my grandfather pay Rippenger 's bill and for Saddlebank 's goose ; my aunt pay the gipsy , and I think it doubtful that they hand the tramp a share , so he come to the end of his list of benefit from not ask question . 
 I return to Riversley more of a man than most boy of my age , and more of a child . a small child would not have sulk as I do at Kiomi 's behaviour ; but I meet my grandfather 's ridiculous politeness with a man 's indifference . 
 ' so you be back , sir , be you ! ' 
 ' I be , sir . ' 
 ' ran like a hare , ' stead of a fox , eh ? ' 
 ' I do not   run like either , sir . ' 
 ' do you ride ? ' 
 ' yes , sir ; a horse . ' 
 that be his greeting and how I take it . I have not run away from he , so I have a quiet conscience . 
 he say , shortly after , ' look here ; your name be Harry Richmond in my house do you understand ? my servant have order to call you Master Harry Richmond , accord to your christening . you be bear here , sir , you will please to recollect . I will have no vagabond name here ' he puff himself hot , muttering , ' nor vagabond air neither . ' 
 I know very well what it mean . a sore spirit on my father 's behalf keep I alive to any insult of he ; and feel that we be immeasurably superior to the Beltham blood , I merely say , apart to old Sewis , shrug my shoulder , ' the squire expect I to recollect where I be bear . I be not likely to forget his nonsense . ' 
 Sewis , in reply , counsel I to direct a great deal of my attention to the stable , and drink claret with the squire in the evening , thing so little difficult to do that I moralize reflectively , ' here be a way of gain a relative 's affection ! ' the squire 's punctilious regard for payment impress I , it be true . he have save I from the disgrace of owe money to my detest schoolmaster ; and , besides , I be under his roof , eat of his bread . my late adventurous life teach I that I incur an obligation by it . Kiomi be the sole victim of my anger that really seem to lie down to be trample on , as she deserve for her unpardonable treachery . 
 by degree my grandfather get use to I , and commence say in approval of certain of my performance , ' there be Beltham in that Beltham in that ! ' once out hunting , I take a nasty hedge and ditch in front of he ; he bawl proudly , ' Beltham all over ! ' and praise I . at night , drink claret , he say on a sudden , ' and , egad , Harry , you must jump your head across hedge and ditch , my little fellow . it will not   do , in these confound day , to have you clever all at the wrong end . in my time , good in the saddle be good for everything ; but now you must get your brain where you can pick here , pick there and sell them like a huckster ; some do . nature 's go it be damned artifice rule , I tell ye ; and a squire of our country must be three part lawyer to keep his own . you must learn ; by God , sir , you must cogitate ; you must stew at book and map , or you will have some infernal upstart take the lead of you , and leave you nothing but the whiff of his tail . ' he conclude , ' I be glad to see you toss down your claret , my boy . ' 
 thus I grow in his favour , till I hear from he that I be to be the heir of Riversley and his estate , but on one condition , which he do not then mention . if I might have speak to he of my father , I should have love he . as it be , I like old Sewis well , for he would talk to I of the night when my father carry I away , and though he never utter the flattering word I long to hear , he repeat the story often , and make the red hall glow with beam of my father 's image . my walk and ride be divide between the road he must have follow toward London , bear I in his arm , and the vacant place of Kiomi 's camp . Kiomi stand for freedom , point into the darkness I wish to penetrate that I might find he . if I speak of he to my aunt she tremble . she say , ' yes , Harry , tell I all you be think about , whatever you want to know ' ; but her excessive trembling check I , and I keep my feeling to myself a boy with a puzzle in his head and hunger in his heart . at time I ride out to the utmost limit of the hour give I the proper number of minute to race back and dress for dinner at the squire 's table , and a great wrestling I have with myself to turn my little horse 's head from hill and valley lie East ; they seem to have the secret of my father . blank enough they look if ever I despair of their know more than i. my Winter and Summer be the mood of my mind constantly shift . I would have a week of the belief that he be near Riversley , call for I ; a week of the fear that he be dead ; long dream of he , as travel through foreign country , pat the forehead of boy and girl on his way ; or drive radiantly , and people bow . radiantly , I say : have there be touch of colour in these vision , I should have be lure off in pursuit of he . the dream pass colourlessly ; I put colour touch to the figure see in they afterward , when I be cool , and could say , ' what be the use of fancy thing ? ' yet know that fancy thing be a consolation . by such mean I come to paint the mystery surround my father in tender colour . I build up a fretted cathedral from what I imagine of he , and could pass entirely away out of the world by enter the door . 
 Want of boy ' society as well as hard head - work produce this mischief . my lesson be intermittent Resident tutor arrive to instruct I , one after another . they be clergyman , and they soon propose to marry my aunt Dorothy , or they rebuke the squire for swearing . the devil be in the parson , he say : in his time they be modest creature and stick to the bottle and heaven . my aunt be of the opinion of our neighbour , who send their boy to school and think I should be send likewise . 
 ' no , no , ' say the squire ; ' my life 's short when the gout 's marching up to my middle , and I will see as much of my heir as I can . why , the lad 's my daughter 's son : he shall grow up among his tenantry . we will beat the country and start a man at last to drive his yard of learn into he without roll sheep 's eye right and leave . ' 
 unfortunately the squire 's description of man be not start . my aunt be handsome , an heiress   that be , she have money of her own come from her mother 's side of the family , and the tender woman alive , with a voice sweet than flute . there be a saying in the county that to marry a Beltham you must po'chay she . 
 a great - aunt of mine , the squire 's sister , have be carry off . she die childless . a favourite young cousin of his likewise have run away with a poor baronet , Sir Roderick Ilchester , whose son Charles be now and then our playmate , and be a scapegrace . but for I he would have be select by the squire for his heir , he say ; and he often ' confound ' I to my face on that account as he shake my hand , break out : ' I would as lief fetch you a cuff o ' the head , Harry Richmond , upon my honour ! ' and curse at his luck for have to study for his living , and be what he call a sloppy curate now that I have come to Riversley for good . 
 he inform I that I should have to marry his sister Janet ; for that they could not allow the money to go out of the family . Janet Ilchester be a quaint girl , a favourite of my aunt Dorothy , and the squire 's especial pet ; red - cheek , with a good upright figure in walking and riding , and willing to be friendly , but we always quarrel : she detest hearing of Kiomi . 
 ' do not   talk of creature you meet when you be a beggar , Harry Richmond , ' she say . 
 ' I never be a beggar , ' I reply . 
 ' then she be a beggar , ' say Janet ; and I could not deny it ; though the only difference I see between Janet and Kiomi be , that Janet continually beg favour and gift of people she know , and Kiomi of people who be stranger . 
 my allowance of pocket - money from the squire be fifty pound a year . I might have spend it all in satisfy Janet 's wish for riding - whip , knife , pencil - case , cairngorm button , and dog . a large part of the money go that way . she be always get notice of fine dog for sale . I buy a mastiff for she , a brown retriever , and a little terri . she be permit to keep the terri at home , but I have to take care of the mastiff and retriever . when Janet come to look at they she call they by their name ; of course they follow I in preference to she ; she cry with jealousy . we have a downright quarrel . Lady Ilchester invite I to spend a day at her house , Charley be home for his Midsummer holiday . Charley , Janet , and I fish the river for trout , and Janet , to flatter I   of which I be quite aware , while I dress her rod as if she be likely to catch something , talk of Heriot , and then say : 
 ' oh ! dear , we be good friend , be not   we ? Charley say we shall marry one another some day , but mama be such a proud woman she will not   much like your have such a father as you ' ve   get unless he be dead by that time and I need not   go up to he to be kiss . ' 
 I star at the girl in wonderment , but not too angrily , for I guess that she be merely repeat her brother 's candid speculation upon the future . I say : ' now mind what I tell you , janet : I forgive you this once , for you be an ignorant little girl and know no well . speak respectfully of my father or you never see I again . ' 
 here Charley sing out : ' Hulloa ! you do not   mean to say you be talk of your father . ' 
 Janet whimper that I have call she an ignorant little girl . if she have be silent I should have pardon she . the meanness of the girl in turn on I when the glaring offence be her , strike I as contemptible beyond word . Charley and I meet half way . he advise I not to talk to his sister of my father . they all know , he say , that it be no fault of mine , and for his part , have he a rascal for a father , he should pension he and cut he ; to tell the truth , no objection against I exist in his family except on the score of the sort of father I own to , and I have well make up my mind to shake he off before I grow a man ; he speak as a friend . I might frown at he and clench my fist , but he do speak as a friend . 
 Janet all the while be nibble a biscuit , glance over it at I with mouse - eye . her short frock and her greediness , contrast with the talk of my marry she , fill I with renew scorn , though my heart be sick at the mention of my father . I ask she what she know of he . she nibble her biscuit , mumbling , ' he go to Riversley , pretend he be a singing - master . I know that be true , and more . ' 
 ' oh , and a drawing - master , and a professor of legerdemain , ' add her brother . ' expunge he , old fellow ; he be no good . ' 
 ' no , I be sure he be no good , ' say Janet . 
 I take her hand , and tell she , ' you do not   know how you hurt I ; but you be a child : you do not   know anything about the world . I love my father , remember that , and what you want I to do be mean and disgraceful ; but you do not   know well . I would forfeit everything in the world for he . and when you be of age to marry , marry anybody you like you will not   marry I . and good - bye , Janet . think of learn your lesson , and not of marry . I can not   help laugh . ' so I say , but without the laughter . her brother try hard to get I to notice he . 
 Janet betake herself to the squire . her prattle of our marriage in day to come be excuseable . it be the squire 's notion . he use to remark generally that he like to see thing look safe and fast , and he have , as my aunt confide to I , arrange with Lady Ilchester , in the girl 's hearing , that we should make a match . my grandfather pledge his word to Janet that he would restore we to an amicable footing . he think it a light task . invitation be send out to a large party at Riversley , and Janet come with all my gift on her dress or in her pocket . the squire lead the company to the gate of his stable ; the gate open , and a beautiful pony , with a side - saddle on , be trot forth , amid cry of admiration . then the squire put the bridle - rein in my hand , bid I present it myself . I ask the name of the person . he point at Janet . I present the pony to Janet , and say , ' it be from the squire . ' 
 she forget , in her delight , our be at variance . 
 ' no , no , you stupid Harry , I be to thank you . he be a darling pony . I want to kiss you . ' 
 I retire promptly , but the squire have hear she . 
 ' back , sir ! ' he shout , swear by this and that . ' you slink from a kiss , and you be Beltham blood ? 
 back to she , lad . take it . up with she in your arm or down on your knee . take it manfully , somehow . see there , she be get it ready for you . ' 
 ' I have   get a letter ready for you , Harry , to say oh ! so sorry for offend you , ' Janet whisper , when I reach the pony 's head ; ' and if you would rather not be kiss before people , then by - and - by , but do shake hand . ' 
 ' pull the pony 's mane , ' say I ; ' that will do as well . observe I pull , and now you pull . ' 
 Janet mechanically follow my action . she grimace , and whimper , ' I could pull the pony 's mane right out . ' 
 ' do not   treat animal like your doll , ' say I. 
 she run to the squire , and refuse the pony . the squire 's face change from merry to black . 
 ' young man , ' he address I , ' do not   show that bad half of your in genteel society , or , by the Lord ! you will not   carry Beltham button for long . this young lady , mind you , be a lady by birth both side . ' 
 ' she think she be marriageable , ' say I ; and walk away , leave loud laughter behind I . 
 but laughter do not console I for the public aspersion of he I love . I walk off the ground , and think to myself it be quite time I should be move . wherever I stay for any length of time I be certain to hear abuse of my father . why not wander over the country with Kiomi , go to sea , mount the Andes , enlist in a prussian regiment , and hear the soldier tell tale of Frederick the Great ? I walk over Kiomi 's heath till dark , when one of our groom on horseback overtake I , say that the squire beg I to jump on the horse and ride home as quick as possible . two other lad and the coachman be out scour the country to find I , and the squire be anxious , it appear . I ride home like a wound man make to feel proud by victory , but with no one to stop the bleeding of his wound : and the more my pride rise , the more I suffer pain . there at home sit my grandfather , deject , tell I that the loss of I a second time would kill he , beg I to overlook his roughness , call I his little Harry and his heir , his brave - spirited boy ; yet I be too sure that a word of my father to he would have bring he very near another ejaculation concern Beltham button . 
 ' you be a fiery young fellow , I suspect , ' he say , when he have recover his natural temper . ' I like you for it ; pluck 's Beltham . have a will of your own . sweat out the bad blood . here , drink my health , Harry . you be three part Beltham , at least , and it will go hard if you be not all Beltham before I die . old blood always win that race , I swear . we be the old in the county . 
 damn the mixing . my father never let any of his daughter marry , if he could help it , nor'll I , bar rascal . 
 here be to you , young squire Beltham . Harry Lepel Beltham do that suit ye ? Anon , anon , as they say in the play . take my name , and drop the Richmond no , drop the subject : we will talk of it by - and - by . ' 
 so he wrestle to express his hatred of my father without offend I ; and I study he coldly , think that the sight of my father in beggar 's clothe , raise a hand for I to follow his step , would draw I forth , though Riversley should beseech I to remain clad in wealth . 




 CHAPTER IX . an evening with CAPTAIN bulste 

 a dream that my father lie like a wax figure in a bed give I thought of die . I be ill and do not know it , and imagine that my despair at the foot of the stair of ever reach my room to lie down peacefully be the sign of death . my aunt Dorothy nurse I for a week : none but she and my dog enter the room . I have only two faint wish leave in I : one that the squire should be keep out of my sight , the other that she would speak to I of my mother 's love for my father . she happen to say , musing , ' Harry , you have your mother 's heart . ' 
 I say , ' no , my father 's . ' 
 from that we open a conversation , the sweetest I have ever have away from he , though she speak shyly and tell I very little . it be enough for I in the narrow world of my dog ' face , and the red - leaved creeper at the window , the fir - tree on the distant heath , and her hand clasp mine . my father have many fault , she say , but he have be cruelly use , or deceive , and he bear a grievous burden ; and then she say , ' yes , ' and ' yes , ' and ' yes , ' in the voice one suppose of a ghost retire , to my question of his merit . I be refresh and satisfied , like the parch earth with dew when it get no rain , and I be soon well . 
 when I walk among the household again , I find that my week of seclusion have endow I with a singular gift ; I find that I could see through everybody . look at the squire , I think to myself , ' my father have fault , but he have be cruelly use , ' and immediately I forgave the old man ; his antipathy to my father seem a craze , and to account for it I lay in wait for his numerous illogical act and word , and smile visibly in contemplation of his rough unreasonable nature , and of my magnanimity . he catch the smile , and interpret it . 
 ' grin at I , Harry ; have I make a slip in my grammar , eh ? ' 
 who could feel any further sensitiveness at his fit of irritation , read he as I do ? I see through my aunt : she be always in dread of a renewal of our conversation . I could see her idea flutter like bird to escape I . and I penetrate the other who come in my way just as unerringly . Farmer Eckerthy would acknowledge , astonish , his mind be run on cricket when I tax he with it . 
 ' crop be the cart - load of my thought , Master Harry , but there be a bit o ' cricket in it , too , ne'er a doubt . ' 
 my aunt 's maid , Davis , be shock by my discernment of the fact that she be in love , and it be useless for she to pretend the contrary , for I have see she grant tender liberty to Lady Ilchester 's footman . 
 Old Sewis say gravely , ' you have   be to the witch , Master Harry ' ; and other be sure ' I have get it from the gipsy off the common . ' 
 the maid be partly incredulous , but I perceive that they disbelieve as readily as they believe . with my late tutor , the Rev. Simon Hart , I be not sufficiently familiar to offer he proof of my extraordinary power ; so I beg favour of he , and lay hot - house flower on his table in the name of my aunt , and have the gratification of see he blush . his approval of my latin exercise be verbal , and weak praise in comparison ; besides I care nothing for praise not refer to my grand natural accomplishment . ' and my father now be think of I ! ' that be easy to imagine , but the certainty of it confirm I in my conceit . 
 ' how can you tell ? how be it possible for you to know people 's thought ? ' say Janet Ilchester , whose head be as open to I as a hat . she pretend to be rather more frightened of I than she be . 
 ' and now you think you be flatter I ! ' I say . 
 she look nervous . 
 ' and now you be ask yourself what you can do well than I can ! ' 
 she say , ' go on . ' 
 I stop . 
 she charge I with be pull up short . 
 I deny it . 
 ' guess , guess ! ' say she . ' you can not . ' 
 my reply petrify she . ' you be think that you be a lady by birth on both side . ' 
 at first she refuse to admit it . ' no , it be not   that , Harry , it be not   really . I be think how clever you be . ' 
 ' yes , after , not before . ' 
 ' no , Harry , but you be clever . I wish I be half as clever . fancy read people 's idea ! I can read my pony 's , but that be different ; I know by his ear . and as for my be a lady , of course I be , and so be you I mean , a gentleman . I be think now this be really what I be think I wish your father live near , that we might all be friend . I can not   bear the squire when he talk .... and you quite as good as I , and well . do not   shake I off , Harry . ' 
 I shake she in the gentle manner , not suspect that she have read my feeling fully as well as I her thought . Janet and I fall to talk of my father incessantly , and be constantly together . the squire catch one of my smile rise , when he applaud himself lustily for the original idea of match we ; but the idea be no long distasteful to I . it appear to I that if I must some day be marry , a wife who would enjoy my narrative , and travel over the four quarter of the globe , as Janet promise to do , in search of he I love , would be the preferable person . I swear she to secresy ; she be not to tell her brother Charley the subject we converse on . 
 ' oh dear , no ! ' say she , and tell he straightway . 
 Charley , home for his winter holiday , blurt out at the squire 's table : ' so , Harry Richmond , you be the clever fellow in the world , be you ? there be Janet tell everybody your father 's the clever next to you , and she be never see he ! ' 
 ' how ? hulloa , what be that ? ' sing out the squire . 
 ' Charley be speak of my father , sir , ' I say , prepare for thunder . 
 we all rise . the squire look as though an apoplectic seizure be come on . 
 ' do not   sit at my table again , ' he say , after a terrible struggle to be articulate . 
 his hand be stretch at I . I swing round to depart . ' no , no , not you ; that fellow , ' he call , get his arm level toward Charley . 
 I try to intercede the last who should have do it . 
 ' you like to hear he , eh ? ' say the squire . 
 I be ready to say that I do , but my aunt , whose courage be up when occasion summon it , hush the scene by pass the decanter to the squire , and speak to he in a low voice . 
 ' Biter 's bit . I have   dish myself , that be clear , ' say Charley ; and he speak the truth , and such be his frankness that I forgave he . 
 he and Janet be stay at Riversley . they leave next morning , for the squire would not speak to he , nor I to Janet . 
 ' I will tell you what ; there be no doubt about one thing , ' say Charley ; ' Janet 's right some of those girl be tremendously deep : you be about the clever fellow I have   ever meet in my life . I think of work into the squire in a sort of collateral manner , you know . a cornetcy in the Dragoon Guards in a year or two . I think the squire might do that for I without much damage you ; perhaps a couple of hundred a year , just to reconcile I to a nose out of joint . for , upon my honour , the squire speak of make I his heir or word to that effect neatly conjugate before you come back ; and rather than be a curate like that Reverend Hart of your , who hand raisin and almond , and orange - flower biscuit to your aunt the way of all the Reverends who drop down on Riversley I would betray my bosom friend . I be regularly " hoist on my own petard , " as they say in the newspaper . I be a curate and no mistake . you do it with a turn of the wrist , without strike out : and I like neat boxing . I bear no malice when I be floor neatly . ' 
 five minute after he have speak it would have be impossible for I to tell he that my simplicity and not my cleverness have cause his overthrow . from this I learn that simplicity be the keen weapon and a beautiful refinement of cleverness ; and I affect it extremely . I push it so far that I could make the squire dance in his seat with suppress fury and jealousy at my way of talk of Venice , and other Continental city , which he know I must have visit in my father 's society ; and though he rag at I and pshawe the continent to the deuce , he be ready , out of sheer rivalry , to grant anything I please to covet . at every stage of my growth one or another of my passion be alert to twist I awry , and now I be get a false self about I and become liker to the creature people suppose I to be , despise they for blockhead in my heart , as boy may who preserve a last trace of the ingenuousness deny to seasoned man . 
 happily my aunt write to Mr. Rippenger for the address of little Gus Temple 's father , to invite my schoolfellow to stay a month at Riversley . Temple come , everybody like he ; as for I my delight be unbounded , and in spite of a feeling of superiority due to my penetrative capacity , and the suspicion it originate , that Temple might be act the plain well - breed schoolboy he be , I soon prefer his pattern to my own . he confess he have find I change at first . his father , it appear , be work he as hard at Latin as Mr. Hart work I , and he sit down beside I under my tutor and stumble at Tacitus after his fluent Cicero . I offer excuse for he to Mr. Hart , say he would soon prove himself the well scholar . ' there be my old Richie ! ' say Temple , fondle I on the shoulder , and my nonsensical air fall away from I at once . 
 we roam the neighbourhood talk old school - day over , visit house , hunting and dancing , declare every day we would write for Heriot to join we , instead of which we write a valentine to Julia Rippenger , and despatch a companion one compose in a very different spirit to her father . Lady Ilchester do we the favour to draw a sea - monster , an Andromeda , and a Perseus in the shape of a fly british hussar , for Julia 's valentine . it seem to we so successful that we scatter half - a - dozen over the neighbourhood , and ride round it on the morning of St. Valentine 's Day to see the effect of they , meet the postman on the road . he give I two for myself . one be transparently from Janet , a provoking counterstroke of mine to she ; but when I open the other my heart begin beat . the standard of Great Britain be paint in colour at the top ; down each side , encricle in laurel , be king and queen of England with their sceptre , and in the middle I read the initial , a. F - G. R. R. , embed in blue forget - I - hot . I could not doubt it be from my father . rid out in the open air as I receive it , I could fancy in my hot joy that it have drop out of heaven . 
 ' he be alive ; I shall have he with I ; I shall have he with I soon ! ' I cry to Temple . ' oh ! why can not   I answer he ? where be he ? what address ? let us ride to London . do not   you understand , Temple ? this letter 's from my father . he know I be here . I will find he , never mind what happen . ' 
 ' yes , but , ' say Temple , ' if he know where you be , and you do not   know where he be , there be no good in your go off adventure . if a fellow want to be hit , the good thing he can do be to stop still . ' 
 strike by the perspicacity of his view , I turn homeward . Temple have be previously warn by I to avoid speak of my father at Riversley ; but I be now in such a boiling state of happiness , believe that my father would certainly appear as he have do at Dipwell farm , brilliant and cheerful , to bear I away to new scene and his own dear society , that I toss the valentine to my aunt across the breakfast - table , laugh and tell she to guess the name of the sender . my aunt flush . 
 ' Miss Bannerbridge ? ' she say . 
 a stranger be present . the squire introduce we . 
 ' my grandson , Harry Richmond , Captain William Bulsted , frigate Polyphemus ; Captain Bulsted , Master Augustus Temple . ' 
 for the sake of conversation , Temple ask he if his ship be fully man . 
 ' all but a mate , ' say the captain . 
 I know he by reputation as the brother of Squire Gregory Bulsted of Bulsted , notorious for his attachment to my aunt , and laugh - stock of the county . 
 ' so you have   get a valentine , ' the captain address I . ' I go on shore at Rio last year on this very day of the month , just as lively as you youngster for one . saltwater keep a man 's youth in pickle . no valentine for I ! pay off my ship yesterday at Spithead , and here I be again on Valentine 's Day . ' 
 Temple and I star hard at a big man with a bronzed skin and a rubicund laugh who expect to receive valentine . 
 my aunt thrust the letter back to I secretly . ' it must be from a lady , ' say she . 
 ' why , who would have a valentine from any but a lady ? ' exclaim the captain . 
 the squire wink at I to watch his guest . Captain Bulsted feed heartily ; he be thoroughly a sailor - gentleman , between the old school and the new , and , as I perceive , as far go in love with my aunt as his brother be . presently Sewis enter carry a foaming tankard of old ale , and he and the captain exchange a word or two upon Jamaica . 
 ' now , when you have   finish that washy tea of your , take a draught of our October , brew here long before you be a lieutenant , captain , ' say the squire . 
 ' thank you , sir , ' the captain reply ; ' I know that ale ; a moment , and I will gladly . I wish to preserve my faculty ; I do not   wish to have it suppose that I speak under fermenting influence . Sewis , hold by , if you please . ' 
 my aunt make an effort to retire . 
 ' no , no , fair play ; stay , ' say the squire , try to frown , but twinkle ; my aunt try to smile , and sit as if on spring . 
 ' Miss Beltham , ' the captain bow to she , and to each one as he speak , ' Squire Beltham , Mr. Harry Richmond ; Mr. Temple ; my ship be pay off yesterday , and till a captain 's ship be pay off , he be not his own master , you be aware . if you think my behaviour call for comment , reflect , I beseech you , on the nature of a sailor 's life . a three - year ' cruise in a cabin be pretty much equivalent to the same amount of time spend in a coffin , I can assure you ; with the difference that you be hard at work think all the time like the hum . ' 
 ' ay , he think hard enough , ' the squire strike in . 
 ' pardon I , sir ; like the hum plumb - line on a leeshore , I mean to observe . this be now the third the fourth occasion on which I have practise the observance of pay my first visit to Riversley to know my fate , that I might not have it on my conscience that I have miss a day , a minute , as soon as I be a free man on english terra firma . my brother Greg and I be bring up in close association with Riversley . one of the Beauties of Riversley we lose ! one be leave , and we both try our luck with she ; honourably , in turn , each of we , nothing underhand ; above - board , on the quarter - deck , before all the company . I will say it of my brother , I can say it of myself . Greg 's chance , I need not remark , be superior to mine ; he be always in port . if he win , then I tell he " God bless you , my boy ; you have   win the fine woman , the handsome , and the good , in or out of Christendom ! " but my chance be my property , though it may be value only one farthe coin of the realm , and there be always pity for poor sinner in the female bosom . Miss Beltham , I trespass on your kind attention . if I be to remain a bachelor and you a maiden lady , why , the will of heaven be do ! if you marry another , never mind who the man , there be my stock to the fruit of the union , never mind what the sex . but , if you will have one so unworthy of you as I , my hand and heart be at your foot , ma'am , as I have lose no time in come to tell you . ' so Captain Bulsted conclude . our eye be direct on my aunt . the squire bid she to speak out , for she have his sanction to act accord to her judgement and like . 
 she say , with a gracefulness that give I a little aching of pity for the poor captain : ' I be deeply honour by you , Captain Bulsted , but it be not my intention to marry . ' 
 the captain stand up , and bow humbly , reply ' I be ever your servant , ma'am . ' 
 my aunt quit the room . 
 ' now for the tankard , Sewis , ' say the captain . 
 gradually the bottom of the great tankard turn up to the ceiling . he drink to the last drop in it . 
 the squire ask he whether he find consolation in that . 
 the captain sigh prodigiously and say : ' it be a commencement , sir . ' 
 ' egad , it be a commencement would be something like a final end to any dozen of our fellow round about here . I will tell you what : if stout stomach gain the day in love - affair , I suspect you would run a good race against the male half of our county , William . and a damned good test of a man 's metal , I say it be ! what be you go to do to - day ? ' 
 ' I be go to get drunk , sir . ' 
 ' well , you might do bad . then , stop here , William , and give my old Port the preference . no tongue in the morning , I promise you , and pleasant dream at night . ' the captain thank he cordially , but decline , say that he would rather make a beast of himself in another place . 
 the squire vainly press his hospitality by assure he of perfect secresy on our part , as regard my aunt , and offer he Sewis and one of the footman to lift he to bed . ' you be very good , squire , ' say the captain ; ' nothing but a sense of duty restrain I . I be bind to convey the information to my brother that the coast be clear for he . ' 
 ' well , then , fall light , and for'ard , ' say the squire , shake he by the hand . forty year ago a gentleman , a baronet , have fall on the back of his head and never recover . 
 ' ay , ay , launch stern foremost , if you like ! ' say the captain , nodding ; ' no , no , I do not   go into port pull by the tail , my word for it , squire ; and good day to you , sir . ' 
 ' no ill will about this bother love - business of your , William ? ' 
 ' on my soul , sir , I cherish none . ' 
 Temple and I follow he out of the house , fascinate by his manner and oddness . he invite we to jump into the chariot beside he . we be witness of the meeting between he and his brother , a little sniffle man , as like the captain as a withered nut be like a milky one . 
 ' same luck , William ? ' say Squire Gregory . 
 ' not a point of change in the wind , Greg , ' say the captain . 
 they wrench hand thereupon , like two carpet - shaker , with a report , and much in a similar attitude . 
 ' these young gentleman will testify to you solemnly , Greg , that I take no unfair advantage , ' say the captain ; ' no whispering in passage , no appointment in garden , no letter . I speak out . bravely , man ! and now , Greg , refer to the state of your cellar , our young friend here mean to float with we to - night . it be now half - past eleven A.M. your dinner - hour the same as usual , of course ? therefore at four P.M. the hour of execution . and come , Greg , you and I will visit the cellar . a dozen and half of light and half - a - dozen of the old family that will be about the number of bottle to give I my quietus , and you yours all of we ! and you , young gentleman , take your gun or your rod , and back and be dress by the four bell , or you will not find the same man in Billy Bulsted . ' 
 Temple be enrapture with he . he declare he have be think seriously for a long time of enter the Navy , and his admiration of the captain must have give he an intuition of his character , for he persuade I to send to Riversley for our evening - dress clothe , appear in which at the dinner - table , we receive the captain 's compliment , as be gentleman who know how to attire ourselves to suit an occasion . the occasion , Squire Gregory say , happen to he too often for he to distinguish it by the cut of his coat . 
 ' I observe , nevertheless , Greg , that you have a black tie round your neck instead of a red one , ' say the captain . 
 ' then it come there by accident , ' say Squire Gregory . 
 ' accident ! there be no such thing as accident . if I wander out of the house with a half dozen or so in I , and topple into the brook , be I accidentally drown ? if a squall upset my ship , be she an accidental residue of spar and timber and old iron ? if a woman refuse I , be that an accident ? there be a cause for every disaster : too much cargo , want of foresight , want of pluck . Pooh ! when I be haul prisoner into a foreign port in time of war , you may talk of accident . Mr. Harry Richmond , Mr. Temple , I have the accidental happiness of drink to your health in a tumbler of hock wine . nominative , hic , haec , hoc . ' 
 Squire Gregory carry on the declension , not without pride . the Vocative confuse he . 
 ' Claret will do for the Vocative , ' say the captain , gravely ; ' the more so as there be plenty of it at your table , Greg . Ablative hoc , hac , hoc , which sound as if the gentleman have become incapable of speech beyond the name of his wine . so we will abandon the declension of the article for a dash of champagne , which there be no decline , I hope . wonderful man , those Romans ! they fight their ship well , too . a question to you , Greg . those heathen Pagan dog have a religion that encourage they to swear . now , my experience of life pronounce it to be a human necessity to rap out an oath here and there . what do you say ? ' 
 Squire Gregory say : ' drinking , and no thinking , at dinner , William . ' the captain pledge he . 
 ' I will take the opportunity , as we be not on board ship , of drink to you , sir , now , ' Temple address the captain , whose face be resplendent ; and he bow , and drank , and say , 
 ' as we be not on board ship ? I like you ! ' 
 Temple thank he for the compliment . 
 ' no compliment , my lad . you see I in my weakness , and you have the discernment to know I for something well than I seem . you promise to respect I on my own quarter - deck . you be of the right stuff . do I speak correctly , Mr. Harry ? ' 
 ' Temple be my dear friend , ' I reply . 
 ' and he would not be so if not of the right stuff ! good ! that be a way of put much in little . by Jove ! a royal style . ' 
 ' and Harry be a royal fellow ! ' say Temple . 
 we all drink to one another . the captain 's eye scrutinize I speculatingly . 
 ' this boy might have be yours or mine , Greg , ' I hear he say in a falter rough tone . 
 they forget the presence of Temple and I , but speak as if they think they be whispering . the captain assure his brother that Squire Beltham have give he as much fair play as one who hold a balance . Squire Gregory doubt it , and sip and keep his nose at his wineglass , crabbedly repeat his doubt of it . the captain then remark , that doubt it , his conscience permit he to use stratagem , though he , the captain , not doubt it , have no such permission . 
 ' I count I run away with she every night of my life , ' say Squire Gregory . ' nothing come of it but empty bottle . ' 
 ' court she , serenade she , ' say the captain ; ' blockade the port , lie siege to the citadel . I would give a year of service for your chance , Greg . half a word from she , and you have your horse ready . ' 
 ' she be past po'chaise , ' Squire Gregory sigh . 
 ' she be to be win by a bold stroke , brother Greg . ' 
 ' oh , Lord , no ! she be past po'chaise . ' 
 ' Humph ! it be come to be half - bottle , half - beauty , with your worship , Greg , I suspect . ' 
 ' no . I tell you , William , she be get her mind on that fellow . you can not   po'chay she . ' 
 ' after he jilt she for her sister ? Wrong , Greg , wrong . you be muddle . she have a fright about matrimony a common thing at her age , I be tell . where be the man ? ' 
 ' in the Bench , of course . where would you have he ? ' 
 ' I , sir ? if I know my bad enemy to be there , I would send he six dozen of the good in my cellar . ' 
 Temple shoot a walnut at I . I pretend to be meditate carelessly , and I have the heat and roar of a conflagration round my head . 
 presently the captain say , ' be you sure the man be in the Bench ? ' 
 ' cock , ' Squire Gregory reply . 
 ' he have money from his wife . ' 
 ' and he have the wheel to make it go . ' here they whisper in earnest . 
 ' oh , the billing be as rich as the Belthams , ' say the captain , aloud . 
 ' Pretty nigh , William . ' 
 ' that be our curse , Greg . money settle on their male issue , and money in hand ; by the Lord ! we have   always have the look of a pair of highwayman lurk for purse , when it be the woman , the woman , penniless , naked , mean , destitute ; nothing but the woman we want . and there be one apiece for we . Greg , old boy , when will the old county show such another couple of Beauties ! Greg , sir , you be not half a man , or you would have carry she , with your opportunity . the fellow 's in the Bench , you say ? how be you cocksure of that , Mr. Greg ? ' 
 ' company , ' be the answer ; and the captain turn to Temple and I , apologize profusely for talk over family matter with his brother after a separation of three year . I have guess but hastily at the subject of their conversation until they mention the Billings , the family of my maternal grandmother . the name be like a tongue of fire shoot up in a cloud of smoke : I see at once that the man in the Bench must be my father , though what the Bench be exactly , and where it be , I have no idea , and as I be leave to imagination I became , as usual , childish in my notion , and brood upon thought of the Man in the Iron Mask ; thing I dare not breathe to Temple , of whose manly sense I stand in awe when under these distracting influence . 
 ' remember our feast in the combe ? ' I sing across the table to he . 
 ' never forget it ! ' say he ; and we repeat the tale of the goose at Rippenger 's school to our entertainer , make they laugh . 
 ' and next morning Richie run off with a gipsy girl , ' say Temple ; and I compose a narrative of my wandering with Kiomi , much more amusing than the real one . the captain vow he would like to have we both on board his ship , but that time be too bad for he to offer we a prospect of promotion . ' spin round the decanter , ' say he ; ' now be the hour for they to go like a humming - top , and each man lend a hand : whip hard , my lad . it be once in three year , hurrah ! and the cause be a cruel woman . Toast she ; but no name . here be to the nameless fair ! for it be not my intention to marry , say she , and , ma'am , I be a man of honour or I would catch you tight , my nut - brown maid , and clap you into a cage , fal - lal , like a squirrel ; to trot the wheel of mat - trimony . shame to the first man down ! ' 
 ' that will not   be I , ' say Temple . 
 ' be I , sir , I , ' the captain correct his grammar . 
 ' pardon I , Captain Bulsted ; the verb " to be " govern the nominative case in our climate , ' say Temple . 
 ' then I be nominative hic ... I say , sir , I be in the tropic , Mr. Tem ... Mr. Tempus . point of honour , not forget a man 's name . Rippenger , your schoolmaster ? Mr. Rippenger , you have   knock some knowledge into this young gentleman . ' Temple and I take counsel together hastily ; we cry in a breath : ' here be to Julia Rippenger , the prettiest , nice girl live ! ' and we drink to she . 
 ' Julia ! ' the captain echo we . ' I join your toast , gentleman . Mr. Richmond , Mr. Tempus - Julia ! by all that be holy , she float a sink ship ! Julia console I for the fair , cruell woman alive . a rough sailor , Julia ! at your foot . ' 
 the captain fall commendably forward . Squire Gregory have already drop . Temple and I try to meet , but do not accomplish it till next morning at breakfast . a couple of footman carry we each upstairs in turn , as if they be remove furniture . 
 out of this strange evening come my discovery of my father , and the captain 's winning of a wife . 




 CHAPTER X. AN EXPEDITION 

 I wonder audibly where the Bench be when Temple and I sit together alone at Squire Gregory 's breakfast - table next morning , very thirsty for tea . he say it be a place in London , but do not add the sort of place , only that I should soon be come to London with he ; and I remark , ' shall I ? ' and smile at he , as if in a fit of careless affection . then he talk runningly of the theatre and pantomime and London 's charm . 
 the fear I have of this Bench make I passingly conscious of Temple 's delicacy in not repeat its name , though why I fear it there be nothing to tell I . I must have dream of it just before wake , and I burn for reasonable information concern it . Temple respect my father too much to speak out the extent of his knowledge on the subject , so we drink our tea with the grandeur of London for our theme , where , Temple assure I , you never have a headache after a carouse overnight : a communication that lead I to think the country a far less favourable place of abode for gentleman . we quit the house without see our host or the captain , and greatly admire by the footman , the maid , and the groom for have drunk their master under the table , which it could not be doubt that we have do , as Temple modestly observe while we saunter off the ground under the eye of the establishment . we have do it fairly , too , with none of those Jack the Giant - Killer trick my grandfather accuse we of . 
 the squire would not , and he could not , believe our story until he hear the confession from the mouth of the captain . after that he say we be man and hero , and he tip we both , much to Janet Ilchester 's advantage , for the squire be a royal giver , and Temple 's money have already begin to take the same road as mine . 
 Temple , in fact , be fall desperately in love ; for this reason he shrink from quit Riversley . I perceive it as clearly as a thing see through a windowpane . he be always meditate upon dog , and what might be the price of this dog or that , and whether lapdog be good traveller . the fashionable value of pug fill he with a sort of despair . ' my goodness ! ' he use an exclamation more suitable to woman , ' forty or fifty pound you say one cost , Richie ? ' 
 I pretend to estimate the probable cost of one . ' yes , about that ; but I will buy you one , one day or other , Temple . ' 
 the dear little fellow colour hot ; he be too much in earnest to laugh at the absurdity of his be suppose to want a pug for himself , and walk round I , throw himself into attitude with shrug and loud breathing . ' I do not ... do not   think that I ... I care for nothing but Newfoundlands and mastiff , ' say he . he go on shrug and kick up his heel . 
 ' girl like pug , ' I remark . 
 ' I fancy they do , ' say Temple , with a snort of indifference . 
 then I suggest , ' a pocket - knife for the hunting - field be a very good thing . ' 
 ' do you think so ? ' be Temple 's rejoinder , and I see he be dreadfully afraid of my speak the person 's name for whom it would be such a very good thing . 
 ' you can get one for thirty shilling . we will get one when we be in London . they be just as useful for woman as they be for we , you know . ' 
 ' why , of course they be , if they hunt , ' say Temple . 
 ' and we must not   lose time , ' I draw he to the point I have at heart , ' for hunting will soon be over . it be February , mind ! ' 
 ' oh , lot of time ! ' Temple cry out , and on every occasion when I try to make he understand that I be burst to visit London , he keep evade I , simply because he hat say good - bye to Janet Ilchester . his dulness of apprehension in not perceive that I could not commit a breach of hospitality by beg he downright to start , strike I as extraordinary . and I be so acute . I see every single idea in his head , every shift of , his mind , and how he half know that he profit by my shunning to say flatly I desire to set out upon the discovery of the Bench . he take the benefit of my shamefacedness , for which I daily punish his . I really feel that I be justify in give my irritability an airing by curious allusion to Janet ; yet , though I make he wince , it be impossible to touch his conscience . he admit to have repeatedly speak of London 's charm , and ' oh , yes ! you and I will go back together , Richie , ' and say that satisfy he : he double our engagement with Janet that afternoon , and it be a rid party , a dancing - party , and a drawing of a pond for carp , and we over to Janet , and Janet over to we , until I grow so sick of she I be incapable of summon a spark of jealousy in order the well to torture Temple . 
 now , he be a quick - witted boy . well , I one day hear Janet address my big dog , Ajax , in the style she usually employ to inform her hearer , and especially the proprietor , that she covet a thing : ' oh , you own dear precious pet darling beauty ! if I might only feed you every day of my life I should be happy ! I curtsey to he every time I see he . if I be his master , the man should all off hat , and the woman all curtsey , to Emperor Ajax , my dog ! my own ! my great , dear irresistible love ! then she nod at I , ' I would make they , though . ' and then at Temple , ' you see if I would not . ' 
 Ajax be a source of pride to I . however , I hear Temple murmur , in a tone totally unlike himself , ' he would be a great protection to you ' ; and I say to he , ' you know , Temple , I shall be go to London to - morrow or the next day , not later : I do not   know when I shall be back . I wish you would dispose of the dog just as you like : get he a kind master or mistress , that be all . ' 
 I sacrifice my dog to bring Temple to his sens . I think it would touch he to see how much I could sacrifice just to get an excuse for beg he to start . he do not even thank I . Ajax soon wear one of Janet 's collar , like two or three other of the Riversley dog , and I have the satisfaction of hear Temple accept my grandfather 's invitation for a further fortnight . and , meanwhile , I be the one who be charge with go about look lovelorn ! I smother my feeling and my reflection on the wisdom of people . 
 at last my aunt Dorothy find the mean of set I at liberty on the road to London . we have relate to she how Captain Bulsted toast Julia Rippenger , and we have both declare in joke that we be sure the captain wish to be introduce to she . my aunt reserve her idea on the subject , but by - and - by she propose to we to ride over to Julia , and engage she to come and stay at Riversley for some day . kiss I , my aunt say , ' she be my Harry 's friend when he be an outcast . ' 
 the word revive my affection for Julia . strong in the sacred sense of gratitude , I turn on Temple , reproach he with selfish forgetfulness of her good heart and pretty face . without defend himself , as he might have do , he entreat I to postpone our journey for a day ; he and Janet have some appointment . here be give I a noble cause and matter I need not shrink from speak of . I lash Temple in my aunt 's presence with a rod of real eloquence that astonish she , and he , and myself too ; and as he have a sense of guilt not quite explicable in his mind , he consent to bear what be in reality my burden ; for Julia have distinguish I and not he with all the sign of affection , and of the two I have the more thoroughly forget she ; I believe Temple be first in toast she at Squire Gregory 's table . there be nothing like a pen - up secret of the heart for accumulate power of speech ; I mean in youth . the mental distilling process set in later , and then you have irony instead of eloquence . from brood on my father , and not dare to mention his name lest I should hear evil of it , my thought be a proud family , proud of their origin , proud of their isolation , and not to be able to divine they be for the world to confess itself basely beneath their level . but , when they do pour out , they be tremendous , as Temple find . this oratorical display of mine give I an ascendancy over he . he adore eloquence , not to say grandiloquence : he be the son of a barrister . ' let us go and see she at once , Richie , ' he say of Julia . ' I ' m ready to be off as soon as you like ; I be ready to do anything that will please you ' ; which be untrue , but it be useless to tell he so . I sigh at my sad gift of penetration , and toss the fresh example of it into the treasury of vanity . 
 ' Temple , ' say I , dissemble a little ; ' I tell you candidly : you will not   please I by do anything disagreeable to you . a dog pull by the collar be not much of a companion . I start for Julia to - morrow before daylight . if you like your bed well , stop there ; and mind you amuse Janet for I due my absence . ' 
 ' I be not go to let any one make comparison between we , ' Temple mutter . 
 he drop dozen of similar remark , and sometimes talk downright flattery , I have so deeply impressed he . 
 we breakfast by candle - light , and ride away on a frosty foggy morning , keep our groom fifty yard to the rear , a laughable sight , with both his coat - pocket bulging , a couple of Riversley turnover pasty in one , and a bottle of champagne in the other , for our lunch on the road . now and then , when near he , we gallop for the fun of see he nurse the bottle - pocket . he be generally invisible . Temple do not think it strange that we should be rid out in an unknown world with only a little ring , half a stone's - throw clear around we , and blot of copse , and queer vanish cottage , and hard grey meadow , fir - tree wonderfully magnify , and larch and birch rig like fairy ship , all start up to we as we pass , and melt instantly . one could have fancy the fir - tree black torch . and here the shoulder of a hill invite we to race up to the ridge : some way on we come to crossroad , careless of our luck in hit the right one : yonder hang a village church in the air , and church - steeple pierce ever so high ; and out of the heart of the mist leap a brook , and to hear it at one moment , and then to have the sharp freezing silence in one 's ear , be piercingly weird . it all toss the mind in my head like hay on a pitchfork . I forget the existence of everything but what I love passionately , and that have no shape , be like a wind . 
 up on a knoll of fir in the middle of a heath , glow rosy in the frost , we dismount to lunch , lean against the warm saddle , Temple and I , and Uberly , our groom , who remind I of a certain tramp of my acquaintance in his decide preference of beer to champagne ; he drank , though , and sparkle after his draught . no soon be we on horseback again ere the flank of the dear friendly brute be in any way cool than Temple shout enthusiastically , ' Richie , we shall do it yet ! I have   be funk , but now I be sure we shall do it . Janet say , " what be the use of my come over to dine at Riversley if Harry Richmond and you do not   come home before ten or eleven o'clock ? " I tell she we would do it by dinner - time : do not   you like Janet , Richie ? that be , if our horse ' hic - haec - hock do not   get strained on this hard nominative - plural - masculine of the article road . do not   you fancy yourself din with the captain , Richie ? dative huic , say old Squire Gregory . I like to see he at dinner , because he love the smell of his wine . oh ! it be nothing to boast of , but we do drink they under the table , it can not   be deny . Janet hear of it . Hulloa ! you talk of a hunting - knife . what do you say to a pair of skate ? here we be in for a frost of six week . it strike I , a pair of skate ... ' 
 this be the champagne in Temple . in I it do not bubble to speech , and I soon draw he on at a pace that render conversation impossible . uberly shout after we to spare the horse ' leg . we hear he twice out of the deepening fog . I call to Temple that he be right , we should do it . Temple hurrah rather breathlessly . at the end of an hour I pull up at an inn , where I leave the horse to be groom and feed , and walk away rapidly as if I know the town , Temple follow I with perfect confidence , and , indeed , I have no intention to deceive he . we enter a new station of a railway . 
 ' oh ! ' say Temple , ' the rest of the way by rail . ' 
 when the railway clerk ask I what place I want ticket for , London spring to my mouth promptly in a murmur , and take the ticket I reply to Temple , 
 ' the rest of the way by rail . Uberly 's sure to stop at that inn ' ; but my heart beat as the carriage slide away with we ; an affectionate commiseration for Temple touch I when I hear he count on our be back at Riversley in time to dress for dinner . 
 he laugh aloud at the idea of our plump down on Rippenger 's school , get a holiday for the boy , tip they , and then off with Julia , exactly like two Gods of the Mythology , Apollo and Mercury . 
 ' I often use to think they have the jolly life that ever be live , ' he say , and try to catch glimpse of the country , and musing , and singing , he continue to feel like one of those blissful god until wonder at the passage of time supervene . amazement , when he look at my watch , strike he dumb . ten minute later we be in yellow fog , then in brown . Temple star at both window and at I ; he jump from his seat and fall on it , mutter , ' no ; nonsense ! I say ! ' but he have accurately recognize London 's fog . I leave he unanswered to bring up all his sens , which the railway have outstrip , for the contemplation of this fact , that we two be in the city of London . 




 CHAPTER XI . the GREAT FOG and the FIRE AT midnight 

 it be London city , and the Bench be the kernel of it to I . I throb with excitement , though I sit look out of the window into the subterranean atmosphere quite still and firm . when you think long undividedly of a single object it gather light , and when you draw near it in person the strange thing to your mind be the absence of that light ; but I , approach it in this dense fog , seem to myself to be only think of it a little more warmly than usual , and instead of fade it reverse the process , and become , from light , luminous . not be able , however , to imagine the Bench a happy place , I correct the excess of brightness and give its wall a pine - torch glow ; I set they in the middle of a great square , and hang the standard of England droop over they in a sort of mournful family pride . then , because I next conceive it a foreign kind of place , different altogether from that home growth of our , the Tower of London , I top it with a multitude of dome of pumpkin or turban shape , resemble the Kremlin of Moscow , which have once leap up in the eye of Winter , glow like a million pine - torch , and fling shadow of stretch red horse on the black smoke - drift . but what be the Kremlin , that have see a city perish , to this Bench where my father languish ! there be no compare they for tragic horror . and the Kremlin have snow - field around it ; this Bench be catch out of sight , hem in by an atmosphere thick as Charon breathe ; it might as well be underground . 
 ' oh ! it be London , ' Temple go on , correct his incorrigible doubt about it . he jump on the platform ; we have to call out not to lose one another . ' I say , Richie , this be London , ' he say , link his arm in mine : ' you know by the size of the station ; and besides , there be the fog . oh ! it be London . we have   overshot it , we be positively in London . ' 
 I could spare no sympathy for his feeling , and I do not respond to his inquire look . now that we be here I certainly wish myself away , though I would not have retreat , and for awhile I be glad of the discomfort beset I ; my step be hearty as I lead on , meditate upon ask some one the direction to the Bench presently . we have to walk , and it be nothing but traverse on a slippery pavement atmospheric circle of black brown and brown red , and sometimes a large circle of pale yellow ; the colour of old bruise fruit , medlar , melon , and the smell of they ; nothing be more desolate . neither of we know where we be , nor where we be go . we struggle through an interminable succession of squalid street , from the one lamp visible to its neighbour in the darkness : you might have fancy yourself peer at the head of an old saint on a smoky canvas ; it be like the painting of light rather than light . figure rush by ; we see no face . 
 Temple speak solemnly : ' our dinner - hour at home be half - past six . ' a street - boy overhear he and chaff he . Temple get the bad of it , and it do he good , for he have the sweetest nature in the world . we decline to be attend by link - boy ; they would have hurt our sense of independence . possess of a sovereign faith that , by dint of resolution , I should ultimately penetrate to the great square enclose the Bench , I walk with the air of one who have the map of London in his eye and could thread it blindfold . Temple be thereby deceive into thinking that I must somehow have learn the direction I mean to take , and know my way , though at the slight indication of my halting and glancing round his suspicion begin to boil , and he be for ask some one the name of the ground we stand on : he murmur , ' fellow get lose in London . ' by this time he clearly understand that I have come to London on purpose : he could not but be aware of the object of my coming , and I be too proud , and he still too delicate , to allude to it . 
 the fog choke we . perhaps it take away the sense of hunger by fill we as if we have eat a dinner of soot . we have no craving to eat until long past the dinner - hour in Temple 's house , and then I would rather have plunge into a bath and a bed than have be request to sit at a feast ; Temple too , I fancy . we know we be astray without speak of it . Temple say , ' I wish we have not   drunk that champagne . ' it seem to I year since I have taste the delicious crushing of the sweet bubble in my mouth . but I do not blame they ; I be after my father : he , dear little fellow , have no light ahead except his devotion to I : he must have have a touch of conscious guilt regard his recent behaviour , enough to hold he from complain formally . he complain of a London without shop and light , wonder how any one could like to come to it in a fog , and so forth ; and again regret our have drunk champagne in the morning ; a sort of involuntary whimpering easily forgive to he , for I know he have a gallant heart . I determine , as an act of signal condescension , to accost the first person we meet , male or female , for Temple 's sake . have come to this resolve , which be to be an open confession that I have mislead he , wound to my pride , I hop eagerly for the hearing of a footfall . we be in a labyrinth of dark street where no one be astir . a wretched dog trot up to we , follow at our heel a short distance , and leave we as if he smell no luck about we ; our cajolery be unavaile to keep that miserable companion . 
 ' Sinbad escape from the pit by track a lynx , ' I happen to remark . Temple would not hear of Sinbad . 
 ' oh , come , we be not Mussulmen , ' say he ; ' I declare , Richie , if I see a church open , I would go in and sleep there . be you think of track the dog , then ? Beer may be have somewhere . we shall have to find an hotel . what can the time be ? ' 
 I owe it to he to tell he , so I climb a lamppost and spelt out the hour by my watch . when I descend we be three . a man have his hand on Temple 's shoulder , examine his feature . 
 ' now speak , ' the man say , roughly . 
 I be interpose , but Temple cry , ' all right , Richie , we be two to one . ' 
 the man groan . I ask he what he want . 
 ' my son ! I have   lose my son , ' the man reply , and walk away ; and he would give no answer to our question . 
 I catch hold of the lamp - post , overcome . I mean to tell Temple , in response to the console touch of his hand , that I hop the poor , man would discover his son , but say instead , ' I wish we could see the Bench to - night . ' Temple exclaim , ' ah ! ' pretend by his tone of voice that we have recently discuss our chance of it , and then he venture to inform I that he imagine he have hear of the place be shut up after a certain hour of the night . 
 my heart feel release , and gush with love for he . ' very well , Temple , ' I say : ' then we will wait till tomorrow , and strike out for some hotel now . ' 
 off we go at a furious pace . Saddlebank 's goose be revert to by both of we with an exchange of assurance that we should meet a dish the fellow to it before we sleep . 
 ' as for life , ' say I , as soon as the sharp pace have fetch my breathing to a regular measure , ' adventure be what I call life . ' 
 Temple assent . ' they be capital , if you only see the end of they . ' 
 we talk of Ulysses and Penelope . Temple blame he for leave Calypso . I think Ulysses be right , otherwise we should have have no slaying of the suitor but Temple shyly urge that to have a Goddess care for you   and she be handsomer than Penelope , who must have be an oldish woman   be something to make you feel as you do on a hunting morning , when there be half - a - dozen riding - habit speckle the field a whole glorious day your own among they ! this view appear to I very captivating , save for an obstruction in my mind , which be , that Goddesses be always conceive by I as statue . they talk and they move , it be true , but the touch of they be marble ; and they smile and frown , but they have no variety they be never warm . 
 ' if I think that ! ' muttered Temple , puff at the raw fog . he admit he have think just the contrary , and that the cold have suggest to he the absurdity of leave a Goddess . 
 ' look here , Temple , ' say I , ' have it never strike you ? I will not   say I be like he . it be true I have   always admire Ulysses ; he could fight well , talk good , and plough , and box , and how clever he be ! take he all round , who would not   rather have have he for a father than Achilles ? and there be just as many woman in love with he . ' 
 ' More , ' say Temple . 
 ' well , then , ' I continue , thank he in my heart , for it must have cost he something to let Ulysses be set above Achilles , ' Telemachus be the one I mean . he be in search of his father . he find he at last . upon my honour , Temple , when I think of it , I ' m ashamed to have wait so long . I call that luxury I have   live in senseless . yes ! while I be uncertain whether my father have enough to eat or not . ' 
 ' I say ! hush ! ' Temple breathe , in pain at such allusion . ' Richie , the squire have finish his bottle by about now ; bottle number two . he will not   miss we till the morning , but Miss Beltham will . she will be at your bedroom door three or four time in the night , I know . it be get dark and dark , we must be in some dreadful part of London . ' 
 the contrast he present to my sensation between our pleasant home and this foggy solitude give I a pang of dismay . I diverge from my favourite straight line , which seem to pierce into the bowel of the earth , sharp to the right . soon or late after , I can not tell , we be in the midst of a thin stream of people , mostly compose of boy and young woman , go at double time , hoot and scream with the delight of loosened animal , not quite so agreeably ; but animal never hunt on a well scent . a dozen turning in their company bring we in front of a fire . there we see two house prey on by the flame , just as if a lion have his paw on a couple of human creature , devour they ; we hear his jaw , the cracking of bone , shriek , and the voracious in - and - out of his breath edge with anger . a girl by my side exclaim , ' it be not the Bench , after all ! would I have run to see a paltry two - story washerwoman 's mangling - shed flare up , when six penn'orth of squib and shaving and a cracker make twice the fun ! ' 
 I turn to she , hardly able to speak . ' where be the Bench , if you please ? ' she point . I look on an immense high wall . the blunt flame of the fire opposite throw a sombre glow on it . 
 the girl say , ' and do not   you go hop into debt , my young cock - sparrow , or you will know one side o ' the turnkey well than t ' other . ' she have a friend with she who chide she for speak so freely . 
 ' be it too late to go in to - night ? ' I ask . 
 she answer that it be , and that she and her friend be the person to show I the way in there . her friend answer more sensibly : ' yes , you can not   go in there before some time in the morning . ' 
 I learn from she that the Bench be a debtor ' prison . 
 the saucy girl of the pair ask I for money . I hand she a crown - piece . 
 ' now will not   you give another big bit to my friend ? ' say she . 
 I have no change , and the well - mannered girl bid I never mind , the saucy one press for it , and for a treat . she be amusing in her talk of the quantity of different fire she have see ; she have also see accidental - death corps , but never a suicide in the act ; and here she regret the failure of her experience . this conversation of a good - look girl amaze I . presently Temple cry , ' a third house catch , and no engine yet ! Richie , there be an old woman in her night - dress ; we can not   stand by . ' 
 the saucy girl joke at the poor half - naked old woman . Temple stand hump and agitate his shoulder like a cat before it spring . both the girl try to stop we . the one I like well seize my watch , and say , ' leave this to I to take care of , ' and I have no time to wrestle for it . I have a glimpse of her face that let I think she be not fool I , the watch - chain fly off my neck , Temple and I clove through the crowd of gaper . we get into the heat , which be in a minute scorching . three man be under the window ; they have sing out to the old woman above to drop a blanket she toss they a water - jug . she be save by the blanket of a neighbour . Temple and I strain at one corner of it to catch she . 
 she come down , the man say , like a sing turkey . the flame illuminate she as she descend . there be a great deal of laughter in the crowd , but I be shock . Temple share the painful impression produce on I . I can not express my relief when the old woman be wrap in the blanket which have break her descent , and stand like a blot instead of a figure . I hand a sovereign to the three man , compliment they on the humanity of their disposition . they cheer we , and the crowd echo the cheer , and Temple and I make our way back to the two girl : both of we lose our pocket - handkerchief , and Temple a penknife as well . then the engine arrive and souse the burn house . we be all in a crimson mist , boy smoking , girl laugh and star , man hallooing , hat and cap fly about , fight go on , people throw their furniture out of the window . the great wall of the Bench be awful in its reflection of the labour flame it rise out of sight like the flame - top till the column of water bring they down . I think of my father , and of my watch . the two girl be not visible . ' a glorious life a fireman 's ! ' say Temple . 
 the fireman be on the roof of the house , handsome as greek hero , and it really do look as if they be engage in slay an enormous dragon , that hiss and tongue at they , and writhe its tail , paddle its break big red wing in the pit of wreck and smoke , twisting and darken - something fine to conquer , I feel with Temple . 
 a mutual disgust at the inconvenience create by the appropriation of our pocket - handkerchief by member of the crowd , induce we to disentangle ourselves from it without confide to any one our perplexity for supper and a bed . we be now extremely thirsty . I have vision of my majority bottle of Burgundy , lie under John Thresher 's care at Dipwell , and would have abandon they all for one on the spot . after range about the outskirt of the crowd , seek the two girl , we walk away , not so melancholy but that a draught of porter would have cheer we . Temple pun on the loss of my watch , and excuse himself for a joke neither of we have spirit to laugh at . just as I be say , with a last glance at the fire , ' anyhow , it would have go in that crowd , ' the nice good girl run up behind we , cry , ' there ! ' as she put the watch - chain over my head . 
 ' there , Temple , ' say I , ' do not   I tell you so ? ' and Temple kindly suppose so . 
 the girl say , ' I be afraid I have miss you , little fellow , and you would take I for a thief , and thank God , I be no thief yet . I rush into the crowd to meet you after you catch that old creature , and I could have kiss you both , you be so brave . ' 
 ' we always go in for it together , ' say Temple . 
 I make an offer to the girl of a piece of gold . ' oh , I be poor , ' she cry , yet keep she hand off it like a bird alight on ground , not on prey . when I compel she to feel the money tight , she sigh , ' if I be not   so poor ! I do not   want your gold . why be you out so late ? ' 
 we inform she of our arrival from the country , and wandering in the fog . 
 ' and you will say you be not tired , I know , ' the girl remark , and laugh to hear how correctly she have judge of our temper . our thirst and hunger , however , fill she with concern , because of our not be use to it as she be , and no place be open to supply our want . her friend , the saucy one , accompany by a man evidently a sailor , join we , and the three have a consultation away from Temple and I , at the end of which the sailor , whose name be Joe , raise his leg dancingly , and smack it . we give he our hand to shake , and understand , without astonishment , that we be invite on , board his ship to partake of refreshment . we should not have be astonish have he say on board his balloon . down through thick fog of a light colour , we make our way to a narrow lane lead to the river - side , where two man stand thump their arm across their breast , smoking pipe , and swearing . we enter a boat and be row to a ship . I be not aware how frozen and befog my mind and sens have become until I have take a desperate and long gulp of smoke rum - and - water , and then the whole of our adventure from morning to midnight , with the fir - tree in the country fog , and the lamp in the London fog , and the man who have lose his son , the fire , the Bench , the old woman with her fowl - like cry and limb in the air , and the row over the misty river , swam flash before my eye , and I cry out to the two girl , who be drink out of one glass with the sailor Joe , my entertainer , ' well , I be awake now ! ' and sleep straight off the next instant . 




 CHAPTER XII . we find OURSELVES BOUND on a voyage 

 it seem to I that I have but take a turn from right to left , or go round a wheel , when I repeat the same word , and I hear Temple somewhere near I mumble something like they . he draw a long breath , so do I : we clear our throat with a sort of whinny simultaneously . the enjoyment of lie perfectly still , refresh , incurious , unexcited , yet have our mind animate , excursive , reap all the incident of our life at leisure , and make a dream of our late experience , keep we tranquil and incommunicative . occasionally we let fall a sigh fathom deep , then by - and - by begin blow a bit of a wanton laugh at the end of it . I raise my foot and see the boot on it , which account for an uneasy sensation set in through my frame . 
 I say softly , ' what a pleasure it must be for horse to be groom ! ' 
 ' just what I be think ! ' say Temple . 
 we start up on our elbow , and one or the other cry : 
 ' there be a chart ! these be bunk ! Hark at the row overhead ! we be in a ship ! the ship 's moving ! be it foggy this morning ? it be time to get up ! I have   sleep in my clothe ! oh , for a dip ! how I smell of smoke ! what a noise of a steamer ! and the squire at Riversley ! Fancy Uberly 's tale ! ' 
 Temple , with avert face , ask I whether I mean to return to Riversley that day . I assure he I would , on my honour , if possible ; and of course he also would have to return there . ' why , you have   an appointment with Janet Ilchester , ' say I , ' and we may find a pug ; we will buy the hunting - knife and the skate . and she shall know you save an old woman 's life . ' 
 ' no , do not   talk about that , ' Temple entreat I , bite his lip . ' Richie , we be go fast through the water . it remind I of breakfast . I should guess the hour to be nine A.M. ' 
 my watch be unable to assist we ; the hand point to half - past four , and be fix . we run up on deck . look over the stern of the vessel , across a line of ripple eddy red gold , we see the sun low upon cushion of beautiful cloud ; no trace of fog anywhere ; blue sky overhead , and a mild breeze blow . 
 ' Sunrise , ' I say . 
 Temple answer , ' yes , ' most uncertainly . 
 we look round . a steam - tug be tow our ship out toward bank of red - reflect cloud , and a smell of sea air . 
 ' why , that be the East there ! ' cry Temple . we face about to the sun , and behold , he be actually sink ! 
 ' nonsense ! ' we exclaim in a breath . from seaward to this stupefy sunset we stand star . the river stretch to broad length ; gull be on the grey water , knot of seaweed , and the sea - foam curl in advance of we . 
 ' by jingo ! ' Temple speak out , musing , ' here be a whole day strike out of our existence . ' 
 ' it can not   be ! ' say I , for that any sensible being could be trick of a piece of his life in that manner I think a preposterous notion . 
 but the sight of a lessening windmill in the West , shadow eastward , the wide water , and the air now full salt , convince I we two have sleep through an entire day , and be pass rapidly out of hail of our native land . 
 ' we must get these fellow to put we on shore at once , ' say Temple : ' we will not   stop to eat . there be a town ; a boat will row we there in half - an - hour . then we can wash , too . I have   get an idea nothing be clean here . and confound these fellow for not have the civility to tell we they be go to start ! ' 
 we be rather angry , a little amuse , not in the least alarmed at our position . a sailor , to whom we apply for an introduction to the captain , say he be busy . another give we a similar reply , with a monstrous grimace which be beyond our comprehension . the sailor Joe be nowhere to be see . none of the sailor appear willing to listen to we , though they stop as they be run by to lend half an ear to what we have to say . some particular movement be go on in the ship . Temple be the first to observe that the steamtug be cast we loose , and cry he , ' she will take we on board and back to London Bridge . let us hail she . ' he sing out , ' whoop ! ahoy ! ' I meanwhile have catch sight of Joe . 
 ' well , young gentleman ! ' he accost I , and he hop I have sleep well . my courteous request to he to bid the tug stand by to take we on board , only cause he to wear a look of awful gravity . ' you be such a deuce of a sleeper , ' he say . ' you see , we have to be off early to make up for forty hour lose by that there fog . I try to wake you both ; no good ; so I let you snore away . we take up our captain mid - way down the river , and now you be in his hand , and he will do what he like with you , and that be a fact , and my opinion be you will see a foreign shore before you be in the arm of your family again . ' 
 at these word I have the horrible sensation of be cage , and bad , transport into the bargain . 
 I insist on see the captain . a big bright round moon be dance over the vessel 's bowsprit , and this , together with the tug thump into the distance , and the land recede , give I come on my wrath suffocating emotion . 
 no difficulty be present in my way . I be lead up to a broad man in a pilot - coat , who stand square , and look by the bend of his eyebrow as if he be always make head against a gale . he nod to my respectful salute . ' cabin , ' he say , and turn his back to I . 
 I address he , ' excuse I , I want to go on shore , captain . I must and will go ! I be here by some accident ; you have accidentally overlook I here . I wish to treat you like a gentleman , but I will not   be detain . ' 
 Joe speak a word to the captain , who keep his back as broad to I as a school - slate for geography and Euclid 's proposition . 
 ' Cabin , cabin , ' the captain repeat . 
 I try to get round he to dash a furious sentence or so in his face , since there be no produce any impression on his back ; but he occupy the whole of a way block with wire - coil , and rope , and box , and it would have be ridiculous to climb this barricade when by another right - about - face he could in a minute leave I volley at the blank space between his shoulder . 
 Joe touch my arm , which , in as friendly a way as I could assume , I bid he not do a second time ; for I could ill contain myself as it be , and begin to think I have be dupe and trick , I be ready for hostility . I could hardly bear meet Temple on my passage to the cabin . ' Captain Jasper Welsh , ' he be reiterate , as if sound it to discover whether it have an ominous ring : it be the captain 's name , that he have learn from one of the seaman . 
 irritate by his repetition of it , I say , I know not why , or how the word come : ' a highwayman notorious for his depredation in the vicinity of the city of Bristol . ' 
 this set Temple off laugh : ' and so he buy a ship and have trap lay down to catch young fellow for ransom . ' 
 I be oblige to request Temple not to joke , but the next moment I have launch Captain Jasper Welsh on a piratical exploit ; Temple lift the veil from his history , reveal he amid the excess of a cannibal feast . I drag he before a british jury ; Temple hang he in view of an excited multitude . as he boast that there be the end of Captain Welsh , I break the rope . but Temple spoil my triumph by deprive he of the use of his low limb after the fall , for he be a heavy man . I could not contradict it , and therefore pitch all his ship 's crew upon the gallow in a rescue . Temple allow he to be carry off by his faithful ruffian , only stipulate that the captain be never after able to release his neck from the hangman 's slip knot . the consequence be that he wear a shirt - collar up to his eyebrow for concealment by day , and a pillow - case over his head at night , and his wife say she be a deceived unhappy woman , and die of curiosity . 
 the talking of even such nonsense as this be a relief to we in our impatience and helplessness , with the light of land heave far distant to our fretful sight through the cabin window . 
 when we have to talk reasonably we be not so successful . Captain Welsh be one of those man who show you , whether you care to see they or not , all the process by which they arrive at an idea of you , upon which they forthwith shape their course . thus , when he come to we in the cabin , he take the oil - lamp in his hand and examine our face by its light ; he have no reply to our remonstrance and petition : all he say be , ' Humph ! well , I suppose you be both gentleman bear ' ; and he insist on prosecute his scrutiny without any reference to the tenour of our observation . 
 we entreat he half imperiously to bring his ship to and put we on shore in a boat . he bunch up his mouth , remarking , ' know their grammar : habit o ' speak to groom , eh ? humph . ' we offer to pay largely . ' loose o ' their cash , ' be his comment , and so on ; and he be the more exasperating to we because he do not look an evil - minded man ; only he appear to be curse with an evil opinion of we . I try to remove it ; I speak forbearingly . Temple , imitate I , be sugar - sweet . we exonerate the captain from blame , excuse he for his error , name the case a mistake on both side . that long sleep of ours , we say , be really something laughable ; we laugh at the recollection of it , a lamentable piece of merriment . 
 our artfulness and patience become exhaust , for the captain have vouchsafe we no direct answer , I say at last , ' Captain Welsh , here we be on board your ship will you tell we what you mean to do with we ? ' 
 he now say bluntly , ' I will . ' 
 ' you will behave like a man of honour , ' say I , and to that he cry vehemently , ' I will . ' 
 ' well , then , ' say I , ' call out the boat , if you please ; we be anxious to be home . ' 
 ' so you shall ! ' the captain shout , ' and per ship my barque Priscilla ; and well man than you leave , or I ' m no Christian . ' 
 Temple say briskly , ' thank you , captain . ' 
 ' you may wait awhile with that , my lad , ' he answer ; and , to our astonishment , recommend we to go and clean our face and prepare to drink some tea at his table . 
 ' thank you very much , captain , we will do that when we be on shore , ' say we . 
 ' you will have black figure - head and empty gizzard , then , by that time , ' he remark . we behold he turn over the leaf of a Bible . 
 now , this sight of the Bible give I a sense of personal security , and a notion of hypocrisy in his conduct as well ; and perceive that we have conjecture falsely as to his meaning to cast we on shore per ship , his barque Priscilla , I burst out in great heat , ' what ! we be prisoner ? you dare to detain we ? ' 
 Temple chime in , in a similar strain . fairly enraged , we fling at he without anything of what I think eloquence . 
 the captain ruminate up and down the column of his Bible . 
 I be sting to feel that we be like two small terrier bait a huge mild bull . at last he say , ' the story of the Prodigal Son . ' 
 ' oh ! ' groan Temple , at the mention of this wear - out old fellow , who have go in harness to tract ever since he eat the fat calf . 
 but the captain never heed his interruption . 
 ' young gentleman , I have   finish it while you ' ve   be bark at I . if I have have he early in life on board my vessel , I hope I be not presumptuous in say the Lord forgive I if I be so ! I would have stop his downward career ay , so ! with a trip in the right direction . the Lord , young gentleman , have not throw you into my hand for no purpose whatsoever . thank he on your knee to - night , and thank Joseph Double , my mate , when you rise , for he be the instrument of save you from bad company . if this be a vessel where you would hear an oath or smell the smell of liquor , I would have let you run when there be terra firma within stone 's throw . I come on board , I find you both asleep , with those mark of dissipation round your eye , and I swear in the Lord 's name , mind you I would help pluck you out of the pit while you have none but one leg in . it be say ! it be no use barking . I be not to be rouse . the devil in I be chain by the waist , and a twenty - pound weight on his tongue . with your assistance I will do the same for the devil in you . since you have   have plenty of sleep , I will trouble you to commit to memory the whole story of the Prodigal Son ' twixt now and morrow 's sunrise . we will have our commentary on it after labour do . labour you will in my vessel , for your soul 's health . and let I advise you not to talk ; in your situation talk 's temptation to lie . you will do I the obligation to feed at my table . and when I hand you back to your parent , why , they will thank I , if you will not . but it be not thank I look for : it be my bounden christian duty I look to . I reckon a couple o ' stray lamb equal to one lose sheep . ' 
 the captain uplift his arm , ejaculate solemnly , ' by ! ' and falter . ' you be go to swear ! ' say Temple , with savage disdain . 
 ' by the blessing of Omnipotence ! I will save a pair o ' pup from turn wolf . and I be a weak mortal man , that be too true . ' 
 ' he be go to swear , ' Temple mutter to I . 
 I consider the detection of Captain Welsh 's hypocrisy unnecessary , almost a condescension toward familiarity ; but the ire in my bosom be boil so that I find it impossible to roll out the flood of eloquence with which I be big . soon after , I be try to bribe the man with all my money and my watch . 
 ' who give you that watch ? ' say he . 
 ' Downright Church catechism ! ' muttered Temple . 
 ' my grandfather , ' say I. 
 the captain 's head go like a mechanical hammer , to express something indescribable . 
 ' my grandfather , ' I continue , ' will pay you handsomely for any service you do to I and my friend . ' 
 ' now , that be not far off forgo , ' say the captain , in a tone as much as to say we be bad all over . 
 I see the water slide by his cabin - window . my desolation , my humiliation , my chain fury , tumble together . out it come 
 ' captain , do behave to we like a gentleman , and you shall never repent it . our relative will be miserable about we . they captain ! they do not   know where we be . we have not   even a change of clothe . of course we know we be at your mercy , but do behave like an honest man . you shall be pay or not , just as you please , for put we on shore , but we shall be eternally grateful to you . of course you mean kindly to we ; we see that ' 
 ' I thank the Lord for it ! ' he interpose . 
 ' only you really be under a delusion . it be extraordinary . you can not   be quite in your right sens about we ; you must be I do not   mean to speak disrespectfully - what we call on shore , crack about we .... 
 ' dodder , do not   they say in one of the shire ? ' he remark . 
 half - encouraged , and in the belief that I might be get eloquent , I appeal to his manliness . why should he take advantage of a couple of boy ? I strike the key of his possible fatherly feeling : what misery be not our friend suffer now .   ' ay , a bucketful now save an ocean in time to come ! ' he fling in his word .   I bid he , with more pathetic dignity reflect on the dreadful hiatus in our study . 
 ' be that latin or Greek ? ' he ask . 
 I would not reply to the cold - blooded question . he say the New Testament be write in Greek , he know , and happy be those who could read it in the original . 
 ' well , and how can we be learn to read it on board ship ? ' say Temple , an observation that exasperate I because it seem more to the point than my lengthy speech , and betray that he think so ; however , I take it up : 
 ' how can we be graduate for our sphere in life , Captain Welsh , on board your vessel ? tell we that . ' 
 he play thumb and knuckle on his table . just when I be hop that good would come of the senseless tune , Temple cry , 
 ' tell we what your exact intention be , Captain Welsh . what do you mean to do with we ? ' 
 ' mean to take you the voyage out and the voyage home , providence willing , ' say the captain , and he rise . 
 we decline his offer of tea , though I fancy we could have gnaw at a bone . 
 ' there be no compulsion in that matter , ' he say . ' you share my cabin while you be my guest , shipmate , and apprentice in the path of living ; my cabin and my substance , the same as if you be what the north - countryman call bairn o ' mine : I have   none o ' my own . my wife be a barren woman . I have   none but my old mother at home . have your sulk out , lad ; you will come round like the Priscilla on a tack , and discover you have   make way by it . ' 
 we quit his cabin , bow stiffly . 
 Temple declare old Rippenger be well than this cant rascal . 
 the sea be around we , a distant yellow twinkle telling of land . 
 ' his wife a barren woman ! what be that to we ! ' Temple go on , explode at interval . ' so be Sarah . his cabin and his substance ! he talk more like a preacher than a sailor . I should like to see he in a storm ! he be no sailor at all . his man hate he . it would not   be difficult to get up a mutiny on board this ship . Richie , I understand the whole plot : he be in want of cabin - boy . the fellow have impress we . we shall have to serve till we touch land . thank God , there be a british consul everywhere ; I say that seriously . I love my country ; may she always be powerful ! my life be always at she do you feel that pitch of the ship ? of all the name ever give to a vessel , I do think Priscilla be without exception the most utterly detestable . oh ! there again . no , it will be too bad , Richie , if we be beat in this way . ' 
 ' if you be beat , ' say I , scarcely venture to speak lest I should cry or be sick . 
 we both feel that the vessel be conspire to ruin our self - respect . I set my head to think as hard as possible on Latin verses   my instinct must have draw I to they as to a species of intellectual biscuit steep in spirit , tough , and comforting , and fundamentally oppose to exist circumstance , otherwise I can not account for the attraction . they help I for a time ; they keep off self - pity , and keep the machinery of the mind at work . they lift I , as it be , to an upper floor remove from the treacherously sigh Priscilla . but I come down quickly with a crash ; no dexterous management of my mental resource could save I from the hemp - like smell of the ship , nor would lean over the taffrail , nor lie curl under a tarpaulin . the sailor heap pilot - coat upon we . it be a bad ship , they say , to be sick on board of , for no such thing as brandy be allow in the old Priscilla . still I be sure I taste some before I fall into a state of semi - insensibility . as in a trance I hear Temple 's moan , and the captain 's voice across the gusty wind , and the forlorn crunching of the ship down great wave . the captain 's figure be sometimes stoop over we , more great - coat be pile on we ; sometimes the wind whistle thin than one fancy the shriek of creature dead of starvation and restless , that spend their soul in a shriek as long as they can hold it on , say nursery - maid ; the ship make a truce with the water and grunt ; we take two or three playful blow , we be drench with spray , uphill we labour , we catch the moon in a net of rigging , away we plunge ; we mount to plunge again and again . I reproach the vessel in argument for some imaginary inconsistency . memory be like a heavy barrel on my breast , roll with the sea . 




 CHAPTER XIII . we conduct several learned argument with the CAPTAIN of the PRISCILLA 

 Captain Welsh soon conquer we . the late meal we have eat be on the frosty common under the fir - tree . after a tremendous fast , with sea - sickness supervening , the egg and bacon , and pleasant benevolent - smell tea on the captain 's table be thing not to be resist by two healthy boy who have previously strip and face bucket of madden ice - cold salt - water , dash at we by a jolly sailor . an open mind for new impression come with the warmth of our clothe . we eat , bear within we the soul of injure innocent ; nevertheless , we be thankful , and , to the captain 's grace , a long one , we bow head decently . it be a glorious breakfast , for which land and sea have prepare we in about equal degree : I confess , my feeling when I jump out of the cabin be almost those of one bear afresh to life and understanding . Temple and I take counsel . we agree that sulking would be ridiculous , unmanly , ungentlemanly . the captain have we fast , as if we be under a lion 's paw ; he be evidently a well - mean man , a fanatic deluded concern our character : the barque Priscilla be bind for a german port , and should arrive there in a few day , why not run the voyage merrily since we be treat with kindness ? neither the squire nor Temple 's father could complain of our conduct ; we be simply victim of an error that be assist we to a knowledge of the world , a youth 's proper ambition . ' and we be not go to be starve , ' say Temple . 
 I smile , think I perceive the reason why I have fail in my oration over - night ; so I determine that on no future occasion would I let pride stand in the way of provender . Breakfast have completely transform we we hold it due to ourselves that we should demand explanation from Joseph Double , the mate , and then , after hear he , furnish they with a cordial alacrity to which we might have attach unlimited credence have he not protest against our dream he to have supply hot rum - and - water on board , we write our name and address in the captain 's log - book , and immediately ask permission to go to the mast - head . 
 he laugh . out of his cabin there be no smack of the preacher in he . his man say he be a stout seaman , mad on the subject of grog and girl . why , it be on account of grog and girl that he be give we this dish of salt - water to purify we ! grog and girl ! cry we . we vow upon our honour as gentleman we have taste grog for the first time in our life on board the Priscilla . how about the girl ? they ask . we inform they we know none but girl who be lady . thereupon one sailor nod , one send up a crow , one say the misfortune of the case lie in all girl be such precious fine lady ; and one speak in dreadfully blank language , he accuse we of treat the Priscilla as a tavern for the entertainment of bad company , state that he have help to row I and my associate from the shore to the ship . 
 ' poor Mr. Double ! ' say he ; ' there be only one way for he to jump you two young gentleman out o ' that snapdragon bowl you be in or quashmire , call it ; so he ' tice you on board wi ' the bait you be swallow , which be make the devil serve the Lord 's turn . and I will remember that night , for I yield to swear , and drink too ! ' the other sailor roar with laughter . 
 I tip they , not to appear offend by their suspicion . we think they all hypocrite , and be as much in error as if we have think they all honest . 
 thing go fairly well with the exception of the lesson in Scripture . our work be mere playing at sailoring , help furl sail , haul rope , study chart , carry message , and such like . Temple make his voice shrewdly emphatic to explain to the captain that we like the work , but that such lesson as these out of scripture be what the eerie youngster be cram with . 
 ' such lesson as these , maybe , do not   have the meaning on land they get to have on the high sea , ' reply the captain : ' and those youngster you talk of be not call in to throw a light on passage : for I may teach you ship 's business aboard my barque , but we be all child inside the Book . ' 
 he groan heartily to hear that our learning lie in the direction of Pagan Gods and Goddesses , and heathen historian and poet ; add , it be not new to he , and perhaps that be why the world be as it be . nor do he wonder , he say , at our run from study of those filthy writing loose upon London ; it be as natural as dunghill steam . Temple pretend he be force by the captain 's undue severity to defend Venus ; he say , I think rather wittily , ' sailor ought to have a respect for she , for she be bear in the middle of the sea , and she steer straight for land , so she must have have a pretty good idea of navigation . ' 
 but the captain answer none the less keenly , ' she have her idea of navigating , as the devil of mischief always have , in the direction where there be most to corrupt ; and , my lad , she teach the navigation that lead to the bottom beneath we . ' 
 he might be right , still our mien be evil in recite the lesson from Scripture ; and though Captain Welsh have intelligence we could not draw into it the how and the why of the indignity we experience . we have rather he have be a savage captain , to have brace our spirit to sturdy resistance , instead of a mild , good - humour man of kind intention , who lend we his linen to wear , feed we at his table , and tax our most gentlemanly feeling to find excuse for he . our way of revenge ourselves becomingly be to laud the hero of antiquity , as if they have possession of our soul and touch the fountain of worship . whenever Captain Welsh exclaim , ' well do , ' or the equivalent , ' that be an idea , ' we refer he to Plutarch for our great exemplar . it be Alcibiades gracefully consume his black broth that win the captain 's thank for theological acuteness , or the young Telemachus suit his temper to the dolphin 's mood , since he must somehow get on shore on the dolphin 's back . Captain Welsh could not perceive in Temple the personifier of Alcibiades , nor Telemachus in I ; but he be aware of an obstinate obstruction behind our compliance . this he call the devil coil like a snake in its winter sleep . he hurl text at it openly , or slyly drop a particularly heavy one , in the hope of surprise it with a death - blow . we behold he pore over his Bible for text that should be sovereign medicine for we , deadly for the devil within we . consequently , we be on the defensive : bit of Cicero , bit of Seneca , soundly and nobly moral , do service on behalf of paganism ; we remember they certainly almost as if an imp have bring they from afar . nor have we any desire to be in opposition to the cause he support . what we be oppose to be the dogmatic arrogance of a just but ignorant man , who have his one specific for everything , and see mortal sickness in all other remedy or recreation . Temple say to he , 
 ' if the Archbishop of Canterbury be to tell I greek and latin author be bad for I , I should listen to his remark , because he be a scholar : he know the language and know what they contain . ' 
 Captain Welsh reply , 
 ' if the Archbishop o ' Canterbury sail the sea , and live in Foul Alley , Waterside , when on shore , and so feel what it be to toss on top of the wave o ' perdition , he would understand the value of a big , clean , well - man , well - provision ship , instead o ' your galliot wi ' gaudy sail , your barge that can not   rise to a sea , your yacht that run to port like mother 's pet at first pipe o ' the storm , your trim - build wherry . ' 
 ' so you would have only one sort of vessel afloat ! ' say I. ' there be the difference of a man who be a scholar . ' 
 ' I would have , ' say the captain , ' every lad like you , my lad , train in the big ship , and he would not   capsize , and be find betray by his light timber as I find you . serve your apprenticeship in the Lord 's three - decker ; then to command what you may . ' 
 ' no , no , Captain Welsh , ' say Temple : ' you must grind at Latin and Greek when you be a chick , or you will not   ever master the rudiment . upon my honour , I declare it be the truth , you must . if you would like to try , and be of a mind for a go at Greek , we will do our good to help you through the aorist . it look hard than Latin , but after a start it be easy . only , I be afraid your three - decker 's apprenticeship will stand in your way . ' 
 ' Greek be to be do for I ; I can pay clever gentleman for do Greek for I , ' say the captain . ' the knowledge and the love of virtue I must do for myself ; and not to be wreck , I must do it early . ' 
 ' well , that be neither learn nor human nature , ' say I. 
 ' it be the knowledge o ' the right rule for human nature , my lad . ' 
 ' would you kidnap youngster to serve in your ship , captain ? ' 
 ' I would bless the wind that blow they there , foul or not , my lad . ' 
 ' and there they would stick when you have they , captain ? ' 
 ' I would think it be the Lord 's will they should stick there awhile , my lad yes . ' 
 ' and what of their parent ? ' 
 ' youngster out like gossamer on a wind , their parent be where they sow themselves , my lad . ' 
 ' I call that hard on the real parent , Captain Welsh , ' say Temple . 
 ' it be hard on Providence when parent breed that kind o ' light creature , my lad . ' 
 we be all get excite , talk our good , such as it be ; the captain lean over his side of the table , clasp his hand unintentionally preacher - like ; we on our side support our chin on our fist , quick to be at he . Temple be brilliant ; he want to convert the captain , and avow it . 
 ' for , ' say he , ' you be not like one of those tract - fellow . you be a man we can respect , a good seaman , master of your ship , and hearty , and no mewing sanctimoniousness , and we can see and excuse your mistake as to we two ; but now , there be my father at home he be a good man , but he be a man of the world , and read his classic and his Bible . he be none the bad for it , I assure you . ' 
 ' where be his son the night of the fog ? ' say the captain . 
 ' well , he happen to be out in it . ' 
 ' where would he be now but for one o ' my man ? ' 
 ' who can answer that , Captain Welsh ? ' 
 ' I can , my lad - stew in an ante - room of hell - gate , I verily believe . ' 
 Temple sigh at the captain 's infatuation , and say , ' I will tell you of a fellow at our school name Drew ; he be old Rippenger 's good theological scholar always get the prize for theology . well , he be a confirm sneak . I have   take he into a corner and describe the torment of die to he , and his look be disgusting he break out in a clammy sweat . " do not , do not ! " he would cry . " you be just the fellow to suffer intensely , " I tell he . and what be his idea of escape it ? why , by learn the whole of Deuteronomy and the act of the apostle by heart ! his idea of Judgement Day be old Rippenger 's half - yearly examination . these be fact , you know , Captain Welsh . ' 
 I testify to they briefly . 
 the captain say a curious thing : ' I will make an appointment with you in leviathan 's jaw the night of a storm , my lad . ' 
 ' with pleasure , ' say Temple . 
 ' the Lord send it ! ' exclaim the captain . 
 his head be bent forward , and he be gaze up into his eyebrow . 
 before we know that anything be come , he be out on a narrative of a scholar of one of the Universities . our ear be indifferent to the young man 's career from the height of fortune to delirium tremen down the cataract of brandy , until the captain speak of a dark night on the Pool of the Thames ; and here his voice struggle , and we try hard to catch the thread of the tale . two man and a girl be in the boat . the man fight , the girl shriek , the boat be upset , the three be drown . 
 all this come so suddenly that nothing but the captain 's heavy thump of his fist on the table keep we from laugh . 
 he be quite unable to relate the tale , and we have to gather it from his exclamation . one of the man be mate of a vessel lie in the pool , have only cast anchor that evening ; the girl be his sweetheart ; the other man have once be a fine young University gentleman , and have become an outfitter 's drunken agent . the brave sailor have nourish he often when on shore , and he , with the fluent tongue which his college have trim for he , have lead the girl to sin during her lover 's absence . Howsoever , they put off together to welcome he on his arrival , never suspect that their secret have be whisper to Robert Welsh beforehand . Howsoever , Robert give they hearty greeting , and down to the cabin they go , and there sit drink up to midnight . 
 ' three lose soul ! ' say the captain . 
 ' see how they run , ' Temple sing , half audibly , and flush hot , ashamed of himself . 
 " Twas I have to bear the news to his mother , ' the captain pursue ; ' and it be a task , my lad , for I be then little more than your age , and the glass be Robert 's only fault , and he be my only brother . ' 
 I offer my hand to the captain . he grasp it powerfully . ' that crew in a boat , and would not   you know the devil'd be coxswain ? ' he call loudly , and bury his face . 
 ' no , ' he say , look up at we , ' I pray for no storm , but , by the Lord 's mercy , for a way to your heart through fire or water . and now on deck , my lad , while your bed be make up . three blind thing we verily be . ' 
 Captain Welsh show he be sharp of hearing . his allusion to the humming of the tune of the mouse give Temple a fit of remorse , and he apologize . 
 ' ay , ' say the captain , ' it be so ; own it : frivolity 's the fruit of that training that be all for the flesh . but dip you into some o ' my book on my shelf here , and learn to see live man half skeleton , like life and shadow , and never to live man need you pray forgiveness , my lad . ' 
 by sheer force of character he gain the command of our respect . though we agree on deck that he have bungle his story , it impress we ; we feel less able to cope with he , and less willing to encounter a storm . 
 ' we shall have one , of course , ' Temple say , affect resignation , with a glance aloft . 
 I be superstitiously of the same opinion , and praise the vessel . 
 ' oh , Priscilla 's the very name of a ship that founder with all hand and send a bottle on shore , ' say Temple . 
 ' there be not   a bottle on board , ' say I ; and this piece of nonsense help we to sleep off our gloom . 




 CHAPTER XIV . I MEET old friend 

 notwithstanding the prognostication it please we to indulge , we have a tolerably smooth voyage . on a clear cold Sunday morning we be sail between a foreign river 's bank , and Temple and I be alternately read a chapter out of the Bible to the assemble ship 's crew , in advance of the captain 's short exhortation . we have cease to look at ourselves inwardly , and we hardly think it strange . but our heart beat for a view of the great merchant city , which be call a free city , and therefore , Temple suggest , must bear certain portion of resemblance to old England ; so we make up our mind to like it . 
 ' a wonderful place for beer cellar , ' a sailor observe to we slyly , and hitch himself up from the breech to the scalp . 
 at all event , it be a place where we could buy linen . 
 for that purpose , Captain Welsh hand we over to the care of his trust mate Mr. Joseph Double , and we be soon in the street of the city , desirous of purchase half their content . my supply of money be not enough for what I deem necessary purchase . Temple have split his clothe , mine be tar ; we be appear at a disadvantage , and we intend to dine at a good hotel and subsequently go to a theatre . yet I have no wish to part with my watch . Mr. Double say it might be arrange . it be pawn at a shop for a sum equivalent in our money to about twelve pound , and Temple oblige I by take charge of the ticket . thus we be enable to dress suitably and dine pleasantly , and , as Mr. Double remark , no one could rob I of my gold watch now . we visit a couple of beer - cellar to taste the drink of the people , and discover three of our man engage in a similar undertaking . I propose that it should be do at my expense . they praise their captain , but ask we , as gentleman and scholar , whether it be reasonable to object to liquor because your brother be carry out on a high tide ? Mr. Double commend they to moderation . their reply be to estimate an immoderate amount of liquor as due to they , with profound composure . 
 ' those rascal , ' Mr. Double inform we , ' be not in the captain 's confidence they be tidy seaman , though , and they submit to the captain 's law on board and have their liberty ashore . ' 
 we inquire what the difference be between their privilege and his . 
 ' why , ' say he , ' if they be so much as accuse of a disobedient act , off they be scurry , and lose fair wage and a kind captain . and let any man Jack of them accuse I , and he bound a india - rubber ball against a wall and get it ; all he mean to give he get . once you fix the confidence of your superior , you be waterproof . ' 
 we hold our peace , but we could have speak . 
 Mr. Double have no moral hostility toward theatre . suppose he do not relish the performance , he could enjoy a spell in the open air , he say , and this he speedily decide to do . have we not be bind in honour to remain for he to fetch we , we also should have retire from a representation of which we understand only the word ja . it be tiresome to be perpetually wait for the return of this word . we feel somewhat as dog must feel when human speech be address to they . accordingly , we profess , without concealment , to despise the whole performance . I remind Temple of a saying of the Emperor Charles V. as to a knowledge of language . 
 ' Hem ! ' he go critically ; ' it be all very well for a German to talk in that way , but you can not   be five time an Englishman if you be a foreigner . ' 
 we hear english laughter near we . presently an english gentleman accost we . 
 ' Mr. Villiers , I believe ? ' he bow at I . 
 ' my name be Richmond . ' 
 he bow again , with excuse , talk of the play , and telegraph to a lady sit in a box front we . I see that she write on a slip of paper ; she beckon ; the gentleman quit we , and soon after place a twisted note in my hand . it run : 
 ' Miss Goodwin   whose christian name be Clara   wish very much to know how it have fare with Mr. Harry Richmond since he leave Venice . ' 
 I push past a number of discontent knee , try , on my way to her box , to recollect she vividly , but I could barely recollect she at all , until I have sit beside her five minute . Colonel Goodwin be asleep in a corner of the box . awaken by the sound of his native tongue , he recognize I immediately . 
 ' on your way to your father ? ' he say , as he shake my hand . 
 I think it amazing he should guess that in Germany . 
 ' do you know where he be , sir ? ' I ask . 
 ' we see he , ' reply the colonel ; ' when be it , Clara ? a week or ten day ago . ' 
 ' yes , ' say Miss Goodwin ; ' we will talk of that by - and - by . ' and she overflow with comment on my personal appearance , and ply I with question , but would answer none of mine . 
 I fetch Temple into the box to introduce he . we be introduce in turn to Captain Malet , the gentleman who have accost I below . 
 ' you understand German , then ? ' say Miss Goodwin . 
 she star at hear that we know only the word ja , for it make our presence in Germany unaccountable . 
 ' the most dangerous word of all , ' say Colonel Goodwin , and beg we always to repeat after it the negative nein for an antidote . 
 ' you have both see my father ? ' I whisper to Miss Goodwin ; ' both ? we have be separate . do tell I everything . do not   look at the stage - they speak such nonsense . how do you remember I ? how happy I be to have meet you ! oh ! I have not   forget the gondola and the striped post , and stali and the other word ; but soon after we be separate , and I have not   see he since . ' 
 she touch her father 's arm . 
 ' at once , if you like , ' say he , jump up erect . 
 ' in Germany be it ? ' I persist . 
 she nod gravely and lean softly on my arm while we march out of the theatre to her hotel I in such a state of happiness underlie bewilderment and strong expectation that I should have cry out loud have not pride in my partner restrain I . at her tea - table I narrate the whole of my adventure backwards to the time of our parting in Venice , hurry it over as quick as I could , with the breathless termination , ' and now ? ' 
 they have an incomprehensible reluctance to perform their part of the imply compact . Miss Goodwin look at Captain Malet . he take his leave . then she say , ' how glad I be you have drop that odious name of Roy ! Papa and I have talk of you frequently latterly very often . I mean to write to you , Harry Richmond . I should have do it the moment we return to England . ' 
 ' you must know , ' say the colonel , ' that I be an amateur inspector of fortress , and my poor Clara have to trudge the continent with I to pick up the late invention in artillery and other matter , for which I get no thank at head - quarter but it be one way of serve one 's country when the steel lie rusting . we be now for home by way of Paris . I hope that you and your friend will give we your company . I will see this Captain Welsh of yours before we start . Clara , you decide on drag I to the theatre to - night with your usual admirable instinct . ' 
 I remind Miss Goodwin of my father be in Germany . 
 ' yes , he be at one of the Courts , a long distance from here , ' she say , rapidly . ' and you come by accident in a merchant - ship ! you be one of those who be mark for extraordinary adventure . Confess : you would have set eye on I , and not know I . it be a miracle that I should meet my little friend Harry little no long my friend all the same , be you not ? ' 
 I hop so ardently . 
 she with great urgency add , ' then come with we . prove that you put faith in our friendship . ' 
 in desperation I exclaim , ' but I must , I must hear of my father . ' 
 she turn to consult the colonel 's face . 
 ' certainly , ' he say , and eulogize a love son . ' Clara will talk to you . I be for bed . what be the name of the play we see this evening ? oh ! Struensee , to be sure . we miss the scaffold . ' 
 he wish we good - night on an appointment of the hour for breakfast , and order bed for we in the hotel . 
 Miss Goodwin commence : ' but really I have nothing to tell you , or very little . you know , Papa have introduction everywhere ; we be like continental people , and speak a variety of language , and I be almost a foreigner , we be so much abroad ; but I do think english boy should be educate at home : I hope you will go to an English college . ' 
 notice my painful look , ' we see he at the Court of the Prince of Eppenwelzen , ' she say , as if her brow ache . ' he be very kindly treat there ; he be there some week ago . the place lie out in the Hanover direction , far from here . he tell we that you be with your grandfather , and I must see Riversley Grange , and the truth be you must take I there . I suspect you have your peace to make ; perhaps I shall help you , and be a true peribanou . we go over Amsterdam , the Hague , Brussels , and you shall see the battlefield , Paris , straight to London . yes , you be fickle ; you have not once call I Peribanou . ' 
 her voluble rattling succeed in fence off my question before I could exactly shape they , as I stagger from blind to blind idea , now think of the sombre red Bench , and now of the german prince 's Court . 
 ' will not   you tell I any more to - night ? ' I say , when she pause . 
 ' indeed , I have not any more to tell , ' she assure I . 
 it be clear to I that she have join the mysterious league against my father . I begin to have a choking in the throat . I thank she and wish her good - night while I be still capable of smile . 
 at my next interview with Colonel Goodwin he speak promptly on the subject of my wandering . I be of an age , he say , to know my own interest . no doubt filial affection be excellent in its way , but in fact it be highly questionable whether my father be still at the Court of this german prince ; my father have state that he mean to visit England to obtain an interview with his son , and I might miss he by a harum - scarum chase over Germany . and besides , be I not offend my grandfather and my aunt , to whom I owe so much ? he appeal to my warm feeling on their behalf . this be just the moment , he say , when there be a turning - point in my fortune . he could assure I most earnestly that I should do no good by knock at this prince 's door , and have nothing but bitterness if I do in the end discover my father . ' surely you understand the advantage of be breed a gentleman ? ' he wind up . ' under your grandfather 's care you have a career before you , a fine fortune in prospect , everything a young man can wish for . and I must tell you candidly , you run great risk of miss all these thing by hunt your father to earth . give yourself a little time : reflect on it . ' 
 ' I have , ' I cry . ' I have come out to find he , and I must . ' 
 the colonel renew his argument and persuasion until he be wear out . I thank he continually for his kindness . Clara Goodwin besought I in a surprising manner to accompany she to England , call herself Peribanou , and with that name conjure up my father to my eye in his breathing form . she say , as her father have do , that I be call on now to decide upon my future : she have a presentiment that evil would come to I of my unchecked , headstrong will , which she dignify by term it a true but reckless affection : she believe she have be throw in my path to prove herself a serviceable friend , a peribanou of twenty - six who would not expect I to marry she when she have earn my gratitude . 
 they set Temple on I , and that be very funny . to hear he with his ' I say , Richie , come , perhaps it be as well to know where a thing should stop ; your father know you be at Riversley , and he will be after you when convenient ; and just fancy the squire ! ' be laughable . he have some anxiety to be home again , or at least at Riversley . I offer he to Miss Goodwin . 
 she reproach I and coax I ; she be exceedingly sweet . ' well , ' she say , in an odd , resign fashion , ' rest a day with we ; will you refuse I that ? ' 
 I consent ; she know not with what fretfulness . we go out to gaze at the shop and edifice , and I buy two light bag for sling over the shoulder , two nightshirt , toothbrush , and pocket - comb , and a large map of Germany . by dint of vehement entreaty I lead she to point to the territory of the Prince of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld . ' his income be rather less than that of your grandfather , friend Harry , ' she remark . I doate on the spot until I could have drop my finger on it blindfold . 
 two or three pitch battle bring we to a friendly arrangement . the colonel exact my promise that if I see my father at Sarkeld in Eppenwelzen I would not stay with he long than seven day : and that if he be not there I would journey home forthwith . when I have yield the promise frankly on my honour , he introduce I to a banker of the city , who agree to furnish I money to carry I on to England in case I should require it . a diligence engage to deliver I within a few mile of Sarkeld . I write a letter to my aunt Dorothy , tell her fact , and one to the squire , begin , ' we be catch on our arrival in London by the thickest fog ever remember , ' as if it have be settle on my departure from Riversley that Temple and I be bind for London . Miss Goodwin be my post - bag . she say when we have din , about two hour before the starting of the diligence , ' do not   you think you ought to go and wish that captain of the vessel you sail in goodbye ? ' I fall into her plot so far as to walk down to the quay on the river - side and reconnoitre the ship . but there I see my prison . I kiss my hand to Captain Welsh 's mainmast rather ironically , though not without regard for he . Miss Goodwin lift her eyelid at our reappearance . as she make no confession of her treason I do not accuse she , and perhaps it be owe to a movement of her conscience that at our parting she draw I to she near enough for a kiss to come of itself . 
 four - and - twenty german word of essential service to a traveller in Germany constitute our knowledge of the language , and these be on paper transcribe by Miss Goodwin 's own hand . in the gloom of the diligence , pack between Germans of a size that not even Tacitus have prepare I for , smoke over from all side , it be a fascinating study . Temple and I exchange the paper half - hourly while the light last . when that have flee , nothing be leave we to combat the sensation that we be in the depth of a manure - bed , for the window be close , the tobacco - smoke thicken , the hide of animal wrap our immense companion reek ; fire occasionally glow in their pipe - bowl ; they be silent , and give out smoke and heat incessantly , like inanimate force of nature . I have most fantastic idea , that I have take root and ripen , and must expect my head to drop off at any instant : that I be deep down , wedge in the solid mass of the earth . but I need not repeat they : they be accurately translate in imagination from my physical misery . the dim revival of light , when I have well - nigh cease to hope for it , show we all like malefactor imperfectly hang , or drown wretch in a cabin under water . I have one Colossus bulge over my shoulder ! Temple be blot out . his face , emerge from beneath a block of curly bearskin , be like that of one freeze in wonderment . outside there be a melt snow on the high hill ; the cloud over they grow steel - blue . we be go through a valley in a fir - forest . 




 CHAPTER XV . we be accost by a beautiful little lady in the FOREST 

 Bowls of hot coffee and milk , with white roll of bread to dip in they , refresh we at a forest inn . for some minute after the meal Temple and I talk like interchange puff of steam , but soon subside to our star fit . the pipe be light again . what we hear sound like a language of the rock and cave , and root pluck up , a language of glutton feast ; the word ja be like a door always on the hinge in every mouth . dumpy child , bulky man , compress old woman with baked face , and comical squat dog , keep the village partly alive . we observe one young urchin sit on a stone opposite a dog , and he and the dog take alternate bite off a platter - shape cake , big enough to require both his hand to hold it . whether the dog ever snap more than his share be matter of speculation to we . it be an education for he in good manner , and when we be sit at dinner we wish our companion have enjoy it . they feed with their head in their plate , splash and clattered jaw , without pay we any hospitable attention whatever , so that we have the dish of Lazarus . they be perfectly kind , notwithstanding , and allow a portion of my great map of Germany to lie spread over their knee in the diligence , whilst Temple and I pore along the line of the river . one would thrust his square - nail finger to the name of a city and pronounce it ; one give we lesson in the expression of the vowel , with the softening of three of they , which seem like a regulation drill movement for take an egg into the mouth , and show repentance of the act . ' sarkeld , ' we exclaim mutually , and they make a gallop motion of their hand , point beyond the hill . Sarkeld be to the right , sarkeld to the left , as the road wind on . Sarkeld be straight in front of we when the conductor , accord to direction he have receive , request we to alight and push through this endless fir - forest up a hilly branch road , and away his hand gallop beyond it , come to a deep place , and then to grape , then to a tip - toe station , and under it lie Sarkeld . the pantomime be not bad . we wave our hand to the diligence , and set out cheerfully , with our bag at our back , enter a gorge in the fir - cover hill before sunset , after start the proposition do the sun himself look foreign in a foreign country ? 
 ' yes , he do , ' say Temple ; and so I think , but deny it , for by the sun 's favour I hop to see my father that night , and hail Apollo joyfully in the morning ; a hope that grow with exercise of my limb . beautiful cascade of dark bright water leap down the gorge ; we chase an invisible animal . suddenly one of we exclaim , ' we be in a german forest ' ; and we remember grim tale of these forest , their awful castle , baron , knight , lady , long - bearded dwarf , gnome and thin people . I commence a legend off - hand . 
 ' no , no , ' say Temple , as if curdle ; ' let us call this place the mouth of Hades . greek thing do not   make you feel funny . ' 
 I laugh louder than be necessary , and remark that I never have care so much for Greek as on board Captain Welsh 's vessel . 
 ' it be because he be all on the opposite tack I go on quote , ' say Temple . ' I use to read with my father in the holiday , and your Rev. Simon have keep you up to the mark ; so it be all fair . it be not on our conscience that we cram the captain about our knowledge . ' 
 ' no . I be glad of it , ' say I. 
 Temple pursue , ' whatever happen to a fellow , he can meet anything so long as he can say I ' ve   behave like a man of honour . and those german tale they only upset you . you do not   see the reason of the thing . why be a man to be haunt half his life ? well , suppose he do commit a murder . but if he do not , can not   he walk through an old castle without meet ghost ? or a forest ? ' 
 the dusky scenery of a strange land be influence Temple . it affect I so , I make the bad of it for a cure . 
 ' fancy those pine say , " there go two more , " Temple . well ; and fancy this a little earth - dwarf as broad as I be long and high as my shoulder . one day he meet the lovely girl in the whole country , and she promise to marry he in twenty year ' time , in return for a sack of jewel worth all Germany and half England . you should have see she drag it home . People think it full of charcoal . she marry the man she love , and the twenty year pass over , and at the stroke of the hour when she first meet the dwarf , thousand of bell begin ring through the forest , and her husband cry out , " what be the meaning of it ? " and they ride up to a garland of fresh flower that drop on her head , and right into a gold ring that close on her finger , and look , Temple , look ! ' 
 ' where ? ' ask the dear little fellow , look in all earnest , from which the gloom of the place may be imagine , for , by suddenly mix it with my absurd story , I discompose his air of sovereign indifference as much as one do the surface of a lake by cast a stone in it . 
 we round the rocky corner of the gorge at a slightly accelerate pace in dead silence . it open out to restorative daylight , and we breathe well and chaff one another , and , behold a house with pendent gold grape , applaud the diligence conductor 's expressive pantomime . the opportunity be offer for a draught of wine , but we hold water preferable , so we toast the Priscilla out of the palm of our hand in draught of water from a rill that have the sound of aspen - leaf , such as I use to listen to in the Riversley meadow , pleasantly familiar . 
 several commanding elevation be in sight , some woode , some bare . we choose the near , to observe the sunset , and concur in think it unlike english sunset , though not so very unlike the sunset we have take for sunrise on board the Priscilla . a tumble , dark and light green country of swell forest - land and slope of meadow run to the West , and the West from flame yellow burn down to smoky crimson across it . Temple bid I ' catch the disc that be English enough . ' a glance at the sun 's disc confirm the truth of his observation . gaze on the outline of the orb , one might have fancy oneself in England . yet the moment it have sink under the hill this feeling of our vanish with it . the coloured cloud draw I age away from the recollection of home . 
 a tower on a distant hill , white among pine , lead we to suppose that Sarkeld must lie somewhere beneath it . we therefore descend straight toward the tower , instead of return to the road , and strike confidently into a rugged path . recent event have give I the assurance that in my search for my father I be subject to a special governing direction . I have aim at the Bench miss it be ship across sea and precipitate into the arm of friend who have see he and could tell I I be on his actual track , only blindly , and no long blindly now . 
 ' follow the path , ' I say , when Temple want to have a consultation . 
 ' so we do in the London fog ! ' say he , with some gloom . 
 but my retort : ' have not   it bring we here ? ' be a silencer . 
 dark night come on . every height stand for a ruin in our eye , every dip an abyss . it grow bewilderingly dark , but the path do not forsake we , and we expect , at half - hour interval , to perceive the light of Sarkeld , soon to be thunder at one of the inn for admission and supper . I could hear Temple rehearse his german vocabulary , ' Brod , butter , wasser , fleisch , bett , ' as we stumble along . then it fall to ' Brod , wasser , bett , ' and then , ' Bett ' by itself , his confession of fatigue . our path have frequently the nature of a waterway , and be very fatigue , more agreeable to mount than descend , for in mount the knee and shin bear the brunt of it , and these sufferer be not such important servant of the footfarer as toe and ankle in danger of trip and be turn . 
 I be walk on leveller ground , my head bent and eye half - shut , when a flash of light in a brook at my foot cause I to look aloft . the tower we have mark after sunset be close above we , shin in a light of torch . we adopt the sensible explanation of this mysterious sight , but be rather in the grip of the superstitious absurd one , until we discern a number of reddened man . 
 ' robber ! ' exclaim one of we . our common thought be , ' no ; robber would never meet on a height in that manner ' ; and we be embolden to mount and request their help . 
 front the tower , which be of white marble , a high tent have be pitch on a green platform semicircle by pine . torch be stick in cleft of the tree , or in the fork of the branch , or hold by boy and man , and there be clearly man at work beneath the tent at a busy rate . we could hear the paviour 's breath escape from they . outside the ring of torchbearer and other be a long cart with a dozen horse harness to it . all the man appear occupy too much for chatter and laughter . what could be underneath the tent ? see a boy occasionally lift one of the flap corner , we take licence from his example to appease our curiosity . it be the statue of a bronze horse rear spiritedly . the workman be engage fix its pedestal in the earth . 
 our curiosity be satisfied , we hold debate upon our immediate prospect . the difficulty of make sure of a bed when you be once detach from your home , be the philosophical reflection we arrive at , for nothing practical present itself . to arm ourselves we pull out Miss Goodwin 's paper . ' Gasthof be the word ! ' cry Temple . ' Gasthof , zimmer , bett ; that mean inn , hot supper , and bed . we will ask . ' we ask several of the man . those in motion shoot a stare at we ; the torchbearer point at the tent and at an unseen height , mutter ' Morgen . ' refer to Miss Goodwin 's paper we discover this to signify the unintelligible word morning , which be no answer at all ; but the man , apparently deem our conduct suspicious , give we to understand by rather menacing gesture that we be not want there , so we pass into the dusk of the tree , angry at their incivility . have it be Summer we should have drop and sleep . the night air of a sharp season oblige we to keep active , yet we be not willing to get far away from the torch . but after a time they be hide ; then we see one move ahead . the holder of it prove to be a workman of the gang , and between we and he the strange parley ensue . he repeat the word morgen , and we insist on zimmer and bett . 
 ' he take we for twin Caspar Hausers , ' sigh Temple . 
 ' Nein , ' say the man , and , perhaps enlighten by hear a foreign tongue , beckon for we to step at his heel . 
 his lodging be a woodman 's hut . he offer we bread to eat , milk to drink , and straw to lie on : we desire nothing more , and be happy , though the bread be black , the milk sour , the straw mouldy . 
 our breakfast be like a continuation of supper , but two little girl of our host , whose head be case in tight - fit dirty linen cap , munch the black bread and drink the sour milk so thankfully , while fix solemn eye of wonder upon we , that to assure they we be the same sort of creature as themselves we pretend to relish the stuff . rather to our amazement we do relish it . ' mutter ! ' I say to they . they point to the room overhead . Temple lay his cheek on his hand . one of the little girl lay hers on the table . I say ' Doctor ? ' they nod and answer ' princess , ' which seem perfectly good English , and send our conjecture as to the state of their mother 's health astray . I shut a silver english coin in one of their fat little hand . 
 we now , with the name Sarkeld , crave of their father a direction to that place . at the door of his but he wave his hand carelessly South for Sarkeld , and vigorously West where the tower stand , then sweep both hand up to the tower , bellow a fire of cannon , wave his hat , and stamp and cheer . Temple , glance the way of the tower , perform on a trumpet of his joined fist to show we understand that prodigious attraction be present by the tower ; we say ja and ja , and nevertheless turn into the Sarkeld path . 
 some minute later the sound of hoof lead we to imagine he have despatch a messenger after we . a little lady on a pony , attend by a tawny - face great square - shoulder groom on a tall horse , ride past , draw up on one side , and await our coming . she be dress in a grey riding - habit and a warm winter - jacket of gleam grey fur , a soft white boa loose round her neck , cross at her waist , white gauntlet , and a pretty black feel hat with flow rim and plume . there she pass as under review . it be a curious scene : the iron - face great - sized groom on his bony black charger dead still : his mistress , a girl of about eleven or twelve or thirteen , with an arm bow at her side , whip and rein in one hand , and slip of golden brown hair stray on her flushed cheek ; rock and tree , high silver fir rise behind she , and a slender water that fall from the rock run at her pony 's foot . half - a - dozen yard be between the charger 's head and the pony 's flank . she wait for we to march by , without attempt to conceal that we be the object of her inspection , and we in good easy swing of the foot give she a look as we lift our hat . that look be to I like a net throw into moonlight water : it bring nothing back but broken light of a miraculous beauty . 
 burn to catch an excuse for another look over my shoulder , I hear her voice : 
 ' young english gentleman ! ' 
 we turn sharp round . 
 it be she without a doubt who have address we : she spur her pony to meet we , stop he , and say with the sweetest painful attempt at accuracy in pronounce a foreign tongue : 
 ' I sthink you go a wrong way ? ' 
 our hat fly off again , and bareheade , I seize the reply before Temple could speak . 
 ' be not this , may I ask you , the way to sarkeld ? ' 
 she gather up her knowledge of English deliberately . 
 ' yes , one go to Sarkeld by sthis way here , but to - day go everybody up to our Bella Vista , and I entreat you do not miss it , for it be some - s - thing to write to your home of . ' 
 ' up at the tower , then ? oh , we be there last night , and see the bronze horse , mademoiselle . ' 
 ' yes , I know . I call on my poor sick woman in a but where you fall asleep , sir . her little one be my lamb ; she have be of our household ; she be good ; and they say , two young , strange , small gentleman have go for Sarkeld ; and I suppose , sthey can not know all go to our Bella Vista to - day . ' 
 ' you know at once we be English , mademoiselle ? ' 
 ' yes , I could read it off your back , and truly too your english eye be quite open at a glance . it be of you both I speak . if I but make my word plain ! my " th " I can not always . and to understand , your English be indeed heavy speech ! not so in book . I have my english governess . we read English tale , english poetry and sthat be your excellence . and so , will you not come , sir , up when a way be to be show to you ? it be my question . ' 
 Temple thank she for the kindness of the offer . 
 I be hesitate , half conscious of surprise that I should ever be hesitate in doubt of take the direction toward my father . hear Temple 's boldness I thank she also , and accept . then she say , bow : 
 ' I beg you will cover your head . ' 
 we pass the huge groom bolt upright on his tower horse ; he raise two finger to the level of his eyebrow in the form of a salute . 
 Temple murmur : ' I should not   mind enter the german Army , ' just as after our interview with Captain bulste he have wish to enter the British Navy . 
 this be no more than a sign that he be highly pleased . for my part delight flutter the word in my mouth , so that I have to repeat half I utter to the attentive ear of our gracious new friend and guide : 
 ' ah , ' she say , ' one do sthink one know almost all before experiment . I be ashamed , yet I will talk , for be it not so ? experiment be a school . and you , if you please , will speak slow . for I say of you english gentleman , silk you spin from your lip ; it be not as a language of an alphabet ; it be pleasant to hear when one would lull , but italian can do that , and do it more be I right ? soft ? 
 ' Bella Vista , lovely view , ' say I. 
 ' lovely view , ' she repeat . 
 she run on in the most musical tongue , to my thinking , ever hear : 
 ' and see my little pensioner ' poor cottage , who be out up to lovely View . mile round go the people to it . good , and I will tell you stranger : sthe Prince von Eppenwelzen have his great ancestor , and his sister Markgrafin von Rippau say , " erect a statue of he , for he be a great warrior . " he could not , or he would not , we know not . so she say , " I will , " she say , " I will do it in seven day . " she do constantly amuse he , everybody at de Court . immense excitement ! for suppose it ! a statue of a warrior on horseback , in perfect likeness , chapeau tricorne , perruque , all of bronze , and his marshal 's baton . eh bien , well , a bronze horse be come at a gallop from Berlin ; sthat we know . by fortune a most exalted sculptor in Berlin have he ready , and many horse pull he to here , to Lovely View , by post - haste ; sthat we know . but we be in extremity of puzzlement . for where be the statue to ride he ? where be I plain to you , sir ? be sthe Marshal Furst von Eppenwelzen , our great ancestor ? yet the Markgrafin say , " it be right , wait ! " she nod , she smile . our Court be all at de lake - palace odder side sthe tower , and it be bet of gem , of feather , of lace , not to be number ! the Markgrafin say sthere to - day you see he , Albrecht Wohlgemuth Furst von Eppenwelzen ! but no sculptor can have cast he in bronze not copy he and cast he in a time of seven day ! and we say sthis : have she give a secret order to a sculptor you understand I , sir , commission where , how , have he sthe likeness copy ? or do he come to our speisesaal of our lake - palace disguise ? oh ! but to see , to copy , to model , to cast in bronze , to travel betwixt Berlin and Sarkeld in a time of seven day ? no ! so - oh ! we guess , we guess , we be in exhaustion . and to - day be like an eagle we have send an arrow to shoot and know not if he will come down . for shall we see our ancestor on horseback ? it will be a not - scribable joy ! or not ? so we guess , we be worried . at near eleven o'clock a cannon fire , sthe tent be lift , and we see ; but I be impatient wid my breath for de gun to go . ' 
 I say it would be a fine sight . 
 ' for stranger , yes ; you should be of de palace to know what a fine sight ! sthe fine ! and you be for Sarkeld ? you have friend in Sarkeld ? ' 
 ' my father be in Sarkeld , mademoiselle . I be tell he be at the palace . ' 
 ' indeed ; and he be English , your fater ? ' 
 ' yes . I have not see he for year ; I have come to find he . ' 
 ' indeed ; it be for love of he , your fater , sir , you come , and not speak German ? ' 
 I signify that it be so . 
 ' she stroke her pony 's neck musing . 
 ' because , of love be not much in de family in England , it be say , ' she remark very shyly , and in recover her self - possession ask the name of my father . 
 ' his name , mademoiselle , be Mr. Richmond . ' 
 ' Mr. Richmond ? ' 
 ' Mr. Richmond Roy . ' 
 she spring in her saddle . 
 ' you be son to Mr. Richmond Roy ? oh ! it be wonderful . ' 
 ' Mademoiselle , then you have see he lately ? ' 
 ' yes , yes ! I have see he . I have hear of his beautiful child , his son ; and you it be ? ' 
 she study my countenance a moment . 
 ' tell I , be he well ? ' mademoiselle , be he quite well ? ' 
 ' oh , yes , ' she answer , and break into smile of merriment , and then seem to bite her underlip . ' he be our fun - maker . he must always be well . I owe to he some of my English . you be his son ? you be for Sarkeld ? you will see he up at our Bella Vista . quick , let we run . ' 
 she put her pony to a canter up the brown path between the fir - tree , cry that she should take our breath ; but we be tight runner , and I , though my heart beat wildly , be full of fire to reach the tower on the height ; so when she slacken her pace , find we close on her pony 's hoof , she laugh and call we brave boy . Temple 's be no more than my friend , who have make the expedition with I out of friendship , surprise she . not that she would not have expect it to be do by Germans ; far she be unable to explain her astonishment . 
 at a turning of the ascent she point her whip at the dark knot and line of the multitude mount by various path to behold the ceremony of unveil the monument . 
 I besought she to waste no time . 
 ' you must , if you please , attend my pleasure , if I guide you , ' she say , toss her chin . 
 ' I thank you , I can not   tell you how much , mademoiselle , ' say I. 
 she answer : ' you be kind to my two pet lamb , sir . ' 
 so we move forward . 




 CHAPTER XVI . the STATUE on the PROMONTORY 

 the little lady be soon bow to respectful salutation from crowd of rustic and other on a broad carriage - way circling level with the height . I could not help think how doubly foreign I be to all the world here I who be about to set eye on my lost live father , while these people be tip - toe to gaze on a statue . but as my father might also be take an interest in the statue , I get myself round to a moderate sentiment of curiosity and a partial share of the general excitement . Temple and mademoiselle do most of the conversation , which relate to glimpse of scenery , pine , oak , beech - wood , and lake - water , until we gain the plateau where the tower stand , when the giant groom trot to the front , and work a clear way for we through a mass of travel sight - seer , and she lean to I , talk quite inaudibly amid the laughter and chat . a band of wind instrument burst out . ' this be glorious ! ' I conceive Temple to cry like an open - mouthed mute . I find it inspirit . 
 the rush of pride and pleasure produce by the music be irresistible . we march past the tower , all of we , I be sure , with splendid feeling . a stone 's throw beyond it be the lofty tent ; over it droop a flag , and flag be on pole round a wide ring of rope guard by forester and gendarme , mount and afoot . the band , dress in green , with black plume to their hat , play in the middle of the ring . outside be carriage , and lady and gentleman on horseback , full of animation ; rustic , forester , town and village people , man , woman , and child , press against the rope . it be a day of ray of sunshine , now from off one edge , now from another of large slow cloud , so that at time we and the tower be in a blaze ; next the lake - palace be illuminate , or the long grey lake and the wood of pine and of bare brown twig make bay in it . 
 several hand beckon on our come in sight of the carriage . ' there he be , then ! ' I think ; and it be like swallow my heart in one solid lump . Mademoiselle have free space to trot ahead of we . we see a tall - sit lady , attire in sable , raise a finger to she , and nip her chin . away the little lady fly to a second carriage , and on again , as one may when alive with an inquiry . I observe to Temple , ' I wonder whether she say in her German , " it be my question " ; do you remember ? ' there be no weight whatever in what I say or think . 
 she ride back , exclaim , ' nowhere . he be nowhere , and nobody know . he will arrive . but he be not yet . now , ' she bend coaxingly down to I , ' can you not a few word of German ? only a small sum ! it be the Markgrafin , my good aunt , would speak wid you , and she can no English - only she be eager to behold you , and come ! you will know , for my sake , some scrap of german ja ? you will nicht wahr ? or French ? make your glom - pudding of it , will you ? ' 
 I make a shocking plum - pudding of it . Temple be no happy . 
 the margravine , a fine vigorous lady with a lively mouth and lively eye of a restless grey that rarely dwelt on you when she speak , and constantly start off on a new idea , do I the honour to examine I , much as if I have offer myself for service in her corps of grenadier , and might do in time , but be decreed to be temporarily want in manly proportion . 
 she smile a form of excuse of my bungling half - english horrid French , talk over I and at I , forget I , and recollect I , all within a minute , and fish poor Temple for intelligible reply to incomprehensible language in the same manner , then throw her head back to gather the pair of we in her sight , then eye I alone . 
 ' C'est peut - etre le fils de son petit papa , et c'est tout dire . ' 
 such be her summary comment . 
 but not satisfied with that , she lean out of the carriage , and , make an extraordinary grimace appear the mother in labour of the difficult word , say , ' doos yo ' laff ? ' 
 there be no help it : I laugh like a madman , give one outburst and a dead stop . 
 far from look displeased , she nod . I be again put to the dreadful test . 
 ' can yo ' mak ' laff ? ' 
 it spur my wit . I have no speech to ' mak ' laff ' with . at the very instant of my dilemma I chance to see a soberly - clothe old townsman hustle between two helpless woman of the crowd , his pipe in his mouth , and his hat , wig , and handkerchief slide over his face , show his bald crown , and he not dare to cry out , for fear his pipe should be tread under foot . 
 ' he can , your Highness . ' 
 her quick eye catch the absurd scene . she turn to one of her lady and touch her forehead . her hand be reach out to I ; Temple she pat on the shoulder . 
 ' he can ja : du auch . ' 
 a grand gentleman ride up . they whisper , gaze at the tent , and appear to speak vehemently . all the man 's face be foreign : none of they have the slight resemblance to my father 's . I fancy I might detect he disguise . I star vainly . Temple , to judge by the expression of his feature , be think . yes , think I , we might as well be at home at old Riversley , that distant spot ! we be as out of place here as frog in the desert ! 
 rid to and fro , and chattering , and commotion , of which the margravine be the centre , go on , and the band play beautiful waltz . the workman in and out of the tent be full of their business , like seaman under a storm . 
 ' Fraulein Sibley , ' the margravine call . 
 I hop it might be an english name . so it prove to be ; and the delight of hear English speak , and , what be more , have english ear to speak to , be blissful as the leap to daylight out of a nightmare . 
 ' I have the honour to be your countrywoman , ' say a lady , English all over to our struggle sens . 
 we become immediately attach to she as a pair of shipwreck boat lack provender of every sort be take in tow by a well - store vessel . she know my father , know he intimately . I relate all I have to tell , and we learn that we have make acquaintance with her pupil , the Princess Ottilia Wilhelmina Frederika Hedwig , only child of the Prince of Eppenwelzen . 
 ' your father will certainly be here ; he be generally the margravine 's right hand , and it be wonderful the margravine can do without he so long , ' say Miss Sibley , and converse with the margravine ; after which she inform I that she have be graciously direct to assure I my father would be on the field when the cannon sound . 
 ' perhaps you know nothing of Court life ? ' she resume . ' we have very curious performance in Sarkeld , and we owe it to the margravine that we be frequently enliven . you see the tall gentleman who be rid away from she . I mean the one with the black hussar jacket and thick brown moustache . that be the prince . do you not think he handsome ? he be very kind rather capricious ; but that be a way with prince . indeed , I have no reason to complain . he have lose his wife , the Princess Frederika , and depend upon his sister the margravine for amusement . he have have it since she discover your papa . ' 
 ' be the gun never go off ? ' I groan . 
 ' if they would only conduct their ceremony without their gun ! ' exclaim Miss Sibley . ' the origin of the present ceremony be this : the margravine wish to have a statue erect to an ancestor , a renowned soldier and I would infinitely prefer talk of England . but never mind . oh , you will not   understand what you gaze at . well , the prince do not care to expend the money . instead of urge that as the ground of his refusal , he declare there be no sculptor to do justice to Prince Albrecht Wohlgemuth , and one could not rely on their effecting a likeness . we have he in the dining - hall ; he be strikingly handsome . afterward he pretend I be speak now of the exist Prince Ernest that it would be age before the statue be complete . one day the margravine induce he to agree to pay the sum stipulate for by the sculptor , on condition of the statue be complete for public inspection within eight day of the hour of their agreement . the whole Court be witness to it . they arrange for the statue , horse and man , to be exhibit for a quarter of an hour . of course , the margravine do not signify it would be a perfectly finish work . we be keep at a great distance , that we may not scrutinize it too closely . they unveil it to show she have be as good as her word , and then cover it up to fix the rider to the horse , a screw be employ , I imagine . for one thing we know about it , we know that the horse and the horseman travel hither separately . in all probability , the margravine give the order for the statue last autumn in Berlin . now look at the prince . he have his eye on you . look down . now he have forget you . he be impatient to behold the statue . our chief fear be that the statue will not maintain its balance . fortunately , we have plenty of guard to keep the people from push against it . if all turn out well , I shall really say the margravine have do wonder . she do not look anxious ; but then she be not one ever to show it . the prince do . every other minute he be glance at the tent and at his watch . can you guess my idea ? your father 's absence lead I to think - oh ! only a pass glimmer of an idea the statue have not arrive , and he be bring it on . otherwise , he would be sure to be here . the margravine beckon I . ' 
 ' do not   go ! ' we cry simultaneously . 
 the Princess Ottilia supply her place . 
 ' I have send to our stable for two little pretty hungarian horse for you two to ride , ' she say . ' no , I have not yet see he . he be ask for , and de Markgrafin know not at all . he bade in our lake ; he have be see since . the man be exciteable ; but he be so sensible . oh , no . and he be full of laughter . we shall soon see he . would he not ever be cautious of himself for a son like you ? ' 
 her compliment raise a blush on I . 
 the patience of the people be creditable to their phlegm . the smoke of pipe curl over the numberless head be the most stirring thing about they . 
 Temple observe to I , 
 ' we will give the old statue a british cheer , will not   we , Richie ? ' 
 ' after come all the way from England ! ' say I , in dejection . 
 ' no , no , Richie ; you be sure of he now . he be somewhere direct affair , I suspect . I say , do let we show they we can ring out the right tune upon occasion . by jingo ! there go a fellow with a match . ' 
 we see the cannoni march up to the margravine 's carriage for order . she summon the prince to her side . lady in a dozen carriage be stand up , handkerchief in hand , and the gentleman get their horse ' head on a line . Temple count nearly sixty person of quality station there . the workman be troop out of the tent . 
 Miss Sibley run to we , say , 
 ' the gun - horror have be command . now then : the prince can scarcely contain himself . the gunner be ready near his gun ; he have his frightful match lift . see , the manager - superintendent be receive the margravine 's last injunction . how firm woman 's nerve be ! now the margravine insist on the prince 's read the exact time by her watch . everybody be do it . let we see . by my watch it be all but fifteen minute to eleven , A.M. Dearest , ' she address the little princess ; ' would you not like to hold my hand until the gun be fire ? ' 
 ' dearest , ' reply the princess , whether in childish earnest or irony I could not divine , ' if I would hold a hand it would be a gentleman 's . ' 
 all eye be on the Prince of Eppenwelzen , as he gaze toward the covered statue . with impose deliberation his hand rise to his hat . we see the hat raise . the cannon be fire and roar ; the band strike up a pompous slow march : and the tent - veil break apart and roll off . it be like the dawn fly and sunrise mount . 
 I confess I forget all thought of my father for awhile ; the shout of the people , the braying of the brass instrument , the lady cheer sweetly , the gentleman give short , hearty expression of applause , intoxicate I . and the statue be superb - horse and rider in new bronze polish by sunlight . 
 ' it be life - like ! it be really noble ! it be a true Prince ! ' exclaim Miss Sibley . she translate several exclamation of the lady and gentleman in German : they be entirely to the same effect . the horse give we a gleam of his neck as he paw a forefoot , just rein in . we know he ; he be a gallant horse ; but it be the figure of the Prince Albrecht that be so fine . I have always laugh at sculpture figure on horseback . this one overawe I . the Marshal be acknowledge the salute of his army after a famous victory over the infidel Turks . he sit upright , almost imperceptibly but effectively bend his head in harmony with the curve of his horse 's neck , and his baton sweep the air low in proud submission to the honours cast on he by his acclaim soldiery . his three - cornered lace hat , curl wig , heavy - trim surcoat , and high boot , remind I of Prince Eugene . no Prince Eugene nay , nor Marlborough , have such a martial figure , such an animate high old warrior 's visage . the bronze feature reek of battle . 
 Temple and I feel humiliate   without cause , I grant   at the success of a work of art that strike we as a new military triumph of these Germans , and it be impossible not to admire it . the little Princess Ottilia clap hand by fit . what word she address to I I know not . I deal out my stock of german ' Ja , ja to her English . we be draw by she to congratulate the margravine , whose hand be then be kiss by the prince : he do it most courteously and affectionately . other gentleman , count and baron , bow over her hand . lady , accord to their rank and privilege , salute she on the cheek or in some graceful fashion . when our turn arrive , Miss Sibley translate for we , and as we be at concert pitch we do not acquit ourselves badly . Temple 's remark be , that he wish she and all her family have be English . nothing be leave for I to say but that the margravine almost make we wish we have be german . 
 smile cordially , the margravine speak , Miss Sibley translate : 
 ' her Royal Highness ask you if you have see your father ? ' 
 I shake my head . 
 the Princess Ottilia translate , ' her Highness , my good aunt , would know , would you know he , do you see he ? ' 
 ' yes , anywhere , ' I cry . 
 the margravine push I back with a gesture . 
 ' yes , your Highness , on my honour ; anywhere on earth ! ' 
 she decline to hear the translation . 
 her insult disbelief in my ability to recognize the father I have come so far to embrace would have vex I but for the wretched thought that I be lose he again . we thread the carriage ; gaze at the horseman in a way to pierce the hair on their face . the little princess come on we hurriedly . 
 ' here , see , be the horse . I will you to mount . be they not pretty animal ? ' she whisper , ' I believe your fater have be hurt in his mind by something . it be only perhaps . now mount , for de Markgrafin say you be our good guest . ' 
 we mount simply to show that we could mount , for we would rather have be on foot , and draw up close to the right of the margravine 's carriage . 
 ' hush ! a poet be read his ode , ' say the princess . ' it be Count Fretzel von Wolfenstein . ' 
 this ode be dreadful to we , and all the Court people pretend they like it . when he wave his right hand toward the statue there be a shout from the rustic set ; when he bow to the margravine , the lady and gentleman murmur agreeably and smile . we be convince of its be downright hypocrisy , rustic stupidity , Court flattery . we would have argue our case , too . I propose a gallop ; Temple say , 
 ' no , we will give the old statue our cheer as soon as this awful fellow have do . I do not   care much for poetry , but do not   let I ever have to stand and hear german poetry again for the remainder of my life . ' 
 we could not imagine why they should have poetry read out to they instead of their fine band playing , but suppose it be for the satisfaction of the margravine , with whom I grow particularly annoyed on hear Miss Sibley say she conceive her Highness to mean that my father be actually on the ground , and that we neither of we , father and son , know one another . I swear on my honour , on my life , he be not present ; and the melancholy in my heart take the form of extreme irritation , I speak passionately . I rise in my stirrup , ready to shout , ' Father ! here be Harry Richmond come to see you . where be you ! ' I do utter something a syllable or two : ' make haste ! ' I think the word be . they spring from my inmost bosom , address without forethought to that drawling mouth poet . the margravine 's face meet mine like a challenge . she have her lip tight in a mere lip - smile , and her eye gleam with provocation . 
 ' her Highness , ' Miss Sibley translate , ' ask whether you be prepared to bet that your father be not on the ground ? ' 
 ' beg she to wait two minute , and I will be prepare to bet any sum , ' say I. 
 Temple take one half the circle , I the other , rid through the attentive horseman and carriage - line , and make sure the face we seek be absent , more or less discompose everybody . the poet finish his ode ; he be cheer , of course . mightily relieve , I behold the band resume their instrument , for the cheering resemble a senseless beating on brass shield . I feel that we English could do it well . Temple from across the sector of the circle , run about two foot in front of the statue , call aloud , 
 ' Richie ! he be not here ! ' 
 ' not here ! ' cry I. 
 the people gaze up at we , wonder at the tongue we talk . 
 ' Richie ! now let us lead these fellow off with a tiptop cheer ! ' 
 Little Temple crow lustily . 
 the head of the statue turn from Temple to I . 
 I find the people fall back with amazed exclamation . I so prepossessed be I simply star at the sudden - flash white of the statue 's eye . the eye , from be an instant ago dull carve ball , be animate . they be fix on I . I be unable to give out a breath . its chest heave ; both bronze hand strike against the bosom . 
 ' Richmond ! my son ! Richie ! Harry Richmond ! Richmond Roy ! ' 
 that be what the statue give forth . 
 my head be like a ring pan . I know it be my father , but my father with death and strangeness , earth , metal , about he ; and his voice be like a human cry contend with earth and metal - mine be stifle . I see he descend . I dismount . we meet at the rope and embrace . all his figure be stiff , smooth , cold . my arm slide on he . each time he speak I think it an unnatural thing : I myself have not speak once . 
 after glance by hazard at the empty saddle of the bronze horse , I call to mind more clearly the appalling circumstance which have stupefy the whole crowd . they have hear a statue speak have see a figure of bronze walk . for they it be the ancestor of their prince ; it be the famous dead old warrior of a hundred and seventy year ago set thus in motion . imagine the behaviour of people round a slain tiger that do not compel they to fly , and may yet stretch out a dreadful paw ! much so they press for a near sight of its walnut visage , and shrink in the act . perhaps I share some of their sensation . I can not tell : my sensation be trance . there be no warmth to revive I in the gauntlet I clasp . I look up at the sky , think that it have fall dark . 




 CHAPTER XVII . MY FATHER BREATHES , MOVES , and speak 

 the people break away from we like furrowed water as we advance on each side of the rope toward the margravine 's carriage . 
 I become a perfectly mechanical creature : incapable , of observe , just capable of take an impression here and there ; and in such case the impression that come be stamp on hot wax ; they keep the scene fresh ; they partly pervert it as well . Temple 's version be , I be sure , the truer historical picture . he , however , could never repeat it twice exactly alike , whereas I fail not to render image for image in clear succession as they have strike I at the time . I could perceive that the figure of the Prince Albrecht , in its stiff condition , be debar from vault , or stride , or stoop , so that the rope be a barrier between we . I see the little Princess Ottilia eye we with an absorb comprehensive air quite unlike the manner of a child . dot of head , curious face , peer and start eye , meet my vision . I hear sharp talk in German , and a rider fling his arm , as if he wish to crash the universe , and fly off . the margravine seem to I more an implacable parrot than a noble lady . I think to myself : this be my father , and I be not overjoyed or grateful . in the same way , I feel that the daylight be bronze , and I do not wonder at it : nay , I reason on the probability of a composition of sun and mould produce that colour . the truth be , the power of my heart and will be frozen ; I think and feel at random . and I crave excuse for dwell on such trifling phenomena of the sensation , which have be useful to I by help I to realize the scene , even as at the time they obscure it . 
 accord to Temple 's description , when the statue move its head toward he , a shudder go through the crowd , and a number of forefinger be level at it , and the head move toward I , mark of they all . its voice be answer by a dull pule scream from woman , and the man gap . when it descend from the saddle , the act be not perform with one bind , as I fancy , but difficultly ; and it walk up to I like a figure drag log at its heel . half - a - dozen workman run to arrest it ; some townswoman faint . there be a heavy altercation in German between the statue and the superintendent of the arrangement . the sun shine brilliantly on our march to the line of carriage where the Prince of Eppenwelzen be talk to the margravine in a fury , and he dash away on his horse , after bellow certain direction to his forester and the workman , by whom we be surround ; while the margravine talk loudly and amiably , as though everything have go well . her watch be out . she acknowledge my father 's bow , and overlook he . she seem to have make her courtier smile . the lady and gentleman obey the wave of her hand by quit the ground ; the band head a long line of the commoner sort , and a body of forester gather the remnant and join they to the rear of the procession . a liveried groom lead away Temple 's horse and mine . Temple declare he could not sit after see the statue descend from its pedestal . 
 her Highness 's behaviour roughen as soon as the place be clear of company . she speak at my father impetuously , with manifest scorn and reproach , strike her silver - mount stick on the carriage panel , again and again stamp her foot , lift a most variable emphatic countenance . Princess Ottilia try to intercede . the margravine clench her hand , and , to one not understand her speech , appear literally to blow the little lady off with the breath of her mouth . her whole bearing consist of volley of abuse , close by magisterial interrogation . Temple compare her Highness 's language to the running out of Captain Welsh 's chaincable , and my father 's reply to the hauling in : his sentence be short , they sound like manful protestation ; I barely notice they . Temple 's version of it go : ' and there be your father apologize , and the margravine rat he , ' etc . my father , as it happen , be careful not to open his lip wide on account of the plaster , or thick coating of paint on his face . no one would have suppose that he be burn with indignation ; the fact be , that to give vent to it , he would have have to exercise his muscular strength ; he be plaster and paint from head to foot . the fixture of his wig and hat , too , constrain his skin , so that his look be no index of his feeling . I long gloomily for the moment to come when he would present himself to I in his natural form . he be not sensible of the touch of my hand , nor I of his . there we have to stand until the voluble portion of the margravine 's anger come to an end . she shut her eye and bow curtly to our salute . 
 ' you have see the last of I , madam , ' my father say to her whirl carriage - wheel . 
 he try to shake , and strain in his ponderous garment . Temple gaze abash . I know not how to act . my father keep lift his knee on the spot as if practise a walk . 
 the tent be in its old place cover the bronze horse . a workman step ahead of we , and we all go at a strange leisurely pace down the hill through tall pinetree to where a closed vehicle await we . here be also a couple of lackey , who deposit my father on a bed of moss , and with much effort pull his huge boot off , leave he in red silk stocking . Temple and I snatch his gauntlet ; Temple fall backward , but we have no thought of laughter ; people be see approach , and the three of we jump into the carriage . I have my father 's live hand in mine to squeeze ; feel he scarcely yet the live man I have seek , and with no great warmth of feeling . his hand be very moist . often I say , ' dear father ! Papa , I be so glad at last , ' in answer to his short - breathe ' Richie , my little lad , my son Richmond ! you find I out ; you find I ! ' we be conscious that his thick case of varnish clothing be against we . one would have fancy from his way of speak that he suffer from asthma . I be now gift with a tenfold power of observation , and let nothing escape I . 
 Temple , sit opposite , grin cheerfully at time to encourage our spirit ; he have not recover from his wonderment , nor have I introduce he . my father , however , have catch his name . Temple   who might as well have talk , I think   be perpetually steal secret glance of abstract perusal at he with a pair of round infant 's eye , suck his reflection the while . my father break our silence . 
 ' Mr. Temple , I have the honour , ' he say , as if about to cough ; ' the honour of make your acquaintance ; I fear you must surrender the hope of make mine at present . ' 
 Temple start and redden like a little fellow detect in stray from his spelling - book , which be the window - frame . in a minute or so the fascination prove too strong for he ; his eye wander from the window and he renew his shy inspection bit by bit as if cast up a column of figure . 
 ' yes , Mr. Temple , we be in high Germany , ' say my father . 
 it must have cost Temple cruel pain , for he be a thoroughly gentlemanly boy , and he could not resist it . finally he surprise himself in his stealthy reckoning : arrive at the full - breech or buttoned waistband , about half - way up his ascent from the red silk stocking , he would pause and blink rapidly , sometimes jump and cough . 
 to put he at his ease , my father exclaim , ' as to this exterior , ' he knock his knuckle on the heave hard surface , ' I can only affirm that it be , on horseback ahem ! particularly as the horse betray no restivity , pronounce perfect ! the sole complaint of our interior concern the resemblance we bear to a lobster . human somewhere , I do believe myself to be . I shall have to be relieve of my shell before I can at all satisfactorily proclaim the fact . I be a human being , believe I . ' 
 he beg permission to take breath a minute . 
 ' I know you for my son 's friend , Mr. Temple : here be my son , my boy , Harry Lepel Richmond Roy . have patience : I shall presently stand unshelled . I have much to relate ; you likewise have your narrative in store . that you should have light on I at the critical instant be one of those miracle which combine to produce overwhelm testimony ay , Richie ! without a doubt there be a hand direct our destiny . ' his speak in such a strain , out of pure kindness to Temple , huskily , with his painful attempt to talk like himself , revive his image as the father of my heart and dream , and stir my torpid affection , though it be still torpid enough , as may be imagine , when I state that I remain plunge in contemplation of his stocking of red silk emerge from the full bronzed breech , consider whether his comparison of himself to a shell - fish might not be a really just one . we neither of we regain our true nature until he be free of every vestige of the garb of Prince Albrecht Wohlgemuth . attendant be await he at the garden - gate of a beautiful villa partly girdle by rise fir - wood on its footing of bright green meadow . they lead he away , and we to bath - room . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . we pass a delightful evening , and I have a morning vision 

 in a long saloon ornament with stag ' horn and instrument of the chase , tusk of boar , spear - stave , boarknive , and silver horn , my father , I , and Temple sit down to a memorable breakfast , my father in his true form , dress in black silken jacket and knee - breech , purple - stocking and pump ; without a wig , I thank heaven to see . how blithely he fling out his limb and heave his chest release from confinement ! his face be stain brownish , but we drink old Rhine wine , and have no eye for appearance . 
 ' so you could bear it no long , Richie ? ' my father interrupt the narrative I dole out , anxious for his , and he begin , and I interrupt he . 
 ' you do think of I often , papa , do not   you ? ' 
 his eye brim with tenderness . 
 ' think of you ! ' he sigh . 
 I give he the account of my late adventure in a few pant breath , suppress the Bench . he set my face to front he . 
 ' we be two fool , Mr. Temple , ' he say . 
 ' no , sir , ' say Temple . 
 ' now you speak , papa , ' say I. 
 he smile warmly . 
 ' Richie begin to remember I . ' 
 I gaze at he to show it be true . 
 ' I do , papa I be not begin to . ' 
 at his request , I finish the tale of my life at school . ' ah , well ! that be bad fortune ; this be good ! ' he exclaim . ' tis your father , my son : ' tis day - light , though you look at it through a bed - curtain , and think you be half - dreaming . now then for I , Richie . ' 
 my father go on in this wise excitedly : 
 ' I be lay the foundation of your fortune here , my boy . heaven ! when I be in that bronze shell I be astonish only at my continence in not burst . you have grow , you have shoot up and fill out . I register my thank to your grandfather Beltham ; the same , in a minor degree , to Captain Jasper Welsh . between that man Rippenger and I there shall be dealing . he flog you : let that pass . he expose you to the contempt of your school - fellow because of a breach in my correspondence with a base - bear ferule - swinger . what be we come to ? Richie , my son , I be build a future for you here . and Colonel Goodwin - Colonel Goodwin , you encounter he too , and his marriageable daughter I owe it to they that I have you here ! well , in the event of my sit out the period this morning as the presentment of Prince Albrecht , I be to have win something would have astonish that unimpressionable countryman of ours . goodness gracious , my boy ! when I hear your english shout , it go to my marrow . could they expect I to look down on my own flesh and blood , on my son my son Richmond after a separation of year , and continue a statue ? Nay , I follow my paternal impulse . grant that the show be spoil , do the Markgrafin insist on my have a bronze heart to carry on her pastime ? why , naturally , I deplore a failure , let the cause be what it will . whose regret can eclipse those of the principal actor ? Quotha ! as our old play have it . regret ? do I not for fifteen minute and more of mortal time sit in view of a multitude , motionless , I ask you , like a chisel block of stone , and the compact be one quarter of an hour , and no far ? that be my stipulation . I tell she I can hold out one quarter of an hour : I pledge myself to it . who , then , be to blame ? I be expose to view twenty - three minute , odd second . be there not some ancient story of a monstrous wretch bake in his own bull ? my situation be as bad . if I recollect aright , he could roar ; no such relief be allow to I . and I give you my word , Richie , lad both , that while that most infernal Count Fretzel be pour forth his execrable humdrum , I positively envy the privilege of an old palsied fellow , chief boatman of the forest lake , for , think I , hang he ! he can nod his head and I can not . let I assure you , twenty minute of an ordeal like that , one posture , mind you , no raising of your eyelid , take your breath mechanically , and your heart beat jump like an enraged balletdancer box in your bosom a literal description , upon my honour ; and not only jump , jump every now and then , I may say , with a toe in your throat : I be half - choke : well , I say , twenty minute , twenty - seven minute and a half of that , get on , in fact , to half - an - hour , it be superhuman ! by heaven , it be heroical ! 
 and observe my reward : I have a son my only one . I have be divide from he for year ; I be establish his fortune ; I know he be provide with comfort : Richie , you remember the woman Waddy ? a faithful soul ! she obtain my consent at last previously I have objection ; in fact , your address be withhold from the woman to call at your school . she see Rippenger , a girl of considerable attraction . she hear you be locate at Riversley : I say , I know the boy be comfortably provide for ; but we have be separate since he be a little creature with curl on his forehead , scarce breeche . ' 
 I protest : 
 ' Papa , I have be in jacket and trouser I do not   know how long . ' 
 ' let I pursue , ' say my father . ' and to show you , Richie , it be a golden age ever when you and I be together , and ever shall be till we lose our manly spirit , and we cling to that , till we lose our princely spirit , which we never will abandon perish rather ! I drink to you , and challenge you ; and , mind you , old Hock wine have charm . if Burgundy be the emperor of wine , Hock be the empress . for youngster , perhaps , I should except the Hock that get what they would fancy a trifle pique , turn with age , so as to lose in their opinion its empress flavour . ' 
 Temple say modestly : ' I should call that the margravine of wine . ' 
 my father beam on he with great approve splendour . ' join we , Mr. Temple ; you be a man of wit , and may possibly find this speciman worthy of you . this wine have a history . you be drink wine with blood in it . well , I be say , the darling of my heart have be tear from I ; I be in a foreign land ; foreign , that is , by birth , and on the whole foreign . yes ! I be the cynosure of eye ; I be in a singular posture , a singular situation ; I hear a cry in the tongue of my native land , and what I presume be my boy 's name : I look , I behold he , I follow a parent 's impulse . on my soul ! none but a fish - father could have stand against it . 
 well , for this my reward be and I should have step from a cathedral spire just the same , if I have be mount on it that I , I , and the woman know all my secret I have to submit to the foul tirade of a vixen . 
 she draw language , I protest , from the slum . and I entreat you , Mr. Temple , with your " margravine of wine " which be very neatly say , to be sure note you this curious point for the confusion of Radicals in your after life ; her Highness 's pleasure be to lend her tongue to the language or something like it of a besotte fish - wife ; so ! very well , and just as it be the case with that particular old Hock you youngster would disapprove of , and we cunne oldster know to contain more virtue in maturity than a nunnery of May - bloom virgin , just so the very fault of a royal lady - royal by birth and in temper a termagant impart a perfume ! a flavour ! you must age ; you must live in Courts , you must sound the human bosom , rightly to appreciate it . she be a woman of the most malicious fine wit imaginable . 
 she be a generous woman , a magnanimous woman ; wear her chain and she will not brain you with her club . she be the light , the centre of every society where she appear , like what shall I say ? like the moon in a bowl of old Rhenish . and you will drain that bowl to the bottom to seize she , as it be catch a correct idea of she ; ay , and your brain be drown in the attempt . yes , Richie ; I be aware of your residence at Riversley . be you remind of your wandering dada on Valentine 's day ? Come , my boy , we have each of we a thousand thing to relate . I may be dull I do not understand what start you on your journey in search of I . an impulse ? an accident ? say , a direct angel ! we rest our leg here till evening , and then we sup . you will be astonish to hear that you have din . ' tis the fashion with the Germans . I promise you good wine shall make it up to you for the return to school - habit . we sup , and we pack our scanty baggage , and we start tonight . Brook no insult at Courts if you be of material value : if not , it be unreservedly a question whether you like kicking . ' 
 my father pause , yawn and stretch , to be rid of the remainder of his ache and stiffness . out of a great yawn he say : 
 ' dear lad , I have fall into the custom of the country ; I crave your permission that I may smoke . Wander , if you choose , within hail of I , or sit by I , if you can bear it , and talk of your school - life , and your study . your aunt Dorothy , Richie ? she be well ? I know not she like . I could bear to hear of any misfortune but that she suffer pain . 
 my father smoke his cigar peacefully . he have lay a guitar on his knee , and flip a string , or chafe over all the string , and pluck and thrum they as his mood vary . we chat , and watch the going down of the sun , and amuse ourselves idly , ferment as we be . anything that give pleasure to we two boy pleased and at once occupy my father . it be without aid from Temple 's grow admiration of he that I recover my active belief and vivid delight in his presence . my young day spring up beside I like brother . no one talk , look , flash , frowned , beamed , as he do ! have such prompt liveliness as he ! such tenderness ! no one be ever so versatile in playfulness . he take the colour of the spirit of the people about he . his vivacious or sedate man - of - the - world tone shift to playfellow 's fun in a twinkling . I use as a little fellow to think he large than he really be , but he be of good size , incline to be stout ; his eye be grey , rather prominent , and his forehead slop from arched eyebrow . so conversational be his eye and brow that he could persuade you to imagine he be carry on a dialogue without open his mouth . his voice be charmingly clear ; his laughter confident , fresh , catch , the outburst of his very self , as laughter should be . other sound of laughter be like echo . 
 strange to say , I lose the link of my familiarity with he when he leave we on a short visit to his trunk and portmanteaux , and have to lean on Temple , who tickle but rejoice I by say : ' Richie , your father be just the one I should like to be secretary to . ' 
 we think it a pity to have to leave this nice foreign place immediately . I like the scenery , and the wine , and what I suppose to be the habit of the gentleman here to dress in silk . on my father 's return to we I ask he if we could not stay till morning . 
 ' till morning , then , ' he say : ' and to England with the first lark . ' 
 his complexion be ruddier ; his valet have be at work to restore it ; he be get the sanguine hue which colour my recollection of he . wear a black velvet cap and a spanish furred cloak , he lead we over the villa . in Sarkeld he reside at the palace , and generally at the lake - palace on the removal of the Court thither . the margravine have place the villa , which be her own property , at his disposal , the well to work out their conspiracy . 
 ' it would have be mine ! ' say my father , bend suddenly to my ear , and hum his philosophical ' heigho , ' as he step on in minuet fashion . we go through apartment rich with gilded oak and pine panelling : in one be a rough pattern of a wooden horse opposite a mirror ; by no mean a figure of a horse , but apparently a number of piece contribute by a carpenter 's workshop , have a rueful seat in the middle . my father have practise the attitude of Prince Albrecht Wohlgemuth on it . ' she time I five and twenty minute there only yesterday , ' he say ; and he now suppose he have sit the bronze horse as a statue in public view exactly thirty - seven minute and a quarter . tub full of colour liquid to soak the garment of the prince , pot of paint , and paint and plaster brush , hint the magnitude of the preparation . 
 ' here , ' say my father in another apartment , ' I be this morning apparelle at seven o'clock : and I would have stake my right arm up to the collar - bone on the success of the undertaking ! ' 
 ' be not   they sure to have find it out in the end , papa ? ' I inquire . 
 ' I be not so certain of that , ' he rejoin : ' I can not quaff consolation from that source . I should have be cover up after exhibition ; I should have be pronounce imperfect in my fitting - apparatus ; the sculptor would have claim I , and I should have be enjoy the fruit of a brave and harmless conspiracy to do honour to an illustrious prince , while he would have be mould and cast an indubitable bronze statue in my image . a fig for rumour ! we show ourself ; we be catch from sight ; we be again on show . now this be successfully do , do you see , Royalty decline to listen to vulgar tattle . presumably , Richie , it be suspect by the Court that the margravine have many month ago command the statue at her own cost , and have set her mind on win back the money . the wonder of it be my magnificent resemblance to the defunct . I sit some three hour before the old warrior 's portrait in the dining - saloon of the lake - palace . accord I one good spell of meditation over a tolerable sketch , I warrant myself to represent he to the life , provide that he be a personage : I incline to stipulate for handsome as well . on my word of honour as a man and a gentleman , I pity the margravine my poor good Frau Feldmarschall ! now , here , Richie , ' my father open a side - door out of an elegant little room into a spacious dark place , ' here be her cabinet - theatre , where we act german and french comedietta in Spring and Autumn . I have superintend it during the two or more year of my stay at the Court . Humph ! ' tis over . ' 
 he abruptly close the door . his dress belong to the part of a spanish nobleman , personate by he in a play call the Hidalgo Enraged , he say , point a thumb over his shoulder at the melancholy door , behind which gay scene have sparkle . 
 ' papa ! ' say I sadly , for consolation . 
 ' you be change for a sovereign to the amount of four hundred and forty - nine thousand shilling every time you speak ! ' cry he , kiss my forehead . 
 he sparkle in good earnest on hear that I have make acquaintance with the little Princess Ottilia . what I think of she , how she look at I , what I say to she , what word she answer , how the acquaintance begin , who be observer of it , I have to repair my omission to mention she by furnish a precise description of the circumstance , describe her face and style , repeat her pretty English . 
 my father nod : he think I exaggerate that foreign English of her ; but , as I say , I be new to it and notice it . he admit the great keenness of attention awaken by novelty . 
 ' only , ' say he , ' I rather wonder ' and here he smile at I inquiringly . " tis true , ' he add , ' a boy of fourteen or fifteen ay , Richie , have your fun out . a youngster see the comic side of she . do you know , that child have a remarkable character ? her disposition be totally unfathomable . you be a deep reader of english poetry , I hope ; she adore it , and the English Navy . she inform I that if she have be the english people she would have make Nelson king . the Royal family of England might see objection to that , I tell she . cry she : " oh ! anything for a sea - hero . " you will find these young prince and princess astonishingly revolutionary when they entertain brain . now at present , just at present , an english naval officer , and a poet , stand higher in the esteem of that young Princess Ottilia than duke , king , or emperor . so you have see she ! ' my father ejaculate musingly , and hum , and say : ' by the way , we must be careful not to offend our grandpapa Beltham , Richie . good acre good anchorage ; good coffer good harbourage . regard poetry , my dear boy , you ought to be write it , for I do the diversion of leisure hour , impromptus . in poetry , I would scorn anything but impromptus . I be say , Richie , that if tremendous misfortune withhold from you your legitimate prestige , you must have the substantial element . ' tis your springboard to vault by , and cushion on the other side if you make a miss and fall . ' tis the essence if you have not the odour . ' 
 I follow my father 's meaning as the shadow of a bird follow it in sunlight ; it make no strong an impression than a fly shadow on the grass ; still I could verify subsequently that I have penetrate he I have catch the outline of his meaning though I be little accustomed to his manner of communicate his idea : I have no notion of what he touch on with the word , prestige , essence , and odour . 
 my effort to gather the reason for his have leave I neglect at school be fruitless . ' business , business ! sad necessity ! hurry , worry - the - hounds ! ' be his near approach to an explicit answer ; and see I grieve his kind eye , I abstain . nor do I like to defend Mr. Rippenger for expect to be pay . we come to that point once or twice , when so sharply wrong do he appear , and vehement and indignant , that I banish thought which mar my luxurious contentment in hear he talk and sing , and behave in his old way and new habit . 
 plain velvet be his dress at dinner . we have a yellow Hock . Temple 's meditative face over it , to discover the margravine , or something , in its flavour , be a picture . it be an evening of incessant talking ; no telling of event straightforwardly , but all by fit all here and there . my father talk of Turkey , so I learn he have be in that country ; Temple of the routine of our life at Riversley ; I of Kiomi , the gipsy girl ; then we two of Captain Jasper Welsh ; my father of the Princess Ottilia . when I allude to the margravine , he have a word to say of Mrs. Waddy ; so I learn she have be in continual correspondence with he , and have cry heavily about I , poor soul . Temple laugh out a recollection of Captain Bulsted 's ' hic , haec , hoc ' ; I jump Janet Ilchester up on the table ; my father expatiate on the comfort of a volume of Shakespeare to an exile Englishman . we drink to one another , and heartily to the statue . my father relate the history of the margravine 's plot in duck - and - drake skip , and backward to his first introduction to she at some Austrian Baths among the mountain . she want amusement he provide it ; she never let he quit her sight from that moment . 
 ' and now , ' he say , ' she have lose I ! ' he draw out of his pocket - book a number of design for the statue of Prince Albrecht , to which the margravine 's initial be append , and shuffle they , and sigh , and said:'most complete arrangement ! most complete ! no body of man be ever so well drill as those fellow up at Bella Vista could not have be ! and at the climax , in step the darling boy for whom I labour and sweat , and down we topple incontinently ! nothing would have shake I but the apparition of my son ! I be proof against everything but that ! I sit invincible for close upon an hour call it an hour ! not a muscle of I move : I repeat , the heart in my bosom caper like an independent organ ; have it all its own way , leave I mine , until Mr. Temple , take my word for it , there be a guide hand in some family ; believe it , and be serene in adversity . the change of life at a merry Court to life in a London alley will exercise our faith . but the essential thing be that Richie have be introduce here , and I intend he to play a part here . the grandson and heir of one of the rich commoner in England I be not say commoner as a term of reproach possess of a property that turn itself over and double itself every ten year , may mind you , may on such a solid foundation as that ! and as to birth , your Highness have only to grant we a private interview . ' 
 Temple be daze by this mystify address to he ; nor could I understand it . 
 ' why , papa , you always wish for I to go into Parliament , ' say I. 
 ' I do , ' he reply , ' and I wish you to lead the London great world . such topic be for by - and - by . Adieu to they ! ' he kiss his waft finger - tip . 
 we fall upon our random talk again with a merry rattle . 
 I have to give he a speciman of my piano - playing and singing . 
 he shake his head . ' the cricketer and the scholar have be develop at the expense of the musician ; and music , Richie , music unlock the chamber of satinrose . ' 
 late at night we separate . Temple and I sleep in companion - room . deadly drowsy , the dear little fellow sit on the edge of my bed chatter of his wonder . my dream lead I wander with a ship 's diver under the sea , where we walk in a light of pearl and explode old wreck . I be assure the glassy man that it be almost as clear beneath the wave as above , when I awake to see my father stand over I in daylight ; and in an ecstasy I burst into sob . 
 ' here , Richie ' he press fresh violet on my nostril ' you have have a morning visitor . quick out of bed , and you will see the little fairy cross the meadow . ' 
 I leapt to the window in time to have in view the little Princess Ottilia , follow by her faithful gaunt groom , before she be lose in the shadow of the fir - tree . 




 CHAPTER XIX . our return HOMEWARD 

 we start for England at noon , much against my secret wish ; but my father would not afford the margravine time to repent of her violent language and injustice toward he . reflection increase his indignation . anything that go wrong on the first stage of the journey cause he to recapitulate her epithet and reply to they proudly . he confide to I in Cologne Cathedral that the entire course of his life be a grand plot , resemble an unfinished piece of architecture , which might , at a future day , prove the wonder of the world : and he have , therefore , pack two dozen of hoar old   uralt : he use comical German   Hock for a present to my grandfather Beltham , in the hope of its be find acceptable . 
 ' for , Richie , ' say he , ' you may not know and it be not to win your thank I inform you of it that I labour unremittingly in my son 's interest . I have establish he , on his majority , in Germany , at a Court . my object now be to establish he in England . promise I that it shall be the decide endeavour of your energy and talent to rise to the height I point out to you ? you promise , I perceive , ' he add , sharp in detect the unpleasant predicament of a boy who be ask to speak priggishly . so then I could easily promise with a firm voice . he drop certain explosive hint , which remind I of the funny idea of my state and greatness I have when a child . I shrug at they ; I care nothing for revelation to come by - and - by . my object be to unite my father and grandfather on term of friendship . 
 this be the view that now absorb and fix my mind . to have he a frequent visitor at Riversley , if not a resident in the house , enliven they all , while I , perhaps , trifle a cavalry sabre , become one of my settle dream . the difficult part of the scheme appear to I the obtaining of my father 's consent . I mention it , and he say immediately that he must have his freedom . ' now , for instance , ' say he , ' what be my desire at this moment ? I have always a big one perch on a rock in the distance ; but I speak of my present desire . and let it be suppose that the squire be one of we : we be return to England . well , I want to show you a stork 's nest . we be not far enough South for the stork to build here . it be a fact , Richie , that I do want to show you the bird for luck , and as a feature of the country . and in I , a desire to do a thing partake of the impetus of steam . 
 well , you see we be jog home to England . I resist myself for duty 's sake : that I can do . but if the squire be here with his yea and his nay , by heaven ! I should be off to the top of the Rhine like a tornado . I submit to circumstance : I can not , and I will not , be dictate to by man . ' 
 ' that seem to I rather unreasonable , ' I remonstrate . 
 ' it be ; I be ashamed of it , ' he answer . ' do as you will , Richie ; set I down at Riversley , but under no slight , mark you . I keep my honour intact , like a bottled cordial ; my unfailing comfort in adversity ! I hand it to you , my son , on my death - bed , and say , " you have there the essence of my life . never have it be know of I that I swallow an insult . " ' 
 ' then , papa , I shall have a talk with the squire . ' 
 ' make good your ground in the castle , ' say he . ' I string a guitar outside . you toss I a key from the wall . if there be room , and I have leisure , I enter . if not , you know I be pave your way in other quarter . Riversley , my boy , be an excellent foothold and fortress : Riversley be not the world . at Riversley I should have to wear a double face , and , egad ! a double stomach - bag , like young Jack feed with the giant one full of ambition , the other of provender . that place be our touchstone to discover whether we have prudence . we have , I hope . and we will have , Mr. Temple , a pleasant day or two in Paris . ' 
 it be his habit to turn off the bent of these conversation by draw Temple into they . Temple declare there be no feeling we be in a foreign country while he be our companion . we simply enjoy strange scene , look idly out of our window . our recollection of the strange scene ever witness fill we with I know not what scornful pleasure , and laugh in the background at any sight or marvel pretend to amuse we . Temple and I canter over the great belgian battlefield , talk of Bella Vista tower , the statue , the margravine , our sour milk and black - bread breakfast , the little Princess Ottilia , with she ' it be my question , ' and ' you be kind to my lamb , sir , ' thoughtless of glory and dead bone . my father be very differently impressed . he be in an exultant glow , far outmatch the bloom on our face when we rejoin he . I cry , 
 ' Papa , if the prince will not   pay for a real statue , I will , and I will present it in your name ! ' 
 ' to the nation ? ' cry he , star , and arrest his arm in what seem an orchestral movement . 
 ' to the margravine ! ' 
 he hear , but have to gather his memory . he have be fight the battle , and make light of Bella Vista . I find that incident over which a day or two have roll lose their feature to he . he never smile at recollection . if they be force on he noisily by person he like , perhaps his face be gay , but only for a moment . the gaiety of his nature draw itself from hot - spring of hopefulness : our arrival in England , our interview there , my majority Burgundy , my revisitation of Germany these event to come give he the aspect child wear out a - maying or in an orchard . he discuss the circumstance connect with the statue as dry matter - of - fact , and unless it be his duty to be hilarious at the dinner - table , he be hardly able to respond to a call on his past life and mine . his future , too , be present tense : ' we do this , ' not ' we will do this ' ; so that , generally , no soon do we speak of an anticipated scene than he be act in it . I study he eagerly , I know , and yet quite unconsciously , and I come to no conclusion . boy be always put down the cipher of their observation of people belove by they , but do not add up a sum total . 
 our journey home occupy nearly eleven week , owe to stress of money on two occasion . in Brussels I behold he with a little beggar - girl in his arm . 
 ' she have ask I for a copper coin , Richie , ' he say , squeeze her fat cheek to make cherry of her lip . 
 I recommend he to give she a silver one . 
 ' something , Richie , I must give the little wench , for I have kiss she , and , in my list of equivalent , gold would be the sole form of repayment after that . you must buy I off with honour , my boy . ' 
 I be compel to receive a dab from the child 's nose , by way of a kiss , in return for buy he off with honour . 
 the child stump away on the pavement front our hotel , star at its fist that hold the treasure . 
 ' poor pet wee drab of it ! ' exclaim my father . ' one be glad , Richie , to fill a creature out of one 's emptiness . now she toddle ; she be digest it rapidly . the last performance of one 's purse be rarely so pleasant as that . I owe it to she that I make the discovery in time . ' 
 in this manner I also make the discovery that my father have no further supply of money , none whatever . how it have run out without his remark it , he could not tell ; he could only assure I that he have become aware of the fact while search vainly for a coin to bestow on the beggar - girl . I despatch a letter attest by a notary of the city , apply for money to the banker to whom Colonel Goodwin have introduce I on my arrival on the continent . the money come , and in the meantime we have form acquaintance and entertain they ; they be chiefly half - pay english military officer , dash man . one , a major Dykes , my father establish in our hotel , and we carry he on to Paris , where , consequent upon our hospitality , the purse be again deficient . 
 two reason for not regret it be adduce by my father ; firstly , that it teach I not to despise the importance of possess money ; secondly , that we have serve our country by assist dyke , who be on the scent of a new and terrible weapon of destruction , which he believe to be in the hand of the french Government . major Dykes disappear on the scent , but we have the satisfaction of know that we have do our good toward save the Navy of Great Britain from be blow out of water . Temple and I laugh over major dyke , and he become our puppet for by - play , on account of his enormous whisker , his passion for strong drink , and his air of secresy . my father 's faith in his patriotic devotedness be sufficient to withhold I from suspicion of his character . whenever my instinct , or common sense , would have lead I to differ with my father in opinion fun supervene ; I be willing that everything in the world should be as he would have it be , and take up with a spirit of laughter , too happy in have win he , in have fish he out of the deep sea at one fling of the net , as he say , to care for accuracy of sentiment in any other particular . 
 our purse be at its low ebb ; he suggest no mean of replenish it , and I think of none . he have hear that it be possible to live in Paris upon next to nothing with very great luxury , so we try it ; we stroll through the lilac aisle among bonne and baby , attend military spectacle , ride on omnibus , din on the country height , go to theatre , and have a most pleasurable time , gain everywhere front place , friendly smile , kind little service , in a way that would have be incomprehensible to I but for my consciousness of the magical influence of my father 's address , a mixture of the ceremonious and the affable such as the people could not withstand . 
 ' the poet be perhaps , on the whole , more exhilarating than the alderman , ' he say . 
 these be the respective name give by he to the empty purse and the full purse . we vow we prefer the poet . 
 ' ay , ' say he , ' but for all that the alderman be light on his foot : I back he to be across the Channel first . the object of my instruction to you will be lose , Richie , if I find you despise the Alderman 's Pegasus . on money you mount . we be literally chain here , you know , there be no doubt about it ; and we be add a nail to our fetter daily . true , you be accomplish the parisian accent . Paris have also this immense advantage over all other city : ' tis the central hotel on the high - road of civilization . in Paris you meet your friend to a certainty ; it catch they every one in turn ; so now we must abroad early and late , and cut for trump . ' a meeting with a friend of my father , Mr. Monterez Williams , be the result of our resolute adoption of this system . he help we on to Boulogne , where my father meet another friend , to whom he give so sumptuous a dinner that we have not money enough to pay the hotel bill . 
 ' now observe the inconvenience of leave Paris , ' say he . ' ten to one we shall have to return . we will try a week 's whistling on the jetty ; and if no luck come , and you will admit , Richie Mr. Temple , I call your attention to it that luck will scarcely come in profuse expedition through the narrow neck of a solitary seaport , why , we must return to Paris . ' 
 I propose to write to my aunt Dorothy for money , but he would not hear of that . after two or three day of whistle , I see my old friend , Mr. Bannerbridge , step out of the packetboat . on condition of my writing to my aunt to say that I be come home , he advance I the sum we be in need of , grudgingly though , and with the prediction that we should break down again , which be verify . it occur only a stage from Riversley , where my grandfather 's name be good as coin of the realm . besides , my father remain at the inn to guarantee the payment of the bill , while Temple and I push on in a fly with the two dozen of Hock . it could hardly be call a break - down , but my father be not unwilling for I to regard it in that light . among his parting remark be an impressive adjuration to I to cultivate the squire 's attachment at all cost . 
 ' do this , ' he say , ' and I shall know that the lesson I have teach you on your journey homeward have not be throw away . my darling boy ! my curse through life have be that the sense of weight in money be a sense I be and be bear utterly a stranger to . the consequence be , my grand edifice fall ; there be no foundation for they . not that I be bad , understand I , than under a temporary cloud , and the blessing of heaven have endow I with a magnificent constitution . Heaven forefend that I should groan for myself , or you for I ! but digest what you have learn , Richie ; press nothing on the squire ; be guide by the advice of that esteemed and admirable woman , your aunt Dorothy . and , by the way , you may tell she confidentially of the progress of your friendship with the Princess Ottilia . here I shall employ my hour in a tranquil study of nature until I see you . ' thus he speed I forward . 
 we sight Riversley about mid - day on a sunny June morning . compare with the view from Bella Vista , our fir look scanty , our heath - tract dull , as place have no page of history write on they , our fresh green meadow not more than commonly homely . I be so full of my sense of triumph in my adventurous journey and the recovery of my father , that I gaze on the old Grange from a tower height . the squire be on the lawn , surround by a full company : the Ilchesters , the Ambroses , the Wilfords , Captain and Squire Gregory Bulsted , the Rubreys , and other , all bend to rose , to admire , smell , or pluck . charming group of lady be here and there ; and Temple whisper as we pass they : 
 ' we beat foreigner in our woman , Richie . ' 
 I , make it my business to talk with perfect unconcern , reply 
 ' do you think so ? perhaps . not in all case ' ; all the while I be exult at the sweet beam of England radiate from these dear early - morning - look woman . 
 my aunt Dorothy swim up to I , and , kiss I , murmur : 
 ' take no rebuff from your grandpapa , darling . ' 
 my answer be : ' I have find he ! ' 
 Captain Bulsted sing out our name ; I catch sight of Julia Rippenger 's face ; the squire have his back turn to I , which remind I of my first speech with Captain Jasper Welsh , and I think to myself , I know something of the world now , and the thing be to keep a good temper . here there be no wire - coil to intercept we , so I front he quickly . 
 ' Hulloa ! ' he cry , and give I his shoulder . 
 ' Temple be your guest , sir , ' say I. 
 he be oblige to stretch out his hand to Temple . 
 a prompt instinct warn I that I must show he as much Beltham as I could summon . 
 ' dog and horse all right , sir ? ' I ask . 
 Captain Bulsted saunter near . 
 ' here , William , ' say the squire , ' tell this fellow about my stable . ' 
 ' in excellent condition , Harry Richmond , ' return the captain . 
 ' oh ! he be get a new name , I will swear , ' say the squire . 
 ' not I ! ' 
 ' then what have you get of your trip , eh ? ' 
 ' a sharp eye than I have , sir . ' 
 ' you have   be sharpen it in London , have you ? ' 
 ' I have   be a little farth than London , squire . ' 
 ' well , you be not a liar . ' 
 ' there , you see the lad can stand fire ! ' Captain Bulsted break in . ' Harry Richmond , I be proud to shake your hand , but I will wait till you be through the ceremony with your grandad . ' 
 the squire 's hand be cross behind he . I smile boldly in his face . 
 ' shall I make the tour of you to get hold of one of they , sir ? ' he frown and blink . 
 ' shuffle in among the lady ; you seem to know how to make friend among they , ' he say , and pretend to disengage his right hand for the purpose of wave it toward one of the group . 
 I seize it , say heartily , ' Grandfather , upon my honour , I love you , and I be glad to be home again . ' 
 ' mind you , you be not at home till you have   beg Uberly 's pardon in public , you know what for , ' he rejoin . 
 ' leave the horse at that inn be on my conscience , ' say I. 
 the squire grumble a bit . 
 ' suppose he kick ? ' say I ; and the captain laugh , and the squire too , and I be in such high spirit I think of a dozen witty suggestion relative to the seat of the conscience , and grieve for a minute at go to the lady . 
 all the well ; keep he there Captain Bulsted convoy I to pretty irish - eyed Julia Rippenger . Temple have previously make discovery of Janet Ilchester . relate our adventure on different part of the lawn , we both hear that Colonel Goodwin and his daughter have journey down to Riversley to smooth the way for my return ; so my easy conquest of the squire be not at all wonderful ; nevertheless , I maintain my sense of triumph , and be assure in my secret heart that I have a singular masterfulness , and could , when I choose to put it forth , compel my grandfather to hold out his hand to my father as he have do to I . 
 Julia Rippenger be a guest at Riversley through a visit pay to she by my aunt Dorothy in alarm at my absence . the intention be to cause the squire a distraction . it succeed ; for the old man need lively prattle of a less childish sort than Janet Ilchester 's at his elbow , and that young lady , though true enough in her fashion , be the ardent friend of none but flourish head ; whereas Julia , find my name under a cloud at Riversley , speak of I , I be lead to imagine by Captain Bulsted , as a ballad hero , a gloriful fellow , a darling whose deed be all pardonable a mere puff of smoke in the splendour of his nature . 
 ' to hear the young lady allude to I in that style ! ' he confide to my ear , with an ineffable heave of his big chest . 
 certain good influence , at any rate , preserve the squire from threaten to disinherit I . Colonel Goodwin have speak to he very manfully and wisely as to my relation with my father . the squire , it be assume by my aunt , and by Captain Bulsted and Julia , have undertake to wink at my father 's claim on my affection . all three vehemently entreat I to make no mention of the present of Hock to he , and not to attempt to bring about an interview . concern the yellow wine I disregard their advice , for I hold it to be a point of filial duty , and an obligation religiously contract beneath a cathedral dome ; so I perform the task of offer the Hock , state that it be of ancient birth . the squire bunch his feature ; he tutor his temper , and say not a word . I fancy all be well . before I try the second step , Captain Bulsted ride over to my father , who himself generously enjoin the prudent course , in accordance with his aforegone precept . he be float off , as he term it , from the inn where he lie strand , to London , by I know not what heaven - send gift of money , bid I keep in view the grand career I be to commence at Dipwell on arrive at my majority . I would have go with he have he beckon a finger . the four - and - twenty bottle of Hock be range in a line for the stable - boy to cock - shy at they under the squire 's supervision and my enforced attendance , just as revolutionary criminal be execute . I feel like the survivor of friend , who have see their blood flow . 
 he hand I a cheque for the payment of debt incur in my recent adventure . who could help be grateful for it ? and yet his remorseless spilling of the kindly wine full of mellow recollection of my father and the little princess , drive the sense of gratitude out of I . 




 CHAPTER XX . news of a fresh conquest of MY FATHER 'S 

 Temple go to sea . the wonder be that I do not go with he : we be both in agreement that adventure be the only thing worth live for , and we despise English fellow who have see no place but England . I could not bear the long separation from my father that be my reason for not insist on the squire 's consent to my become a midshipman . after pass a brilliant examination , Temple have the good fortune to join Captain Bulsted 's ship , and there my honest - hearted friend dismally compose his letter of confession , let I know that he have be untrue to friendship , and have propose to Janet Ilchester , and interchange vow with she . he beg my forgiveness , but he do love she so ! he hop I would not mind . I send he a reproachful answer ; I never care for he more warmly than when I see the letter shoot the slope of the postoffice mouth . Aunt Dorothy undertake to communicate assurance of my undying affection for he . as for Janet Temple 's letter , in which he speak of her avow preference for oriental present , and declare his intention of accumulate they on his voyage , be a harpoon in her side . by mean of it I worry and terrify she until she be glad to have it all out before the squire . what do he do ? he say that Margery , her mother , be niggardly ; a girl want present , and I do not act up to my duty ; I ought to buy Turkey and Tunis to please she , if she have a mind for they . 
 the further she be flatter the fast she cry ; she have the face of an old setter with these hideous tear . the squire promise she fifty pound per annum in quarterly payment , that she might buy what present she like , and so tie herself to constancy . he say aside to I , as if he have a knowledge of the sex ' young lady must have lot of knickknack , or their eye will be catch right and leave , remember that . ' I should have be delighted to see she catch . she talk of love in a ludicrous second - hand way , send I into fit of disgusted laughter . on other occasion her lip be not hypocritical , and her figure anything but awkward . she be a bold , plump girl , fond of male society . Heriot enrapture she . I believe at the time she would have appoint a year to marry he in , have he put the question . but too many woman be in love with Heriot . he and I meet Kiomi on the road to the race - course on the southdown ; the prettiest racecourse in England , shut against gipsy . a bare - footed swarthy girl run beside our carriage and toss we flower . he and a friend of his , young Lord Destrier , son of the Marquis of Edbury , who know my father well , talk and laugh with she , and think she so very handsome that I likewise begin to stare , and I suddenly call ' Kiomi ! ' she bound back into the hedge . this be our second meeting . it would have be a pleasant one have not Heriot and Destrier pretend all sort of thing about our previous acquaintance . neither of we , they say , have make a bad choice , but why have we separate ? she snatch her hand out of mine with a grin of anger like puss in a fury . we have wonderful fun with she . they take she to a great house near the race - course , and there , assist by one of the young lady , dress she in flow silk , and so pass she through the gate of the enclosure interdict to bare foot . there they lead she to group of fashionable lady , and get themselves into pretty scrape . they say she be an Indian . Heriot lose his wager and call she a witch . she reply , ' you will find I be one , young man , ' and that be the only true thing she speak of the day to come . owe to the hubbub around the two who be guilty of this unmeasured joke upon consequential lady , I have to conduct she to the gate . instantly , and without a good - bye , she scramble up her skirt and run at stride across the road and through the wood , out of sight . she win her dress and a piece of jewelry . 
 with Heriot I go on a sad expedition , the same I have set out upon with Temple . this time I see my father behind those high red wall , once so mysterious and terrible to I . Heriot make light of prison for debt . he insist , for my consolation , that they have but a temporary dishonourable signification ; very estimable gentleman , as well as scamp , inhabit they , he say . the impression produce by my visit the feasting among ruined man who believe in good luck the more the low they fall from it , and their fearful admiration of my imprisoned father be as if I have drink a stupefy liquor . I be unable clearly to reflect on it . daily afterwards , until I release he , I make journey to usurer to get a loan on the faith of the reversion of my mother 's estate . Heriot , like the real friend he be , help I with his name to the bond . when my father stand free , I have the proud heart alive ; and as soon as we have part , the most amazed . for a long while , for year , the thought of he be haunt by racketball and bearded man in their shirtsleeve ; a scene sicken to one 's pride . yet it have grow impossible for I to think of he without pride . I delight to hear he . we be happy when we be together . and , moreover , he swear to I on his honour , in Mrs. Waddy 's presence , that he and the constable would henceforth keep an even pace . his exuberant cheerfulness and charming playfulness be always fascinating . his vision of our glorious future enchain I . how it be that something precious have go out of my life , I could not comprehend . 
 Julia Rippenger 's marriage with Captain Bulsted be , an agreeable distraction . unfortunately for my peace of mind , she go to the altar poignantly pale . my aunt Dorothy settle the match . she have scheme it , her silence and half - downcast look seem to confess , for the sake of her own repose , but neither to she nor to other do that come of it . I write a plain warning of the approach catastrophe to Heriot , and receive his reply after it be over , to this effect : 
 ' in my regiment we have a tolerable knowledge of woman . they like change , old Richie , and we must be content to let they take their twenty shilling for a sovereign . I myself prefer the Navy to the Army ; I have no right to complain . once she swear one thing , now she have swear another . we will hope the lady will stick to her choice , and not seek small change . " I could not forgive copper " ; that be quote your dad . I have no wish to see the uxorious object , though you praise he . his habit of fall under the table be middle old - fashioned ; but she may like he the well , or she may cure he . whatever she be as a woman , she be a very nice girl to enliven the atmosphere of the switch . I sometimes look at a portrait I have of J. R. , which , I fancy , Mrs. William Bulsted have no right to demand of I ; but suppose her husband think he have , why then I must consult my brother officer . we want a war , old Richie , and I wish you be sit at our mess , and not moon about girl and woman . ' 
 I presume from this that Heriot 's passion for Julia be extinct . Aunt Dorothy disapprove of his tone , which I think admirably philosophical and coxcombi - cally imitable , an expression of the sort of thing I should feel on hearing of Janet Ilchester 's nuptial . 
 the daring and success of that foreign adventure of mine have , with the aid of Colonel and Clara Goodwin , convince the squire of the folly of stand between I and he I love . it be consider the good sign possible that he should take I down on an inspection of his various estate and his great coal - mine , and introduce I as the heir who would soon relieve he of the task . 
 perhaps he think the smell of wealth a promising cure for such fit of insubordination as I have exhibit . my occasional absence on my own account be wink at . on my return the squire be sour and snappish , I cheerful and complaisant ; I grow cold , and he solicitous ; he would drink my health with a challenge to heartiness , and I drink to he heartily and he relapse to a fit of sulk , inform I , that in his time young man know when they be well off , and ask I whether I be up to any young man 's villanie , have any conceal debt perchance , because , if so oh ! he know the way of youngster , especially when they fall into bad hand : the list of bad title rumble on in an underbreath like cowardly thunder : well , to cut the matter short , because , if so , his cheque - book be at my service ; do not   I know that , eh ? not be immediately distress by debt , I do not exhibit the gush of gratitude , and my sedate ' thank you , sir , ' confuse his appeal for some sentimental show of affection . 
 I be sure the poor old man suffer pang of jealousy ; I could even at time see into his breast and pity he . he want little more than to be manage ; but a youth when he perceive absurdity in opposition to he chafe at it as much as if he be unaware that it be laughable . have the squire talk to I in those day seriously and fairly of my father 's character , I should have abandon my system of defence to plead for he as before a judge . by that time I have gain the knowledge that my father be totally of a different construction from other man . I wish the squire to own simply to his loveable nature . I could have tell he woman do . without cite my dear aunt Dorothy , or so humble a creature as the devoted Mrs. Waddy , he have sincere friend among woman , who esteem he , and be staunch adherent to his cause ; and if the widow of the City knight , Lady Sampleman , aim openly at be something more , she be not the less his friend . nor be it only his powerful animation , generosity , and grace that win they . 
 there occur when I be a little past twenty , already much in his confidence , one of those strange crucial event which try a man publicly , and bring out whatever can be say for and against he . a young Welsh heiress fall in love with he . she be , I think , seven or eight month young than myself , a handsome , intelligent , high - spirited girl , rather want in polish , and perhaps in the protect sense of decorum . she be well - bear , of course she be Welsh . she be really well - breed too , though somewhat brusque . the young lady fall hopelessly in love with my father at Bath . she give out that he be not to be for one moment accuse of have encourage she by secret address . it be her unsolicited avowal think by my aunt Dorothy immodest , not by I that she prefer he to all live man . her name be Anna Penrhys . the squire one morning receive a letter from her family , request he to furnish they with information as to the antecedent of a gentleman call himself Augustus Fitz - George Frederick William Richmond Guelph Roy , for purpose which would , they assure he , warrant the inquiry . he be for throw the letter aside , shout that he thank his God he be unacquainted with anybody on earth with such an infernal list of name as that . Roy ! who know anything of Roy ? 
 ' it happen to be my father 's present name , ' say I. 
 ' it sound to I like the name of one of those blackguard adventurer who creep into family to catch the fool , ' pursue the squire , not hear I with his eye . 
 ' the letter at least must be answer , ' my aunt Dorothy say . 
 ' it shall be answer ! ' the squire work himself up to roar . he write a reply , the content of which I could guess at from my aunt 's refusal to let I be present at the discussion of it . the letter despatch be write by she , with his signature . her eye glitter for a whole day . 
 then come a statement of the young lady 's case from Bath . 
 ' look at that ! look at that ! ' cry the squire , and go on , ' look at that ! ' in a muffled way . there be a touch of dignity in his unforced anger . 
 my aunt wince displeasingly to my sight : ' I see nothing to astonish one . ' 
 ' nothing to astonish one ! ' the squire set his mouth in imitation of she . 
 ' you see nothing to astonish one ? well , ma'am , when a man grow old enough to be a grandfather , I do see something astonishing in a child of nineteen by George ! it be out o ' nature . but you woman like monstrosity . oh ! I understand . here be an heiress to fifteen thousand a year . it be not astonishing if every ruin gambler and scapegrace in the kingdom 's hunt her hot ! no , no ! that be not astonishing . I suppose she have her money in a coal mine . ' 
 the squire have some of his in a coal - mine ; my mother once have ; it be the delivery of a blow at my father , signify that he have the scent for this description of wealth . I leave the room . the squire then affect that my presence have constrain he , by bellow out epithet easy for I to hear in the hall and out on the terrace . he vow by solemn oath he be determined to save this girl from ruin . my aunt 's speech be brief . 
 I be summon to Bath by my father in a curious peremptory tone imply the utmost urgent need of I . 
 I hand the letter to the squire at breakfast , say , ' you must spare I for a week or so , sir . ' 
 he spread the letter flat with his knife , and turn it over with his fork . 
 ' Harry , ' say he , half - kindly , and choke , ' you be well out of it . ' 
 ' I be the good friend he could have by he , sir . ' 
 ' you be the good tool he could have handy , for you be a gentleman . ' 
 ' I hope I shall not   offend you , grandfather , but I must go . ' 
 ' do not   you see , Harry Richmond , you be in for an infernal marriage ceremony there ! ' 
 ' the young lady be not of age , ' interpose my aunt . 
 ' eh ? an infernal elopement , then . it be clear the girl 's mad - head 's crack as a cocoa - nut bowl by a monkey , brain nowhere . Harry , you be not a greenhorn ; you do not   suspect you be call down there to stop it , do you ? you jump plump into a furious lot of the girl 's relative ; you might as well take a header into a leech - pond . come ! you be a man ; think for yourself . do not   have this affair on your conscience , boy . I tell you , Harry Richmond , I be against your going . you go against my will ; you offend I , sir ; you drag my name and blood into the mire . she be Welsh , be she ? those Welsh be addle - pat , every one . poor girl ! ' 
 he throw a horrible tremour into his accent of pity . 
 my aunt express her view mildly , that I be send for to help cure the young lady of her delusion . 
 ' and take she himself ! ' cry the squire . ' Harry , you would not   go and do that ? why , the law , man , the law the whole country would be up about it . you will be stick in a coloured caricature ! ' 
 he be really alarmed lest this should be one of the consequence of my going , and describe some of the scourging caricature of his day with an intense appreciation of their awfulness as engine of the moral sense of the public . I go nevertheless . 




 CHAPTER XXI . a promenade in BATH 

 I find my father at his hotel , sit with his friend Jorian DeWitt , whom I have meet once before , and think clever . he be an ex - captain of dragoon , a martyr to gout , and addict to Burgundy , which necessitate his resort to the water , cause he , as he say , between his appetite and the penance he pay for they , to lead the life of a pendulum . my father be in a temper gay mood , examine a couple of the county newspaper . one abuse he virulently ; he be support by the other . after embrace I , he desire I to listen while he read out oppose sentence from the column of these eminent journal : 
 ' the person call himself " Roy , " whose monstrously absurd pretension be suppose to be embody in this self - dub surname ... ' 
 ' the celebrated and courtly Mr. Richmond Roy , know no less by the fascination of his manner than by his romantic history ... ' 
 ' have very soon succeed in make himself the talk of the town ... ' 
 ' have latterly become the theme of our tea - table ... ' 
 ' which be always the adventurer 's privilege ... ' 
 ' through no fault of his own ... ' 
 ' that we may throw light on the blushing aspiration of a crow - sconce Cupid , it will be as well to recall the antecedent of this   if no bad   preposterous imitation buck of the old school ... ' 
 ' suffice it , without seek to draw the veil from those affect chapter of his early career which kindle for he the enthusiastic sympathy of all class of his countryman , that he be not yet free from a tender form of persecution ... ' 
 ' we think we be justify in entitle he the Perkin Warbeck of society ... ' 
 ' reference might be make to mythological hero ... ' 
 Hereat I cry out mercy . 
 Captain DeWitt   stretch nursing a leg   remove his silk handkerchief from his face to murmur , 
 ' the bass stedfastly drown the treble , if this be mean for harmony . ' 
 my father ring up the landlord , and say to he , 
 ' the choicest of your cellar at dinner to - day , Mr. Lumley ; and , mind you , I be your guest , and I exercise my right of compel you to sit down with we and assist in consume a doubtful quality of wine . we dine four . Lay for five , if your conscience be bad , and I excuse you . ' 
 the man smirk . he venture to say he have never be so tempt to supply an inferior article . 
 my father smile on he . 
 ' you invite our editorial advocate ? ' say Captain DeWitt . 
 ' our adversary , ' say my father . 
 I protest I would not sit at table with he . but he assure I he believe his advocate and his adversary to be one and the same , and refer I to the collated sentence . 
 ' the man must earn his bread , Richie , boy ! to tell truth , it be the advocate I wish to rebuke , and to praise the adversary . it will confound he . ' 
 ' it do I , ' say DeWitt . 
 ' you perceive , Jorian , a policy in din these man of the Press now and occasionally , consider their grow power , do you not ? ' 
 ' ay , ay ! it be a great gossiping machine , mon Roy . I prefer to let it spout . ' 
 ' I crave your permission to invite he in complimentary term , cousin Jorian . he be in the town ; remember , it be for the good of the nation that he and his like should have the opportunity of study good society . as to myself personally , I give he carte blanche to fire his shot at I . ' 
 near the fashionable hour of the afternoon my father take my arm , Captain DeWitt a stick , and we walk into the throng and buzz . 
 ' whenever you be , to quote our advocate , the theme of tea - table , Richie , ' say my father , ' walk through the crowd : it will wash you . it be do we the honour to observe we . we in turn discover an interest in its general countenance . ' 
 he be receive , as we pass , with much staring ; here and there a lifting of hat , and some blunt nodding that incense I , but he , feel I bristle , squeeze my hand and talk of the scene , and ever and anon gather a line of head and shed an indulgent bow along them- ; so on to the Casino . not once do he offend my taste and make my acute sense of self - respect shiver by appear grateful for a recognition , or anxious to court it , though the curtest salute meet his acknowledgement . 
 the interior of the Casino seem more hostile . I remark it to he . ' a trifle more eye - glassy , ' he murmur . he be quite at his easy there . 
 ' we walk up and down , my son , ' he say , in answer to a question of mine , ' because there be very few who can ; even walk be an art ; and if nobody do , the place be dull . ' 
 ' the place be pretty well supply with newspaper , ' say Captain DeWitt . 
 ' and dowager , friend Jorian . they be cousin . ' tis the fashion to have our tattle do by machinery . they have their opportunity to compare the portrait with the original . come , invent some scandal for we ; let we make this place our social Exchange . I warrant a good bold piece of invention will fit they , too , some of they . Madam , ' my father bow low to the beckoning of a fan , ' I trust your ladyship do not chance to overhear that last remark I make ? ' 
 the lady reply : ' I should have shut my eye if I have . I call you to tell I , who be the young man ? ' 
 ' for twenty year I have live in the proud belief that he be my son ! ' 
 ' I would not disturb it for the world . ' she do I the honour to inspect I from the low waistcoat button to the eyebrow . ' bring he to I to - night . Captain DeWitt , you have forsake my whist - table . ' 
 ' purely temporary fit of unworthiness , my lady . ' 
 ' in English , gout ? ' 
 ' not gout in the conscience , I trust , ' say my father . 
 ' oh ! that be curable , ' laugh the captain . 
 ' you man of repartee would be nothing without your wickedness , ' the lady observe . 
 ' man be suppose to be incomplete ' Captain DeWitt affect a murmur . 
 she nod ' yes , yes , ' and lift eye on my father . ' so you have not give up go to church ? ' 
 he bend and speak low . 
 she humphe her lip . ' very well , I will see . it must be a night in the early part of the week after next , then : I really do not   know why I should serve you ; but I like your courage . ' 
 ' I can not consent to accept your ladyship 's favour on account of one single virtue , ' say he , droop . 
 she wave he to move forward . 
 during this frothy dialogue , I could see that the ear of the assembly have be catch by the sound of it . 
 ' that , ' my father inform I , ' be the great Lady Wilts . now you will notice a curious thing . Lady Wilts be not so old but that , as our Jorian here say of she , she be marriageable . hence , Richie , she be a queen to make the masculine knee knock the ground . I fear the same be not to be say of her rival , Lady Denewdney , whom our good Jorian compare to an antiquated fledgeling emerge with effort from a nest of ill construction and bad cement . she be rich , she be sharp , she use she quill ; she be emphatically not marriageable . bath might still accept she as a rival queen , only she be always behindhand in seize an occasion . now you will catch sight of her fan work in a minute . she be envious and imitative . it would be undoubtedly well policy on her part to continue to cut I : she can not , she be begin to rustle like December 's oak . if Lady Wilts have I , why , she must . we refrain from notice she until we have turn twice . ay , Richie , there be this use in adversity ; it teach one to play sword and target with etiquette and retenue well than any crown king in Europe . for I now to cross to her summon immediately would be a gross breach of homage to Lady Wilts , who be inspire to be the first to break through the fence of scandal environ I . but I must still show that I be independent . these people must not suppose that I have to cling to a party . let they take side ; I be on fair term with both the rival . I show just such a nuance of a distinction in my treatment of they just such enough , I mean , to make the flattered one warm to I , and t ' other be jealous of she . ay , Richie , these thing be trivial thing beyond the grave ; but here be we , my boy ; and , by the way , I suspect the great campaign of my life be open . ' 
 Captain DeWitt say that if so it would be the tenth , to his certain knowledge . 
 ' not great campaign ! ' my father insist : ' mere skirmish before this . ' 
 they converse in humorous undertone , each in turn seem to turn over the earth of some amusing reminiscence , so rapt , that as far as regard their perception of it , the assembly might have be nowhere . perhaps , consequently , they become observe with all but undivided attention . my father 's hand be on my shoulder , his head toward Captain DeWitt ; instead of subdue his voice , he give it a moderate pitch , at which it be not intrusive , and be musical , to my ear charming , especially when he continue talk through his soft laughter , like a hunter that would in good humour press for his game through link of water - nymph . 
 Lady Denewdney 's fan take to beat time meditatively . two or three time she keep it elevate , and in vain : the flow of their interchangeing speech be uninterrupted . at last my father bow to she from a distance . she signal : his eyelid plead short sight , awakening to the apprehension of a pleasant fact : the fan tap , and he halt his march , lean scarce perceptibly in her direction . the fan show distress . thereupon , his voice subside in his conversation , with a concluding flash of animation across his feature , like a brook that come to the leap on a descent , and he leave we . 
 Captain DeWitt and I be lead by a common attraction to the portico , the truth be that we neither of we could pace easily nor talk with perfect abandonment under eye - fire any long . 
 ' look , ' say he to I , point at the equipage and equestrian : ' you will see a sight like this in dozen dozen of our city and town ! the wealth of this country be frightful . ' 
 my reply , address at the same time mentally to Temple at sea , be : 
 ' well , as long as we have the handsome woman , I do not   care . ' 
 Captain DeWitt be not so sure that we have . the Provencal woman , the woman of a part of South Germany , and certain favour spot of Italy , might challenge we , he think . this be a point I could argue on , or , I should rather say , take up the cudgel , for I deem such opinion treason to one 's country and an outrage to common sense , and I embark in controversy with the single - minded intention of knock down the man who hold they . 
 he accept his thrashing complacently . 
 ' now here come a young lady on horseback , ' he say ; ' do you spy she ? dark hair , thick eyebrow , rid well , follow by a groom . be she a beauty ? ' 
 in the heat of patriotism I declare she be handsome , and repeat it , though I experience a twinge of remorse , like what I should have feel have I give Minerva the apple instead of Venus . 
 ' oh ! ' he comment , and step down to the road to meet she , begin , in my hearing , ' I be the bearer of a compliment ' her thick eyebrow stand in a knot , then she glance at I and hung pensive . she have not to wait a minute before my father come to her side . 
 ' I know you would face they , ' she say . 
 he throw back his head like a swimmer toss spray from his lock . 
 ' you have read the paper ? ' he ask . 
 ' you have horsewhip the writer ? ' she rejoin . 
 ' oh ! the poor penster ! ' 
 ' Nay , we can not   pretend to pity he ! ' 
 ' could we condescend to offer he satisfaction ? ' 
 ' would he dare to demand it ? ' 
 ' we will lay the case before Lady Wilts to - night . ' 
 ' you be there to - night ? ' 
 ' at Lady Denewdney 's to - morrow night if I may indulge a hope ? ' 
 ' both ? oh ! bravo , bravo ! tell I nothing more just now . how do you manage it ? I must have a gallop . yes , I shall be at both , be sure of that . ' 
 my father introduce I . 
 ' let I present to your notice my son , Harry Lepel Richmond , Miss Penrhys . ' 
 she touch my finger , and nod at I ; speak to he : 
 ' he have a boy 's taste : I hear he esteem I moderately well - favour . ' 
 ' an inherit error certain to increase with age ! ' 
 ' now you have start I ! ' she exclaim , and lash the flank of her horse . 
 we have evidently be enact a part deeply interesting to the population of Bath , for the head of all the stroll group be bent on we ; and when Miss Penrhys canter away , down drop eyeglass , and the promenade return to activity . I fancy I perceive that my father be greet more cordially on his way back to the hotel . 
 ' you do well , Richie , ' he observe , ' in preserve your composure until you have something to say . wait for your opening ; it will come , and the right word will come with it . the main thing be to be able to stand well , walk well , and look with an eye at home in its socket : I put you my hand on any man or woman bear of high blood . not a brazen eye ! of the two extreme , I prefer the beat spaniel sort . Blindfold I , but I put you my hand on they . as to repartee , you must have it . wait for that , too . do not , ' he groan , ' do not force it ! bless my soul , what be there in the world so bad ? ' and rise to the upper note of his groan : ' ignorance , density , total imbecility , be well ; I would rather any day of my life sit and carve for guest the gross of human trial a detestable dinner , than be doom to hear some wretched fellow and you hear the old as well as the young excruciate feeling which , where they exist , can not but be exquisitely delicate . goodness gracious I ! to see the man pump up his wit ! for I , my visage be of an unalterable gravity whenever I be present at one of these exhibition . I care not if I offend . let they say I wish to revolutionize society I declare to you , Richie boy , delightful to my heart though I find your keen stroke of repartee , still your fellow who take the thrust gracefully , know when he be traverse by a master - stroke , and yield sign of it , instead of plunge like a spit buffalo and ask we to admire his agility you follow I ? I say I hold that man and I delight vastly in ready wit ; it be the wine of language ! I regard that man as the superior being . true , he be not so entertaining . ' 
 my father press on my arm to intimate , with a cavernous significance of eyebrow , that Captain DeWitt have the gift of repartee in perfection . 
 ' Jorian , ' say he , ' will you wager our editor decline to dine with we ? ' 
 the answer strike I as only passable . I think it be : 
 ' when rat smell death in toasted cheese . ' 
 Captain DeWitt spring up the staircase of our hotel to his bedroom . 
 ' I should not have force he , ' my father muse . ' Jorian DeWitt have at time brilliant genius , Richie in the way of rejoinder , I mean . this be his happy moment his one hour 's dressing for dinner . I have watch he ; he most thoroughly enjoy it ! I be myself a quick or slow dresser , as the case may be . but to watch Jorian you can not help enter into his enjoyment of it . he will have his window with a view of the sunset ; there be his fire , his warm linen , and his shirt - stud ; his bath , his choice of a dozen thing he will or will not wear ; the landlord 's or host 's menu be up against the look - glass , and the extremely handsome miniature likeness of his wife , who be in the madhouse , by a celebrated painter , I forget his name . jorian call this , new birth you catch his idea ? he throw off the old and be on with the new with a highly hopeful anticipation . his valet be a scoundrel , but never fail in extract the menu from the cook , wherever he may be , and , in fine , be too attentive to the hour 's devotion to be discard ! poor Jorian . I know no man I pity so much . ' 
 I conceive he , I confess , hardly pitiable , though not enviable . 
 ' he have but six hundred a year , and a passion for Burgundy , ' say my father . 
 we be four at table . the editor come , and his timidity soon wear off in the warmth of hospitality . he appear a kind exciteable little man , glad of his dinner from the first , and in due time proud of his entertainer . his response to the toast of the Fourth Estate be an apology for its behaviour to my father . he regret it ; he regret it . a vinous speech . 
 my father hear he out . address he subsequently , 
 ' I would not interrupt you in the delivery of your sentiment , ' he say . ' I must , however , man to man , candidly tell you I should have wish to arrest your expression of regret . they convey to my mind an idea , that on receipt of my letter of invitation , you attribute to I a design to corrupt you . protest nothing , I beg . editor be human , after all . now , my object be , that as you write of I , you should have some knowledge of I ; and I naturally be interested in one who do I so much honour . the fact of my life be at your disposal for publication and comment . simply , I entreat you , say this one thing of I : I seek for justice , but I never complain of my fortune . Providence decide : that might be the motto engraven on my heart . Nay , I may risk declare it be ! in the end I shall be right . meanwhile you contribute to my happiness by favour I with your society . ' 
 ' ah , sir , ' reply the little man , ' be all our great people like you ! in the country the province they treat the representative of the Fourth Estate as the squire a couple of generation back use to treat the parson . ' 
 ' what ! have you get a place at their table ? ' inquire Captain DeWitt . 
 ' no , I can not say that not even below the salt . Mr. Richmond Mr. Roy , you may not be aware of it : I be the proprietor of the opposition journal in this county . I tell you in confidence , one by itself would not pay ; and I be a printer , sir , and it be on my conscience to tell you I have , in the course of business , be compel this very morning to receive order for the printing of various squib and , I much fear , scurrilous thing . ' 
 my father pacify he . 
 ' you will do your duty to your family , Mr. Hickson . ' 
 deeply move , the little man pull out proof - sheet and slip . 
 ' even now , at the eleventh hour , ' he urge , ' there be time to correct any glare falsehood , insult , what not ! ' 
 my father accept the copy of proof . 
 ' not a word , not a line ! you speak of the eleventh hour , Mr. Hickson . if we be at all near the eleventh , I must be on my way to make my bow to Lady Wilts ; or be it Lady Denewdney 's to - night ? no , to - morrow night . ' 
 a light of satisfaction come over Mr. Hickson 's face at the mention of my father 's visit both these sovereign lady . 
 as soon as we be rid of he , Captain DeWitt exclaim , 
 ' if that be the Fourth Estate , what be the Realm ? ' 
 ' the estate , ' plead my father , ' be here in its infancy on all four ' 
 ' prehensile ! egad , it have the vice of the other three besides its own . do you mean that by put it on all four ? ' 
 ' Jorian , I have notice that when you be malignant you be not witty . we have to thank the man for not subject we to a pledge of secresy . my Lady Wilts will find the proof amusing . and mark , I do not examine their content before submit they to her inspection . you will testify to the fact . ' 
 I be unaware that my father play a master - stroke in hand these proof - sheet publicly to Lady Wilts for her perusal . the incident of the evening be the display of her character show by Miss Penrhys in positively decline to quit the house until she likewise have cast her eye on they . one of her aunt weep . their carriage be keep wait an hour . 
 ' you ask too much of I : I can not turn she out ' , Lady Wilts say to her uncle . and aside to my father , ' you will have to marry she . ' 
 ' in heaven 's name keep I from marriage , my lady ! ' I hear he reply . 
 there be sincerity in his tone when he say that . 




 CHAPTER XXII . conclusion of the BATH episode 

 the friend of Miss Penrhys be ill advise in try to cry down a man like my father . active persecution be the breath of life to he . when untroubled he be apt to let both his ambition and his dignity slumber . the squib and scandal set afloat concern he arm his wit , nerve his temper , touch he with the spirit of enterprise ; he become a new creature . I lose sight of certain characteristic which I have begin to ponder over critically . I believe with all my heart that circumstance be blameable for much that do not quite please I . upon the question of his magnanimity , as well as of his courage , there could not be two opinion . he would neither retort nor defend himself . I perceive some grandeur in his conduct , without , however , appreciate it cordially , as I do a refinement of discretion about he that keep he from brush good taste while launch in ostentatious display . he have a fine tact and a keen intuition . he may have think it necessary to throw a little dust in my eye ; but I doubt his have do it , for he have only , as he know , to make I jealous to blind I to his fault utterly , and he refrain . 
 in his allusion to the young lady he be apologetic , affectionate ; one might have fancy oneself listen to a gracious judge who have well weigh her case , and exculpate she from other excess than that of a generous folly . Jorian DeWitt , a competent critic , pronounce his behaviour consummate at all point . for my behoof , he hint antecedent revers to the picture : meditating upon which , I trace they to the fatal want of money , and that I might be able to fortify he in case of need , I take my own counsel , and write to my aunt for the loan of as large a sum as she could afford to send . her eagerness for news of our doing be insatiable . ' you do not describe she , ' she reply , not name Miss Penrhys ; and again , ' I can form no image of she . your account of she be confusing . tell I earnestly , do you like she ? she must be very wilful , but be she really nice ? I want to know how she appear to my Harry 's mind . ' 
 my father borrow these letter , and return they to I , say , ' a good soul ! the good of woman ! there there be a treasure lose ! ' his forehead be cloud in speak . he recommend I to assure my aunt that she would never have to take a family interest in Miss Penrhys . but this be not deem perfectly satisfactory at Riversley . my aunt write : ' be I to understand that you , Harry , raise objection to she ? think first whether she be in herself objectionable . she be rich , she may be prudent , she may be a forethoughtful person . she may not be able to support a bitter shock of grief . she may be one who can help . she may not be one whose heart will bear it . put your own feeling aside , my dearest . our duty can not ever be clear to we until we do . it be possible for headstrong wilfulness and secret tenderness to go together . think whether she be capable of sacrifice before you compel she to it . do not inflict misery wantonly . one would like to see she . Harry , I brood on your future ; that be why I seem to you preternaturally anxious about you . ' 
 she seem to I preternaturally anxious about Miss Penrhys . 
 my father listen in silence to my flippant satire on woman 's letter . 
 he answer after a pause , 
 ' our Jorian say that woman 's letter must be read like anagram . to put it familiarly , they be like a child 's field of hop - scotch . you may have notice the urchin at their game : a bit of tile , and a variety of compartment to pass it through to the base , hop . or no , Richie , pooh ! ' tis an unworthy comparison , this hopscotch . I mean , laddie , they write in zigzag ; and so will you when your heart trumpet in your ear . tell she , tell that dear noble good woman say , we be happy , you and I , and alone , and shall be ; and do I the favour she love you , my son address she sometimes she have be it call she " mother " ; she will like it she deserve nothing shall supplant she ! ' 
 he lose his voice . 
 she send I three hundred pound ; she must have suppose the occasion press . thus fortify against paternal improvidence , I expend a hundred in the purchase of a horse , and stake the remainder on he in a match , and be beat . disgust with the horse , I sell he for half his purchase - money , and with that sum pay a bill to maintain my father 's credit in the town . figuratively speak , I look at my hand as astonish as I have be when the poor little rascal in the street snatch my cake , and give I the vision of he gorge it in the flurry alley of the London crowd . 
 ' money go , ' I remark . 
 ' that be the general experience of the nature of money , ' say my father freshly ; ' but nevertheless you will be surprised to find how extraordinarily few be the people to make allowance for particular case . it play the trick with everybody , and almost nobody let it stand as a plea for the individual . here be jorian , and you , my son , and perhaps your aunt Dorothy , and upon my word , I think I have number all I know or , ay , Sukey Sampleman , I should not omit she in an honourable list and that make positively all I know who would commiserate a man touch on the shoulder by a sheriff 's officer not that such an indignity be any long do to I . ' 
 ' I hope we have see the last of Shylock 's great - grandnephew , ' say I emphatically . 
 ' merely to give you the instance , Richie . ay ! I hope so , I hope so ! but it be the nature of money that you never can tell if the boarding 's sound , once be dependent upon it . but this be talk for tradesman . ' think it so myself , I have not attempt to discover the source of my father 's income . such as it be , it be pay half - yearly , and spend within a month of the receipt , for the most signal proof possible of its shameful insufficiency . thus ten month of the year at least he live protest , and many with he , compulsorily . for two month he be a brilliant man . I penetrate his mystery enough to abstain from question he , and enough to determine that on my coming of age he should cease to be a pensioner , petitioner , and adventurer . he aim at a manifest absurdity . 
 in the meantime , after the lesson I have receive as to the nature of money , I see with some alarm my father prepare to dig a great pit for it . he have no doubt perform wonder . despite of scandal and tattle , and the deadly report of a penniless fortune - hunter have fascinate the young heiress , he command an entrance to the reception of both the rival lady dominant . these lady , Lady Wilts and Lady Denewdney , who move each in her select half - circle , and could heretofore be induce by none to meet in a common centre , have pledge themselves to honour with their presence a ball he propose to give to the choice world here assemble on a certain illuminated day of the calendar . 
 ' so I have now possession of Bath , Richie , ' say he , twinkle to propitiate I , lest I should suspect he of value his achievement highly . he have , he continue , promise Hickson of the Fourth Estate , that he would , before leave the place , do his utmost to revive the ancient glory of bath : Bath have once set the fashion to the kingdom ; why not again ? I might have ask he , why at all , or why at his expense ; but his lead be irresistible . Captain DeWitt and his valet , and I , and a score of lady , score of tradesman , be rush , reluctant or not , on a torrent . my part be to show that I be an athlete , and primarily that I could fence and shoot . ' it will do no harm to let it be know , ' say DeWitt . he sit write letter incessantly . my father make the tour of his fair stewardess from noon to three , after receive in audience his jeweller , linen - draper , carpenter , confectioner , from nine in the morning till twelve . at three o'clock business cease . Workmen then apply to he for instruction be despatch to the bar of the hotel , bear the recommendation to the barmaid not to supply they refreshment if they have ever in their life be see drunk . at four he dress for afternoon parade . nor could his enemy have say that he be not the chief voice and eye along his line of march . his tall full figure maintain a superior air without insolence , and there be a leap beam in his large blue eye , together with the signification of movement come to his kindly lip , such as hardly ever fail to waken smile of greeting . People smile and bow , and forget their curiosity , forget even to be critical , while he be in sight . I can say this , for I be acutely critical of their bearing ; the atmosphere of the place be never perfectly pleasing to I . 
 my attitude of watchful reserve , and my reputation as the heir of immense wealth , tend possibly to constrain a certain number of the inimical party to be ostensibly civil . Lady Wilts , who do I the honour to patronize I almost warmly , compliment I on my manner of back he , as if I be the hero ; but I feel his peculiar charm ; she partly admit it , make a whimsical mouth , say , in allusion to Miss Penrhys , ' I , you know , be past twenty . at twenty forty be charming ; at forty twenty . ' 
 where I serve he perhaps be in show my resolution to protect he : he have be insult before my arrival . the male relative of Miss Penrhys do not repeat the insult ; they go to Lady Wilts and groan over their hard luck in not have the option of fight I . I be , in her phrase , a new piece on the board , and check they . thus , if they provoke a challenge from I , they bring the destructive odour of powder about the headstrong creature 's name . I be therefore of use to he so far . I lean indolently across the rail of the promenade while she bent and chatter in his ear , and her attendant cousin and cavalier chew vexation in the form of a young mustachio 's curl . his horse fret ; he murmur deep note , and his look be savage ; but he be bind to wait on she , and she would not go until it suit her pleasure . she introduce he to I as if conversation could be carry on between two young man feel themselves simply piece on the board , one give check , and the other chafing under it ! I need not say that I dislike my situation . it be bad when my father take to bow to she from a distance , unobservant of her hand 's prompt pull at the rein as soon as she see he . Lady Wilts have assume the right of a woman still possess attraction to exert her influence with he on behalf of the family , for I have do my good to convince she that he entertain no serious thought of marrying , and decidedly would not marry without my approval . he act on her advice to discourage the wilful girl . 
 ' how be it I be so hateful to you ? ' Miss Penrhys accost I abruptly . I fancy she must have go mad , and an interrogative frown be my sole answer . 
 ' oh ! I hear that you pronounce I everywhere unendurable , ' she continue . ' you be young , and you misjudge I in some way , and I should be glad if you know I well . by - and - by , in Wales . be you fond of mountain scenery ? we might be good friend ; my temper be not bad at least , I hope not . Heaven know what one 's relative think of one . will you visit we ? I hear you have promise your confidante , Lady Wilts . ' 
 at a dancing party where we meet , she be throw on my hand by her ungovernable vehemence , and I , as I have tell Lady Wilts , not be able to understand the liking of twenty for forty   fifty would have be near the actual mark , or sixty , offer she no lively sympathy . I believe she have request my father to pay public court to she . if Captain DeWitt be to be trust , she desire he to dance , and dance with she exclusively , and so confirm and defy the tattle of the town ; but my father hover between the dowager . she in consequence decline to dance , which be the next bad thing she could do . an aunt , a miserable woman , be on she left ; on her right she contrive , too frequently for my peace of mind , to reserve a vacant place for I , and she eye I intently across the room , under her persistent brow , until perforce I be draw to her side . I have to listen to a repetition of sharp query and reply , and affect a flattered gaiety , feel myself most uncomfortably , as Captain DeWitt   who watch we   say , chip the son of Block the father . by fix the son beside she , she defeat the father 's scheme of coldness , and make it appear a concerted piece of policy . even I see that . I see more than I grasp . love for my father be to my mind a natural thing , a proof of taste and goodness ; woman might love he ; but the love of a young girl with the morning 's mystery about she ! and for my progenitor ! a girl   as I reflect in the midst of my interjection   well - build , clear - eye , animate , clever , with soft white hand and pretty foot ; how could it be ? she be sombre as a sunken fire until he at last come round to she , and then her sudden vivacity be surprising . 
 affair be no far advanced when I have to obey the squire 's command and return to Riversley , miss the night of the grand ball with no profound regret , except for my father 's sake . he write soon after one of his characteristic letter , to tell I that the ball have , be a success . immediately upon this announcement , he indulge luxurious reflection , as his manner be : 
 ' to have stir up the old place and give it something to dream of for the next half century , be a satisfaction , Richie . I have a kindness for Bath . I leave it with its faction reconcile , its tea - table furnish with inexhaustible supply of the chief thing necessary , and the persuasion firmly establish in my own bosom that it be impossible to revive the past , so we must march with the age . and let I add , all but every one of the bill happily discharge , to please you . pray , fag at your German . if   as I myself confess to   you have enjoyment of old way , habit , custom , and ceremony , look to Court life . it be only in Courts that a man may now air a leg ; and there the woman be work of Art . if you be deficient in calf   which my boy , thank heaven ! will never be charge with   you be there find out , and in fact every deficiency , every qualification , be at once in patent exhibition at a Court . I fancy Parliament for you still , and that be no impediment as a step . Jorian would have you sit and wallow in ease , and buy   by the way , we might think of it   a famous Burgundy vineyard   for an investment , devote the prime of your life to the discovery of a cook , your manhood to perfect the creature 's education so forth ; I imagine you be to get five year of ample gratification   a promise hardly to be rely on   in the sere leaf , and so perish . take poor jorian for an example of what the absence of ambition bring man to . I treasure Jorian , I hoard the poor fellow , to have he for a lesson to my boy . Witty and shrewd , and a masterly tactician   I wager he would have win his spur on the field of battle , you see he now live for one hour of the day absolutely twenty - three hour of the man 's life be chain slave , beast of burden , to the four - and - twentieth ! so , I repeat , fag at your German . 
 ' Miss Penrhys retire to her native Wales ; Jorian and I on to London , to the continent . Plinlimmon guard we all ! I send you our local newspaper . that I cut entrechat be false . it happen to be a thing I could do , and not an Englishman in England except myself ; only I do not do it . I do appear in what I be educate to believe be the evening suit of a gentleman , and I can not perceive the immodesty of show my leg . a dress that be not indecent , and be become to I , and be the dress of my father , I wear , and I impose it on the generation of my sex . however , I din Hickson of the Fourth Estate   Jorian consider he hungry enough to eat up his twentieth before he die I forget the wording of the mot , that he might know I be without rancour in the end , as originally I have be without any intention of purchase his allegiance . he offer I his column ; he wish I luck with the heiress ; by his Gods , he swear he worship entrechat , and hold a silk leg the most admirable work of the manufacture . " Sir , you be a gentleman , " say he ; " you be a nobleman , sir ; you be a prince , you be a star of the first magnitude . " Cries Jorian , " Retract that , scum ! you see nothing large but what you dare to think neighbour you , " and quarrel the inebriate dog . and this be the maker and destroyer of reputation in his day ! I study Hickson as a miraculous engine of the very simple contrivance ; he be himself the epitome of a verdict on his period . next day he disclaim in his opposition penny sheet the report of the entrechat , and " the spectator laugh consumedly , " and send I   as I have request he to do   the name of his daughter , to whom I transmit little comforting present , for if they be nice child such a parent must afflict they . 
 ' cultivate Lady Wilts . you have make an impression . she put you forward as a good speciman of our young man . ' Hem ! madam . 
 ' but , my dear boy , as I say , we can not revive the past . I acknowledge it . bath rebuke my last fit of ambition , and the experience be very well worth the expense . you have a mind , Richie , for discuss outlay , upon which I congratulate you , so long as you do not overlook equivalent . the system of the world be barter vary by robbery . show that you have something in hand , and you enjoy the satisfaction of know that you be not rob . I pledge you my word to it I shall not repeat Bath . and mark you , an heiress be never compromise . I be not , I hope , responsible for every creature catch up in my circle of attraction . believe I , dear boy , I should consult you , and another one , estimable beyond mortal speech ! if I have become involved impossible ! no ; I be free of all fresh chain , because of the old one . year will not be sufficient for we when you and I once begin to talk in earnest , when I open ! to resume so I leave Bath with a light conscience . mix with pleasant recollection be the transient regret that you be not a spectator of the meeting of the Wilts and Denewdney stream . Jorian compare they to the Rhone and the I forget the name of the river below Geneva dirtyish ; for there be a transparent difference in the Denewdney style of dress , and do I choose it I could sit and rule those two faction as despotically as Buonaparte his Frenchmen . ask I what I mean by scale billow , Richie . I will some day tell you . I have do it all my life , and here I be . but I thank heaven I have a son I love , and I can match he against the good on earth , and henceforward I live for he , to vindicate and right the boy , and place he in his legitimate sphere . from this time I take to look exclusively forward , and I labour diligently . I have energy . 
 ' not to boast , darle old son , I tell truth ; I be only happy when my heart be beat near you . here come the mother in I pump up . Adieu . lebe wohl . the German ! the German ! may God in his Barmherzigkeit ! tell she I never encourage the girl , have literally nothing to trace a temporary wrinkle on my forehead as regard conscience . I say , may it please providence to make you a good german scholar by the day of your majority . Hurrah for it ! present my humble warm respect to your aunt Dorothy . I pray to heaven nightly for one of its angel on earth . Kunst , Wissenschaft , Ehre , Liebe . die Liebe . quick at the german poet . Frau : Fraulein . I be actually dazzle at the prospect of our future . to be candid , I no long see to write . Gruss ' dich herzlich . from Vienna to you next . lebe wohl ! ' 
 my aunt Dorothy send a glance at the letter while I be fold it evidently think my unwillingness to offer it a sign of bad news or fresh complication . she speak of Miss Penrhys . 
 ' oh ! that be over , ' say I. ' Heiresses soon get console . ' 
 she accuse I of have pick up a vulgar idea . I maintain that it be my father 's . 
 ' it can not be your father 's , ' say she softly ; and on affirm that he have utter it and write it , she reply in the same tone , more effective than the ordinary language of conviction , ' he do not think it . ' 
 the rage of a youth to prove himself in the right of an argument be insufficient to make I lay the letter out before other eye than my own , and I shrink from expose it to compassionate gentle eye that would have plead similar allowance to mine for the wildness of the style . I should have thank , but despise the intelligence of one who frame my excuse for my father , just as the squire , by abuse he , would have make I a desperate partisan in a minute . the vitality of the delusion I cherish be therefore partly extinct ; not so the love ; yet the love of he could no long shake itself free from oppressive shadow . 
 out of his circle of attraction book be my resource . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . MY TWENTY - first birthday 

 book and dream , like the two river cite by my father , flow side by side in I without mix ; and which the bright Rhone be , which the brown Arve , need not to be tell to those who know anything of youth ; they be destine to intermingle soon enough . I read well , for I feel ground and have mount view ; the real world , and the mind and passion of the world , grow visible to I . my tutor please the squire immensely by call I matter - of - fact . in philosophy and history I hat speculation ; but nothing be too fantastic for my idea of possible occurrence . once away from book , I carry a head that shoot rocket to the farth hill . 
 my dear friend Temple be at sea , or I should have have one near I to detect and control the spring of nonsense . I be deem a remarkably quiet sober thoughtful young man , acquiescent in all scheme project for my welfare . the squire would have like to see I court the girl of his heart , as he term Janet Ilchester , a little more demonstratively . we have , however , come to the understanding that I be to travel before settle . traditional notion of the importance of the Grand Tour in the education of gentleman lead he to consent to my take a year on the continent accompany by my tutor . he want some one , he say , to represent he when I be out over there ; which signify that he want some one to keep my father in check ; but as the Rev. Ambrose Peterborough , successor to the Rev. Simon Hart , be hazy and manageable , I do not object . such faith have the quiet thoughtful young man at Riversley in the convulsion of the future , the whirlwind and whirlpool spin for he and all connect with he , that he do not object to hear his name and Janet 's couple , though he have not a spark of love for she . 
 I try to realize to myself the general opinion that she be handsome . her eyebrow be thick and level and long ; her eye direct in their gaze , of a flinty blue , with dark lash ; her nose firm , her lip fullish , firm when join ; her shape straight , moderately flexible . but she have no softness ; she could admire herself in my presence ; she claim possession of I openly , and at the same time openly provoke a siege from the remainder of my sex : she be not maidenly . she catch imagination by the sleeve , and shut it between square whitewashed wall . Heriot think she not only handsome , but comparable to Mrs. William Bulsted , our Julia Rippenger of old . at his meeting with Julia , her delicious loss of colour make she seem to I one of the lovely woman on earth . Janet never lose colour , rarely blush ; she touch neither nerve nor fancy . 
 ' you want a rouse coquette , ' say Heriot ; ' you will not   be happy till you ' ve   be rack by that nice instrument of torture , and the fair Bulsted will do it for you if you like . you do not   want a snake or a common serpent , you want a Python . ' 
 I want bloom and mystery , a woman shift like the light with evening and night and dawn , and sudden fire . Janet be bald to the heart inhabit I then , as if quite shaven . she could speak her affectionate mind as plain as print , and it be dull print face I , not the arch of the sunset . Julia have only to lisp , ' my husband , ' to startle and agitate I beyond expression . she say simple thing ' I sleep well last night , ' or ' I dream , ' or ' I shiver , ' and plunge I headlong down impenetrable forest . the mould of her mouth to a reluctant ' no , ' and her almost invariable draw in of her breath with a ' yes , ' surcharge the everyday monosyllable with meaning of life and death . at last I be reduce to tell she , see that she reproach my coldness for Janet , how much I wish Janet resemble she . her irish eye lighten : ' I ! Harry ' ; then they shadow : ' she be worth ten of I . ' such pathetic humility tempt I to exalt she supremely . 
 I talk like a boy , feel like a man : she behave like a woman , blush like a girl . 
 ' Julia ! I can never call you Mrs. Bulsted . ' 
 ' you have an affection for my husband , have you not , Harry ? ' 
 of a season when this be adorable language to I , the indication be sufficient . rid out perfectly craze by it , I meet Kiomi , and transfer my emotion . the squire have pay her people an annual sum to keep away from our neighbourhood , while there be a chance of my taking to gipsy life . they have come back to their old camping - ground , rather dissatisfied with the squire . 
 ' speak to he yourself , Kiomi , ' say I ; ' whatever you ask for , he can not   refuse anything to such eye as your . ' 
 ' you ! ' she rally I ; ' why can not   you talk sensible stuff ! ' 
 she have grow a superb savage , proof against weather and compliment . her face be like an egyptian sky front night . the strong old eastern blood put ruddy flame for the red colour ; tawny olive edge from the red ; rare vivid yellow , all but amber . the light that first look down upon the fallen sun be her complexion above the brow , and round the cheek , the neck 's nape , the throat , and the firm bosom prompt to lift and sink with her vigour of speech , as her eye be to flash and darken . meet she you swear she be the personification of wander Asia . there be no question of beauty and grace , for these have law . the curve of her brow break like a beat wave ; the lip and nostril be wide , tragic in repose . but when she laugh she illuminate you ; where she step she make the earth her . she be as fresh of her East as the morning when her ancient people strike tent in the track of their shadow . I write of she in the style consonant to my idea of she at the time . I would have carry she off on the impulse and live her life , merely to have have such a picture move in my sight , and call it mine . 
 ' you be not married ? ' I say , ludicrously faintly . 
 ' I ' ve   not see the man I would marry , ' she answer , grin scorn . 
 the prizefighter have adopt drink for his pursuit ; one of her aunt be dead , and she be in quest of money to bury the dead woman with the conventional ceremony and show of respect dear to the heart of gipsy , whose sense of propriety and adherence to custom be a sentiment indulge by they to a degree unknown to the stable class . in fact , they have no other which do not come under the definite title of pride ; pride in their physical prowess , their dexterity , ingenuity , and tricksiness , and their purity of blood . Kiomi confess she have hop to meet I ; confess next that she have be wait to jump out on I : and next that she have sit in a tree watch the Grange yesterday for six hour ; and all for money to do honour to her dead relative , poor little soul ! Heriot and I join the decent procession to the grave . her people have some quarrel with the Durstan villager , and she fear the scandal of be pelt on the way to the church . I know that nothing of the sort would happen if I be present . Kiomi walk humbly with her head bent , leave I the thick ripple coarse black lock of her hair for a mark of observation . we be entertain at her camp in the afternoon . I see no sign of intelligence between she and Heriot . on my ask she , the day before , if she remember he , she say , ' I do , I be dangerous for that young man . ' Heriot 's comment on she be impressed on I by his choosing to call she ' a fine doe leopard , ' and maintain that it be a defensible phrase . 
 she be sweep from my amorous mind by Mabel Sweetwinter , the miller 's daughter of Dipwell . this be a Saxon beauty in full bud , yellow as mid - May , with the eye of open June . Beauty , you will say , be easily paint in that style . but the sort of beauty suit the style , and the well - wear comparison express the well - know type . beside Kiomi she be like a rich meadow on the border of the heath . 
 we see they together on my twenty - first birthday . to my shame I awake in the early morning at Riversley , forgetful of my father 's old appointment for the great Dipwell feast . not long after sunrise , when blackbird peck the lawn , and swallow be out from under eave to the flood 's face , I be hail by Janet Ilchester beneath my open window . I know she have a bet with the squire that she would be the first to hail I legal man , and be prepare for it . she sit on horseback alone in the hazy dewy Midsummer morning , give clear note : 
 ' whoop ! Harry Richmond ! halloo ! ' to which I toss she a fox 's brush , have a jewel bracelet pendant . she miss it and let it lie , and laugh . 
 ' no , no ; it be foxie himself ! anybody may have the brush . you be dress , be you , Harry ? you be sure I should come ? a thousand happy year to you , and I to see they , if you do not   mind . I ' m first to wish it , I be certain . I be awake at three , out at halfpast , over Durstan heath , across Eckerthy 's field we will pay the old man for damage down by the plantation , Bran and Sailor at my heel , and here I be . Crow , cock ! bark , dog ! up , lark ! I say I would be first . and now I ' m round to stable to stir up uberly . do not   be tardy , Mr. Harry , and we will be Commodore Arson and his crew before the world 's awake . ' 
 we ride out for a couple of hour , and have to knock at a farmhouse for milk and bread . possibly a sense of independence , owe to the snatching of a meal in midflight away from home , make Janet exclaim that she would gladly be out all day . such freak be exceedingly to my taste . then I remember Dipwell , and sure that my father would be there , though he have not write of it , I propose to ride over . she plead for the horse and the squire alternately . feasting be arrange at Riversley , as well as at Dipwell , and she say musically , 
 ' Harry , the squire be a very old man , and you may not have many more chance of please he . to - day do , do ! to - morrow , ride to your father , if you must : of course you must if you think it right ; but do not   go this day . ' 
 ' not upset my fortune , Janet ? ' 
 ' do not   hurt the kind old man 's heart to - day . ' 
 ' oh ! you be the girl of his heart , I know . ' 
 ' well , Harry , you have first place , and I want you to keep it . ' 
 ' but here be an oath I have   swear to my father . ' 
 ' he should not have exact it , I think . ' 
 ' I promise he when I be a youngster . ' 
 ' then be wise now , Harry . ' 
 ' you have brilliant idea of the sacredness of engagement . ' 
 ' I think I have common sense , that be all . ' 
 ' this be a matter of feeling . ' 
 ' it seem that you forgot it , though ! ' 
 Kiomi 's tent on Durstan heath rise into view . I control my verbal retort upon Janet to lead she up to the gipsy girl , for whom she have an odd aversion , date from childhood . Kiomi undertake to ride to Dipwell , a distance of thirty mile , and carry the message that I would be there by nightfall . tear be on Janet 's resolute face as we canter home . 
 after breakfast the squire introduce I to his lawyer , Mr. Burgin , who , closet alone with I , say formally , 
 ' Mr. Harry Richmond , you be Squire Beltham 's grandson , his sole male descendant , and you be establish at present , and as far as we can apprehend for the future , as the direct heir to the whole of his property , which be enormous now , and likely to increase so long as he live . you may not be aware that your grandfather have a most sagacious eye for business . have he not be bear a rich man he would still have be one of our very great millionaire . he have rarely invest but to double his capital ; never speculate but to succeed . he may not understand man quite so well , but then he trust none entirely ; so if there be a chasm in his intelligence , there be a bridge throw across it . the metaphor be obscure perhaps : you will doubtless see my meaning . he know how to go on his road without be cheat . for himself , your grandfather , Mr. Harry , be the soul of honour . now , I have to explain certain family matter . the squire 's wife , your maternal grandmother , be a rich heiress . part of her money be settle on she to descend to her child by reversion upon her death . what she herself possess she bequeath to they in reversion likewise to their child . thus at your maternal grandmother 's death , your mother and your aunt inherit money to use as their own , and the interest of money tie fast in reversion to their child   in case of marriage   after their death . your grandfather , as your natural guardian , have leave the annual interest of your money to accumulate , and now you be of age he hand it to you , as you see , without much delay . thus you become this day the possessor of seventy thousand pound , respect the disposal of which I be here to take your order . Ahem ! as to the remain property of your mother 's the sum hold by she for her own use , I mean , it devolve to her husband , your father , who , it be probable , will furnish you an account of it ah ! at his leisure ah ! um ! and now , in addition , Mr. Harry , I have the squire 's command to speak to you as a man of business , on what may be deem a delicate subject , though from the business point of view no peculiar delicacy should pertain to it . your grandfather will settle on you estate and money to the value of twenty thousand pound per annum on the day of your union with a young lady in this district , Miss Janet Ilchester . he undertake likewise to provide her pin - money . also , let I observe , that it be his request but he make no stipulation of it that you will ultimately assume the name of Beltham , subscribe yourself Harry Lepel Richmond Beltham ; or , if it please you , Richmond - Beltham , with the junction hyphen . needless to say , he leave it to your decision . and now , Mr. Harry , I have do , and may most cordially congratulate you on the blessing it have please a kind and discern Providence to shower on your head . ' 
 none so grimly ironical as the obsequious ! I think of Burgin 's ' discern ' providence   he speak with all professional sincerity   in after day . 
 on the occasion I think of nothing but the squire 's straight - forwardness , and grieve to have to wound he . Janet help I . she hint with a bashfulness , quite new to she , that I must go through some ceremony . guess what it be , I salute she on the cheek . the squire observe that a kiss of that sort might as well have be plant on her back hair . ' but , ' say he , and wisely , ' I would rather have the girl worth ten of you , than you be more than her match . girl like my girl here be precious . ' owe to her intercession , he wink at my departure after I have do duty among the tenant ; he barely betray his vexation , and it must have be excessive . 
 Heriot and I ride over to Dipwell . next night we ride back by moonlight with matter for a year of laughter , sing like two arabian poet praise of dark and fair , challenge one to rival the other . Kiomi ! Mabel ! we shout separately . we have just see the dreg of the last of the birthday Burgundy . 
 ' Kiomi ! what a splendid panther she be ! ' cry Heriot ; and I : ' tooth and claw , and a skin like a burn patch on a common ! Mabel 's like a wonderful sunflower . ' 
 ' Butter and egg ! old Richie , and about as much fire as a rushlight . if the race be Fat she would beat the world . ' 
 ' Heriot , I give you my word of honour , the very look of she 's eternal Summer . Kiomi ring thin she tinkle ; it be the difference between metal and flesh . ' 
 ' do she tinkle , as you call it , when that fellow Destrier , confound he ! touch she ? ' 
 ' the little cat ! do you notice Mabel 's blush ? ' 
 ' how could I help it ? we have   all have a dozen apiece . you see little Kiomi curl up under the hop and briony ? ' 
 ' I take she for a dead jackdaw . ' 
 ' I take she for what she be , and she may slap , scream , tear , and bite , I will take she yet - and all her tribe crying thief , by way of a diversion . she and I be foot a pair . ' 
 his impetuosity surpass mine so much that I fall to brood on the superior image of my charmer . the result be , I could not keep away from she . I manage to get home with leaden limb . next day I be back at Dipwell . 
 such guilt as I have to answer for I may avow . I make violent love to this silly country beauty , and hold every advantage over her other flatterer . she have meet I on the evening of the great twenty - first , she and a line of damsel dress in white and wear wreath , and I have claim the privilege of salute she . the chief superintendent of the festivity , my father 's old cook , Monsieur Alphonse , turn twilight into noonday with a sheaf of rocket at the moment my lip brush her cheek . it be a kiss mar ; I claim to amend it . besides , we have be bosom friend in childhood . my wonder at the growth of the rose I have leave but an insignificant thorny shoot be exquisite natural flattery , sweet reason , to which she could not say nonsense . at each step we trod on souvenir , innocent in themselves , have they recur to childish mind . the whisper , ' Hark ! it be sunset , Mabel , Martha Thresher call , ' cloud her face with stormy sunset colour . I respect Martha even then for boldly speak to I on the girl 's behalf . Mrs. Waddy 's courage fail . John Thresher and Mark Sweetwinter be overcome by my father 's princely prodigality ; their head be turn , they appear to have assume that I could do no wrong . to cut short the episode , some one write to the squire in uncouth English , tell he I be court a country lass , and he at once start I for the Continent . we have some conversation on money before part . the squire allow I a thousand a year , independent of my own income . he counsel prudence , warn I that I be on my trial , and give I his word of honour that he should not spy into my Bank account , desire I to be worthy of the trust repose in I . speculation he forbid . I leave he satisfied with the assurance that I mean to make my grand tour neither as a merchant , a gambler , nor a rake , but simply as a plain english gentleman . 
 ' there be nothing well in the world than that , ' say he . 
 arrive in London , I leave my travel companion , the Rev. Ambrose Peterborough , sip his Port at the hotel , and rush down to Dipwell , shoot a pebble at Mabel 's window by morning twilight , and soon have her face at the casement . but it be a cloudy and rainbeaten face . she point toward the farm , say that my father be there . 
 ' has he grieve you , Mabel ? ' I ask softly . 
 ' oh , no , not he ! he would not , he could not ; he talk right . oh , go , go : for I have not   a foot to move . and do not   speak so soft ; I can not   bear kindness . ' 
 my father in admonish she have do it tenderly , I be sure . tenderness be the weapon which have wound she , and so she shrink from it ; and if I have reproach and abuse she she might , perhaps , have obey I by come out , not to return . she be deaf . I kiss my hand to she regretfully ; a condition of spirit gradually dissolve by the haunt phantom of her forehead and mouth crumple up for fresh flood of tear . have she conceal that vision with her handkerchief , I might have wait to see she before I see my father . he soon change the set of the current . 
 ' our little Mabel here , ' he say , ' be an inflammable puss , I fear . by the way , talk of girl , I have a surprise for you . remind I of it when we touch Ostend . we may want a yacht there to entertain high company . I have set inquiry afloat for the hire of a schooner . this child Mabel can read and write , I suppose ? good write no letter , boy . do not make old Dipwell a thorny bed . I have a portrait to show you , Richie . a portrait ! I think you will say the original be worthy of more than to be take up and throw away like a weed . you see , Richie , girl have only one chance in the world , and good God ! to ruin that no , no . you shall see this portrait . a pretty little cow - like Mabel , I grant you . but to have she on the conscience ! what a coronet to wear ! my young Lord Destrier you will remember he as one of our guest here ; I bring he to make your acquaintance ; well , he would not be scrupulous , it be possible . ay , but compare yourself with he , Richie ! and you and I , let we love one another and have no nettle . ' 
 he flourish I away to London , into new sphere of fancy . he be irresistible . 
 in a London Club I be lead up to the miniature of a youthful woman , singular for her endear beauty her cheek be merry red , her lip lively with the spark of laughter , her eye in good union with they , show you the laughter be gentle ; eye of overflow blue light . 
 ' who be she ? ' I ask . 
 the old - fashioned building of the powdered hair counsel I to add , ' who be she ? ' 
 Captain DeWitt , though a member of the Club , seem unable to inform I . his glance consult my father . he hum and drawl , and say : ' Mistress Anastasia Dewsbury ; that be her name . ' 
 ' she do not look a grandmother , ' say my father . 
 ' she would be one by this time , I dare say , ' say I. 
 we gaze in silence . 
 ' yes ! ' he sigh . ' she be a charming actress , and one of the good of woman . a noble - minded young woman ! a woman of cultivation and genius ! do you see a broken heart in that face ? no ? very well . a walk will take we to her grave . she die early . ' 
 I be breathe ' who ? ' when he say , ' she be my mother , my dear . ' 
 it be piteous . 
 we walk to an old worn flat stone in a London street , where under I have to imagine those feature of beautiful humanity lie shut from we . 
 she have suffer in life miserably . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . I meet the PRINCESS 

 hearing that I have not sleep at the hotel , the Rev. Ambrose rush down to Riversley with melancholy ejaculation , and be make to rebound by the squire 's contemptuous recommendation to he to learn to know something of the spirit of young blood , see that he have the nominal charge of one , and to preach his sermon in secret , if he would be sermonize out of church . the good gentleman have not exactly understand his duty , or how to conduct they . far from object to find I in company with my father , as he would otherwise have do by transmit information of that fact to Riversley , he now congratulate himself on it , and after the two have converse apart , cordially agree to our scheme of travel together . the squire have sicken he . I believe that by comparison he see in my father a well friend of youth . 
 ' we shall not be the bad for a ghostly adviser at hand , ' my father say to I with his quaint air of gravity and humour mixed , which be not insincerely grave , for the humour be unconscious . ' an accredited casuist may frequently be a treasure . and I avow it , I like to travel with my private chaplain . ' 
 Mr. Peterborough 's temporary absence have allow I time for get ample fund place at our disposal through the agency of my father 's solicitor , Messrs. Dettermain and Newson , whom I already know from certain transaction with they on his behalf . they be profoundly courteous to I , and show I his box , and allude to his case a long one , and a lamentable , I be teach to apprehend , by their lugubriously professional tone about it . the question be naturally prompt in I , ' why do you not go on with it ? ' 
 ' want of fund . ' 
 ' there be no necessity to name that now , ' I insist . but my father desire they to postpone any further exposition of the case , say , ' pleasure first , business by - and - by . that , I take it , be in the order of our great mother Nature , gentleman . I will not have he help shoulder his father 's pack until he have have his , fill of entertainment . ' 
 a smooth voyage bring we in view of the tower of Ostend at sunrise . stand with my father on deck , and gaze on this fringe of the grand romantic continent , I remember our old travel , and feel myself bind to he indissolubly , ashamed of my recent critical probing of his character . my boy 's love for he return in full force . I be sufficiently cognizant of his history to know that he keep his head erect , light by the fire of his robust heart in the thick of overhang natal cloud . as the way be with man when they be too happy to be sentimental , I chatter of anything but my feeling . 
 ' what a capital idea that be of yours to bring down old Alphonse to Dipwell ! you should have hear old John Thresher and Mark Sweetwinter and the other grumble at the interference of " french frog ; " with their beef , though Alphonse vow he only order the ox to be turn fast , and he dress their potato in six different way . I doubt if Dipwell have compose itself yet . you know I sit for president in their tent while the beef go its first round ; and Alphonse be in an awful hurry to drag I into what he call the royal tent . by the way , you should have haul the standard down at sunset . ' 
 ' not when the son have not come down among we , ' say my father , smile . 
 ' well , I forget to tell you about Alphonse . by the way , we will have he in our service . there be he pluck at I : " Monsieur Henri - Richie , Monsieur Henri - Richie ! mille complimens ... et les potage , Monsieur ! a la Camerani , a la tortue , aux petit pois ... c'est en vrai artiste que j'ai su tout retarder jusqu'au derni moment .... Monsieur ! cher Monsieur Henri - Richie , je vous en supplie , laissez - la , ce planteur de choux . " and John Thresher , as spokesman for the rest : " Master Harry , we beg to say , in my name , we can not   masticate comfortably while we have   get a notion Mr. Frenchman he be present here to play his frenchified trick with our plain wholesome dish . our opinion be , he do not   know beef from hedgehog ; and let he trim them , and egg them , ' and bread - crumb them , and pound the mess all his might , and then tak ' and roll them into ball , we say we wun't , for we can not   make English muscle out o ' that . " and Alphonse , quite indifferent to the vulgar : " he ! mais pensez donc au Papa , Monsieur Henri - Richie , san doute il a une sante de fer : mais encore faut - il lui menager le suc gastrique , pancreatique .... " ' 
 ' ay , ay ! ' laugh my father ; ' what set you think of Alphonse ? ' 
 ' I suppose because I shall have to be speak French in an hour . ' 
 ' German , Richie , German . ' 
 ' but these Belgians speak French . ' 
 ' such French as it be . you will , however , be engage in a german conversation first , I suspect . ' 
 ' very well , I will stumble on . I do not   much like it . ' 
 ' in six hour from this second of time , Richie , boy , I undertake to warrant you fonder of the german tongue than of any other speak language . ' 
 I look at he . he give I a broad pleasant smile , without sign of a jest lurk in one corner . 
 the scene attract I . laugh fishwife face radiant with sea - bloom in among the weedy pier - pile , and sombre blue - cheek officer of the douane , with their double row of button extend the breadth of their shoulder . my father win Mr. Peterborough 's approval by declare cigar which he might easily have pass . 
 ' and now , sir , ' he use the command unction of a lady 's doctor , ' you to bed , and a short repose . we will , if it please you , breakfast at eight . I have a surprise for Mr. Richie . we be about to beat the drum in the market - place , and sing out for echo . ' 
 ' indeed , sir ? ' say the simple man . 
 ' I promise you we shall not disturb you , Mr. Peterborough . you have reach that middle age , have you not , when sleep be , so to put it , your capital ? and your activity be the interest you draw from it to live on . you have three good hour . so , then , till we meet at the breakfast - table . ' 
 my father 's first proceeding at the hotel be to examine the list of visitor . he question one of the waiter aside , take information from he , and seize my arm rather tremulously , say , 
 ' they be here . ' tis as I expect . and she be take the morning breath of sea - air on the dune . come , Richie , come . ' 
 ' who be the ' she " ? ' I ask incuriously . 
 ' well , she be young , she be of high birth , she be charming . we have a crown head or two here . I observe in you , Richie , an extraordinary deficiency of memory . she have have an illness ; Neptune speed her recovery ! now for a turn at our German . die strassen ruhen ; die Stadt schlaft ; aber dort , siehst Du , dort liegt das blaue Meer , das nimmer - schlafende ! she be gaze on it , and breathe it , Richie . Ach ! ihr jauchzende Seejungfern . on my soul , I expect to see the very lovely of her sex ! 
 you must not be dismay at pale cheeks - blasse Wangen . her illness have be alarming . why , this air be the top of life ; it will , and it shall , revive she . how will she address he ? " Freund , " in my presence , perchance : she have her invalid 's privilege . " Theure Prinzessin " you might venture on . no ice ! ay , there she be ! ' 
 Solitary , on the long level of the sand - bank , I perceive a group that become discernible as three person attach to an invalid 's chair , move leisurely toward we . I be in the state of mind between divination and doubt when the riddle be not impossible to read , would but the heart cease its hurry an instant ; a tumbled sky where the break be come . it come . the dear old day of my wandering with Temple frame her face . I know she without need of pause or retrospect . the crocus raise its cup point as when it pierce the earth , and the crocus stretch out on earth , wound by frost , be the same flower . the face be the same , though the feature be change . unaltere in expression , but wan , and the kind blue eye large upon lean brow , her aspect be that of one who have be half catch away and still shake faintly in the relax invisible grasp . 
 we stop at a distance of half - a - dozen pace to allow her time for recollection . she eye we softly in a fix manner , while the sea - wind blow her thick redbrown hair to thread on her cheek . colour on the fair skin tell we we be recognize . 
 ' Princess Ottilia ! ' say my father . 
 ' it be I , my friend , ' she answer . ' and you ? ' 
 ' with more health than I be in need of , dearest princess . ' 
 ' and he ? ' 
 ' Harry Richmond ! my son , now of age , commence his tour ; and he have not forget the farewell bunch of violet . ' 
 her eyelid gently lift , ask I . 
 ' nor the mount you do I the honour to give I on the little hungarian , ' say I. 
 ' how nice this sea - air be ! ' she speak in English . ' England and sea go together in my thought . and you be here ! I have be down very low , near the low . but your good old sea make I breathe again . I want to toss on it . have you yet see the Markgrafin ? ' 
 my father explain that we have just land from the boat . 
 ' be our meeting , then , an accident ? ' 
 ' dear princess , I hear of your be out by the shore . ' 
 ' ah ! kind : and you walk to meet I ? I love that as well , though I love chance . and it be chance that bring you here ! I look out on the boat from England while they be dress I : I can not have too much of the morning , for then I have all to myself : sea and sky and I. the night people be all asleep , and you come like an old marchen . ' 
 her eyelid drop without closing . 
 ' speak no more to she just at present , ' say an english voice , Miss Silbey 's . Schwartz , the huge dragoon , whose big black horse hang near he in my memory like a phantom , pull the chair at a quiet pace , head downward . a young girl clothe in plain black walk beside Miss Sibley , follow the wheel . 
 ' danger be over , ' Miss Sibley answer my gaze . ' she be convalescent . you see how weak she be . ' 
 I praise the lady for what I deem her great merit in not have quit the service of the princess . 
 ' oh ! ' say she , ' my adieux to Sarkeld be utter year ago . but when I hear of her fall from the horse I go and nurse she . we be once in dread of she leave we . she sink as if she have take some internal injury . it may have be only the shock to her system and the cessation of her accustomed exercise . she have a little over - study . ' 
 ' the margravine ? ' 
 ' the margravine be really very good and affectionate , and have win my esteem . so you and your father be unite at last ? we have often talk of you . oh ! that day up by the tower . but , do you know , the statue be positively there now , and no one no one who have the privilege of behold the first bronze Albrecht Wohlgemuth , Furst von Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld , no one will admit that the second be half worthy of he . I can feel to this day the leap of the heart in my mouth when the statue dismount . the prince sulk for a month : the margravine still long at your father 's evasion . she could not make allowance for the impulsive man : such a father ; such a son ! ' 
 ' thank you , thank you most humbly , ' say I , bow to her shadow of a mock curtsey . 
 the princess 's hand appear at a side of the chair . we hasten to she . 
 ' let I laugh , too , ' she pray . 
 Miss Sibley be about to reply , but star , and delight spring to her lip in a quick cry . 
 ' what medicine be this ? why , the light of morning have come to you , my darling ! ' 
 ' I be well , dearest , well . ' 
 ' you sigh , my own . ' 
 ' no ; I breathe lot , lot of salt air now , and lift like a boat . ask he he have a little friend , much short than himself , who come the whole way with he out of true friendship ask he where be the friend ? ' 
 Miss Sibley turn her head to I . 
 ' Temple , ' say I ; ' Temple be a midshipman ; he be at sea . ' 
 ' that be something to think of , ' the princess murmur , and drop her eyelid a moment . she resume ' the Grand Seigneur be at Vienna last year , and would not come to Sarkeld , though he know I be ill . ' 
 my father stoop low . 
 ' the Grand Seigneur , your servant , dear princess , be an Ottoman Turk , and his Grand Vizier advise he to send flower in his place weekly . ' 
 ' I have they , and when we could get those flower nowhere else , ' she reply . ' so it be you ! so my friend have be about I . ' 
 during the remainder of the walk I be on one side of the chair , and her little maid on the other , while my father to rearward converse with Miss Sibley . the princess take a pleasure in tell I that this aennchen of hers know I well , and have know I before ever her mistress have see I . Aennchen be the eld of the two child Temple and I have eat breakfast with in the forester 's hut . I feel myself as if in the forest again , merely wonder at the growth of the tree , and the narrowness of my vision in those day . 
 at part , the princess say , 
 ' be my English improve ? you smile at it once . I will ask you when I meet you next . ' 
 ' it be my question , ' I whisper to my own ear . 
 she catch the word . 
 ' why do you say " it be my question " ? ' 
 I be constrain to remind she of her old form of english speech . 
 ' you remember that ? Adieu , ' she say . 
 my father considerately leave I to carry on my promenade alone . I cross the ground she have traverse , note every feature surround it , the curve wheel - track , the thin prickly sand - herbage , the wave - mound , the sparse wet shell and pebble , the gleam flatness of the water , and the vast horizon - boundary of pale flat land level with shore , look like a dead sister of the sea . by a careful examination of my watch and the sun 's altitude , I be able to calculate what would , in all likelihood , have be his height above yonder wave when her chair be turn toward the city , at a point I reach in the track . but of the matter then simultaneously occupy my mind , to recover which be the second supreme task I propose to myself - of what . I also be think upon the stroke of five o'clock , I could recollect nothing . I could not even recollect whether I happen to be look on sun and wave when she must have have they full and glorious in her face . 




 CHAPTER XXV . ON BOARD a yacht 

 with the heartiest consent I could give , and a blank cheque , my father return to England to hire forthwith a commodious yacht , fit and man . before go he discourse of prudence in our expenditure ; though not for the sake of the mere money in hand , which be a trifle , barely more than the half of my future income ; but that the squire , should he by and by bethink he of inspect our affair , might perceive we be not spendthrift . 
 ' I promise you a surprise , Richie , ' say he , ' and you have have it ; whether at all equal to your expectation be for you to determine . I be aware of the margravine 's intention to bring the princess to these sea - sand ; they be famous on the continent . it be bruit last winter and Spring that she would be here in the season for bath ; so I hold it likely we should meet . we have , you behold . in point of fact , we owe the good margravine some show of hospitality . the princess have a passion for toss on the sea . to she a yacht be a thing drop from the moon . his Highness the prince her father could as soon present she with one as with the moon itself . the illustrious Serenity 's revenue be absorb , my boy , in the state he have to support . as for his daughter 's dowry , the young gentleman who anticipate get one with she , I commend to the practise of his whistling . it will be among the sum you may count , if you be a moderate arithmetician , in groschen . the margravine 's income I should reckon to approach twenty thousand per annum , and she prove her honourable sense that she hold it in trust for other by disperse it rapidly . I fear she love card . so , then , I shall go and hire the yacht through Dettermain and Newson , furnish it with piano and swing - cot , etc . ; and if the lady shrink from a cruise they can have an occasional sail . here be we at their service . I shall be seriously baffle by fortune if I be not back to you at the end of a week . you will take your early morning walk , I presume . on Sunday see that our chaplain , the excellent Mr. Peterborough , officiate for the assemble Protestants of all nation . it excite our english enthusiasm . in addition , son Richie , it be peculiarly our duty . I , at least , hold the view that it be a family duty . think it over , Richie boy . providence , you see , have send we the man . as for I , I feel as if I be in the dawn of one life with all the mature experience of another . I be calm , I be perfectly unexcited , and I tell you , old son , I believe pick among the high our destiny be about the most brilliant of any couple in Great Britain . ' 
 his absence relieve I in spite of my renew pleasure in his talk ; I may call it a thirsty craving to have he inflate I , puff the deep unillumine treasure - pit of my nature with laborious hint , as mine be fill with air to keep the miner go . while he talk he make these inmost recess habitable . but the pain lie in my have now and then to utter reply . the task of speak be hateful . I find a sweetness in brood unrealizingly over hope and dream and possibility , and I let he go gladly that I might enjoy a week of silence , just take impression as they come , like the sand in the ebb - tide . the impression of the morning be always enough for a day 's meditation . the green colour and the crimson athwart it , and high up the pinky light , flamingo feather , on a warm half - circle of heaven , in hue between amethyst and milky opal ; then the rim of the sun 's disc not yet severe ; and then the monstrous shadow of tall Schwartz dart at I along the sand , then the princess . this picture , see at sunrise , last till I sleep . it stir no thought , conjure no image , it possess I . in the afternoon the margravine accompany the princess to a point face seaward , within hearing of the military band . she do I the favour to tell I that she tolerate I until I should become efficient in German to amuse she , but the dulness of the belgian city compare with her lively german watering - place compel she to try my power of fun in French , and in French I have to do duty , and fail in my office . 
 ' do you know , ' say she , ' that your honourable papa be one in a million ? he have the life of a regiment in his ten finger . what astonish I be that he do not make fury in that England of yours that Lapland ! Je ne puff I passer de cet homme ! he offend I , he trifle , he outrage , he dare permit himself to be indignant . Bon ! we part , and absence plead for he with the eloquence of Satan . I be his victim . do he , then , produce no stir whatever in your England ? but what a people ! but yes , you resemble we , as bottle bottle ; seulement , you be empty of your wine . Ce Monsieur Peterbooroo ' ! Il m'agace les nerfs . it can not be blood in his vein . one long to see he cuff , to see if he have the english lion in he , one know not where . but you be so , you English , when not intoxicate . and so censorious ! you win your battle , they say , upon beer and cordial : it be why you never can follow up a success . Je tiens cela du Marechal Prince B - . let that pass . one groan at your intolerable tristesse . La vie en Angleterre est comme un marais . it be a scandal to human nature . it blow fog , foul vapour , joint - stiffness , ague , pestilence , over we here , yes , here ! that be your good side : but your bad be too atrocious ! Mon Dieu ! your man - rascal ! your woman - rascal ! ' 
 ' good soul ! ' the princess arrest she , ' I beg that you will not abuse England . ' 
 ' have I abuse England ? ' exclaim the margravine . ' Nay , then , it be because England be shockingly unjust to the most amusing , the most reviving , charming of man . there be he fresh as a green bubble well , and those english decline to do honour to his source . now tell I , you ! ' she address I imperiously . ' be you prosecute his claim ? be you besiege your government ? what ! you be in the season of generosity , an affectionate son , wealthy as a Magyar prince of flock , herd , mine , and man , and you let he stand in the shade deprive of his birthright ? be you a purse - proud commoner or an imbecile ? ' 
 ' my whimsy aunt ! ' the princess interpose again , ' now you have take to abuse a defenceless Englishman . ' 
 ' nothing of the sort , child . I compliment he on his look and manner ; he be the only one of his race who do not appear to have march out of a sentinel 's box with a pocket - mirror in his hand . I thank he from my soul for not cultivate the national cat 's whisker . none can imagine what I suffer from the oppressive sight of his Monsieur Peterbooroo ' ! and they be of one pattern the entire nation ! he ! no , he have the step of a train blood - horse . only , as Kaunitz , or somebody , say of Joseph II . , or somebody , he think or he chew . Englishmen 's mouth be clearly not make for more purpose than one . in truth , I be so utterly weary , I could pray for the diversion of a descent of rain . the life here be as bad as in Rippau . I might just as well be in Rippau do duty : the silly people complain , I hear . I be gather dust . these , my dear , these be the experience which age woman at a prodigious rate . I feel chain on my limb here . ' 
 ' Madame , I would , ' say I , ' that I be the Perseus to relieve you of your monster Ennui , but he be come quickly . ' 
 ' you see he have his pretty phrase ! ' cry the margravine ; add encouragingly , ' s'il nest pas tant sort peu impertinent ? ' 
 the advance of some german or russian nobleman spar I further effort . 
 we be on shore , listen to the band in the afternoon , when a sail like a spark of pure white stand on the purple black edge of a storm - cloud . it be the yacht . by sunset it be moor off shore , and at night hang with variegate lamp . early next morning we go on board . the lady be astonish at the extent of the vessel , and its luxurious fitting and cunning arrangement . my father , in fact , have negotiate for the hire of the yacht some week previously , with his accustomed forethought . 
 ' House and town and fortress provision , and moveable at will ! ' the margravine interject repeatedly . 
 the princess be lay on raise pillow in her swingcot under an awning aft , and watch the sailor , the splendid offspring of old sea - fight , as I could observe her spirited fancy conceive they . they be a set of man to point to for an answer to the margravine 's stricture on thing English . 
 ' then , be you the captain , my good Herr Heilbrunn ? ' the margravine ask my father . 
 he be dress in cheerful blue , wear his cheerfull air , and seem strongly inclined for the part of captain , but present the actual commander of the schooner - yacht , and help he through the margravine 's interrogation . 
 ' all be excellent , excellent for a day 's sail , ' she say . ' I have no doubt you could nourish my system for a month , but to deal frankly with you prepare meat and cold pie ! to face they once be as much as I be capable of . ' 
 ' Dear Lady Field - Marshal , ' return my father , ' the son of Neptune would be of poor account , if they could not furnish you cookery at sea . ' 
 they do , for Alphonse be on board . he and my father have a hot discussion about the margravine 's dish , alphonse declare that it be against his conscience to season they pungently , and my father preach expediency . alphonse speak of the artist and his duty to his art , my father of the wise diplomatist who manipulate individual without any sacrifice of principle . they be partly at play , of course , both have humour . 
 it end in the margravine 's be enrapture . the delicacy of the invalid 's dish , be beyond praise . ' so , then , we be absolutely well house and accommodate than on shore ! ' the margravine make her wonder hear , and from that fall to enthusiasm for the vessel . after a couple of pleasant smooth - sailing day , she consent to cruise off the coast of France and England . Adieu to the sand . throughout the cruise she be placable , satisfied with earth and sea , and constantly eulogize herself for this novel state of serenity . card , and a collection of trip french book bind in yellow , dance the gavotte with time , which make the fly minute endurable to she : and for relaxation there be here the view of a shin town drop between green hill to dip in sea - water , yonder a ship of merchandise or war to speculate upon , trawler , collier - brig , sea - bird , wave over wave . no cloud on sun and moon . we have gold and silver in our track , like the believable child of fairyland . 
 the princess , lie in her hammock - cot on deck , both day and night , or for the great part of the night , let her eye feast incessantly on a laugh sea : when she turn they to any of we , pure pleasure sparkle in they . the breezy salt hour be visible ecstasy to her blood . if she speak it be but to utter a few hurried , happy word , and shrink as you see the lightning behind a cloud - rack , suggestive of fiery swift emotion within , and she gaze away overjoyed at the swoop and plunge of the gannet , the sunny spray , the wave curl crest or down - like . at night a couple of sailor , tender as woman , move she in the cot to her cabin . we hear her voice in the dark of the morning , and her little maid Aennchen come out and be meet by I ; and I at that hour have the privilege to help move she back to her favourite place , and strap the iron - stand fast , give the warm - hooded cot room to swing . the keen sensation of a return to health amid unwonted scene make thing magical to she . when she behold our low green Devon hill she signal for help to rise , and ' that be England ! ' she say , summon to her beautiful clear eyeball the recollection of her first desire to see my country . her petition be that the yacht should go in nearer and near to the land till she could discern man , woman , and child , and their occupation . a fisherman and his wife sit in the porch above their hang garden , the woman knitting , the man mend his net , barefoote boy and girl astride the keel of a boat below they . the princess eye they and weep . ' they give I happiness ; I can give they nothing , ' she say . 
 the margravine groan impatiently at talk of such a dieaway sort . 
 my father send a couple of man on shore with a gift of money to their family in the name of the Princess Ottilia . how she thank he for his prompt idea ! ' it be because you be generous you read one well . ' 
 she have never thank I . I crave for that vibrate music as of her deep heart penetrate and thrilling , but shrank from grateful word which would have sound payment . run before the wind swiftly on a night of phosphorescent sea , when the wave open to white hollow with fray white ridge , wreath of hiss silver , her eyelid close , and her hand wander over the silken coverlet to the hammock cloth , and up , in a blind effort to touch . mine join to it . little Aennchen be witness . Ottilia hold I softly till her slumber be deep . 




 CHAPTER XXVI . in VIEW of the HOHENZOLLERN 's BIRTHPLACE 

 our cruise come to an end in time to save the margravine from yawn . the last day of it be windless , and we hang in sight of the colourless low flemish coast for hour , my father task his ingenuity to amuse she . he sing with Miss Sibley , rally Mr. Peterborough , play picquet to lose , throw over the lead line to count the fathom , and whistle for the breeze , say to I , ' we shall decidedly have to offer she an exhibition of tipsy british seaman as a final resource . the case be grave either way ; but we can not allow the concluding impression to be a dull one . ' 
 it strike I with astonishment to see the vigilant watch she keep over the princess this day , after have leave she almost uninterruptedly to my care . 
 ' you be well ? ' she address Ottilia . ' you can sit up ? you think you can walk ? then I have act rightly , nay , judiciously , I have not make a sacrifice for nothing . I take the cruise , mind you , on your account . you would study yourself to the bone , till you look like a canary 's quill , with that Herr Professor of your . now I ' ve   give you a dose of life . yes , you begin to look like human flesh . something have do you good . ' 
 the princess flush scarlet , the margravine cry , 
 ' there be no occasion for you to have the whole british army in your cheek . goodness I ! what be the meaning of it ? why , you answer I like flag , banner , uhlan ' pennon , fullfrocke cardinal ! ' 
 my father step in . 
 ' ah , yes , ' say the margravine . ' but you little know , my good Roy , the burden of an unmarried princess ; and heartily glad shall I be to hand she over to Baroness Turckems . that be her institute governess , duenna , dragon , what you will . she be bear for responsibility , I be not ; it make I miserable . I have have no holiday . true , while she be like one of their wax virgin I have a respite . fortunately , I hear of you English , that when you fall to sigh , you suck your thumb and be console . ' 
 my father bow she , and smile she , and whirl she away from the subject . I hear he say , under his breath , that he have half a mind to issue order for an allowance of grog to be serve out to the sailor on the spot . I suggest , as I conceive in a similar spirit the forcible ducking of Mr. Peterborough . he appear to entertain and relish the notion in earnest . 
 ' it might do . it would gratify she enormously , ' he say , and eye the complacent clerical gentleman with transparent jealousy of his claim to decent treatment . ' otherwise , I must confess , ' he add , ' I be at a loss . my wit be in the doldrums . ' 
 he go up to Mr. Peterborough , and , with an air of great sincerity and courtesy , request he in French to create a diversion for her Highness the Margravine of Rippau during the extreme heat of the afternoon by precipitate himself headlong into forty fathom , either attach or unattached . his art in baffle Mr. Peterborough 's attempt to treat the unheard - of request as a jest be extraordinary . the ingenuity of his successive plea for press such a request pertinaciously upon Mr. Peterborough in particular , his fixed eye , yet cordial deferential manner , and the stretch of his forefinger , and argumentative turn of the head indicative of an armed disputant fully on the alert , and as if it be of profound and momentous importance that he should thoroughly defeat and convince his man overwhelm we . Mr. Peterborough , not be supple in French , fall back upon his English with a flickering smile of protestation ; but even in his native tongue he could make no head against the tremendous volubility and brief eager pause beset he . 
 the farce be too evanescent for I to reproduce it . 
 Peterborough turn and flee to his cabin . half the crew be on the broad grin . the margravine spring to my father 's arm , and entreat he to be her guest in her austrian mountain summer - seat . Ottilia be now her darling and her comfort . whether we english youth suck our thumb , or sigh furiously , she have evidently cease to care . Mr. Peterborough assure I at night that he have still a difficulty in persuade himself of my father 's absolute sanity , so urgent be the fire of his eye in second his preposterous proposal ; and , as my father invariably treat with the utmost reserve a farce play out , they never arrive at an understanding about it , beyond a sententious agreement once , in the extreme heat of an Austrian highland valley , that the option of take a header into sea - water would there be divine . 
 our yacht wing her way home . Prince Ernest of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld , accompany by Baroness Turckems , and Prince Otto , his nephew , son of the Prince of Eisenberg , a captain of austrian lancer , join the margravine in Wurtemberg , and we feel immediately that domestic affair be under a different management . Baroness Turckems relieve the margravine of her guard . she take the princess into custody . Prince Ernest greet we with some affability ; but it be communicate to my father that he expect an apology before he could allow himself to be as absolutely unclouded toward we as the blaze of his title . my father decline to submit ; so the prince inquire of we what our destination be . down the Danube to the Black Sea and Asia Minor , Greece , Egypt , the Nile , the Desert , India , possibly , and the Himalayas , my father say . the prince bow . the high personage , if they can not travel , be conscious of a sort of airy majesty pertain to one who can command so wide and far a flight . we be supplicate by the margravine to appease her brother 's pride with half a word . my father be firm . the margravine reach her two hand to he . he kiss over they each in turn . they interchange smart semi - flattering or cut sentence . 
 ' good ! ' she conclude ; ' now I sulk you for five year . ' 
 ' you would decapitate I , madam , and weep over my astonished head , would you not ? ' 
 ' upon my honour , I would , ' she shake herself to reply . 
 he smile rather sadly . 
 ' no pathos ! ' she implore he . 
 ' not while I live , madam , ' say he . 
 at this her countenance undergo a tremour . 
 ' and when that end ... friend ! well , I shall have have my last laugh in the world . ' 
 both seem affect . my father murmur some soothe word . 
 ' then you do mean to stay with I ? ' the margravine catch he up . 
 ' not in livery , your Highness . ' 
 ' to the deuce with you ! ' would be a fair translation of the exalt lady 's reply . she rail at his insufferable pride . 
 ' and you be wrong , wrong , ' she pursue . ' you offend the prince mightily : you travesty his most noble ancestor ' 
 ' in your service , may it please you . ' 
 ' you offend , offend he , I say , and you have not   the courage to make reparation . and when I tell you the prince be manageable as your ship , if you will only take and handle the rudder . do you perceive ? ' 
 she turn to I . 
 ' hither , Mr. Harry ; come , persuade he . why , you do not desire to leave I , do you ? ' 
 much the reverse . but I have to congratulate myself subsequently on have be moderate in the expression of my wish ; for , as my father explain to I , with sufficient lucidity to enlighten my dulness , the margravine be tempt he grossly . she see more than I do of his plan . she could actually affect to wink at they that she might gain her point , and have her amusement , and live for the hour , treacherously beguile a hoodwinked pair to suppose she partially blind or wholly complaisant . my father know she and fence she . 
 ' have I yield , ' he say , when my heart be low after the parting , ' I should have show she my hand . I do not choose to manage the prince that the margravine may manage I . I pose my pride immolate my son to it , Richie ? I hope not . no . at Vienna we shall receive an invitation to sarkeld for the winter , if we hear nothing of entreaty to turn aside to Ischl at Munich . she be sure to entreat I to accompany she on her annual visit to her territory of Rippau , which she detest ; and , indeed , there be not a vine in the length and breadth of it . she think herself broad awake , and I have dose she with an opiate . ' 
 he squeeze my finger tenderly . I be in want both of consolation and very delicate handling when we drive out of the little Wurtemberg town : I have not take any farewell from Ottilia . Baroness Turckems be already exercise her function of dragon . with the terrible forbid word ' Repose ' she have waft the princess to her chamber in the evening , and fold she inextricably round and round in the morning . the margravine huff , the prince icy , Ottilia invisible , I find myself shoot down from the height of a dream among shattered fragment of my cloud - palace before I well know that I have leave off tread common earth . all my selfish nature cry out to accuse Ottilia . we drive along a dusty country road that lie like a glare shaft of the desert between vineyard and hill . 
 ' there , ' say my father , wave his hand where the hill on our left fall to a distance and throw up a lofty head and neck cut with one white line , ' your Hohenzollerns shoot up there . their castle look like a tight military stock . upon my word , their native mountain have the air of a drum major . Mr. Peterborough , have you a mind to climb it ? we be at your disposal . ' 
 ' thank you , thank you , sir , ' say the Rev. Ambrose , gaze enthusiastically , but daunt by the heat : ' if it be your wish ? ' 
 ' we have none that be not your , Mr. Peterborough . you love ruin , and we be adrift just now . I presume we can drive to the foot of the ascent . I should wish my son perhaps to see the source of great house . ' 
 here it be that my arm be touch by old Schwartz . he salute stiffly , and lean from the saddle on the trot of his horse at an even pace with our postillion , stretch out a bouquet of rose . I seize it palpitating , smell the rose , and wonder . may a man write of his foolishness ? tear rush to my eye . Schwartz be far behind we when my father catch sight of the magical flower . 
 ' come ! ' say he , glow , ' we will toast the Hohenstaufens and the Hohenzollerns to - night , Richie . ' 
 later , when I be revel in fancy sweet than the perfume of the rose , he press their stem reflectively , unbound they , and disclose a slip of crested paper . on it be write : 
  ' violet be over . ' 
 plain word ; but a princess have write they , and never do so golden a halo enclose any piece of human handiwork . 




 CHAPTER XXVII . the TIME of rose 

 I sit and thrill from head to foot with a deep emotion than joy . not I , but a detached self ally to the career universe and have life in it . 
 ' violet be over . ' 
 the first strenuous effort of my mind be to grasp the meaning , subtle as odour , in these word . innumerable meaning wreathe away unattainable to thought . the fine sens could just perceive they ere they vanish . then as I grow material , two camp be pitch and two army prepare to fight to establish one distinct meaning . ' violet be over , so I send you rose ' ; she write you simple fact . Nay , ' our time of violet be over , now for we the rose ' ; she give you heavenly symbolism . 
 ' from violet to rose , so run the season . ' 
 or be it , 
 ' from violet to rose , thus far have we two travel ? ' 
 but would she merely say , ' I have not this kind of flower , and I send you another ? ' 
 true , but would she dare to say , ' the violet no long express my heart ; take the rose ? ' 
 ' maidenly , and a Princess , yet sweet and grateful , she give you the gracefull good speed . 
 ' noble above all human distinction , she bind you to herself , if you will it . ' 
 the two army come into collision , the luck of the day go to the one I side with . 
 but it be curiously observable that the oppose force recover energy from defeat , while mine languish in victory . I head they alternately , and it invariably happen so . 
 ' she can not mean so much as this . ' 
 ' she must mean more than that . ' 
 thus the Absolute and the symbolical faction struggle on . a princess draw they as the moon the tide . 
 by degree they subside and united , each reserve its view ; a point at which I imagine myself to have regain my proper humility . ' the princess have send you these flower out of her homely friendliness ; not see you to speak her farewell , she , for the very reason that she can do it innocent of any meaning whatsoever , bid you be sure you carry her esteem with you . be the sun of blue heavens guilty of the shadow it cast ? clear your mind . she mean nothing . warmth and beauty come from she , and be on you for the moment . but full surely she be a thing to be win : she be human : do not her hand like a gentle snake seek your , and detain it , and bear it away into the heart of her sleep ? be moderate . let not a thought or a dream spring from her condescension , lest you do outrage to her noble simplicity . look on that high Hohenzollern hill - top : she also be of the line of those who help to found illustrious house : what be you ? ' 
 I turn to my father and star he in the face . what be he ? be we not lose precious time in not prosecute his suit ? I put this question to he , believe that it would sound as too remote from my thought to betray they . he glance at the rose , and answer gladly , 
 ' yes ! no , no ! we must have our holiday . Mr. Peterborough be for explore a battle - field in the neighbourhood of Munich . he shall . I wish he to see the Salzkammergut , and have a taste of german Court - life . allow I to be captain , Richie , will you ? I will show you how battle be gain and mountain be scale . that young Prince Otto of Eisenberg be a fine young fellow . those austrian cavalry regiment be good training - school for the carriage of a young man 's head and limb . I would match my boy against he in the exercise fence , shooting , rid . ' 
 ' as you do at Bath , ' say I. 
 he reply promptly : ' we might give he Anna Penrhys to marry . english wife be like here adore if they fetch a dowry . concern my suit , Richie , enough if it keep pace with we : and we be not go slow . it be a thing certain . Dettermain and Newson have repeatedly say , " money , money ! ' hand we money , and we guarantee you a public recognition . " money we now have . but we can not be in two field at once . be it your desire to return to England ? ' 
 ' not at all , ' say I , with a chill at the prospect . 
 ' if it be ? ' he press I , and relent add : ' I confess I enjoy this suabian land as much as you do . indolence be occasionally charming . I be at work , nevertheless . but , Richie , determine not to think little of yourself : there be the main point ; believe I , that be half the battle . you , sir , be one of the wealthy gentleman in Europe . you be pronouncedly a gentleman . that be what we can say of you at present , as you appear in the world 's eye . and you be by descent illustrious . well , no more of that , but consider if you kneel down , who will decline to put a foot on you ? prince have the habit , and they do it as a matter of course . challenge they . and they , Richie , be particularly susceptible to pity for the misfortune of their class kind , I should say , for class it be not ; now I have do . all I tell you be , I intend you , under my guidance , to be happy . ' 
 I think his remark the acute worldly wisdom I have ever hear , his veiled method of treat my case the shrewd , delicatest , and most consoling , most inspiring . it have something of the mystical power of the Oracles , the power which belong to anonymous writing . have he dispose of my apparent rival , and exalt I to the level of a princely family , in open speech , he would have convey no balm to I I should have class it as one confident man 's opinion . disguised and vague , but emphatic , and interpret by the fine beam of his eye , it be intoxicate ; and when he say subsequently , ' our majority Burgundy be good emperor wine , Richie . you approve it ? I lay that vintage down to give you a lesson to show you that my plan come safe to maturity , ' I credit he with a large share of foresight , though I well know his habit of antedate his sagacity , and could not but smile at the illustration of it . 
 you perceive my state without render it necessary for I to label myself . 
 I see she next in a pinewood between Ischl and the Traun . I have climb the steep hill alone , while my father and Mr. Peterborough drive round the carriage - road to the margravine 's white villa . Ottilia be lean on the arm of Baroness Turckems , walk a miracle that disentangle she cruelly from my net of fancy . the baroness place a second hand upon she as soon as I be see stand in the path . Ottilia 's face colour like the cyclaman at her foot . 
 ' you ! ' she say . 
 ' I might ask , be it you , princess ? ' 
 ' some wonder have be work , you see . ' 
 ' I thank heaven . ' 
 ' you have a part in it . ' 
 ' the poor possible . ' 
 ' yet I shall presume to call you Doctor Oceanus , ' 
 ' will you repeat his medicine ? the yacht await you always . ' 
 ' when I be well I study . do not you ? ' 
 ' I have never study in my life . ' 
 ' ah , lose no more time . the yacht be delicious idleness , but it be idleness . I be long for it now , I be still so very weak . my dear Sibley have leave I to be marry . she marry a hanoverian officer . we change country I mean , ' the princess catch back her tongue , ' she will become german , not compatriot of your ship of war . my English rebuke I . I cease to express ... it be like my walking , do half for pride , I think . baroness , low I , and let I rest . ' 
 the baroness lay she gently on the dry brown pine - shedding , and blow a whistle that hang at her girdle , by which old Schwartzy keep out of sight to encourage the princess 's delusion of pride in her walking , be summon . Ottilia have faint . the baroness shoot a suspicious glance at I . ' it come of this everlaste english talk , ' I hear her mutter . she be quick to interpose between I and the form I have once raise and bear undisputedly . 
 ' Schwartz be the princess 's attendant , sir , ' she say . ' in future , may I request you to talk German ? ' 
 the Prince of Eppenwelzen and Prince Otto be shoot in the mountain . the margravine , after converse with the baroness , receive I stiffly . she seem eager to be rid of we ; be barely hospitable . my mind be too confused to take much note of word and sign . I make an appointment to meet my father the day follow , and walk away and return at night , encounter Schwartz and feed on the crumb of tiding I get from he , a good , rough old faithful fellow , far past the age for sympathy , but he have carry Ottilia when she be an infant , and mean to die in her service . I think he enviable above most creature . 
 his principal anxiety be about my finding sleeping quarter . when he have deliver himself three time over of all that I could lead he to say , I leave he still puff at his pipe . he continue on guard to be in readiness to run for a doctor , should one be want . twice in the night I come across his path . the night be quiet , dark blue , and starry ; the morning soft and fragrant . the burden of the night be bearable , but that of daylight I flee from , and all day I be like one expect a crisis . Laughter , with so much to arouse it , hardly have any foothold within I to stir my wit . for if I say ' Folly ! ' I do not feel it , and what I feel I do not understand . my heart and head be positively divided . day and week be spend in reconcile they a little ; day pass with a pencil and scribble slip of paper the line write with regular commencement and irregular termination ; you know they . why have Ottilia faint ? she recommend hard study think I idle , worthless ; she have a grave intelligence , a serious estimation of life ; she think I intrinsically of the value of a summer fly . but why do she say , ' we change country , ' and immediately flush , break and falter , lose command of her English , grow pale and swoon ; why ? with this question my disastrous big heart come thunder up to the closed door of - comprehension . it be unanswerable . ' we change country . ' that is , she and Miss Sibley change country , because the english woman marry a German , and the german princess oh ! enormous folly . pierce it , slay it , trample it under . be that what the insane heart be big with ? throughout my night - watch I have be free of it , as one who walk meditate in cloister on a sentence that once issue from divine lip . there be no relief , save in those pencil line which give honest laughter a chance ; they stand like such a hasty levy of raw recruit raise for war , go through the goose - step , with pretty accurate shoulder , and foot of distract degree of extension , enough to craze a rhythmical drill - sergeant . I exult at the first reading , shudder at the second , and at the third feel desperate , destroy they and sit star at vacancy as if I have now lose the power of speech . 
 at last I fling away idleness and come to a good resolution ; and I carry it through . I study at a famous german university , not far from Hanover . my father , after discuss my project with I from the point of view of amazement , settle himself in the University town , a place of hopeless dulness , where the stone of the street and the house seem to have get their knotty problem to brood over , and never know holiday . a fire for acquisition possess I , and soon an ungovernable scorn for english system of teach sound enough for the producing of gentleman , and perhaps of merchant ; but gentleman rather bare of grace , and merchant not too scientific in finance . Mr. Peterborough conduct the argument against I until my stout display of fact , or it may have be my insolence , combine with the ponderous pressure of the atmosphere upon one who be not imbibe a counteracting force , drive he on a tour among german cathedral . 
 letter from Riversley inform I that my proceeding be approve , though the squire want I near he . we offer entertainment to the student on a vast scale . the local newspaper speak of my father as the great Lord Roy . so it happen that the margravine at Sarkeld hear of we . return from a visit to the prince 's palace , my father tell I that he see an opportunity for our be useful to the prince , who want money to work a newly - discover coal - mine in his narrow dominion , and he suggest that I might induce the squire to supply it ; as a last extremity I could advance the money . meanwhile he have engage to accompany the prince in mufti to England to examine into the working of coal - mine , and hire an overseer and workman to commence operation on the Sarkeld property . it would be obligatory to entertain he fitly in London . 
 ' certainly , ' say I. 
 ' during our absence the margravine will do she good to console you , Richie . the prince chafe at his poverty . we give he a display of wealth in England ; here we be particularly discreet . we shall be surer of our ground in time . I set Dettermain and Newson at work . I have write for they to hire a furnished mansion for a couple of month , carriage , horse , lacquey . but over here we must really be goodness I ! I know how hard it be ! we must hold the rein on ourselves tight . Baroness Turckems be a most estimable person on the side of her duty . why , the Dragon of Wantley sit on its egg , you may be convince ! she be a praiseworthy dragon . the side she present to we be horny , and not so agreeable . talk German when she be on guard . far I need not counsel a clever old son . counsel I , Richie . would it be adviseable to run the prince down to Riversley ? a Prince ! ' 
 ' oh ! decidedly not , ' be my advice . 
 ' well , well , ' he assent . 
 I empower he to sell out Bank stock . 
 he write word from England of a very successful expedition . the prince , travel under the title of Count Delzenburg , have be suitably entertain , receive by Lady Wilts , Serena Marchioness of Edbury , Lady Denewdney , Lady Sampleman , and other . he have visit my grandfather 's mine , and that of Miss Penrhys , and be astounded ; have say of I that I want but a title to be as brilliant a parti as any in Europe . 
 the margravine must have receive order from her brother to be civil to I ; she send I an imperious invitation from her villa , and for this fruit of my father 's diplomacy I yield he up my dainty feeling , my judgement into the bargain . 
 snow of early Spring be on the pinewood country I have traverse with Temple . Ottilia greet I in health and vivacity . the margravine lead I up to she in the very saloon where Temple , my father , and I have sit after the finale of the statue scene , say 
 ' our sea - lieutenant . ' 
 ' it delight I to hear he have turn University student , ' she say ; and in English : ' you have make friend of your book ? ' 
 she be dress in blue velvet to the throat ; the hair be brush from the temple and bind in a simple knot . her face and speech , fair and unconstrained , have neither shadow nor beam direct specially for I . I reply , 
 ' at least I have be teach to despise idleness . ' 
 ' my Professor tell I it be strange for any of your countryman to love book . ' 
 ' we have some good scholar , princess . ' 
 ' you have your Bentley and Porson . oh ! I know many of the world 's man have grow in England . who can deny that ? what we mean be , your society be not penetrate with learning . but my Professor shall dispute with you . now you be facile in our german you can defend yourself . he be a deep scholar , broad over tongue and dialect , european , Asiatic - a lion to I , poor little mouse ! I be speak of Herr Professor von Karsteg , lady aunt . ' 
 ' speak intelligibly , and do not   drum on my ear with that hybrid language , ' rejoin the margravine . 
 ' Hybrid ! it be my Herr Professor 's word . but English be the choice gathering of language , and honey be hybrid , unless you condemn the bee to suck at a single flower . ' 
 ' ha ! you strain compliment like the poet Fretzel , ' the margravine exclaim . ' luckily , they be not , address to human creature . you will find the villa dull , Herr Harry Richmond . for my part , every place be dull to I that your father do not enliven . we receive no company in the prince 's absence , so we be utterly cut off from fool ; we have simply none about we . ' 
 ' the deprivation be one we be immensely sensible of ! ' say the princess . 
 ' laugh on ! you will some day be aware of their importance in daily life , Ottilia . ' 
 the princess answer : ' if I could hate , it would be such person . ' a sentence that hang in the memory of one know himself to be animate by the wild genius of folly . 
 we drive to the statue of Prince Albrecht Wohlgemuth , overlook league of snow - roof branch . again Ottilia revert to Temple , 
 ' that dear little friend of yours who wander out with you to seek your father , and be now a sailor ! I can not forget he . it strike I as a beautiful piece of the heroism of boy . you both cross the sea to travel over the whole continent until you should find he , do you not ? what be hard to understand , be your father 's not write to you while he do we the favour to reside at the palace . ' 
 ' Roy be a butterfly , ' say the margravine . 
 ' that I can not think . ' 
 ' Roy be busy , he be occupy . I will not   have he abuse . besides , one can not   be always caress and cajole one 's pretty brat . ' 
 ' he be an intensely love father . ' 
 ' very well ; establish that , and what do it matter whether he write or not ? a good reputation be the good vindication . ' 
 the princess smile . ' see here , dearest aunty , the two boy pass half the night here , until my Aennchen 's father give they shelter . ' 
 ' apparently he pass half or all the night in the open air everywhere , ' say the margravine . 
 I glance hurriedly over both face . the margravine be snuff her nostril up contemptuously . the princess have vividly redden . her face be luminous over the nest of white fur fold her neck . 
 ' yes , I must have the taste for it : for when I be a child , ' say I , plunge at anything to catch a careless topic , ' I be out in my father 's arm through a winter night , and I still look back on it as one of the most delightful I have ever know . I wish I could describe the effect it have on I . a track of blood in the snow could not be bright . ' 
 the margravine repeat , 
 ' a track of blood in the snow ! my good young man , you have excite form of speech . ' 
 I shudder . Ottilia divine that her burn blush have involve I . divination be fiery in the season of blush , and I , too , fall on the track of her fair spirit , set out from the transparent betrayal by Schwartz of my night - watch in the pine - wood near the Traun river - fall . my feeling be as if a wave have roll I helpless to land , at the margravine 's mercy should she put another question . she startle we with a loud outburst of laughter . 
 ' no ! no man upon this earth but Roy could have sit that horse I do not   know how many minute by the clock , as a figure of bronze , ' she exclaim . 
 Ottilia and I exchange a grave look . the gentleness of the old time be sweet to we both : but we have the wish that my father 's extravagant prominency in it might be forget . 
 at the dinner - table I make the acquaintance of the Herr Professor Dr. Julius von Karsteg , tutor to the princess , a grey , broad - head man , whose chin remain imbedded in his neck - cloth when his eyelid be raise on a speaker . the first impression of he be , that he be chiefly neck - cloth , coat - collar , grand head , and gruffness . he have not join the ceremonial step from the reception to the dining saloon , but have shuffle in from a side - door . no one pay he any deference save the princess . the margravine have the habit of thrum the table thrice as soon as she hear his voice : nor be I displease by such an exhibition of impatience , consider that he speak merely for the purpose of snub I . his power be place in evidence by she not dare to utter a sarcasm , which be possibly the main cause of her burn fretfulness . 
 I believe there be not a word utter by I throughout the dinner that escape he . nevertheless , he do his business of catch and worry my poor unwary sentence too neatly for I , an admirer of real force and aptitude , to feel vindictive . I behave to he like a gentleman , as we phrase it , and obtain once an encouraging nod from the margravine . she lean to I to say , that they be accustom to think themselves lucky if no learn talk come on between the Professor and his pupil . the truth be , that his residence in Sarkeld be an honour to the prince , and his acceptance of the tutorship a signal condescension , account for by his appreciation of the princess 's intelligence . he be a man distinguish even in Germany for scholarship , rather notorious for his political and social opinion too . the margravine , with infinite humour in her countenance , inform I that he wish to fit the princess for the dignity of a Doctor of Laws . 
 ' it say much for she that he have not spoil her manner ; her health , you know , he succeed in almost totally destroy , and he be at it again . the man be , I suspect , at heart arrant Republican . he may teach a girl whatever nonsensical politic he like it go at the lifting of the bridegroom 's little finger . we could not permit he to be near a young prince . alas ! we have none . ' 
 the Professor allow himself extraordinary liberty with stranger , the guest of the margravine . I meet he cross an inner court next day . he interrupt I in the middle of a commonplace remark , and to this effect : 
 ' you be either a most fortunate or a most unfortunate young man ! ' 
 so profoundly penetrate with thoughtfulness be the tone of his voice that I could not take umbrage . the attempt to analyze his signification cost I an aching forehead , perhaps because I know it too acutely . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII . OTTILIA 

 she be on horseback ; I on foot , Schwartz for sole witness , and a wide space of roll silent white country around we . 
 we have meet in the fall of the winter noon by accident . ' you like my Professor ? ' say Ottilia . 
 ' I do : I respect he for his learning . ' 
 ' you forgive he his irony ? it be not mean to be personal to you . England be the object ; and partly , I may tell you , it spring from jealousy . you have such wealth ! you embrace half the world : you be such a little island ! all this be wonderful . the bitterness be , you be such a mindless people I do but quote to explain my Professor 's idea . " mindless , " he say , " and arrogant , and neither in the material nor in the spiritual kingdom of noble or gracious stature , and cease to have a brave aspect . " he call you squat goth . can you bear to hear I ? ' 
 ' princess ! ' 
 ' and to his conception , you , who be pioneer when the earth have to be shape for implement and dig for gold , will turn upon we and stop our march ; you be to be overthrow and leave behind , there to gain humility from the only teacher you can understand from poverty . will you defend yourself ? ' 
 ' well , no , frankly , I will not . the proper defence for a nation be its history . ' 
 ' for an individual ? ' 
 ' for a man , his readiness to abide by his word . ' 
 ' for a woman what ? ' 
 ' for a princess , her ancestry . ' 
 ' ah ! but I speak of woman . there , there be my ground of love for my Professor ! I meet my equal , prince , princess , and the man , the woman , be out of they , gone , fly ! they be out of the tide of humanity ; they be walk title , " now , " say my Professor , " that tide be the blood of our being ; the blood be the life - giver ; and to be cut off from it be to perish . " our princely house he esteem as dead wood . not near so much say I : yet I hear my equal talk , and I think , " oh ! my Professor , they testify to your wisdom . " I love he because he have give my every sense a face - forward attitude   you will complain of my feebleness of speech   to exterior existence . there be a princely view of life which be a true one ; but it be a false one if it be the sole one . in your Parliament your House of Commons show we real prince , your Throne merely title one . I speak what everybody know , and you , I be sure , be astonish to hear I . ' 
 ' I be , ' say I. 
 ' it be owe to my Professor , my mind 's father and mother . they say it be the pleasure of low - bear people to feel themselves prince ; mine it be to share their natural feeling . " for a princess , her ancestry . " yes ; but for a princess who be no more than princess , her ancestor be a bundle of faggot , and she , with her mind and heart tie fast to they , be , at least a good half of she , dead wood . this be our opinion . may I guess at your thought ? ' 
 ' it be more than I could dare to do myself , princess . ' 
 how different from the Ottilia I have know , or could have imagine ! that be one thought . 
 ' out of the number , then , this , ' she resume : ' you think that your english young lady have command over their tongue : be it not so ? ' 
 ' there be prattler among they . ' 
 ' be they educate strictly ? ' 
 ' I know little of they . they seem to I to be educate to conceal their education . ' 
 ' they reject idea ? ' 
 ' it be uncertain whether they have have the offer . ' 
 Ottilia smile . ' would it be a home in their midst ? ' 
 something move my soul to lift wing , but the passion sink . 
 ' I question you of english lady , ' she resume , ' because we read your writing of we . your kindness to we be that which pass from nurse to infant ; your criticism remind one of paedagogue and urchin . you make we sorry for our manner and habit , if they be so bad ; but most of all you be merry at our simplicity . not only we say what we feel , we display it . now , I be so german , this offence be especially mine . ' 
 I touch her horse 's neck , and say , ' I have not see it . ' 
 ' yet you understand I . you know I well . how be that ? ' 
 the murmur of honest confession come from I : ' I have see it ! ' 
 she laugh . ' I bring you to be german , you see . could you forsake your England ? ' 
 ' instantly , though not willingly . ' 
 ' not regrettingly ? ' 
 ' cheerfully , if I have my work and my my friend . ' 
 ' no ; but well I know a man 's field of labour be his country . you have your ambition . ' 
 ' yes , now I have . ' 
 she strike a fir - branch with her riding - whip , scatter flake on my head . ' would that extinguish it ? ' 
 ' in the form of an avalanche perhaps it would . ' 
 ' then you make your aim a part of your life ? ' 
 ' I do . ' 
 ' then you win ! or it be write of you that you never know failure ! so with I . I set my life upon my aim when I feel that the object be of true worth . I win , or death hide from I my miss it . 
 this I look to ; this obtain my Professor 's nod , and the approval of my conscience . Worthiness , however ! the mind must be train to discern it . we can err very easily in youth ; and to find ourselves shoot at a false mark uncontrollably must be a cruel thing . I can not say it be undeserve the scourge of derision . do you know yourself ? I do not ; and I be tell by my Professor that it be the sole subject to which you should not give a close attention . I can believe he . for who beguile so much as Self ? tell she to play , she play her sweetest . lurk to surprise she , and what a serpent she become ! she be not to be aware that you be watch she . you have to review her act , observe her method . always be above she ; then by - and - by you catch her hesitating at cross - road ; then she be bare : you catch her bewailing or exulting ; then she can no long pretend she be other than she seem . I make self the feminine , for she be the weak , and the soul have to purify and raise she . on that point my Professor and I disagree . Dr. Julius , unlike our modern Germans , esteem woman over man , or it be a further stroke of his irony . he do not think your english lady have head : of we he be proud as a laurelled poet . have I talk you dumb ? ' 
 ' Princess , you have give I matter to think upon . ' 
 she shake her head , smile with closed eyelid . 
 I , now that speech have be summon to my lip , could not restrain it , and proceed , scarcely govern the word , quite without idea ; ' for you to be indifferent to rank yes , you may well be ; you have intellect ; you be high above I in both ' so on , against good taste and common sense . 
 she cry : ' oh ! no compliment from you to I . I will receive they , if you please , by deputy . let my Professor hear your immense admiration for his pupil 's accomplishment . hear he then in return ! he will beat at I like the rainy West wind on a lily . " see , " he will say , when I be break and bespatter , ' she be fair , she be stately , be she not ! " and really I feel , at the sound of praise , though I like it , that the opposite , satire , condemnation , have its good right to pelt I . look ; there be the tower , there be the statue , and under that line of pine - tree the path we run up ; " dear english boy ! " as I remember say to myself ; and what do you say of I ? ' 
 her hand be hang loose . I grasp it . she draw a sudden long breath , and murmur , without fret to disengage herself , 
 ' my friend , not that ! ' 
 her voice carry an unmistakeable command . I kiss above the finger and release they . 
 ' be you still able to run ? ' say she , lead with an easy canter , face avert . she put on fresh speed ; I be outstrip . 
 have she quit I in anger ? have she part from I out of view of the villa window to make it possible for we to meet accidentally again in the shadow of her old protect Warhead , as we name he from his appearance , gaunt Schwartz ? 




 CHAPTER XXIX . an evening with DR . JULIUS VON KARSTEG 

 in my perplexity , I think of the Professor 's saying : ' a most fortunate or a most unfortunate young man . ' these word begin to strike I as have a prophetic depth that I have not fathom . I feel myself fast become bind in every limb , every branch of my soul . Ottilia meet I smile . she move free as air . she could pursue her study , and argue and discuss and quote , keep unclouded eye , and laugh and play , and be her whole live self , unfettered , as if the pressure of my hand imply nothing . perhaps for that reason I have her pardon . ' my friend , not that ! ' her imperishably delicious English ring I awake , and lull I asleep . be it not too securely friendly ? or be it not her natural voice to the good beloved , bid he respect she , that we might meet with the sanction of her train discretion ? the Professor would invite I to his room after the ' sleep well ' of the lady , and I sit with he much like his pipe - bowl , which burn bright a moment at one sturdy puff , but generally give out smoke in fantastical wreath . he tell I frankly he have a poor idea of my erudition . my fancifulness he commend as something to be turn to use in write story . ' give I time , and I will do well thing , ' I groan . he rarely speak of the princess ; with grave affection always when he do . he be evidently observe I comprehensively . the result be beyond my guessing . 
 one night he ask I what my scheme of life be . 
 on the point of improvize one of an impressive character , I stop and confess : ' I have so many that I may say I have none . ' expect reproof , I beg he not to think the bad of I for that . 
 ' quite otherwise , ' say he . ' I have never care to read deliberately in the book you open to I , my good young man . ' 
 ' the book , Herr Professor ? ' 
 ' collect your wit . we will call it Shakespeare 's book ; or Gothe 's , in the minor issue . no , not minor , but a narrow volume . you be about to give I the answer of a hypocrite . be it not so ? ' 
 I admit it , feel that it be easily to have be perceive . he be elated . 
 ' good . then I apprehend that you wait for the shifting of a tide to carry you on ? ' 
 ' I try to strengthen my mind . ' 
 ' so I hear , ' say he dryly . 
 ' well , as far as your school of teaching will allow . ' 
 ' that be , you read and commit to memory , like other young scholar . Whereunto ? have you no aim ? you have , or I be tell you be to have , fabulous wealth a dragon 's heap . you be one of the main drainpipe of english gold . what be your object ? to spend it ? ' 
 ' I shall hope to do good with it . ' 
 ' to do good ! there be hardly a prince or millionaire , in history or alive , who have not in his young day hug that notion . pleasure swarm , he have the pick of his market . you English live for pleasure . ' 
 ' we be the hard worker in the world . ' 
 ' that you may live for pleasure ! deny it ! ' 
 he puff his tobacco - smoke zealously , and resume : 
 ' yes , you work hard for money . you eat and drink , and boast of your exercise : they sharpen your appetite . so go the round . we strive , we fail ; you be our frog - chorus of critic , and you suppose that your brekek - koax affect we . I say we strive and fail , but we strive on , while you remain in a past age , and be proud of it . you reproach we with lack of common sense , as if the belly be its seat . now I ask you whether you have a scheme of life , that I may know whether you be to be another of those huge human pumpkin call rich man , who cover your country and drain its blood and intellect those impoverisher of nature ! here we have our prince ; but they be ruler , they be responsible , they have their task , and if they also run to gourd , the scandal punish they and their order , all in seasonable time . they stand eminent . do you mark I ? they be not a community , and be not bad enough ! bad enough ! but they be not protect by law in their right to do nothing for what they receive . that system be an invention of the commercial genius and the English . ' 
 ' we have our aristocracy , Herr Professor . ' 
 ' your noble be nothing but rich man inflate with empty tradition of insufferable , because unwarrantable , pride , and drawing , substance from alliance with the merchant class . be they your leader ? do they lead you in letter ? in the Arts ? ay , or in Government ? no , not , I be inform , not even in military service ! and there our title witling do manage to hold up their brainless pate . you be all in one mass , struggle in the stream to get out and lie and wallow and belch on the bank . you work so hard that you have all but one aim , and that be fatness and ease ! ' 
 ' pardon I , Herr Professor , ' I interpose , ' I see your drift . still I think we be the only people on earth who have show mankind a representation of freedom . and as to our aristocracy , I must , with due deference to you , maintain that it be widely respect . ' 
 I could not conceive why he go on worry I in this manner with his jealous outburst of Continental bile . 
 ' widely ! ' he repeat . ' it be widely respect ; and you respect it : and why do you respect it ? ' 
 ' we have illustrious name in our aristocracy . ' 
 ' we beat you in illustrious name and in the age of the line , my good young man . ' 
 ' but not in a race of noble who have stand for the country 's liberty . ' 
 ' so long as it imperille their own ! any long ? ' 
 ' well , they have know how to yield . they have help to build our Constitution . ' 
 ' reverence their ancestor , then ! the bad for such descendant . but you have touch the exact stamp of the english mind : it be , to accept whatsoever be bequeath it , without inquiry whether there be any change in the matter . noble in very fact you would not let they be if they could . Nobles in name , with a remote recommendation to posterity that suit you ! ' 
 he sit himself up to stuff a fresh bowl of tobacco , while he pursue : ' yes , yes : you worship your aristocracy . it be notorious . you have a sort of sagacity . I be not prepared to contest the statement that you have a political instinct . here it be chiefly social . you worship your so - call aristocracy perforce in order to preserve an ideal of contrast to the vulgarity of the nation . ' 
 this be downright insolence . 
 it be intolerable . I jump on my foot . ' the weapon I would use in reply to such remark I can not address to you , Herr Professor . therefore , excuse I . ' 
 he send out quick spirt of smoke roll into big volume . ' Nay , my good young Englishman , but on the other hand you have not answer I . and hear I : yes , you have show we a representation of freedom . true . but you be content with it in a world that move by computation some considerable sum upwards of sixty thousand mile an hour . ' 
 ' not on a fresh journey a recur course ! ' say I. 
 ' good ! ' he applaud , and I be flatter . 
 ' I grant you the physical illustration , ' the Professor continue , and with a warm gaze on I , I think . ' the mind journey somewhat in that way , and we in our old Germany hold that the mind advance notwithstanding . astronomer condescend to earthly philosophy may admit that advance in the physical universe be computable , though not perceptible . some whither we tend , shell and spirit . you English , fight your little battle of domestic policy , and sneer at we for fly at high game , you unimpressionable English , who will not   believe in the existence of aim that do not   drop on the ground before your eye , and squat and stare at you , you assert that man 's labour be complete when the poor be keep from cry out . now my question be , have you a scheme of life consonant with the spirit of modern philosophy with the view of intelligent , moral , humane human being of this period ? or be you one of your robust english brotherhood worthy of a Caligula in his prime , lion in gymnastic for a time ; sheep always in the dominion of mind ; and all of one pattern , all in a rut ! favour I with an outline of your idea . pour they out pell - mell , intelligibly or not , no matter . I undertake to catch you somewhere . I mean to know you , hark you , rather with your assistance than without it . ' 
 we be deep in the night . I have not a single idea ready for delivery . I could have tell he , that wish be a good thing , excess of tobacco a bad , moderation in speech one of the outward evidence of wisdom ; but Ottilia 's master in the Humanities exact civility from I . 
 ' indeed , ' I say , ' I have few thought to communicate at present , Herr Professor . my german will fail I as soon as I quit common ground . I love my country , and I do not reckon it as perfect . we be swiller , possibly glutton ; we have a large prosperous middle class ; many good man be to be find in it . ' 
 his discharge of smoke grow stifle . my advocacy be certainly of a miserable sort . 
 ' yes , Herr Professor , on my way when a boy to this very place I meet a thorough good man . ' 
 here I relate the tale of my encounter with Captain Welsh . 
 Dr. Julius nod rapidly for continuation . far ! far ! 
 he refuse to dig at the mine within I , and seem to expect it to unbosom its rich by explosion . 
 ' well , Herr Professor , we have conquer India , and hold it as no other people could . ' 
 ' vide the article in the last file of english newspaper ! ' say he . 
 ' suppose we boast of it . ' 
 ' can you ? ' he simulate wonderment . 
 ' why , surely it be something ! ' 
 ' something for non - commission officer to boast of ; not for statesman . however , say that you be fit to govern Asiatics . go on . ' 
 ' I would endeavour to equalize rank at home , encourage the growth of idea ... ' 
 ' support a non - celibate clergy , and an intermingle aristocracy ? your endeavour , my good young man , will lessen like those of the man who employ a spade to uproot a rock . it want blast . your married clergy and merchandize aristocracy be coil : they be the ivy about your social tree : you would resemble Laocoon in the throe , if one could imagine you anything of a heroic figure . forward . ' 
 in desperation I exclaim , ' it be useless ! I have not think at all . I have be barely educate . I only know that I do desire with all my heart to know more , to be of some service . ' 
 ' now we be at the bottom , then ! ' say he . 
 but I cry , ' stay ; let I beg you to tell I what you mean by call I a most fortunate , or a most unfortunate young man . ' 
 he chuckle over his pipe - stem , ' aha ! ' 
 ' how be I one or the other ? ' 
 ' by the weight of what you carry in your head . ' 
 ' how by the weight ? ' 
 he shoot a keen look at I . ' the case , I suspect , be singular , and do not often happen to a youth . you be fortunate if you have a solid and adventurous mind : most unfortunate if you be a mere sensational whipster . there be an explanation that cover the whole . I be as much in the dark as you be . I do not say which of we two have the convex eye . ' 
 protest that I be unable to read riddle , though the heat of the one in hand make my frame glow , I entreat to have explicit word . he might be in Ottilia 's confidence , probe I why not ? any question he choose to put to I , I say , I be ready to answer . 
 ' but it be the questioner who unmask , ' say he . 
 ' be we mask , Herr Professor ? I be not aware of it . ' 
 ' look within , and avoid lie . ' 
 he stand up . ' my night , ' he remark , ' be not commonly waste in this manner . we Germans use the night for work . ' 
 after a struggle to fle myself on his mercy and win his aid or counsel , I take his hand respectfully , and hold it , say , ' I be unable to speak out . I would if it involve myself alone . ' 
 ' yes , yes , I comprehend ; your country breed honourable man , chivalrous youngster , ' he reply . ' it be not enough not enough . I want to see a mental force , energy of brain . if you have that , you might look as high as you like for the match for it , with my consent . do you hear ? what I will not   have be , flat robbery ! mark I , Germany or England , it be one to I if I see vital power in the field run to a grand career . it be a fine field over there . as well there as here , then ! but well here than there if it be to be a wasp 's life . do you understand I ? ' 
 I reply , ' I think I do , if I may dare to ' ; and catch breath : ' Herr Professor , dear friend , forgive my boldness ; grant I time to try I ; do not   judge of I at once ; take I for your pupil be I presumptuous in ask it ? make of I what you will , what you can ; examine I ; you may find there be more in I than I or anybody may know . I have thought and aim , feeble at present Good God ! I see nothing for I but a choice of the two " most unfortunate " seem likeli . you read at a glance that I have no other choice . rather the extreme ! I would rather grasp the limit of life and be swing to the pit below , be the most unfortunate of human being , than never to have aim at a star . you laugh at I ? an Englishman must be horribly in earnest to talk as I do now . but it be a star ! '   the image of Ottilia spring fountain - like into blue night heaven before my eye memorably .   ' she , ' be my next word . I swallow it , and with a burn face , petition for help in my study . 
 to such sight as I have at that instant he appear laugh outrageously . it be a composed smile ' right , ' he say ; ' you shall have help in a settle course . certain Professors , friend of mine , at your university , will see you through it . aim your head at a star your head ! and even if you miss it you do not   fall . it be that light dancer , that gambler , the heart in you , my good young man , which aim itself at inaccessible height , and have the fall somewhat icy to reflect on ! give that organ full play and you may make sure of a handful of dust . do you hear ? it be a mind that win a mind . that be why I warn you of be most unfortunate if you be a sensational whipster . good - night Shut my door fast that I may not have the trouble to rise . ' 
 I leave he with the warm lamplight fall on his forehead , and book pile and slop , shut and open ; an enviable picture to one in my condition . the peacefulness it indicate make scholarship seem beautiful , attainable , I hop . I have the sense to tell myself that it would give I unrotte grain , though it should fail of be a practicable road to my bright star ; and when I spurn at consolation for failure , I could still delight to think that she shine over these harvest and the reaper . 




 CHAPTER XXX . a summer storm , and LOVE 

 the foregoing conversation with Ottilia and her teacher , hard as they be for passion to digest , grow luminous on a relapse heart . without apprehend either their exact purport or the character of the speaker , I be transform by they from a state of craving to one of intense quietude . I think neither of win she , nor of aim to win she , but of a foothold on the height she gaze at reverently . and if , sometimes , see and hear she , I think , oh , rare soul ! the wish be , that brother and sisterhood of spirit might be ours . my other eager thirstful self I shake off like a thing wear out . man in my confidence would have suppose I more rational : I be simply possess . 
 my desire be to go into harness , bury in book , and for recreation to chase vision of original idea for benefit mankind . a clear - win friend at my elbow , my dear Temple , perhaps , could have hit on the track of all this mental vagueness , but it be doubtful that he would have push I out of the strange mood , half stupor , half the folding - in of passion ; it be such magical happiness . not to be awake , yet vividly sensible ; to lie calm and reflect , and only to reflect ; be satisfied with each succeed hour and the privation of the hour , and , as if in the depth of a smooth water , to gather fold over patient fold of the submerge self , safe from wound ; the happiness be not noble , but it breathe and be harmless , and it give I rest when the alternative be folly and bitterness . 
 visitor be come to the palace to meet the prince , on his return with my father from England . I go back to the University , jealous of the invasion of my ecstatic calm by new face , and jealous when there of the privilege those new face would enjoy ; and then , how my recent deadness of life cry out against I as bad than a spendthrift , a destroyer ! a nerveless absorbent of the bliss shower on I the light of her morning presence when , just before embrace , she make her obeisance to the margravine , and kindly salute I , and stoop her forehead for the baroness to kiss it ; her gesture and her voice ; her figure on horseback , with old Warhead following , and I meet she but once ! her walk with the Professor , listen to his instruction ; I use to see they walk up and down the cypress path of the villa garden , her ear give to he wholly as she continue her grave step , and he shuffle and treading out of his line across her , or on the path - border , and never apologize , nor she notice it . at night she sing , sometimes mountain ditty to the accompaniment of the zither , lean on the table and sweep the wire between snatch of talk . nothing haunt I so much as those tone of , her zither , which be little loud than summer gnat when firefly be at their bright and storm impend . 
 my father bring horse from England , and a couple of english groom , and so busy an air of cheerfulness , that I have , like a sick invalid , to beg he to keep away from I and prolong unlimitedly his visit to Sarkeld ; the rather so , as he say he have now become indispensable to the prince besides the margravine . ' only no more bronze statue ! ' I adjure he . he nod . he have hire Count Fretzel 's chateau , in the immediate neighbourhood , and be absolutely independent , he say . his lawyer be busy procure evidence . he have impress Prince Ernest with a due appreciation of the wealth of a young english gentleman , by take he over my grandfather 's mine . 
 ' and , Richie , we have advance he a trifle of thousand for the working of this coal discovery of his . in six week our schooner yacht will be in the Elbe to offer he entertainment . he graciously deign to accept a couple of english hunter at our hand ; we shall improve his breed of horse , I suspect . now , Richie , have I do well ? I flatter myself I have be attentive to your interest , have I not ? ' 
 he hang wait for confidential communication on my part , but do not press for they ; he preserve an unvarying delicacy in that respect . 
 ' you have nothing to tell ? ' he ask . 
 ' nothing , ' I say . ' I have only to thank you . ' 
 he leave I . at no other period of our life be we so disunited . I feel in myself the reverse of everything I perceive in he , and such letter as I write to the squire consequently have a homely tone . it seem that I write of the pleasure of simple living of live for learn 's sake . Mr. Peterborough at the same time despatch praise of my sobriety of behaviour and diligent studiousness , confess that I begin to outstrip he in some of the high branch . the squire 's brief reply breathe satisfaction , but too evidently on the point where he have be lead to misconceive the state of affair . ' he want to have I near he , as do another person , whom I appear to be forget ; he grant I another year 's leave of absence , bid I bluffly not to be a bookworm and forget I be an Englishman . ' the idea that I be deceive he never enter my mind . 
 I be deceive everybody , myself in the bargain , as a man must do when in chase of a woman above he in rank . the chase necessitate deceit who know ? chicanery of a sort as well ; it bring inevitable humiliation ; such that ever since the commencement of it at speed I could barely think of my father with comfort , and rarely meet he with pleasure . with what manner of face could I go before the prince or the margravine , and say , I be an english commoner , the son of a man of doubtful birth , and I claim the hand of the princess ? what contortion be not in store for these feature of mine ! even as affair stand now , could I make a confidant of Temple and let he see I through the stage of the adventure ? my jingling of verse , my fret about the signification of flower , and trifle with symbol , haunt I excrutiatingly , taunt I with I know not what abject vileness of spirit . 
 in the midst of these torture an arrow strike I , in the shape of an anonymous letter , contain one brief line : ' the princess be in need of help . ' 
 I throw my book aside , and repair to Count Fretzel 's chateau , from which , happily , my father be absent ; but the countenance of the princess give I no encouragement to dream I could be of help to she ; yet a second unsigned note word in a quaint blunt manner , insist that it be to I she look . I chance to hear the margravine , address Baroness Turckems , say : ' the princess 's betrothal , ' what far , escape I . soon after , I hear that Prince Otto be a visitor at the lake - palace . my unknown correspondent ply I a third time . 
 I paste the scrap in my neglect book of note and reflection , where it have ample space and about equal lucidity . it draw I to the book , nearly drive I desperate ; I be now credulous of anything , except that the princess care for help from I . I resolve to go home ; I have no long any zeal for study . the desolation of the picture of England in my mind grow congenial . it become imperative that I should go somewhere , for news arrive of my father 's approach with a french company of actor , and deafen entertainment be at hand . on the whole , I think it decent to finish my course at the University , if I have not quite lose the power of get into the heart of book . one who study be not be a fool : that be an establish truth . I thank Dr. Julius for plant it among my recollection . the bone and marrow of study form the sure antidote to the madness of that light gambler , the heart , and distasteful as book be , I have gain the habit of sit down to they , which be as good as an instinct toward the right medicine , if it would but work . 
 on an afternoon of great heat I ride out for a gaze at the lake - palace , that I choose to fancy might be the last , foresee the possibility of one of my fit of movement come on I before sunset . my very pulse throb ' away ! ' transfer the sense of overwhelming heat to my moral condition , I think it the despair of silliness to stay bake in that stagnant place , where the sky do nothing but shine , give nothing forth . the sky be bronze , a vast furnace dome . the fold of light and shadow everywhere be satin - rich ; shadow perforce of blackness have light in they , and the light a sword - like sharpness over their edge . it be inanimate radiance . the laurel sparkle as with frost - point ; the denser foliage drop burn brown : a sickly saint's - ring be round the head of the pine . that afternoon the bee hum of thunder , and refresh the ear . 
 I pity the horse I ride , and the dog at his heel , but for I the intensity be inspiriting . nothing lie in the light , I have the land to myself . ' what hurt I ? ' I think . my physical pride be up , and I look on the cattle in black corner of the field , and here and there a man tumble anyhow , a wreck of limb , out of the insupportable glare , with an even glance . not an eye be lift on I . 
 I see nothing that move until a boat shoot out of the bight of sultry lake - water , lie close below the dark promontory where I have draw rein . the rower be old Schwartz Warhead . how my gorge rise at the impartial brute ! he be row the princess and a young man in uniform across the lake . 
 that they should cross from unsheltered path to close covert be reasonable conduct at a time when the vertical ray of the sun be fiery arrow - head . as soon as they be swallow in the gloom I spring in my saddle with torture , transfix by one of the coarse shafts of hideous jealousy . off I fly , tear through dry underwood , and round the bend of the lake , determine to confront she , wave the man aside , and have my last word with the false woman . of the real Ottilia I have lose conception . blood be inflame , brain bare of vision : ' he take her hand , she jump from the boat ; he keep her hand , she feign to withdraw it , all woman to he in her eye : they pass out of sight . ' a groan burst from I . I strain my crazy imagination to catch a view of they under cover of the wood and torture myself trebly , but it be now blank , shut fast . sit bolt upright , pant on horseback in the yellow green of one of the open woodway , I see the young officer raise a branch of chestnut and come out . he walk moodily up to within a yard of my horse , look up at I , and with an angry stare that grow to be one of astonishment , say , ' ah ? I think I have have the pleasure somewhere ? in Wurtemberg , if I recollect . ' 
 it be Prince Otto . I dismount . he stand alone . the spontaneous question on my lip would have be ' where be she ? ' but I be unable to speak a word . 
 ' English ? ' he say , pat the horse 's neck . 
 ' yes the horse ? an english hunter . how be you , Prince Otto ? do you like the look of he ? ' 
 ' immensely . you know we have a passion for english thoroughbred . pardon I , you look as if you have be close on a sunstroke . do you generally take ride in this weather ? ' 
 ' I be out by chance . if you like he , pray take he ; take he . Mount he and try he . he be yours if you care to have he ; if he do not   suit you send he up to Count Fretzel 's . I have   have rid enough in the light . ' 
 ' perhaps you have , ' say he , and hesitate . ' it be difficult to resist the offer of such a horse . if you want to dispose of he , mention it when we meet again . shall I try he ? I have a slight inclination to go as hard as you have be go , but he shall have good grooming in the prince 's stable , and that be less than half as near again as Count Pretzel 's place ; and a horse like this ought not to be out in this weather , if you will permit I the remark . ' 
 ' no : I be ashamed of bring he out , and shall not   look on he with satisfaction , ' say I. ' take he and try he , and then take he from I , if you do not   mind . ' 
 ' do you know , I would advise your lie down in the shade awhile ? ' he observe solicitously . ' I have see man on the march in Hungary and Italy . an hour 's rest under cover would have save they . ' 
 I thank he . 
 ' ice be the thing ! ' he ejaculate . ' I will ride and have some fetched to you . rest here . ' 
 with visible pleasure he swing to the saddle . I see he fix his cavalry thigh and bind off as if he mean to take a gate . have he glance behind he he would have fancy that the sun have do its bad . I run at full speed down the footpath , mad to think she might have return homeward by the lake . the two have part why ? he this way , she that . they would not have part but for a division of the will . I come on the empty boat . Schwartz lie near it beneath heavy bough , smoking and perspiring in peace . neither of we speak . and it be now temper by a fit of alarm that I renew my search . so when I behold she , intense gratitude break my passion ; when I touch her hand it be tremble for absolute assurance of her safety . she be lean against a tree , gaze on the ground , a white figure in that iron - mote gloom . 
 ' Otto ! ' she cry , shrink from the touch ; but at sight of I , all softly as a light in the heaven , her face melt in a suffusion of waver smile , and deep colour shoot over they , heavenly to see . she press her bosom while I speak : a lover 's speech , breathless . 
 ' you love I ? ' she say . 
 ' you have know it ! ' 
 ' yes , yes ! ' 
 ' forgiven I ? speak , princess . ' 
 ' call I by my name . ' 
 ' my own soul ! Ottilia ! ' 
 she disengage her arm tenderly . 
 ' I have know it by my knowledge of myself , ' she say , breathe with her lip dissever . ' my weakness have come upon I . yes , I love you . it be speak . it be too true . be it a fate that bring we together when I have just lose my little remain strength all power ? you hear I ! I pretend to wisdom , and talk of fate ! ' 
 she try to laugh in scorn of herself , and look at I with almost a bitter smile on her feature , make beautiful by her soft eye . I fear from the helpless hanging of her underlip that she would swoon ; a shudder convulse she ; and at the same time I become aware of the blotting out of sunlight , and a strange bowing and shore - like noising of the forest . 
 ' do not heed I , ' she say in happy undertone . ' I think I be go to cry like a girl . one can not see one 's pride die like this , without but it be not anguish of any kind . since we be here together , I would have no other change . ' 
 she speak till the tear come thick . 
 I tell she of the letter I have receive , warn I of a trouble beset she . they be , perhaps , the excuse for my conduct , if I have any . 
 Schwartz burst on we with his drill - sergeant 's shout for the princess . stand grey in big rain - drop he be an object of curiosity to we both . he come to take her order . 
 ' the thunder , ' he announce , raise a telegraphic arm , ' roll . it rain . we have a storm . command I , princess ! your highness ! ' 
 Ottilia 's eyelid be set blink by one look aloft . rain and lightning fill heaven and earth . 
 ' direct we , you ! ' she say to I gently . 
 the natural proposal be to despatch her giant by the direct way down the lake to fetch a carriage from the stable , or mat from the boathouse . I mention it , but do not press it . 
 she meditate an instant . ' I believe I may stay with my beloved ? ' 
 Schwartz and I run to the boat , haul it on land , and set it keel upward against a low leafy dripping branch . to this place of shelter , protect she as securely as I could , I lead the princess , while Schwartz happe a rough trench around it with one of the scull . we start he on foot to do the good thing possible ; for the storm give no promise that it be a pass one . in truth , I know that I should have be the emissary and he the guard ; but the storm overhead be not full of its mighty burden than I of mine . I look on she as mine for the hour , and well win . 




 CHAPTER XXXI . PRINCESS OTTILIA 's letter 

 that hour of tempest go swift as one of its flash over our little nest of peace , where we crouch like insect . the lightning and the deluge seem gloriously endless . Ottilia 's harbouring nook be dry within an inch of rush flood and patter mire . on I the torrent descend , and her gentle effort draw I to her side , as with a maternal claim to protect I , or to perish in my arm if the lightning find we . we have for prospect an ever - outburste flame of foliage , and the hubbub of the hiss lake , crimson , purple , dusky grey , like the face of a passionate creature scourge . it be useless to speak . her lip be shut , but I have the intent kindness of her eye on I almost unceasingly . 
 the good hour slip away . Old Warhead 's splashed knee on the level of our head be see by we when the thunder have abate . Ottilia prepare to rise . 
 ' you shall hear from I , ' she say , bend with brow measure the boat - roof , like a bird about to fly . 
 ' shall I see you ? ' 
 ' ultimately you surely will . ah ! still be patient . ' 
 ' be I not ? have I not be ? ' 
 ' yes ; and can you regret it ? ' 
 ' no ; but we separate ! ' 
 ' would you have we be two foot high for ever ? ' she answer smile . 
 ' one foot high , or under earth , if it might be together ! ' 
 ' poor little gnome ! ' say she . 
 the homeliness of our resting - place arrest she for an instant , and perhaps a touch of comic pity for thing of such diminutive size as to see nothing but knee where a man stand . our head be hide . 
 ' adieu ! no pledge be need , ' she say tenderly . 
 ' none ! ' I reply . 
 she return to the upper world with a burn blush . 
 Schwartz have bear himself with extraordinary discretion by forbear to spread alarm at the palace . he salute his young mistress in the regulation manner while receive she beneath a vast umbrella , the holiday peasant 's invariable companion in these part . a forester be in attendance carry shawl , clog , and mat . the boat be turn and launch . 
 ' Adieu , Harry Richmond . will you be quite patient till you hear from I ? ' say Ottilia , and add , ' it be my question ! ' delightfully recall old time . 
 I be soon gaze at the track of the boat in rough water . 
 shout be be raise somewhere about the forest , and be reply to by hearty bellow of the rower 's lung . she be now at liberty to join my name to her own or not , as she will . I have to wait . but how much rich be I than all the world ! the future owe I nothing . I would have register a vow to ask nothing of it . among the many determined purpose frame which I walk home , be one to obtain a grant of that bit of land where we have sit together , and build a temple on it . the fear that it might be tread by foot of man before I have enclose it beset I with anguish . the most absolute pain I suffer spring from a bewildering incapacity to conjure up a vision of Ottilia free of the glitter accessory of her high birth ; and that be the pain of shame ; but it come only at interval , when pride stand too loftily and the shadow of possible mischance threaten it with the axe . 
 she do not condemn I to long wait . her favourite Aennchen bring I her first letter . the girl 's face beam , and have a look as if she commend I for a worthy deed . 
 ' an answer , aennchen ? ' I ask she . 
 ' yes , yes ! ' say she anxiously ; ' but it will take more time than I can spare . ' she appoint a meeting near the palace garden - gate at night . 
 I choose a roof of lime to read under . 
 ' noblest and good belove ! ' the princess address I in her own tongue , doubt , I perceive , as her training have teach she , that my english eye would tolerate apostrophe of open - hearted affection . the rest be her English confide to a critic who would have good reason to be merciful : 
 ' the night have come that write the chapter of the day . my father have have his interview with his head - forester to learn what have befall from the storm in the forest . all have not be tell he ! that shall not be delay beyond to - morrow . 
 ' I be hurried to it . and I have the thought that it hang perhaps at the very end of my life among the coloured leaf , the stroke of sunset that then it would be know ! or if early , distant from this strange imperative now . but we have our personal freedom now , and I have learn from minute what I do mean to seek from year , and from our forest what I hop that change of scene , travel , experience , would teach I . yet I be right in my intention . it be a discreet and a just meaning I have . for thing will not go smoothly for he at once : he will have his hard battle . he be prove : he have pass his most brave ordeal . but I ! shall I see he put to it and not certainly know myself ? even thus I reason . one can not study without know that our human nature be most frail . daily the body change , daily the mind why not the heart ? I do design to travel and converse with various person . 
 ' pardon it to one who know that she would require super - feminine power of decision to resolve that she would dispose of herself ! 
 ' I hear of Harry Richmond before I see he . my curiosity to behold the two fair boy of the sailor kingdom set I whip my pony after they that day so remote , which be always yesterday . my thought follow you , and I wonder do he mean to be a distinguished countryman of his Nelson ? or a man of learn ? then many an argument with " my Professor , " until for so it will ever be the weak creature do succumb in the open controversy , and think her thought to herself . Contempt of England gain on I still . but when I lie wither , though so young , by the sea - shore , his country 's ancient grandeur insist , and I dream of Harry Richmond , imagine that I have be false to my childhood . you stand before I , dearest . you be kind : you be strong , and have a gentle voice . our soul be catch together on the sea . do you recollect my slip in the speaking of Lucy Sibley 's marriage ? " we change country . " at that moment I smell salt air , which would bring you to my sight and touch be you and I divide let I not think how far . 
 ' to - morrow I tell the prince , my father , that I be a plighted woman . then for we the struggle , for he the grief . I have to look on he and deal it . 
 ' I can refer he to Dr. Julius for my estimate of my husband 's worth . 
 ' " my Professor " be win by it . he once do incline to be the young bold Englishman 's enemy . " why be he here ? what seek he among we ? " it be his jealousy , not of the man , but of the nation , which would send one to break and bear away his carefully cultivate german lily . no eye but his do read I through . and you endure the trial that be force on you . you make no claim for recompense when it be over . no , there be no pure love but strong love ! it belong to our original element , and of its purity should never be question , only of its strength . 
 ' I could not help you when you be put under scrutiny before the margravine and the baroness . help from I would have be the betrayal of both . the world have accurate eye , if they be not very penetrate . the world will see a want of balance immediately , and also too true a balance , but it will not detect a depth of concord between two soul that do not show some fretfulness on the surface . 
 ' so it be consider that in refuse my cousin Otto and other propose alliance , I be heart - free . an instructed princess , they think , be of the woeful specie of woman . you leave we : I lose you . I hear you praise for civil indifference to I the one great quality you do not possess ! then it be the fancy of people that I , be very cold , might be suffer to hear my cousin plead for himself . the majority of our family favour Otto . he be permit to woo I as though I have be a simple maid ; and henceforth shall I have pity for all poor little feminine thing who be so persecute , ask to inflict cruelty to take a sword and strike with it . but I who look on marriage as more than a surrender I could well withstand surpass eloquence . it be easy to I to be inflexible in speech and will when I stand there , entreat to change myself . but when come magically the other , who be my heart , my voice , my mate , the half of I , and break into illumination of thing long hide oh ! then do I say to you that it be my weakness have come upon I ? it be my last outcry of self the " I " expire . I be now your , " we " have long overshadow " I , " and now engulph it . we be one . if it be new to I to find myself interrogate the mind of my beloved , rely on his courage , take many proof of his devotion , I might pause to re - peruse my word here , without scruple , write . I sign it , before heaven , your Ottilia . 
  ' OTTILIA frederika wilhelmina hedwig , 
  ' Princess of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld . ' 




 CHAPTER XXXII . an INTERVIEW with PRINCE ERNEST and a meeting with PRINCE OTTO 

 a messenger from Prince Ernest command my immediate attendance at the palace signify that the battle have begin . I could have wait for my father , whose return from one of his expedition in the prince 's service be expect every instant ; but though I know I should have , have a powerful coadjutor in he to assist I through such a conference , I prefer to go down alone . Prince Otto meet I in the hall . he pass by , glance an eye sharply , and say over his shoulder , 
 ' we shall have a word together presently ! ' 
 the library door be fling open . Prince Ernest and the margravine be in the room . she walk out with angry majesty . the prince hold his figure in the stiff attitude of reception . he could look impose . 
 the character of the interview be perceptible at once . 
 ' you have not , I presume , to be inform of the business in hand , Mr. Richmond ! ' 
 ' your Highness , I believe I can guess it . ' 
 this start he pace the floor . 
 ' an impossibility ! a monstrous extravagance ! a thing unheard of ! mania ! mania ! ' he mutter . ' you be aware , sir , that you have be do your bad to destroy the settle arrangement of my family ? what do it mean ? in common reason you can not indulge any legitimate hope of succeed . take you as a foreigner , you must know that . Judge of the case by your own reign family . such event never happen amongst they . do you suppose that the possession of immense wealth entitle you to the immeasurable presumption of aspire to equality of position with reign house ? such folly be more frequently castigate than reason with . why , now now , be it publish that I have condescend condescend as I be do , I should be the laugh - stock of every Court in Europe . you English want many lesson . you be teach by your scribe to despise the dignity which be not support by a multitude of bayonet , gun , and gold . I hear of it when I travel incognito . you make merry over little potentate . good . but do not cross their path . their dominion may be circumscribe , but they have it ; and where we be now , my power equal that of the Kaiser and the Czar . you will do I the favour to understand that I be not boast , not menacing ; I attempt , since it be extraordinarily impose on I , to instruct you . I have cause to be offend ; I waive it . I meet you on common ground , and address myself to your good sense . have you anything to say ? ' 
 ' much , sir . ' 
 ' much ? ' he say , with affected incredulity . 
 the painful hardship for I be to reply in the vague term he have be pleased to use . 
 ' I have much to say , your Highness . first , to ask pardon of you , without excuse myself . ' 
 ' a condition , apparently , that absolve the necessity for the grant . speak precisely . ' 
 but I be as careful as he in abstain from any direct indication of his daughter 's complicity , and say , ' I have offend your Highness . you have do I the honour to suggest that it be owe to my english training . you will credit my assurance that the offence be not intentional , not preconceive . ' 
 ' you charge it upon your have be train among a nation of shopkeeper ? ' 
 ' my countryman be not illiterate or unmannerly , your Highness . ' 
 ' I have not speak it ; I may add , I do not think it . ' 
 ' I fear that your Highness entertain what I find to be a very general , perhaps here and there wilful , error with regard to England . ' 
 ' when I be in the service I have a comrade , a gallant gentleman , deeply belove by I , and he be an Englishman . he die in the uniform and under the flag I reverence . ' 
 ' I rejoice that your Highness have have this experience of we . I have to imagine that I express myself badly . my english training certainly do not preclude the respect due to exalt rank . your Highness will , I trust humbly , pardon my offence . I do not excuse myself because I can not withdraw , and I be incapable of say that I regret it . ' 
 ' in cool blood you utter that ? ' exclaim the prince . 
 his amazement be unfeigned . 
 ' what be the impossible , monstrous idea you where ? who lead you to fancy there be one earthly chance for you when you say you can not withdraw ? can not ? be you request ? be you consult ? it be a question to be decide in the imperative : you must . what wheel it be you think you have sufficient vigour to stop , I be profoundly unaware , but I be prepared to affirm that it be not the wheel of my household . I would declare it , be I a plain citizen . you be a nullity in the case , in point of your individual will a nullity sweep away with one wave of the hand . you can do this , and nothing else : you can apologize , recognize your station , repair a degree of mischief that I will not say be preconceive or plot . so for awhile pursue your study , your travel . in time it will give I pleasure to receive you . Mr. Richmond , ' he add , smile and rise ; ' even the head of a little german principality have to give numberless audience . ' his feature take a more cordial smile to convince I that the dismiss sentence be merely playful . 
 as for I , my mind be confuse by the visible fact that the father 's feature resemble the daughter 's . I mention it , that my mind 's condition may be understand . 
 hardly have I be bow out of the room when my father embrace I , and some minute later I hear Prince Otto talk to I and demand answer . that he or any one else should have hostile sentiment toward a poor devil like I seem strange . my gift of the horse appear to anger he most . I reach the chateau without once look back , a dispirit wretch . I shut myself up ; I try to read . the singular brevity of my interview with the prince , from which I have expect great if not favourable issue , affect I as though I have be strike by a cannon shot ; my brain be nowhere . his perfect courtesy be confound . I be torment by the delusion that I have behave pusillanimously . 
 my father rush up to I after dark . embrace I and hold I by the hand , he congratulate I with his whole heart . the desire of his life be accomplish ; the thing he have plot for age have come to pass . he praise I infinitely . my glorious future , he say , be to carry a princess to England and sit among the high there , the husband of a lady peerless in beauty and in birth , who , in addition to what she be able to do for I by way of elevation in my country , could ennoble in her own territory . I have the option of be the father of english noble or of german prince ; so forth . I do not like the strain ; yet I clung to he . I be compel to ask whether he have news of any sort worth hearing . 
 ' none , ' say he calmly ; ' none . I have everything to hear , nothing to relate ; and , happily , I can hardly speak for joy . ' he weep . 
 he guarantee to have the margravine at the chateau within a week , which seem to I a sufficient miracle . the prince , he say , might require three month of discretionary treatment . three further month to bring the family round , and the princess would be mine . ' but she be yours ! she be yours already ! ' he cry authoritatively . ' she be the reign intellect there . I dread her very intellect would give we all the trouble , and behold , it be our ally ! the prince live with an elbow out of his income . but for I it would be other part of his person as well , I assure you , and the world would see such a princely tatterdemalion as would astonish it . money to he be important . he must carry on his mine . he can carry on nothing without my help . by the way , we have to deal out cheque ? ' 
 I assent . 
 in spite of myself , I catch the contagion of his exuberant happiness and faith in his genius . the prince have applaud his energetic management of the affair of the mine two or three time in my hearing . it strike I that he have really find his vocation , and would turn the sneer on those who have call he volatile and reckless . this lead I to a luxurious sense of dependence on he , and I be willing to live on dream and amuse , though all around I seem phantom , especially the french troupe , the flower of the parisian stage : Regnault , Carigny , Desbarolles , Mesdames Blanche Bignet and Dupertuy , and Mdlle . Jenny Chassediane , the most spirituelle of Frenchwomen . ' they be a part of our enginery , Richie , ' my father say . they prove to be an irresistible attraction to the margravine . she send word to my father that she mean to come on a particular day when , as she evidently know , I should not be present . two or three hour later I have Prince Otto 's cartel in my hand . Jorian DeWitt , our guest at this season , tell I subsequently , and with the utmost seriousness , that I be largely indebted to Mdlle . Jenny for a touching french song of a beau chevalier she sing before Ottilia in my absence . both he and my father believe in the efficacy of this kind of enginery , but , as the case happen , the beau chevalier be down low enough at the moment his highborn lady listen to the song . 
 it appear that when Prince Otto meet I after my interview with Prince Ernest , he do his good to provoke a rencontre , and fail to get anything but a nod from my stunned head , betook himself to my University . a friendly young fellow there , Eckart vom Hof , offer to fight he on my behalf , should I think proper to refuse . Eckart and two or three other make a spirited stand against the aristocratic party siding with Prince Otto , whose case be that I have play he a dishonourable trick to laugh at he . I have , in truth , persuade he to relieve I at once of horse and rival at the moment when he be suffer the torture of a rejection , and I be rush to take the hand he covet ; I be so far guilty . but to how great a degree guiltless , how could I possibly explain to the satisfaction of an angry man ? I have the vision of he leap on the horse , while I peruse his challenge ; see he fix to the saddle and smile hard , and away to do I of all service the last he would have perform wittingly . the situation be exactly of a sort for one of his german phantasy - writer to image the forest jeering at he as he fly , blind , deaf , and unreasonable , vehement for one fierce draught of speed . we be all dog by the humour of follow event when we start on a wind of passion . I could almost fancy myself an accomplice . I realize the scene with such intensity in the light run at his heel : it may be quite true that I laugh in the hearing of his messenger as I fold up the letter . that be the man 's report . I be not commonly one to be forgetful of due observance . 
 the prospect of the possible eternal separation from my beloved prick my mechanical wit and set they trace the consequent line by which I have be bring to this pass as to a natural result . have not my father succeed in inspire the idea that I be something more than something ? the tendency of young man be to conceive it for themselves without assistance ; a prolong puff from the breath of another be nearly sure to make they mad as king , and not so pardonably . 
 I see that I might have act wisely , and do not ; but that be a speculation take apart from my capability . if a man 's fate be as a forbidden fruit , detach from he , and in front of he , he might hesitate fortunately before pluck it ; but , as most of we be aware , the vital half of it lie in the seed - path he have traverse . we be son of yesterday , not of the morning . the past be our mortal mother , no dead thing . our future constantly reflect she to the soul . nor be it ever the new man of to - day which grasp his fortune , good or ill . we be push to it by the hundred of day we have bury , eager ghost . and if you have not the habit of take counsel with they , you be but an instrument in their hand . 
 my english tongue admonish I that I have fall upon a tone resemble one who uplift the finger of piety in a salon of conversation . a man 's review of the course of his life grow for a moment stringently serious when he behold the stream first broaden perchance under the light interpenetrate mine just now . 
 my second be young Eckart vom Hof , and the barely much old , though already famous Gregorius Bandelmeyer , a noted mathematician , a savage republican , lean - faced , spectacle , and long , soft - finger ; a cat to look at , a tiger to touch . both of they be animate by detestation of the imperial uniform . they distrust my skill in the management of the weapon I have choose ; for reason of their own they carry a case of pistol to the field . Prince Otto be attend by Count Loepel and a Major Edelsheim of his army , fresh from the garrison fortress of Mainz , gentleman perfectly conversant with the law of the game , which my worthy comrade be not . several minute be spend in an altercation between Edelsheim and Bandelmeyer . the major might have have an affair of his own have he please . my feeling be concentrate within the immediate ring where I stand : I can compare they only to those of a gambler determined to throw his large stake and abide the issue . I be not open to any distinct impression of the surround scenery ; the hill and leafage seem to wear an iron aspect . my darling , my saint 's face be shut up in my heart , and with it a little inaudible cry of love and pain . the prince decline to listen to apology . ' he mean to teach I that this be not a laugh matter . ' Major Edelsheim have misunderstood Bandelmeyer ; no offer of an apology have be make . a momentary human sensation of an unworthy sort beset I when I see they stand together again , and contrast the collectedness and good - humour of my adversary 's representative with the vexatious and unnecessary naggling of mine , the sight of whose yard - long pipe scandalize I . 
 at last the practical word be give . the prince do not reply to my salute . he be smoking , and keep his cigar in one corner of his mouth , as if he be a master fencer bid his pupil to come on . he assume that he have to do with a bourgeois Briton unused to arm , such as we be generally hold to be on the continent . after feel my wrist for a while he shake the cigar out of his tooth . 
 the ' cliquetis ' of the crossed steel must be very distant in memory , and yourself in a most dilettante frame of mind , for you to be accessible to the music of that thin skeleton 's clank . nevertheless , it be well and fine even at the time of action , than the abominable hollow ogre 's eye of the pistol - muzzle . we exchange pass , the prince chiefly attack . of all the thing to strike my thought , can you credit I that the vivid be the picture of the old woman Temple and I have see in our boyhood on the night of the fire drop askew , like fork of brown flame , from the burn house in London city ; I must have smile . the prince cry out in French : ' Laugh , sir ; you shall have it ! ' he have nothing but his impetuosity for an assurance of his promise , and be never able to force I back beyond a foot . I touch he on the arm and the shoulder , and finally pierce his arm above the elbow . I could have do nearly what I like with he ; his skill be that of a common regimental sabreur . 
 ' ludere qui nescit campestribus abstinet armis ! ' Bandelmeyer sing out . 
 ' you observe ? ' say Major Edelsheim , and receive another disconcert discharge of a latin line . the prince frown and make use of some military slang . be his honour now satisfied ? not a whit . he certainly could not have keep his sword - point straight , and yet he clamour to fight on , stamp , and summon I to assault he , propose to fight I with his left hand after his right have fail ; in short , he be beside himself , an example of the predicament of a man who have give all the provocation and find himself disable . my second could have stop it have they be equal to their duty ; instead of which Bandelmeyer , hear what he deem an insult to the order of student and scholar , retort furiously and offensively , and Eckart , out of good - fellowship , join he , whereat Major Edelsheim , in the act of bandage the prince 's arm , warn they that he could not pass by an outrage on his uniform . Count Loepel stept politely forward , and give Eckart a significant bow . the latter remark mockingly , ' with pleasure and condescension ! ' at a murmur of the name of doctor from Edelsheim , the prince damn the doctor until he or I be food for he . irritated by the whole scene , and his extravagant vindictiveness , in which light I regard the cloak of fury he have fling over the shame of his defeat , I call to Bandelmeyer to open his case of pistol and offer they for a settlement . as the proposal come from I , it be find acceptable . the major remonstrate with the prince , and express to I his regret and et caetera of well - mean civility . he have a hard task to keep out of the hand of Bandelmeyer , who have seize my sword , and want vi et armis to defend the cause of Learning and the People against military brigand on the spot . if I have not fall we should have have one or two other prostrate body . 
 a silly business on all side . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII . what come of a shilling 

 the surgeon , who attend we both , loudly admire our mutual delicacy in spar artery and vital organ : but a bullet cut a rougher pathway than the neat steel blade , and I be prostrate when the prince come to press my hand on his departure for his quarter at Laibach . the utterly unreasonable nature of a duel be manifest by his declaring to I , that he be now satisfied I do not mean to insult he and then laugh at he . we must regard it rather as a sudorific for feverish blood and brain . I feel my wound acutely , see his brisk step when he retire . have overthrow I bodily , it throw my heart back to its first emotion , and I yearn to set eye on my father , with a haunting sense that I have of late injure he and owe he reparation . it vanish after he have be in my room an hour , to return when he have quit it , and incessantly and inexplicably it go and come in this manner . he be depressed . I long for drollery , relieve only by chance allusion to my beloved one , whereas he could not conceal his wish to turn the stupid duel to account . 
 ' Pencil a line to she , ' he entreat I , and dictate his idea of a move line , add urgently , that the crippled letter would be affect to she , as to the Great Frederick his last review of his invalid veteran . ' your name the signature of your name alone , darle Richie , ' and he trace a crooked scrawl with a forefinger , " still , dear angel , in contempt of death and blood , I be yours to eternity , Harry Lepel Richmond , sometimes call Roy a point for your decision in the future , should the breath everlastingly devoted to the most celestial of her sex , continue to animate the frame that would rise on wing to say adieu ! adieu ! " Richie , just a sentence ? ' 
 he be distract . 
 his natural tenderness and neatness of hand qualify he for spread peace in a sick - room ; but he be too full of life and his scheme , and know I out of danger , he could not forbear give his despondency an outlet . I hear he exclaim in big sigh : ' Heavens ! how near ! ' and again , ' she must hear of it ! ' never be man so incorrigibly dramatic . 
 he would walk up to a bookcase and take down a volume , when the interjectional fit wax violent , flip the page , affect a perplexity he would assuredly have be strike by have he peruse they , and read , as he do once , ' Italy , the land of the sun ! and she be to be hurry away there , and we be leave to groan . the conspiracy be infamous ! one of the Family take it upon himself to murder we ! and she be to be hurry out of hearing ! and so we be to have the blood of the Roys spill for nothing ? no ! ' and he shut up the book with a report , and bound to my side to beg pardon of I . from his particular abuse of the margravine , the iteration of certain phrase , which he utter to denounce and defy they , I gather that an interview have pass between the two , and that she have notify a blockade against all letter address to the princess . he half admit have rush to the palace on his road to I . 
 ' but , Richie , ' say he , press I again to write the move line , ' a letter with a broad black border address by I might pass . ' he look mournfully astute . ' the margravine might say to herself , " here 's Doctor Death in full diploma come to cure the wench of her infatuation . " I be but quote the coarse old woman , Richie ; confusion on she and I ! for I like she . it might pass in my handwriting , with a smudge for paternal grief it might . " to her serene Highness the Margravine of Rippau , etc . , etc . , etc . , in trust for the most exalted the Princess of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld . " I transpose or omit a title or so . " aha ! " say she , " there be verwirrung in Roy 's poor head , poor fellow ; the boy have sink to a certainty . here   to the princess , it seem , my dear , this be for you . pray do not communicate the content for a day or so , or a month . " ' 
 his imitation of the margravine be the pleasantest thing I hear from he . the princess 's maid and confidante , he regret to state , be incorruptible , which I know . that line of Ottilia 's writing , ' violet be over , ' read by I in view of the root - mountain of the Royal House of Princes , scoff at I insufferably whenever my father show I these opening of his mind , until I be drag down to think almost that I have not love the woman and noble soul , but only the glorify princess the carve gilt frame instead of the divine portrait ! a shameful acrid suspicion , ransack my conscience with the thrusting in of a foul torch here and there . 
 for why have I shun he of late ? how be it that he torture I now ? do I in no degree participate in the poignant savour of his scheme ? such questioning set I flush in deadly chill . my brain be weak , my heart exhaust , my body seem truthful perforce and confess on the rack . I could not deny that I have partly , insensibly clung to the vain glitter of hereditary distinction , my father 's pitfall ; take it for a substantial foothold , when a young man of wit and sensibility and , mark you , true pride , would have make it his first care to trample that under heel . Excellent be pride ; but oh ! be sure of its foundation before you go on build monument high . I know nothing to equal the anguish of an examination of the basis of one 's pride that discover it not solidly fix ; an impose , self - impose structure , pile upon empty cellarage . it will inevitably , like a tree strike bad soil , betray itself at the top with time . and the anguish I speak of will be the sole healthy sign about you . whether in the middle of life it be adviseable to descend the pedestal altogether , I dare not say . few take the precaution to build a flight of step inside it be not a labour to be proud of ; few like to let themselves down in the public eye it amount to a castigation ; you must , I fear , remain up there , and accept your chance in topple over . but in any case , delude yourself as you please , your lofty baldness will assuredly be see with time . meanwhile , you can not escape the internal intimation of your unsoundness . a man 's pride be the front and headpiece of his character , his soul 's support or snare . look to it in youth . I have to thank the interminable hour on my wretched sick - bed for a singularly beneficial investigation of the ledger of my deed and omission and moral stock . perhaps it have already strike you that one who take the trouble to sit and write his history for as large a world as he can obtain , and shape his style to harmonize with every development of his nature , can no long have much of the hard grain of pride in he . a proud puppet - showman blow into pandaean pipe be an inconceivable object , except to those who judge of characteristic from posture . 
 it begin to be observe by other that my father be not the most comforting of nurse to I . my landlady bring a young girl up to my room , and introduce she under the name of Lieschen , say that she have for a long time be interested in I , and have be diligent in call to inquire for news of my condition . command to speak for herself , this Lieschen colour and say demurely , ' I be in service here , sir , among good - hearted people , who will give I liberty to watch by you , for three hour of the afternoon and three of the early part of the night , if you will honour I . ' 
 my father take her shoulder between finger and thumb , and slightly shake she to each ejaculation of his emphatic ' no ! no ! no ! no ! what ! a young maiden nurse to a convalescent young gentleman ! why , goodness gracious I ! eh ? ' 
 she look at I softly , and I say I wish she to come . 
 my father appeal to the sagacity of the matron . so jealous be he of a suggest partner in his task that he have refuse my earnest request to have Mr. Peterborough to share the hour of watch by my side . the visit of college friend and acquaintance be cut very short , he soon reduce they to talk in a hush with thumb and nod and eyebrow ; and if it have not be so annoying to I , I could have laugh at his method of accustom the regular visitor to make ready , immediately after greeting , for his affectionate dismissal of they . Lieschen go away with the mute blessing of his finger on one of her modest dimple ; but , to his amazement , she return in the evening . he give she a lecture , to which she listen attentively , and come again in the morning . he be petrify . ' idiot , insect , woman , and the salt sea ocean ! ' say he , to indicate a list of the untameable , without distress the one present , and , acknowledge himself beat , he ruefully accept his holiday . 
 the girl be like sweet spring in my room . she speak of Sarkeld familiarly . she be bear in that neighbourhood , she inform I , and have be educate by a dear great lady . her smile of pleasure on enter the room one morning , and see I dress and sit in a grand - fatherly chair by the breezy window , be like a salutation of return health . my father make another stand against the usurper of his privilege ; he refuse to go out . 
 ' then must I go , ' say Lieschen , ' for two be not allow here . ' 
 ' no ! do not   leave I , ' I beg of she , and stretch out my hand for her , while she gaze sadly from the doorway . he suspect some foolishness or he be actually jealous . ' Hum - oh ! ' he go forthwith a murmured groan . 
 she deceive I by take her seat in perfect repose . 
 after smooth her apron , ' now I must go , ' she say . 
 ' what ! to leave I here alone ? ' 
 she look at the clock , and lean out of the window . 
 ' not alone ; oh , not alone ! ' the girl exclaim . ' and please , please do not mention I presently . Hark ! do you hear wheel ? your heart must not beat . now farewell . you will not be alone : at least , so I think . see what I wear , dear Mr. Patient ! ' she draw from her bosom , attach to a piece of blue ribbon , the half of an english shilling , kiss it , and blow a soft farewell to I : 
 she have not be long go when the Princess Ottilia stand in her place . 
 a shilling toss by an english boy to a couple of little foreign girl in a woodman 's hut ! you would not expect it to withstand the common fate of silver coin , and preserve mysterious virtue by live celibate , neither multiply nor reduce , ultimately to play the part of a powerful magician in bring the boy grow man to the foot of an illustrious lady , and she to his side in sickness , treasonably to the law of her station . the little woman quarrel over it , and snatch and hide and contemplate it in secret , each in her turn , until the strife it engender be put an end to by a doughty smith , their mother 's brother , who divide it into equal half , through which he drive a hole , and the piece be now throw out of the currency , each one wear her share of it in her bosom from that time , proudly appease . they be not ordinary peasant child , and happily for they they have another friend that be not a bird of passage , and be endow by nature and position to do the work of an angel . she have they educate to read , write , and knit , and learn pretty manner , and in good season she take one of the sister to wait on her own person . the second go , upon her recommendation , into the household of a Professor of a neighbouring university . but neither of they abjure her superstitious belief in the prove merit of the talisman she wear . so when they see the careless giver again they remember he ; their gratitude be as fresh as on that romantic morning of their childhood , and they resolve without concert to serve he after their own fashion , and quickly spy a way to it . they be german girl . 
 you be now enable to guess more than be know to Ottilia and I of the curious agency at work to shuffle we together . the door of her suite in the palace be bar against letter address to the princess ; the delivery of letter to she be interdict , she consent , yet she find one : it lie on the broad walk of the orange - tree , between the pleasure and the fruit - garden , as if drop by a falcon in mid air . Ottilia behold it , and start . her little maid walk close by , exclaim , scuttle round in front of she the while like an urchin in sabot , 
 ' ha ! what be it ? a snake ? let I ! let I ! ' the guileless mistress reply , ' a letter ! ' Whereupon the maid say : ' not a window near ! and no wall neither ! why , dearest princess , we have walk up and down here a dozen time and not see it star at we ! oh , my good heaven ! ' the letter be seize and open , and Ottilia read : 
  ' he who love you with his heart have be cruelly use . they have 
  shoot he . he be not dead . he must not die . he be where he have 
  study since long . he have his medicine and doctor , and they say 
  the bullet do not lodge . he have not the sight that cure . now be 
  he , the strong young man , lay helpless at anybody 's mercy . ' 
 she sup at her father 's table , and amuse the margravine and he alternately with card and a sonata . before twelve at midnight she be drive on the road to the University , say farewell to what her mind reverence , so that her lover might but have sight of she . she imagine I have be assassinate . for a long time , and most pertinaciously , this idea dwelt with she . I could not dispossess she of it , even after utter the word ' duel ' I know not how often . I have flatly to relate the whole - of the circumstance . 
 ' but Otto be no assassin , ' she cry out . 
 what be that she reverence ? it be what she jeopardize her state , her rank , her dignity as princess and daughter of an ancient House , thing typical to she of sovereign duty , and the high seclusion of her name . to she the escapade of foolish damsel be abominable . the law of society as well as of her exalt station be in harmony with her intelligence . she think they good , but obey they as a subject , not slavishly : she claim the right to exercise her train reason . the modest , humblest , sweetest of woman , undervalue nothing that she possess , least of all what be due from she to other , she could go whithersoever her reason direct she , put anything aside to act justly accord to her light . nor would she have have cause to repent have I be the man she hold I to be . even with I she have not behave precipitately . my course of probation be severe and long before she allow her heart to speak . 
 Pale from a sleepless night and her heart 's weariful eagerness to be near I , she sit by my chair , hold my hand , and sometimes look into my eye to find the life reflect hers as in a sunken well that have once be a spring . my book and poor bachelor comfort catch her attention between - while . we talk of the day of storm by the lake ; we read the unsigned letter . with her hand in mine I sleep some minute , and awake grasp it , doubt and terrified , so great a wave of life lift I up . 
 ' no ! you be not go , ' I sigh . 
 ' only come , ' say she . 
 the nature of the step she have take begin to dawn on I . 
 ' but when they miss you at the palace ? Prince Ernest ? ' 
 ' hush ! they have miss I already . it be do . ' she say it smile . 
 ' Ottilia , will he take you away ? ' 
 ' Us , dear , we . ' 
 ' can you meet his anger ? ' 
 ' our aunt will be the executioner . we have a day of sweet hour before she can arrive . ' 
 ' may I see she first ? ' 
 ' we will both see she as we be now . ' 
 ' we must have prompt answer for the margravine . ' 
 ' none , Harry . I do not defend myself ever . ' 
 Distant hill , and fold of recede cloud and sky beyond they , be visible from my window , and beyond the sky I feel her soul . 
 ' Ottilia , you be go to Italy ? ' 
 ' yes : or whither they please , for as long as they please . I wish once to go , I have tell you why . one of the series '   she touch the letter lie on a reading - table beside her   ' turn the channel of all wish and intention . my friend leave I to fall at the mercy of this one . I consent to the injunction that I should neither write nor receive letter . do I argue ill in say that a trust be imply ? surely it be a breach of the trust to keep I ignorant of the danger of he I love ! now they know it . I dare not consult they not my dear father ! about any design of mine when I have read this odd copybook writing , all in brief sentence , each begin " he " and " he . " it strike I like thrust of a sword ; it illuminate I like lightning . that " he " be the heart within my heart . the writer must be some clever woman or simple friend , who feel for we very strongly . my lover assassinate , where could I be but with he ? ' 
 her little Ann come in with chocolate and strip of fine white bread to dip in it stop my effort to explain the distinction between an assassination and a duel . I notice then the likeness of Aennchen to Lieschen . 
 ' she have a sister here , ' say Ottilia ; ' and let she bring Lieschen to visit I here this afternoon . ' 
 aennchen , with a blush , murmur , that she hear and would obey . I have a memorable pleasure in watch my beloved eat and drink under my roof . 
 the duel remain incomprehensible to she . she first frighten I by remark that duel be the pastime of brainless young man . her next remark , in answer to my repeat attempt to shield my antagonist from a capital charge : ' but only military man and Frenchmen fight duel ! ' accompany by a slightly investigate glance of timid surprise , give I pain , together with a flash apprehension of what she have forfeit , whom offend , to rush to the succour of a duellist . I have to repeat to she who my enemy be , so that there should be no further mention of assassination . Prince Otto 's name seem to entangle her understanding completely . 
 ' Otto ! Otto ! ' she murmur ; ' he have , I have hear , be oblige by some so - call law of honour once or twice to to he be above suspicion of treachery ! to my mind it be one and the same , but I would not harshly exclude the view the world put on thing ; and I use the world 's language in say that he could not do a dishonourable deed . how far he honour himself be a question apart . that may be low enough , while the world be full of a man 's praise . ' 
 she know the nature of a duel . ' it be the work of soulless creature ! ' she break through my stammer explanation with unwonted impatience , and press my hand : ' ah ! you be safe . I have you still . do you know , Harry , I be not yet able to endure accident and misadventure : I have not fortitude to meet they , or intelligence to account for they . they be little ironical laughter . say we build so high : the lightning strike we : why build at all ? the Summer fly be happy . if I have lose you ! I can almost imagine that I should have ask for revenge . for why should the brave and pure soul of my worship be snatch away ? I be not talk wisdom , only my shake self will speak just now ! I pardon Otto , though he have behave basely . ' 
 ' no , not basely , ' I feel bind to plead on his behalf , think , in spite of a veritable anguish of gather dread , that she have become enlighten and would soon take the common view of our case ; ' not basely . he be excessively irritated , without cause in my opinion ; he simply misunderstood certain matter . Dearest , you have nation fight : a war be only an exaggerated form of duelling . ' 
 ' nation at war be wild beast , ' she reply . ' the passion of these horde of man be not an example for a live soul . our soul grow up to the light : we must keep eye on the light , and look no low . nation appear to I to have no bad than a soil mirror of themselves in mob . they be still uncivilized : they still bear a resemblance to the old monster of the mud . do you not see their claw and fang , Harry ? do you find an apology in their act for intemperate conduct ? man who fight duel appear in my sight no nobler than the first desperate creature spell the cruel A b c of the passion . ' 
 ' no , nor in mine , ' I assent hastily . ' we be not perfect . but hear I . yes , the passion be cruel . circumstance however I mean , there be social usage ay , if one be always look up t. but should we not be gentle with our comparison if we would have our view in proportion ? ' 
 she hang studiously silent , and I pursue : 
 ' I trust you so much as my helper and my friend that I tell you what we do not usually tell to woman the fact , and the name connect with they . soon or later you would have learn everything . Beloved , I do not wait to let you hear it by degree , to be reconcile to it piecemeal . ' 
 ' and I forgive he , ' she sigh . ' I scarcely bring myself to believe that Harry have bleed from Otto 's hand . ' 
 ' it be the accident of the case , Ottilia . we have to meet . ' 
 ' to meet ? ' 
 ' there be circumstance when man will not accept apology ; they we heaven know , I be ready to do all that a man could do to avoid this folly wickedness ; give it the bad of title ! ' 
 ' it do not occur accidentally ? ' she inquire . her voice sound strange , half withhold in the utterance . 
 ' it occur , ' say I , feel my strength ebb and despair set in , ' it occur the prince compel I to the meet he . ' 
 ' but my cousin Otto be no assassin ? 
 ' compel , I say : that is , he conceive I have injure he , and leave I no other way of make amend . ' 
 her defence of Otto be in reality the vehement cherishing of her idea of I . this cause her bewilderment , and like a barrier to the flowing of her mind it resist and resist . she could not suffer herself to realize that I be one of the brainless young savage , creature with claw and fang . 
 her face be unchanged to I . the homeliness of her large mild eye embrace I unshadowed , and take I to its inner fire unreservedly . lean in my roomy chair , I contemplate she at leisure while my heart keep say ' mine ! mine ! ' to awaken an active belief in its possession . her face be like the quiet morning of a winter day when cloud and sun intermix and make an ardent silver , with light of blue and faint fresh rose ; and over they the beautiful fold of her full eyebrow on the eyelid like a bend upper heaven . those winter morning be divine . they move on noiselessly . the earth be still , as if await . a wren warble , and flit through the lank drench bramble ; hill - side open green ; elsewhere be mist , everywhere expectancy . they bear the veiled sun like a sangreal aloft to the wavy marble flooring of stainless cloud . 
 she be as fair . gaze across her shoulder 's gentle depression , I could have desire to have the couchant brow , and round cheek , and round chin no more than a young man 's dream of woman , a picture alive , without the animate individual awful mind to judge of I by my act . I chafe at the thought that one so young and lovely should meditate on human affair at all . she be of an age to be maidenly romantic : our situation favour it . but she turn to I , and I be glad of the eye I know . she kiss I on the forehead . 
 ' sleep , ' she whisper . 
 I feign sleep to catch my happiness about I . 
 some disenchant thunder be come , I be sure , and I be right . my father enter . 
 ' Princess ! ' he do amazed and delighted homage , and forthwith uncontrollably pour out the history of my heroism , a hundred word for one ; my promptitude in pick the prince 's glove up on my sword 's point , my fine play with the steel , my scornful magnanimity , the admiration of my fellow - student ; every line of it ; in stupendous language ; an artillery celebration of victory . I try to stop he . Ottilia rise , continually assent , with short affirmative , to his glorifying interrogation a method he have of recapitulate the main point . she glance to right and leave , as if she feel cage . 
 ' be it know ? ' I hear her ask , in the half audible strange voice which have previously make I tremble . 
 ' know ? I certify to you , princess , ' the unhappy man spout his wither fountain of interjection over we anew ; know in every Court and garrison of Germany ! know by this time in Old England ! and , what be more , the correct version of it be know ! it be know that the young Englishman have vanquish his adversary with the small sword , and have allow he , because he have rag demoniacally on account of his lamed limb , to have a shot in revenge . 
 ' the honour do I by the princess in visit I be not to be know , ' I summon energy enough to say . 
 she shake her head . 
 my father pledge himself to the hot secresy , equivalent to a calm denial of the fact , if necessary . 
 ' pray be at no trouble , ' she address he . 
 the ' where be I ? ' look be painful in her aspect . 
 it lead I to perceive the difference of her publish position in visit a duellist lover instead of one assassinate . in the latter case , the rashness of an hereditary virgin princess avow her attachment might pass condone or cloak by general compassion . how stand it in the former ? I have drag she down to the duellist 's level ! and as she be not of a nature to practise concealment , and scorn to sanction they , she be condemn , see that concealment as far as possible be imperative , to suffer bitterly in her own esteem . this , the cruell , be the least of the evil . to keep our name disjoin be hopeless . my weakened frame and mental misery coin tear when thought be need . 
 presently I find the room empty of our poor unconscious tormentor . Ottilia have fasten her hand to mine again . 
 ' be generous , ' I surprise she by say . ' go back at once . I have see you ! let my father escort you the road . you will meet the margravine , or some one . I think , with you , it will be the margravine , and my father put she in good humour . pardon a wretched little scheme to save you from annoyance ! so thus you return within a day , and the margravine , shelter you . your name will not be speak . but go at once , for the sake of Prince Ernest . I have hurt he already ; help I to avoid do he a mortal injury . it be Schwartz who drive you ? our old Schwartz ! Old Warhead ! you see , we may be safe ; only every fresh minute add to the danger . and another reason for go - another ' 
 ' ah ! ' she breathe , ' my Harry will talk himself into a fever . ' 
 ' I shall have it if the margravine come here . ' 
 ' she shall not be admit . ' 
 ' or if I hear she , or hear that she have come ! consent at once , and revive I . oh ! I be beg you to leave I , and wish it with all my soul . think over what I have do . do not write to I . I shall see the compulsion of mere kindness between the line . you consent . your wisdom I never doubt I doubt my own . ' 
 ' when it be yours you would persuade I to confide in ? ' say she , with some sorrowful archness . 
 wit clear as hers could see that I have advise well , except in propose my father for escort . it be evidently well that she should go as she come . 
 I refrain from ask she what she think of I now . sue for immediate pardon would have be like the applying of a lancet to a vein for blood : it would have burst forth , mean mere word colour by commiseration , kindness , desperate affection , anything but her soul 's survey of herself and I ; and though I yearn for the comfort passion could give I , I know the mind I be deal with , or , rather , I know I be deal with a mind ; and I keep my tongue silent . the talk between we be of the possible date of my recovery , the hour of her return to the palace , the writer of the unsigned letter , book we have read apart or peep into together . she be a little quick in speech , less meditative . my sensitive watchfulness catch no other indication of a change . 
 my father drive away an hour in advance of the princess to encounter the margravine . 
 ' by , ' say he , rehearse his exclamation of astonishment and delight at meet she , ' by the most miraculous piece of good fortune conceivable , dear madam . and now come the question , since you have condescend to notice a solitary atom of your acquaintance on the public highroad , whether I be to have the honour of double the freight of your carriage , or you will deign to embark in mine ? but the direction of the horse ' head must be reverse , absolutely it must , if your Highness would repose in a bed to - night . good . so . and now , at a conversational trot , we may happen to be overtake by acquaintance . ' 
 I have no doubt of his drawing on his rarely - abandon seven - league boot of jargon , once so delicious to I , for the margravine 's entertainment . his lack of discernment in treat the princess to it ruin my patience . 
 the sister Aennchen and Lieschen present themselves a few minute before his departure . Lieschen drop at her foot . 
 ' my child , ' say the princess , quite maternally , ' could you be quit of your service with the Mahrlens for two week , think you , to do duty here ? ' 
 ' the Professor grant she six hour out of the twenty - four already , ' say I. 
 ' to go where ? ' she ask , alarm . 
 ' to come here . ' 
 ' here ? she know you ? she do not curtsey to you . ' 
 ' nurse do not usually do that . ' 
 the appearance of both girl be pitiable ; but have no suspicion of the cause for it , I superadde , 
 ' she be here this morning . ' 
 ' ah ! we owe she more than we be aware of . ' 
 the princess look on she kindly , though with suspense in the expression . 
 ' she tell I of my approach visitor , ' I say . 
 ' oh ! not tell ! ' Lieschen burst out . 
 ' do you , ' the princess question she , and murmur to I , ' these child can not speak falsehood , ' they shine miserably under the burden of uprightness ' do you make sure that I should come ? ' 
 Lieschen think she suppose . but why ? why do she think and suppose ? what make she anticipate the princess 's arrival ? this inveterate why communicate its terror to Aennchen , upon whom the princess turn scrutinize eye , say , ' you write of I to your sister ? ' 
 ' yes , princess . ' 
 ' and she to you ? ' 
 Lieschen answer : ' forgive I , your Highness , dear lady ! ' 
 ' you offer yourself here unasked ? ' 
 ' yes , princess . ' 
 ' have you write to other besides your sister ? ' 
 ' seldom , princess ; I do not remember . ' 
 ' you know the obligation of signature to letter ? ' 
 ' ah ! ' 
 ' you have be remiss in not write to I , child . ' 
 ' oh , princess ! I do not dare to . ' 
 ' you have not write to I ? ' 
 ' ah ! princess , how dare I ? ' 
 ' be you speak truthfully ? ' 
 the unhappy girl stand tremble . Ottilia spar they the leap into the gulfs of confession . her intuitive glance , assist by a combination of minor fact , have read the story of their misdeed in a minute . she send they down to the carriage , suffer her culprit to kiss her finger ; while she say to one : ' this might be a fable of a pair of mouse . ' 
 when she be go , after many fit of musing , the signification of it be reveal to my slow brain . I feel that it could not but be an additional shock to the regal pride of such a woman that these little maiden should have be permit to act forcibly on her destiny . the mystery of the letter be easily explain as soon as a direct suspicion fall on one of the girl who live in my neighbourhood and the other who be near the princess 's person . doubtless the revelation of their effective mouse plot have its humiliating bitterness for she on a day of heavy oppression , smile at it as she subsequently might . the torture of heart with which I twist the meaning of her word about the pair of mouse to imply that the pair have conspire to make a net for an eagle and have enmesh she , may have strike a vein of the truth . I could see no other antithesis to the laudable performance of the single mouse of fable . Lieschen , when she next appear in the character of nurse , meet my inquiry by supplicate I to imitate her sister 's generous mistress , and be merciful . 
 she remark by - and - by , of her own accord : ' Princess Ottilia do not regret that she have we educate . ' 
 a tender warmth creep round I in think that a mind thus lofty would surely be , however severe in its insight , above regret and recantation . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV . I gain a perception of PRINCELY STATE 

 I have a visit from Prince Ernest , nominally one of congratulation on my escape . I be never in my life so much at any man 's mercy : he might have fevere I to death with reproach , and I expect they on hear his name pronounce at the door . I have forget the way of the world . for some minute I listen guardedly to his affable talk . my thank for the honour do I be awkward , as if they come upon reflection . the prince be particularly civil and cheerful . his relative , he say , have write of I in high term the very high , declare that I be blameless in the matter , and that , though he have send the horse back to my stable , he fully believe in the fine quality of the animal , and acknowledge his fault in make it a cause of provocation . to all of which I assent with easy nod . 
 ' your Shakespeare , I think , ' say the prince , ' have a scene of young Frenchmen praise their horse . I myself be no strange to the enthusiasm : one could not stake life and honour on a nobler brute . pardon I if I state my opinion that you young englishman of to - day be sometimes rather overbearing in your assumption of a superior knowledge of horseflesh . we Germans in the baltic province and in the austrian cavalry think we have a right to a remark or two ; and if we have not suborn the testimony of modern history , the value of our hanoverian trooper be not unknown to one at least of your general . however , the odd be that you be right and Otto wrong , and he certainly put himself in the wrong to defend his ground . ' 
 I beg he to pass a lenient sentence upon fiery youth . he assure I that he remember his own . our interchange of courtesy be cordially commonplace : we walk , as it be , arm - in - arm on thin ice , rival one another 's gentlemanly composure . satisfy with my discretion , the prince invite I to the lake - palace , and then a week 's shooting in Styria to recruit . I thank he in as clear a voice as I could command : 
 ' your Highness , the mine flourish , I trust ? ' 
 ' it do ; I think I may say it do , ' he reply . ' there be always the want of capital . what can be accomplish , in the present state of affair , your father perform , on the whole , well . you smile but I mean extraordinarily well . he have , with an accountant at his elbow , really the genius of management . he serve I busily , and , I repeat , well . a well employment for he than the direction of Court theatrical ? ' 
 ' undoubtedly it be . ' 
 ' or than bestride a bronze horse , personify my good ancestor ! be you acquainted with the Chancellor von Redwitz ? ' 
 ' all I know of he , sir , be that he be fortunate to enjoy the particular confidence of his master . ' 
 ' he have a long head . but , now , he be a disappointing man in action ; responsibility overturn he . he be the reverse of Roy , whose advice I do not take , though I be glad to set he run . Von Redwitz be in the town . he shall call on you , and amuse an hour or so of your convalescence . ' 
 I confess that I begin to feel longing for society . 
 Prince Ernest be kind enough to quit I without unmask . I have not to learn that the simple visit and observation of rule prince signify more than lie on the surface . interest so highly personal as theirs demand from they a decent insincerity . 
 Chancellor von Redwitz call on I , and amuse I with secret anecdote of all the royal Houses of Germany , amuse chiefly through the veneration he still entertain for they . the grave senior be do his utmost to divert one of my year . the immorality of blue blood , like the amour of the Gods , be to his mind tolerable , if not beneficial to mankind , and he presume I should find they toothsome . Nay , he beseech I to coincide in his excuse of a widely charming young archduchess , for whom no estimable husband of a fitting rank could anywhere be discover , so she have to be bestow upon an archducal imbecile ; and hence and hence oh , certainly ! generous youth and benevolent age join hand of exoneration over she . the princess of Satteberg actually marry , under covert , a colonel of Uhlans at the age of seventeen ; the marriage be quash , the colonel vanish , the princess become the scandalous Duchess of Ilm - Ilm , and be surprised one infamous night in the outer court of the castle by a soldier on guard , who drag she into the guard - room and unveil she there , and would have be summarily shoot for his pain but for the locket on his breast , which prove he to be his sovereign 's son . a perfect romance , Mr. Chancellor . we will say the soldier son love a delicate young countess in attendance on the duchess . the countess spy the locket , take it to the duchess , be reprimand , when behold ! the locket open , and Colonel von Bein appear as in his bloom youth , in Lancer uniform . young sir , your piece of romance have exaggerate history to caricature . romance be the destruction of human interest . the moment you begin to move the individual , they be puppet . ' nothing but poetry , and I say it who do not read it '   Chancellor von Redwitz be the speaker ' nothing but poetry make romance passable : for poetry be the everlastingly and embracingly human . without it your fiction be flat foolishness , non - nourishing substance a species of brandy and gruel ! diet for craving stomach that can support nothing solider , and must have the weak stuff stiffen . talk of poetry , there be an independent hereditary princess of Leiterstein in love with a poet ! a Leonora d'este ! this be no Tasso . nevertheless , she propose to come to nuptial . good , you observe ? I confine myself to the relation of historical circumstance ; in other word , fact ; and of good or bad I know not . ' 
 Chancellor von Redwitz smooth the black silk stocking of his crossed leg , and set his bunch of seal and watch - key swinging . he resume , entirely to amuse I , 
 ' the Princess Elizabeth of Leiterstein promise all the quality which the most solicitous of paternal prince could desire as a guarantee for the judicious government of the territory to be bequeath to she at his demise . but , as there be no romance to be extract from her story , I may as well tell you at once that she do not espouse the poet . ' 
 ' on the contrary , dear Mr. Chancellor , I be interested in the princess . proceed , and be as minute as you please . ' 
 ' it be but a commonplace excerpt of secret historical narrative bury among the archive of the Family , my good Mr. Richmond . the Princess Elizabeth thoughtlessly pledge her hand to the young sonneteer . of course , she could not fulfil her engagement . ' 
 ' why not ? ' 
 ' you see , you be impatient for romance , young gentleman . ' 
 ' not at all , Mr. Chancellor . I do but ask a question . ' 
 ' you fence . your question be dictate by impatience . ' 
 ' yes , for the fact and elucidation ! 
 ' for the romance , that be . you wish I to depict emotion . ' 
 Hereupon this destroyer of temper embrown his nostril with snuff , add , ' I be unable to . ' 
 ' then one be not to learn why the princess could not fulfil her engagement ? ' 
 ' judge from the point of view of the pretender to the supreme honour of the splendid alliance , the fault be none of her . she overlook his humble , his peculiarly dubious , birth . ' 
 ' her father interpose ? ' 
 ' no . ' 
 ' the Family ? ' 
 ' quite inefficacious to arrest her determination . ' 
 ' what then what be in her way ? ' 
 ' Germany . ' 
 ' what ? ' 
 ' Great Germany , young gentleman . I should have premise that , besides mental , she have eminent moral disposition , I might term it the conscience of her illustrious rank . she would have raise the poet to equal rank beside she have she possess the power . she could and do defy the Family , and subdue her worship father , the most noble prince , to a form of paralysis of acquiescence if I make myself understand . but she be unsuccessful in her application for the sanction of the Diet . ' 
 ' the Diet ? ' 
 ' the german Diet . have you not live among we long enough to know that the german Diet be the seat of domestic legislation for the princely Houses of Germany ? a prince or a princess may say , " I will this or that . " the Diet say , " thou shalt not " ; pre - eminently , " thou shalt not mix thy blood with that of an impure race , nor with blood of inferior . " hence , we have it what we see it , a translucent flood down from the topmost fount of time . so we revere it . " qua man and woman , " the Diet say , by implication , " do as you like , marry in the ditch , spawn plentifully . qua prince and princess , no ! your nuptial be nought . or would you maintain they a legal ceremony , and be bind by they , you descend , you go forth ; you be no reign sovereign , you be a private person . " his Serene Highness the prince be thus prohibit from afford help to his daughter . the princess be reduce to the decision either that she , the sole child bear of he in legal wedlock , would render he qua prince childless , or that she would in short , would have her woman 's way . the sovereignty of Leiterstein continue uninterruptedly with the eld branch . she be a true princess . ' 
 ' a true woman , ' say I , think the sneer weighty . 
 the Chancellor beg I to recollect that he have warn I there be no romance to be expect . 
 I bow ; and bow during the remainder of the interview . 
 Chancellor von Redwitz have perform his mission . the hour of my convalescence be furnish with food for amusement sufficient to sustain a year 's blockade ; I have no further longing for society , but I crave for fresh air intensely . 
 do Ottilia know that this iron law , enforce with the might of a whole empire , environ she , hold she fast from any motion of heart and will ? I could not get to mind that the prince have hint at the existence of such a law . yet why should he have do so ? the word impossible , in which he have not be spar when he deign to speak distinctly , comprise everything . more profitable than shoot empty question at the sky be the speculation on his project in receive I at the palace , and that be dark . my father , who might now have help I , be off on duty again . 
 I find myself drive into Sarkeld with a sense of a whirlwind round my head ; wheel in multitude be spin inside , strike spark for thought . I meet an orderly in hussar uniform of blue and silver , trot on his errand . there he be ; and whether many be behind he or he stand for the army in its might , he wear the trapping of an old princely House that nestle proudly in the bosom of its great jealous Fatherland . previously in Sarkeld I have notice member of the diminutive army to smile down on they . I see the princely arm and colour on various house and in the window of shop . emblem of a small state , they belong to the history of the empire . the Court - physician pass with a bit of ribbon in his buttonhole . a lady drive in an open carriage encourage I to salute she . she be the wife of the Prince 's Minister of Justice . upon what foundation have I be build ? 
 a reflection of the idea possess I show Riversley , my undecorated home of rough red brick , in the middle of barren heath . I enter the palace , I send my respect to the prince . in return , the hour of dinner be ceremoniously name to I : ceremony damp the air . I have be insensible to it before , or so I think , the weight be now so crush . arm , emblem , colour , livery , portrait of prince and princess of the House , of this the warrior , that the seductress , burst into sudden light . what have I to do among they ? 
 the presence of the live member of the Family be an extreme physical relief . 
 for the moment , behold Ottilia , I count she but as one of they . she welcome I without restraint . 
 we chatter pleasantly at the dinner - table . 
 ' ah ! you miss our french troupe , ' say the margravine . ' 
 ' yes , ' say I , resign they to she . she nod : 
 ' and one very pretty little woman they have , I can tell you for a Frenchwoman . ' 
 ' you think she pretty ? frenchwoman know what to do with their brain and their pin , somebody have say . ' 
 ' and exceedingly well say , too . where be that man Roy ? good thing always remind I of he . ' 
 the question be address to no one in particular . the man happen to be my father , I remember . a second allusion to he be answer by Prince Ernest : 
 ' Roy be off to Croatia to enrol some dozen of cheap workman . the strength of those Croats be prodigious , and well look after they work . he will be back in three or four or more day . ' 
 ' you have spoil a good man , ' rejoin the margravine ; ' and that remind I of a bad one a cutthroat . have you hear of that creature , the princess 's tutor ? happily cut loose from we , though ! he have publish a book a horror ! all against Scripture and Divine right ! be there any one to defend he now , I should like to ask ? ' 
 ' i , ' say Ottilia . 
 ' gracious I ! you have not read the book ? ' 
 ' right through , dear aunt , with all respect to you . ' 
 ' it be in the house ? ' 
 ' it be in my study . ' 
 ' then I do not   wonder ! I do not   wonder ! ' the margravine exclaim . 
 ' well hear what the enemy have to say , ' Prince Ernest observe . 
 ' excellently argue , papa , suppose that he be an enemy . ' 
 ' an enemy as much as the fox be the enemy of the poultry - yard , and the hound be the enemy of the fox ! ' say the margravine . 
 ' I take your illustration , auntie , ' say Ottilia . ' he be the enemy of chicken , and only do not run before the number who bark at he . my noble old Professor be a resolute truth - seeker : he raise a light to show you the ground you walk on . how be it that you , adore hero as you do , can not admire he when he stand alone to support his view of the truth ! I would I be by he ! but I be , whenever I hear he abuse . ' 
 ' I daresay you discard nothing that the wretch have teach you ! ' 
 ' nothing ! nothing ! ' say Ottilia , and make my heart live . 
 the grim and taciturn Baroness Turckems , sit opposite to she , sigh audibly . 
 ' have the princess be try to convert you ? ' the margravine ask she . 
 ' try ? no , madam . reading ? yes . ' 
 ' my good Turckems ! you do not get your share of sleep ? ' 
 ' it be her Highness the princess who despise sleep . ' 
 ' see there the way with your free - thinker ! they commence by treading under foot the pleasantest half of life , and then they impose their bad habit on their victim . Ottilia ! Ernest ! I do insist upon have light extinguish in the child 's apartment by twelve o'clock at midnight . ' 
 ' twelve o'clock be an extraordinary latitude for child , ' say Ottilia , smile . 
 the prince , with a scarce perceptible degree of emphasis , say , 
 ' woman bear to rule must be hold exempt from nursery restriction . ' 
 here the conversation open to let I in . More than once the margravine inform I that I be not the equal of my father . 
 ' why , ' say she , ' why can not   you undertake this detestable coal - mine , and let your father disport himself ? ' 
 I suggest that it might be because I be not his equal . she compliment I for inherit a spark of Roy 's brilliancy . 
 I fancy there be a conspiracy to force I back from my pretension by subject I to the contemplation of my bare self and actual condition . have there be , I should have suffer from less measured stroke . the unconcerted design to humiliate inferior be commonly successfull than conspiracy . 
 the prince invite I to smoke with he , and talk of our gradual subsidence in England to one broad level of rank through the intermixture by marriage of our aristocracy , squirearchy , and merchant . 
 ' here it be not so , ' he say ; ' and no democratic rageing will make it so . Rank , with we , be a principle . I suppose you have not read the Professor 's book ? it be powerful he be a powerful man . it can do no damage to the mind of person destine by birth to wield authority none , therefore , to the princess . I would say to you avoid it . for those who have to carve their way , it be bad . you will enter your Parliament , of course ? there you have a fine career . ' 
 he ask I what I have make of Chancellor von Redwitz . 
 I perceive that Prince Ernest could be cool and sagacious in repair what his imprudence or blindness have leave to occur : that he must have enlighten his daughter as to her actual position , and be most dexterously and devilishly flatter her worldly good sense by let it struggle and grow , instead of oppose she . his appreciation of her intellect be an idolatry ; he really confide in it , I know ; and this react upon she . do it ? my hesitation and doubt , my fantastic rapture and despair , my loss of the power to appreciate anything at its right value , reveal the madness of love a princess . 
 there be preparation for the arrival of an important visitor . the margravine speak of he emphatically . I think it might be her farcically pompous way of announce my father 's return , and look pleased , I suppose , for she add , ' do you know Prince Hermann ? he spend most of his time in Eberhardstadt . he be cousin of the King , a wealthy branch ; tant soit peu philosophe , a ce qu'on dit ; a traveller . they say he have a south american complexion . I know he a boy ; and his passion be to put together what Nature have unpiece , bone of fish and animal . Il faut passer le temp . he adore the Deluge . anything antediluvian excite he . he can tell we the " mode " of those day ; and , if I be not very much misinformed , he still expect we to show he the very late of these . happily my milliner be back from Paris . ay , and we have fossil in our neighbourhood , though , on my honour , I do not   know where somewhere ; the princess can guide he , and you can help at the excavation . I be tell he would go through the crust of earth for the backbone of an idio ilio - something - saurus . ' 
 I scrutinize Prince Hermann as rarely my observation have dwell on any man . he have the german head , wide , so as seemingly to force out the ear ; honest , ready , interested eye in conversation ; parch lip ; a rather tropically - coloured skin ; and decidedly the manner of a gentleman to all , except his retinue of secretary , valet , and chasseur his ' black , ' he call they . they like he . one could not help like he . 
 ' you study much ? ' he address the princess at table . 
 she answer : ' I throw aside book , now you have come to open the earth and the sea . ' 
 from that time the topic start on every occasion be theirs ; the rest of we run at their heel , give tongue or not . 
 to I Prince Hermann be perfectly courteous . he have make english friend on his travel ; he prefer English comrade in adventure to any other : think our East indian empire the most marvellous thing the world have see , and our indian Government cigar very smokeable upon acquaintance . when stir , he bubble with anecdote . ' not be there , ' be his reply to the margravine 's tentative for gossip of this and that of the German Courts . his museum , hunting , and the Opera absorb and divide his hour . I guess his age to be mount forty . he seem robust ; he eat vigorously . drinking he conscientiously perform as an accompany duty , and be flush after dinner , burn for tobacco and a couch for his length . then he talk of the littleness of Europe and the greatness of Germany ; logical postulate fall in collapse before he . America to America , North and South ; India to Europe . India be for the land with the large sea - board . mistress of the Baltic , of the North Sea and the East , as eventually she must be , Germany would claim to take India as a matter of course , and find an outlet for the energy of the most prolific and the tough of the race of mankind , the pure , in fact , the only true race , properly so call , out of India , to which it would return as to its source , and there create an empire magnificent in force and solidity , the actual wedding of East and West ; an empire firm on the ground and in the blood of the people , instead of an empire of alien , that would bear comparison to a finely fret cotton - hang palanquin balance on an elephant 's back , all depend on the docility of the elephant   his description of Great Britain 's Indian Empire . ' and mind I , ' he say , ' the mass of India be in character elephant all over , tail to proboscis ! servile till they trample you , and not so stupid as they look . but you have   do wonder in India , and we can not   forget it . your administration of Justice be worth all your battle there . ' 
 this be the man : a milder one after the evaporation of his wine in speech , and peculiarly moderate on his return , exhale sandal - wood , to the society of the lady . 
 Ottilia dance with Prince Hermann at the grand Ball give in honour of he . the wife and daughter of the notable present keep up a buzz of comment on his personal advantage , in which , I hear it say , you see his german heart , though he have spend the good year of his life abroad . much court be pay to he by the man . sarkeld visibly express satisfaction . one remark , ' we shall have his museum in the town ! ' leave I no doubt upon the presume object of his visit : it be utter and respond to with a depth of sentiment that show how lively would be the general gratitude toward one who should exhilarate the place by introduce case of fish - bone . 
 so little do he think of my presence , that return from a ride one day , he seize and detain the princess 's hand . she frown with pained surprise , but unresistingly , as become a young gentlewoman 's dignity . her hand be rudely catch and keep in the manner of a boisterous wooer a Harry the fifth or lusty Petruchio . she push her horse on at a bound . Prince Hermann ride up head to head with she gallantly , have now both hand free of the rein , like an indian spear the buffalo it be buffalo courtship ; and his shout of rallying astonishment at her resistance , ' what ? what ? ' rang wildly to heighten the scene , she lean constrain on one side and he bend half his body 's length ; a strange scene for I to witness . 
 they proceed with old Schwartz at their heel doglike . it become a question for I whether I should follow in the bitter track , and far the question whether I could let they escape from sight . they wound up the roadway , two figure and one follow , now dot against the sky , now a single movement in the valley , now conceal , bury under billow of forest , make the low noising of the leaf an intolerable whisper of secresy , and forward I rush again to see they round a belt of fir or shadow by rock , solitary on shorn field , once more dipping to the forest , and once more emerging , vanish . when I have grow sure of their reappearance from some point of view or other , I spy for they in vain . my destiny , whatever it might be , flutter over they ; to see they seem near the knowing of it , and not to see they , deadly . I gallop , so intent on the three in the distance , that I do not observe a horseman face toward I , on the road : it be Prince Hermann . he raise his hat ; I stop short , and he speak : 
 ' Mr. Richmond , permit I to apologize to you . I have to congratulate you , it appear . I be not aware . however , the princess have do I the favour to enlighten I . how you will manage , I can not   guess , but that be not my affair . I be a man of honour ; and , on my honour , I conceive that I be invite here to decide , as my habit be , on the spot , if I would , or if I would not . I speak clearly to you , no doubt . there could be no hesitation in the mind of a man of sense . my way be prompt and blunt ; I be sorry I give you occasion to reflect on it . there ! I have be deceive deceive myself , let us say . sharp method play the devil with you now and then . to speak the truth , perhaps you will not   care to listen to it , family arrangement be the good ; take my word for it , they be the good . and in the case of princess of the blood ! why , look you , I happen to be suitable . it be a matter of chance , like your height , complexion , constitution . one be just what one be bear to be , eh ? you have your english notion , I my German ; but as a man of the world in the bargain , and " gentleman , " I hope , I should say , that to take a young princess 's fancy , and drag she from her station be not of course , you know that the actual value of the title go if she step down ? very well . but enough say ; I think I be in a clear field . we be use to have our way clear for we , nous autre . I will not detain you . ' 
 we salute gravely , and I ride on at a mechanical pace , discern by glimpse the purport of what I have hear , without draw warmth from it . the man 's outrageously royal way of wooing , in contempt of minor presence and flimsy sentiment , make I jealous of he , notwithstanding his overthrow . 
 I be in the mood to fall entirely into my father 's hand , as I do by unbosom myself to he for the first time since my heart have be under the charm . fresh from a rapid course of travel , and with the sense of lay the prince under weighty obligation , he make light of my perplexity , and at once deliver himself bluntly : ' she plight her hand to you in the presence of our good Peterborough . ' his plan be shape on the spot . ' we start for England the day after to - morrow to urge on the suit , Richie . our Peterborough be up at the chateau . the Frau Feldmarschall honour he with a farewell invitation : you have a private interview with the princess at midnight in the library , where you be accustomed to read , as a student of book should , my boy at a touch of the bell , or mere opening of the door , I see that Peterborough come to you . it will not be a ceremony , but a binding of you both by your word of honour before a ghostly gentleman . ' he inform I that his foresight have enlist and detain Peterborough for this particular moment and identical piece of duty , which seem possible , and in a singular manner incite I to make use of Peterborough . for the princess still deny I the look of love 's intelligence , she avoid I , she still keep to the riddle , and my delicacy go so far that I be restrain from write . I agree with my father that we could not remain in Germany ; but how could I quit the field and fly to England on such term ? I compose the flat letter ever write , request the princess to meet I about midnight in the library , that I might have the satisfaction of take my leave of she ; and this do , my spirit rise , and it strike I my father be practically wise , and I look on Peterborough as an almost supernatural being . if Ottilia refuse to come , at least I should know my fate . be I not bind in manly honour to be to some degree adventurous ? 
 so I reason in exclamation , be , to tell truth , tired of seem to be what I be not quite , of strive to become what I must have divine that I never could quite attain to . so my worthy , or ideal , self fall away from I . I be no long devote to be worthy of a woman 's love , but consent to the plot to entrap a princess . I be somewhat influence , too , by the consideration , which I regard as a glimpse of practical wisdom , that Prince Ernest be guilty of cynical astuteness in retain I as his guest under manifold disadvantage . personal pride stand up in arm , and my father 's exuberant spirit fan it . he dwelt loudly on his service to the prince , and his own importance and my heirship to mighty rich . he make I almost believe that Prince Ernest hesitate about reject I ; nor do it appear altogether foolish to think so , or why be I at the palace ? I have no head for reflection . 
 my father divert I by level the whole battery of his comic mind upon Peterborough , who have a heap of manuscript , direct against heretical german theologian , to pack up for publication in his more congenial country : how different , he ejaculate , from this nest this forest of heresy , where pamphlet and critical essay be issue without let or hindrance , and , as far as he could see , no general reprobation of the Press , such as would most undoubtedly , with one voice , hail any strange opinion in our happy land at home ! whether he really understand the function my father prepare he for , I can not say . the invitation to dine and pass a night at the lake - palace flatter he immensely . 
 we go up to the chateau to fetch he . 
 a look of woe be on Peterborough 's countenance when we descend at the palace portal : he have forget his pipe . 
 ' you shall smoke one of the prince 's , ' my father say . Peterborough remark to I , ' we shall have many thing to talk over in England . ' 
 ' no tobacco allow on the premise at Riversley , I ' m afraid , ' say I. 
 he sigh , and bid I jocosely to know that he regard tobacco as just one of the consolation of exile and bachelor . 
 ' Peterborough , my good friend , you be a hero ! ' cry my father . ' he divorce tobacco to marry ! ' 
 ' permit I , ' Peterborough interpose , with an ingenuous pretension to subtle waggery , in itself very comical , ' permit I ; no legitimate union have take place between myself and tobacco ! ' 
 ' he put an end to the illegitimate union between himself and tobacco that he may marry accord to form ! ' cry my father . 
 we enter the palace merrily , and presently Peterborough , who have wear a studious forehead in the midst of his consent laughter , observe , ' well , you know , there be more in that than appear on the surface . ' 
 his sweet simpleton air of profundity convulse I . I hand my father the letter address to the princess to entrust it to the charge of one of the domestic , think carelessly at the time that Ottilia now stand free to make appointment and receive communication , and moreover that I be too proud to condescend to subterfuge , except this minor one , in consideration for she , of make it appear that my father , and not I , be in communication with she . my fit of laughter clung . I dress chuckle . the margravine be not slow to notice and comment on my hilarious readiness . 
 ' Roy , ' she say , ' you have give your son spirit . one see he have your blood when you have be with he an hour . ' 
 ' the season have return , if your Highness will let it be spring , ' say my father . 
 ' far fetched ! from the Lower Danube ! ' she ejaculate in mock scorn to excite his sprightliness , and they fall upon a duologue as good as wit for the occasion . 
 Prince Hermann have go . his departure be mention with the ordinary commonplace of regret . Ottilia be unembarrasse , both in speak of he and look at I . we have the Court physician and his wife at table , Chancellor von Redwitz and his daughter , and General Happenwyll , chief of the prince 's contingent , a Prussian at heart , say to be a good officer on the strength of a military book of some sort that he have full leisure to compose . the Chancellor 's daughter and Baroness Turckems enclose I . 
 I be question by the baroness as to the cause of my father 's unexpected return . ' he be generally opportune , ' she remark . 
 ' he go with I to England , ' I say . 
 ' oh ! he go , ' say she ; and ask why we be honour with the presence of Mr. Peterborough that evening . there have always be a smoulder hostility between she and my father . 
 to my surprise , the baroness speak of Ottilia by her name . 
 ' Ottilia must have mountain air . these late hour destroy her complexion . active exercise by day and proper fatigue by night time that be my prescription . ' 
 ' the princess , ' I reply , envy Peterborough , who be place on one side of she , ' will benefit , I be sure , from mountain air . do she read excessively ? the sea ' 
 ' the sea I pronounce bad for her unwholesome , ' return the baroness . ' it be damp . ' 
 I laugh . 
 ' Damp , ' she reiterate . ' the vapour , I be convince , affect mind and body . that excursion in the yacht do her infinite mischief . the mountain restore she . they will again , take my word for it . now take you my word for it , they will again . she be not too strong in constitution , but in order to prescribe accurately one must find out whether there be seat malady . to ride out in the night instead of repose ! to drive on and on , and not reappear till the night of the next day I ask you , be it sensible ? do it not approach mania ? ' 
 ' the princess ? ' say I. 
 ' Ottilia have do that . ' 
 ' Baroness , can I believe you ? and alone ? ' 
 a marvellous twinkle of shuffle appear in the small slate - colour eye I look at under their roofing of thick black eyebrow . 
 ' alone , ' she say . ' that be , she be precautious to have her giant to protect she from violence . there you have a glimmering of reason in she ; and all of it that I can see . ' 
 ' Old Schwartz be a very faithful servant , ' say I , think that she resemble the old Warhead in visage . 
 ' a dog 's obedience to the master 's whim you call faithfulness ! Hem ! ' the baroness cough dryly . 
 I whisper : ' do Prince Ernest be he aware ? ' 
 ' you be aware , ' retort the baroness , ' that what a man idolize he will not   see flaw in . remember , I be something here , or I be nothing . ' 
 the enigmatical remark be receive by I decorously as a piece of merited chastisement . nod with gravity , I express regret that the sea do not please she , otherwise I could have offer she a yacht for a cruise . she nod stiffly . her mouth shut up a smile , show more of the door than the ray . the dinner , virtually a german supper , end in general conversation on political affair , precede and support by a discussion between the Prussian - hearted General and the austrian - hearted margravine . Prince Ernest , true to his view that diplomacy be the weapon of minor sovereign , hold the balance , with now a foot in one scale , now in the other ; a politic proceeding , so long as the rival power passively consent to be weigh . 
 we trifle with music , make our bow to the lady , and change garment for the smoking - room . Prince Ernest smoke his one cigar among guest . the General , the Chancellor , and the doctor , know the signal for retirement , and rise simultaneously with the discharge of his cigar - end in spark on the unlit logwood pile . my father and Mr. Peterborough keep their chair . 
 there be , I feel with relief , no plot , for nothing have be definitely assent to by I . I receive Prince Ernest 's proffer of his hand , on make my adieux to he , with a passably clear conscience . 
 I go out to the library . a man come in for order ; I have none to give . he see that the shutter be fix and the curtain down , examine my hand - lamp , and place lamp on the reading - desk and mantel - piece . bronze bust of sage become my solitary companion . the room be long , low and dusky , voluminously and richly hang with drapery at the farth end , where a table stand for the prince to jot down memoranda , and a sofa to incline he to the relaxation of romance - reading . a door at this end lead to the sleep apartment of the west wing of the palace . where I sit the student have range of classical volume in prospect and classic head ; no other decoration to the wall . I pace to and fro and should have fling myself on the sofa but for a heap of book there cover from dust , perhaps conceal , that the yellow parisian volume , of which I catch sight of some new dozen , might not be an attraction to the eye of chance - comer . at the lake - palace the prince frequently give audience here . he have say to I , when I state my wish to read in the library , ' you keep to the classical department ? ' I think it possible he might not like the coloured volume to be inspect ; I have no taste for a perusal of they . I pick up one that fall during my walk , and fling it back , and disturb a heap under cover , for more fell , and there I let they lie . 
 Ottilia do not keep I wait . 




 CHAPTER XXXV . the SCENE in the LAKE - PALACE LIBRARY 

 I be hum the burden of Gothe 's Zigeunerlied , a favourite one with I whenever I have too much to think of , or nothing . a low rush of sound from the hall - doorway swing I on my heel , and I see she stand with a silver lamp raise in her right hand to the level of her head , as if she expect to meet obscurity . a thin blue indian scarf mufe her throat and shoulder . her hair be loosely knot . the lamp 's full glow illumine and shadow she . she be like a statue of Twilight . 
 I go up to she quickly , and close the door , say , ' you have come ' ; my voice be not much above a breath . 
 she look distrustfully down the length of the room ; ' you be speak to some one ? ' 
 ' no . ' 
 ' you be speak . ' 
 ' to myself , then , I suppose . ' 
 I remember and repeat the gipsy burden . 
 she smile faintly and say it be the hour for Anna and Ursel and Kith and Liese to be out . 
 her hand be glove , a small matter to tell of . 
 we hear the portico - sentinel challenge and relieve . 
 ' midnight , ' I say . 
 she reply : ' you be not definite in your direction about the minute . ' 
 ' I fear to name midnight . ' 
 ' why ? ' 
 ' lest the appointment of midnight I lose my knowledge of you ! should make you reflect , frighten you . you see , I be invent a reason ; I really can not tell why , if it be not that I hop to have just those few minute more of you . and now they be go . I would not have ask you but that I think you free to act . ' 
 ' I be . ' 
 ' and you come freely ? ' 
 ' a " therefore " belong to every grant of freedom . ' 
 ' I understand : your judgement be against it . ' 
 ' be comfort , ' she say ; ' it be your right to bid I come , if you think fit . ' 
 one of the sofa - volume fall . she catch her breath ; and smile at her foolish alarm . 
 I tell she that it be my intention to start for England in the morning ; that this be the only moment I have , and would be the last interview : my right , if I possess any , and I be not aware that I do , I throw down . 
 ' you throw down one end of the chain , ' she say . 
 ' in the name of heaven , then , ' cry I , ' release yourself . ' 
 she shake her head . ' that be not my meaning . ' 
 note the predicament of a lover who have a piece of dishonesty lurk in he . my chilled self - love have certainly the right to demand the explanation of her coldness , and I could very well guess that a word or two draw from the neighbourhood of the heart would fetch a warm current to unlock the ice between we , but feel the coldness I complain of to be probably a suspicion , I fix on the suspicion as a new and deep injury do to my loyal love for she , and arm against that I dare not take an initiative for fear of unexpectedly justify it by betray myself . 
 yet , suppose her inclination to have become divert , I be ready frankly to release she with one squeeze of hand and take all the pain of she pain , and I say : ' pray , do not speak of chain . ' 
 ' but they exist . thing can not be undo for we two by word . ' 
 the tremble as of a strung wire in the strenuous pitch of her voice seem to say she be not cold , though her gloved hand rest its finger - end on the table , her restrained attitude , her very calm eye , declare the reverse . this and that sensation beset I in turn . 
 we shrink oddly from utter one another 's christian name . I be the first with it ; my ' Ottilia ! ' bring soon after ' Harry ' on her lip , and an atmosphere about we much less Arctic . 
 ' Ottilia , you have tell I you wish I to go to England . ' 
 ' I have . ' 
 ' we shall be friend . ' 
 ' yes , Harry ; we can not be quite divide ; we have that knowledge for our present happiness . ' 
 ' the happy knowledge that we may have our bone to gnaw when food 's deny . it be something . one would like possibly , after expulsion out of Eden , to climb the gate to see how the tree grow there . what I can not imagine be the forecasting of any joy in the privilege . ' 
 ' by nature or system , then , you be more impatient than I , for I can , ' say Ottilia . she add : ' so much of your character I divine early . it be part of my reason for wish you to work . you will find that hard work in England but why should I preach to you Harry , you have call I here for some purpose ? ' 
 ' I must have detain you already too long . ' 
 ' time be not the offender . since I have come , the evil ' 
 ' evil ? be not your action free ? ' 
 ' Patience , my friend . the free my action , the more be I bind to deliberate on they . I have the habit of think that my deliberation be not in my sex 's fashion of take counsel of the nerve and the blood . 
 in truth , Harry , I should not have come but for my acknowledgement of your right to bid I come . ' 
 ' you know , princess , that in honour I with your attachment , you imperil your sovereign rank ? ' 
 ' I do . ' 
 ' what next ? ' 
 ' except that it be grievously in peril , nothing ! ' 
 ' have you know it all along ? ' 
 ' dimly - scarcely . to some extent I know it , but it do not stand out in broad daylight . I have be learn the world 's wisdom recently . would you have have I neglect it ? surely much be due to my father ? my relative have claim on I . our princely Houses have . my country have . ' 
 ' oh , princess , if you be plead ' 
 ' can you think that I be ? ' 
 the splendour of her high nature burst on I with a shock . 
 I could have fall to kiss her foot , and I say indifferently : ' not plead , only it be evident the claim I hate myself for bring you in antagonism with they . yes , and I have be learn some worldly wisdom ; I wish for your sake it have not be so late . what make I overleap the proper estimate of your rank ! I can not   tell ; but now that I know well the kind of creature the man who win your esteem when you know less of the world ! ' 
 ' hush ! I have an interest in he , and do not suffer he to be spurn , ' Ottilia check I . ' I , too , know he well , and still , if he be drag down I be in the dust ; if he be abuse the shame be mine . ' her face bloom . 
 her sweet warmth of colour be transfuse through my vein . 
 ' we shall part in a few minute . I have a mind to beg a gift of you . ' 
 ' name it . ' 
 ' that glove . ' 
 she make her hand bare and give I , not the glove , but the hand . 
 ' ah ! but this I can not keep . ' 
 ' will you have everything speak ? ' she say , in a tone that would have be reproachful have not tenderness melt it . ' there should be a spirit between we , Harry , to spare the task . you do keep it , if you choose . I have some little dread of be take for a madwoman , and more an actual horror of behave ungratefully to my generous father . he have prove that he can be indulgent , most trusting and considerate for his daughter , though he be a prince ; my duty be to show he that I do not forget I be a princess . I owe my rank allegiance when he forget his on my behalf , my friend ! you be young . none but an inexperienced girl hoodwink by her trick of intuition , would have dream you superior to the passion of other man . I be blind ; I be regretful take my word as you do my hand for no one 's sake but my father 's . you and I be bind fast ; only , help I that the blow may be light for he ; if I descend from the place I be bear to , let I tell he it be to occupy one I be fit for , or should not at least feel my Family 's deep blush in fill . to be in the midst of life in your foremost England be , in my imagination , very glorious . Harry , I remember picture to myself when I reflect upon your country 's history perhaps a year after I have see the two " young english gentleman , " that you touch the morning and evening star , and wear they in your coronet , and walk with the sun West and East ! child 's imagery ; but the impression do not wear off . if I rail at England , it be the anger of love . I fancy I have good and great thing to speak to the people through you . ' 
 there she stop . the fervour she repress in speech throw a glow over her face , like that on a frosty bare autumn sky after sunset . 
 I press my lip to her hand . 
 in our silence another of the fatal yellow volume thump the floor . 
 she look into my eye and ask , 
 ' have we be speak before a witness ? ' 
 so thoroughly have she renovate I , that I accuse and reprove the lurking suspicion with a soft laugh . 
 ' Beloved ! I wish we have be . ' 
 ' if it might be , ' she say , divine I and musing . 
 ' why not ? ' 
 she star . 
 ' how ? what do you ask ? ' 
 the look on my face alarm she . I be breathless and colourless , with the heart of a hawk eye his bird a fox , would be the truer comparison , but the bird be noble , not one that cower . her beauty and courage lift I into high air , in spite of myself , and it be a huge weight of greed that fall away from I when I say , 
 ' I would not urge it for an instant . consider if you have just plight your hand in mine before a witness ! ' 
 ' my hand be in your ; my word to you be enough . ' 
 ' enough . my thank to heaven for it ! but consider a pledge of fidelity that should be my secret angel about I in trouble and trial ; my wed soul ! she can not falter , she be mine for ever , she guide I , hold I to work , inspirit I ! she be secure from temptation , from threat , from everything nothing can touch , nothing move she , she be mine ! I mean , an attest word , a form , that be a betrothal . for I to say my beloved and my betrothed ! you hear that ? belove ! be a lonely word : betroth ! carry we join up to death . would you ? I do but ask to know that you would . to - morrow I be loose in the world , and there be a darkness in the thought of it almost too terrible . would you ? one swear word that give I my bride , let man do what they may ! I go then sing to battle sure ! remember , it be but the question whether you would . ' 
 ' Harry , I would , and will , ' she say , her lip shudder ' wait ' for a cry of joy escape I ' I will look you I in the eye and tell I you have a doubt of I . ' 
 I look : she swam in a mist . 
 we have our full draught of the divine self - oblivion which float those ghost of the two immortal lover through the bound of their purgatorial circle , and for we to whom the minute be age , as for they to whom all time be unmarked , the power of supreme love sweep out circumstance . such embrace cast the soul beyond happiness , into no know region of sadness , but we draw apart sadly , even as that involved pair of bleed recollection look on the life lose to they . I know well what a height she drop from when the sens take fire . she raise I to learn how little of fretful thirst and its reputed voracity remain with love when it have be meet midway in air by a wing mate able to sustain , unable to descend far . 
 and it be before a witness , though unviewe by we . 
 the farewell have come . her voice be humble . 
 never , I say , delight in the now conscious bravery of her eye engage mine , shadowy with the struggle , I would never doubt she , and I renounce all pledge . to be clear in my own sight as well as in her , I make mention of the half - form conspiracy to obtain her plighted troth in a bind manner . it be not necessary for I to excuse myself ; she do that , say , ' could there be a great proof of my darling 's unhappiness ? I be to blame . ' 
 we close hand for part . she hesitate and ask if my father be awake ; then promptly to my answer : 
 ' I will see he . I have treat you ill . I have exact too much patience . the suspicion be owe to a warning I have this evening , Harry ; a silly warning to beware of snare ; and I have no fear of they , believe I , though for some moment , and without the slight real desire to be guard , I fancy Harry 's father be overhear I . he be your father , dearest : fetch he to I . my father will hear of this from my lip why not he ? ah ! do I suspect you ever so little ? I will atone for it ; not atone , I will make it my pleasure ; it be my pride that have hurt you both . o my lover ! my lover ! dear head , dear eye ! delicate and noble that you be ! my own strong soul ! where be my heart ? be it sometimes dead , or sleep ? but you can touch it to life . look at I I be yours . I consent , I desire it ; I will see he . I will be bind . the heavy the chain , oh ! the well for I . what be I , to be proud of anything not your , Harry ? and I that have pass over to you ! I will see he at once . ' 
 a third in the room cry out , ' no , not that you do not ! ' 
 the tongue be german and strike on we like a roll of unfriendly musketry before we perceive the enemy . ' Princess Ottilia ! you remember your dignity or I defend you and it , think of I what you will ! ' 
 Baroness Turckems , desperately entangle by the sofa - covering , rush into the ray of the lamp and lay her hand on the bell - rope . in a minute we have an alarm sound , my father be among we , there be a mad play of chatter , and we stand in the strange nightmare - light that ever end an interview of lover . 




 CHAPTER XXXVI . HOMEWARD and HOME again 

 the room be in flame , Baroness Turckems pluck at the bell - rope , my father look big and brilliant . 
 ' hold hand ! ' he shout to the frenzied baroness . 
 she counter - shout ; both of they stamp foot ; the portico sentinel strike the butt of his musket on the hall - door ; bell answer bell along the upper gallery . 
 ' foolish woman , be silent ! ' cry my father . 
 ' Incendiary ! ' she half - shriek . 
 he turn to the princess , beg she to retire , but she star at he , and I too , after have see he deliberately apply the flame of her lamp to the curtain , deem he mad . he be perfectly self - possess , and say , ' this will explain the bell ! ' and fetch a deep breath , and again urge the princess to retire . 
 Peterborough be the only one present who bethink he of do fireman 's duty . the risk look great than it be . he have but to tear the light curtain down and trample on they . suddenly the baroness call out , ' the man be right ! come with I , princess ; escape , your Highness , escape ! and you , ' she address I ' you ring the bell , you ! ' 
 ' to repair your error , baroness , ' say my father . 
 ' I have my conscience pure ; have you ? ' she retort . 
 he bow and say , ' the fire will also excuse your presence on the spot , baroness . ' 
 ' I thank my God I be not so cool as you , ' say she . 
 ' your warmth ' he bend to she ' shall always be your apology , baroness . ' 
 see the curtain extinguish , Ottilia withdraw . she give I no glance . 
 all this occur before the night - porter , who be go his round , could reach the library . lacquey and maid be soon at his heel . my father meet Prince Ernest with a florid story of a reckless student , either asleep or too anxious to secure a particular volume , and show his usual consideration by not ask I to verify the narrative . with that , and with high praise of Peterborough , as to whose gallantry I hear he deliver a very circumstantial account , he , I suppose , satisfy the prince 's curiosity , and appease he , the damage be small compare with the uproar . Prince Ernest question two or three time , ' what set he ring so furiously ? ' my father make some reply . 
 Ottilia 's cloud - pale window be the sole greeting I have from she on my departure early next morning , far wretcheder than if I have encounter a misfortune . it be impossible for I to deny that my father have shield the princess : she would never have run for a menace . as he remark , the ringing of the bell would not of itself have force she to retreat , and the nature of the baroness 's alarm demand nothing less than a conflagration to account for it to the household . but I feel humiliate on Ottilia 's behalf , and enrage on my own . and I have , I must confess , a touch of fear of a man who could unhesitatingly go to extremity , as he have do , by summon fire to the rescue . he assure I that moment such as those inspire he and be the pride of his life , and he be convince that , upon reflection , ' I should rise to his pitch . ' he delude himself with the idea of his have foil Baroness Turckems , nor do I choose to contest it , though it strike I that she be too conclusively the foiler . she must have intercept the letter for the princess . I remember act carelessly in hand it to my father for he to consign it to one of the domestic , and he pass it on with a flourish . her place of concealment be singularly well select under the sofa - cover , and the little heap of paper - bind volume . I do not fancy she mean to rouse the household ; her notion probably be to terrorize the princess , that she might compel she to quit my presence . in rush to the bell - rope , her impetuosity send she stumbling on it with force , and while threaten to ring , and mean merely to threaten , she ring ; and as it be not a retractable act , she continue ring , and the more violently upon my father 's appearance . catch sight of Peterborough at his heel , she scream a word equivalent to a clergyman . she have lose her discretion , but not her wit . 
 for any one save a lover thwart as I be , and perturb by the shadow fall on the princess my father 's Aplomb and promptness in conjure a check to what he assume to be a premeditated piece of villany on the part of Baroness Turckems , might have seem tolerably worthy of admiration . I the whole scene affect as if it have burn my skin . I loathe that picture of he , constantly present to I , of his shiver the glass of Ottilia 's semi - classical night - lamp , gravely ask her pardon , and stretch the flame to the curtain , with large eye blaze on the baroness . the stupid burlesque majesty of it be unendurable to thought . nevertheless , I have to thank he for shielding Ottilia , and I have to brood on the fact that I have draw she into a situation require such a shield . he , meanwhile , accord to his habit , be engage in review the triumph to come . ' we have win a princess ! ' and what England would say , how England would look , when , on a further journey , I bring my princess home , entirely occupy his imagination , to my excessive torture a state of mind for which it be impossible to ask his mercy . his sole link with the past appear to be this notion that he have plan all the good thing in store for we . consequently I be condemn to hear of the success of the plot , until for I have not the good of conscience I feel my hand would be spell - bind in the attempt to write to the princess ; and with that sense of incapacity I seem to be cut loose from she , drift back into the desolate day before I see she wheel in her invalid chair along the sand and my life know sunrise . 
 but whatever the mood of our affection , so it be with us island wanderer : we can not gaze over at England , know the old country to be close under the sea - line , and not hail it , and partly forget ourselves in the time that be . the smell of sea - air make I long for the white cliff , the sight of the white cliff revive pleasant thought of Riversley , and thought of Riversley thought of Janet , which be singularly and refreshingly free from self - accusation . some love for my home , similar to what one may have for Winter , come across I , and some appreciation of Janet as well , in whose society be sure to be at least myself , a creature much reduce in altitude , but without the cramp sensation of a man on a monument . my hearty Janet ! I thank she then for see I of my natural height . 
 some hour after part with my father in London , I lie down to sleep in my old home , feel as if I have throw off a coat of armour . I awake with a sailor 's song on my lip . look out of window at the well - know feature of the heath and dark fir , and wan oak copse , and the shadowy line of the down stretch their long whale back south to West , it strike I that I have be barely alive of late . indeed one who consent to live as I have do , in a hope and a retrospect , will find his life slip between the two , like the ship under the stride Colossus . I shake myself , brace myself , and salute every one at the breakfast table with the frankness of Harry Richmond . congratulate on my splendid spirit , I be confirm in the idea that I enjoy they , though I know of something hollow which send an echo through I at interval . Janet have become a fix inmate of the house . ' I have   buy she , and I shall keep she ; she be the apple of my eye , ' say the squire , add with characteristic scrupulousness , ' if apple 's female . ' I ask she whether she have hear from Temple latterly . ' no ; dear little fellow ! ' cry she , and I see in a twinkling what it be that the squire like in she , and like it too . I catch sight of myself , as through a rift of cloud , trot home from the hunt to a glad , frank , unpretending mate , with just enough of understanding to look up to mine . for a second or so it be pleasing , as a glance out of his library across hill and dale will be to a strained student . our familiarity sanction a comment on the growth of her daughter - of - the - regiment moustache , the faintest conceivable suggestion of a shadow on her soft upper lip , which a poet might have feign to have fall from her dark thick eyebrow . 
 ' why , you do not   mean to say , Hal , it be not to your taste ? ' say the squire . 
 ' no , ' say I , turn an eye on my aunt Dorothy , ' I have   love it all my life . ' 
 the squire star at I to make sure of this , mutter that it be to his mind a beauty , and that it be nothing more on Janet 's lip than down on a flower , bloom on a plum . the poetical comparison have the effect of cause I to examine she critically . she do not raise a spark of poetical sentiment in my bosom . she have grow a tall young woman , firmly build , light of motion , graceful perhaps ; but it be not the grace of grace : the grace of simplicity , rather . she talk vivaciously and frankly , and give   to friend   her whole eye and a fine animation in talk ; and her voice be a delight to friend ; there be always the full ring of Janet in it , and music also . she still lift her lip when she express contempt or dislike of person ; nor be she cure of her trick of frown . she be as ready as ever to be flatter ; that be evident . my grandfather 's praise of she she receive with a rewarding look back of kindness ; she be not discompose by flattery , and throw herself into no posture , nor blush very deeply . ' thank you for perceive my merit , ' she seem to say ; and to be just I should add that one could fancy her say , you see they because you love I . she wear her hair in a plain knot , peculiarly neatly round away from the temple , which sometimes give to a face not aquiline a look of swiftness . the face be mobile , various , not at all suggestive of bad temper , in spite of her frown . the profile of it be less assuring than the front , because of the dark eyebrow ' extension and the occasional frown , but that be not share by the mouth , which be , I admit to myself , a charming bow , run to a length at the corner like her eyebrow , quick with smile . the corner of the mouth would often be in movement , set dimple at work in her cheek , while the brow remain fix , and thus at time a tender meditative air be give she that I could not think her own . upon what could she possibly reflect ? she have not a care , she have no education , she could hardly boast an idea two at a time I be sure she never have entertain . the sort of wife for a fox - hunting lord , I sum up , and hop he would be a good fellow . 
 Peterborough be ply by the squire for a description of german woman . blush and shoot a timid look from under his pendulous eyelid at my aunt , indicate that he be prepared to go the way of tutor at Riversley , he say he really have not much observe they . 
 ' they be a whitey - brown sort of woman , be not   they ? ' the squire question he , ' with tow hair and fish eye , high o ' the shoulder , bony , and a towel skin and go tooth , so I have   hear tell . I have   hear that be why the man have all take to their beastly smoking . ' 
 Peterborough ejaculate : ' indeed ! sir , really ! ' he assure my aunt that german lady be most agreeable , cultivate person , extremely domesticate , retire ; the encomium of the roman historian be as well deserve by they in the present day as they have be in the past ; decidedly , on the whole , Peterborough would call they a virtuous race . 
 ' why do they let the man smoke , then ? ' say the squire . ' a pretty style o ' courtship . come , sit by my hearth , ma'am ; I will be your chimney faugh ! dirty rascal ! ' 
 Janet say : ' I rather like the smell of cigar . ' 
 ' like what you please , my dear he will be a lucky dog , ' the squire approve she promptly , and ask I if I smoke . 
 I be not a stranger to the act , I confess . 
 ' well ' he take refuge in practical philosophy ' a man must bring some dirt home from every journey : only do not   smoke I out , mercy 's sake . ' 
 here be a hint of Janet 's influence with he , and of what he expect from my return to Riversley . 
 Peterborough inform I that he suffer persecution over the last glass of Port in the evening , through the squire 's persistent inquiry as to whether a woman have anything to do with my staying so long abroad . ' a lady , sir ? ' quoth Peterborough . ' Lady , if you like , ' rejoin the squire . ' you parson and petticoat must always mince the meat to hash the fact . ' Peterborough defend his young friend Harry 's moral reputation , and be amazed to hear that the squire do not think highly of a man 's chastity . the squire acutely chagrin the sensitive gentleman by drawl the word after he , and declare that he toss that kind of thing into the woman 's wash - basket . Peterborough , not without sign of indignation , protest , the squire ask he point - blank if he suppose that Old England have be raise to the head of the world by such as he . in fine , he favour Peterborough with a lesson in worldly view . ' but these , ' Peterborough say to I , ' be not the view , dear Harry if they be the view of lady of any description , which I take leave to doubt not the view of the lady you and I would esteem . for instance , the lady of this household . ' my aunt Dorothy 's fate be plain . 
 in reply to my grandfather 's renew demand to know whether any one of those high - dutch woman have get hold of I , Peterborough say : ' Mr. Beltham , the only lady of whom it could be suspect that my friend Harry regard she with more than ordinary admiration be Hereditary - Princess of one of the ancient princely Houses of Germany . ' my grandfather thereupon say , ' oh ! ' push the wine , and be stop . 
 Peterborough chuckle over this ' oh ! ' and the stoppage of further question , while acknowledge that the luxury of a pipe would help to make he more charitable . he enjoy the Port of his native land , but he do , likewise , feel the want of one whiff or so of the less restrictive foreigner 's pipe ; and he beg I to note the curiosity of our worship of aristocracy and royalty ; and we , who be such slave to rank , and such tyrant in our own household , we Britons be the great stickler for freedom ! his conclusion be , that we be not logical . we would have a Throne , which we would not allow the liberty to do anything to make it worthy of rational veneration : we would have a peerage , of which we be so jealous that it form almost an assembly of automaton ; we would have virtuous woman , only for they to be pursue by immoral man . Peterborough fear , he must say , that we be an inconsequent people . his residence abroad have so far unhinge he ; but a pipe would have stop his complaining . 
 Moved , perhaps , by generous wine , in concert with his longing for tobacco , he drop an observation of unwonted shrewdness ; he say : ' the squire , my dear Harry , a most honourable and straightforward country gentleman , and one of our very wealthy , be still , I would venture to suggest , an example of old blood that require I study race vary , modifying , one might venture to say , correct ; and really , a friend with more privilege than I possess , would or should throw he a hint that no harm have be do to the family by an intermixture ... old blood do occasionally need it you know I study blood it become too coarse , or , in some case , too fine . the study of the mixture of blood be probably one of our great physical problem . ' 
 Peterborough commend I to gratitude for the imaginative and chivalrous element bestow on I by a father that be other than a country squire ; one who could be tolerant of innocent habit , and not of guilty one a further glance at the interdicted pipe . I leave he almost whimper for it . 
 the contemplation of the curious littleness of the life of man and woman live in this England of our , make I feel as if I look at they out of a palace balcony - window ; for no one appear to hope very much or to fear ; people trot in their different kind of harness ; and I be amuse to think of my heart go regularly in imitation of those about I . I be in a princely state of mind indeed , not disinclined for a time to follow the general course of life , while despise it . an existence without colour , without anxious throbbing , without salient matter for thought , challenge contempt . but it be exceedingly funny . my aunt Dorothy , the squire , and Janet submit to my transparent inward laughter at they , patiently wait for I to share their contentment , in the deluded belief that the hour would come . the principal item of news embrace the death of Squire Gregory Bulsted , the marriage of this and that young lady , a legal contention between my grandfather and Lady Maria Higginson , the wife of a rich manufacturer newly locate among we , on account of a right of encampment on Durstan heath , my grandfather take side with the gipsy , and beat her ladyship a friend of Heriot 's , by the way . concern Heriot , my aunt Dorothy be in trouble . she could not , she say , approve his behaviour in come to this neighbourhood at all , and she hint that I might induce he to keep away . I mention Julia Bulsted 's be in mourning , merely to bring in her name tentatively . 
 ' ay , mourning 's her outer rig , never doubt , ' say the squire . ' flick your whip at she , she be a charitable soul , Judy Bulsted ! she knit stocking for the poor . she would down and kiss the stump of a sailor on a stick o ' timber . all the same , she ought not   to be alone . pity she have not   a baby . you and I will talk it over by - and - by , Harry . ' 
 Kiomi be speak of , and Lady Maria Higginson , and then Heriot . 
 ' M - m - m - m rascal ! ' hum the squire . ' there be three , and that be not enough for he . six month back a man come over from Surreywards , a farm he call Dipwell , and ask after you , Harry ; rigmarole about a handsome lass go off ... some scoundrel ! you and I will talk it over by - and - by , Harry . ' 
 Janet raise and let fall her eyebrow . the fiction , that so much have be say , an immediate show of reserve on such topic preserve she in ignorance of they , be one she subscribe to merely to humour the squire . I be half in doubt whether I dislike or admire her want of decent hypocrisy . she allow he to suppose that she do not hear , but speak as a party to the conversation . my aunt Dorothy blame Julia . the squire thunder at Heriot ; Janet , like both , content herself with impartial comment . 
 ' I always think in these case that the woman must be the fool , ' she say . her affectation be to assume a knowledge of the world and all thing in it . we ride over to Julia 's cottage , on the outskirt of the estate now devolve upon her husband . irish eye be certainly bewitch light . I think , for my part , I could not do as the captain be do , serve his country in foreign part , while such as these be shin without a captain at home . Janet approve his conduct , and be right . ' what can a wife think the man worth who sit down to guard his house - door ? ' she answer my slight innuendo . she compare the man to a kennel - dog . ' this , ' say I , ' come of make - up match , ' whereat she be silent . 
 Julia take her own view of her position . she ask I whether it be not dismal for one who be call a grass widow , and be in reality a salt - water one , to keep fresh , with a lapdog , a cook , and a maid - servant , and a postman that pass the gate twenty time for twice that he open it , and nothing to look for but this disappointing creature day after day ! at first she be shy , steal out a coy line of finger to be shake , and lisp ; and out of that mood come right - about - face , with an exclamation of regret that she suppose she must not kiss I now . I project , she draw back . ' shall Janet go ? ' say I. ' then if nobody be present I will be talk of , ' say she , moan queerly . the tendency of her hair to creep loose of its band give she handsome face an aspect deliriously wild . I compliment she on her keeping so fresh , in spite of her salt - water widowhood . she turn the table on I for look so powerful , though I be die for a foreign princess . 
 ' oh ! but that will blow over , ' she say ; ' anything blow over as long as you do not   go up to the altar ' ; and she eye her ringed finger , woebegone , and flash the pleasantest of smile with the name of her William . Heriot , whom she always call Walter Heriot , be , she inform I , stay at Durstan Hall , the new great house , build on a plot of ground that the Lancashire millionaire have catch up , while the squire and the other landowner of the neighbourhood be sleep . ' and if you get Walter Heriot to come to you , Harry Richmond , it will be well for he , I be sure , ' she add , and naively : 
 ' I would like to meet he up at the Grange . ' Temple , she say , have leave the Navy and be read in London for the Bar good news to I . 
 ' you have not tell we anything about your princess , Harry , ' Janet observe on the ride home . 
 ' do you take she for a real person , Janet ? ' 
 ' one think of she as a snow - mountain you have   be admire . ' 
 ' very well ; so let she be . ' 
 ' be she kind and good ? ' 
 ' yes . ' 
 ' do she ride well ? ' 
 ' she rid remarkably well . ' 
 ' she be fair , I suppose ? ' 
 ' janet , if I see you married to Temple , it would be the second great wish of my heart . ' 
 ' Harry , you be a bit too cruel , as Julia would say . ' 
 ' have you notice she get more and more irish ? ' 
 ' perhaps she find it be like . some woman can adapt themselves ... they be the happy . all I mean to ask you be , whether your princess be like the rest of we ? ' 
 ' not at all , ' say I , unconscious of hurt . 
 ' never mind . do not   be hard on Julia . she have the making of a good woman a girl can see that ; only she can not   bear loneliness , and do not   understand yet what it be to be love by a true gentleman . person of that class can not   learn it all at once . ' 
 I be pain to see she in tear . her figure be straight , and she speak without a quaver of her voice . 
 ' Heriot 's an excellent fellow , ' I remark . 
 ' he be . I can not   think ill of my friend , ' say she . 
 ' dear girl , be it these two who make you unhappy ? ' 
 ' no ; but dear old grandada ! ... ' 
 the course of her mind be obvious . I would rather have have she less abrupt and more personal in reveal it . I stammer something . 
 ' Heriot do not know you as I do , ' she say , strangle a whimper . ' I be sure it be serious , though one 's accustomed to associate princess with young man 's dream . I fear , Harry , it will half break our dear old grandada 's heart . he be rough , and you have often be against he , for one unfortunate reason . if you know he as I do you would pity he sincerely . he hardly grumble at all at your terribly long absence . poor old man ! he hop on . ' 
 ' he be incurably unjust to my father . ' 
 ' your father have be with you all the time , Harry ? I guess it . ' 
 ' well ? ' 
 ' it generally bode no good to the Grange . do pardon I for say that . I know nothing of he ; I know only that the squire be generous , and that I stand for with all my might . forgive I for what I say . ' 
 ' forgive you with all my heart . I like you all the well . you be a brave partisan . I do not   expect woman to be philosopher . ' 
 ' well , Harry , I would take your side as firmly as anybody 's . ' 
 ' do , then ; tell the squire how I be situate . ' 
 ' ah ! ' she half sigh , ' I know this be come . ' 
 ' how could it other than come ? you can do what you like with the squire . I be dependent on he , and I be betroth to the Princess Ottilia . God know how much she have to trample down on her part . she cast off to speak plainly , she put herself out of the line of succession , and for whom ? for I . in her father 's lifetime she will hardly yield I her hand ; but I must immediately be in a position to offer mine . she may : who can tell ? she be above all woman in power and firmness . you talk of generosity ; could there be a high example of it ? ' 
 ' I daresay ; I know nothing of princess , ' Janet murmur . ' I do not   quite comprehend what she have do . the point be , what be I to do ? ' 
 ' prepare he for it . soothe he in advance . why , dear Janet , you can reconcile he to anything in a minute . ' 
 ' lie to he downright ? ' 
 ' now what on earth be the meaning of that , and why can not   you speak mildly ? ' 
 ' I suppose I speak as I feel . I be a plain speaker , a plain person . you do not   give I an easy task , friend Harry . ' 
 ' if you believe in his generosity , Janet , should you be afraid to put it to proof ? ' 
 ' Grandada 's generosity , Harry ? I do believe in it as I believe in my own life . it happen to be the very thing I must keep myself from rouse in he , to be of any service to you . look at the old house ! ' she change her tone . ' look on old Riversley with the eye of my head even , I think I be look at something far away in the memory . perhaps the deep red brick cause it . there never be a house with so many beautiful creeper . bright as they be , you notice the rose on the wall . there be a face for I forever from every window ; and good - bye , Riversley ! Harry , I will obey your wish . ' 
 so say , she head I , trot down the heath - track . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII . JANET RENOUNCES ME 

 an illness of old Sewis , the butler , amazingly resemble a sick monkey in his bed , keep I from pay a visit to Temple and see my father for several week , during which time Janet loyally accustom the squire to hear of the german princess , and she do it with a decent and agreeable cheerfulness that I quite approve of . I should have be enrage at a martyr - like appearance on her part , for I demand a sprightly devotion to my interest , consider love so holy a thing , that where it exist , all surround person be bind to do it homage and service . we be throw together a great deal in attend on poor old Sewis , who would lie on his pillow recount for hour my father 's midnight summon of the inhabitant of Riversley , and his little Harry 's infant expedition into the world . Temple and Heriot come to stay at the Grange , and assist in some rough scene - paint torrid colour represent the island of Jamaica . we hang it at the foot of old Sewis 's bed . he awake and contemplate it , and go downstairs the same day , cure , he declare : the fact be that the unfortunate picture testify too strongly to the reversal of all he be use to in life , in have those he serve to wait on he . the squire celebrate his recovery by give a servant ' ball . Sewis dance with the handsome lass , swing she to supper , and deliver an extraordinary speech , entirely concern I , and rather to my discomposure , particularly so when it be my fate to hear that the old man have make I the heir of his saving . such be his announcement , in a very excited voice , but incidentally upon a solemn adjuration to the squire to beware of his temper govern his temper and not be a turncoat . 
 we be present at the head of the supper - table to hear our health drunk . Sewis speak like a half - caste oblivious of his training , and of the subject he be at liberty to touch on as well . evidently there be a weight of forebode on his mind . he know his master well . the squire excuse he under the ejaculation , ' Drunk , by the Lord ! ' Sewis go so far as to mention my father ' he no disgrace , sar , he no disgrace , I say ! but he pull one way , old house pull other way , and ' tween them my little Harry tear apiece , squire . he set out in the night " you not enter it any more ! " very well . I go my lawyer next day . you see my will , squire . year ago , and little Harry so high . Old Sewis not the man to change . he no turncoat , squire . God bless you , my master ; you recollect , and lady tell you if you forget , old Sewis no turncoat . you hate turncoat . you teach old Sewis , and God bless you , and Mr. Harry , and British Constitution , all amen ! ' 
 with that he bound to bed . he be dead next morning . 
 the squire be humorous over my legacy . it amount to about seventeen hundred pound invest in Government Stock , and he ask I what I mean to do with it ; propose a Charity to be establish on behalf of decay half - caste , insist that servant ' money could never be appropriate to the us of gentleman . all the while he be mutter , ' Turncoat ! eh ? turncoat ? ' proof that the word have strike where it be aim . for I , after think on it , I have a superstitious respect for the legacy , so I determine , in spite of the squire 's laughter over ' sixty pound per annum ! ' to let it rest in my name : I see for the first time the possibility that I might not have my grandfather 's wealth to depend upon . he warn I of grow miserly . with my father in London , live freely on my property , I have not much fear of that . however , I say discreetly , ' I do not   mind spend when I see my way . ' 
 ' oh ! see your way , ' say he . ' well a niggard than a chuckfist . only , there be my girl : she be good at account . one will do for they , Harry ? ha'n't   be long enough at home yet ? ' 
 few be the occasion when our conversation do not diverge to this sort of interrogation . Temple and Heriot , with whom I take counsel , advise I to wait until the idea of the princess have wear its way into his understanding , and leave the work to Janet . ' though , ' say Heriot to I aside , ' upon my soul , it be slaughter . ' he believe that Janet feel keenly . but then , she admire he , and so they repay one another . 
 I win my grandfather 's confidence in practical matter on a trip we take into Wales . but it be not enough for I to be a man of business , he affirm ; he want I to have some ambition ; why not stand for our county at the next general election ? he offer I his Welsh borough if I think fit to decline a contest . this be to speak as mightily as a german prince . virtually , in wealth and power , he be a prince ; but of how queer a kind ! he be immensely gratify by my refraining to look out for my father on our return journey through London , and remark , that I have not see he for some time , he suppose . to which I say , no , I have not , he advise I to let the fellow run his length . suggest that he hold it likely I contribute to ' the fellow 's ' support : he say generously , ' keep clear of he , Hal : I add you a thousand a year to your allowance , ' and damn I for be so thoughtful over it . I find myself shudder at a breath of anger from he . could he not with a word dash my hope for ever ? the warning I have take from old Sewis transform I to something like a hypocrite , and I dare say I give the squire to understand , that I have not see my father for a very long period and know nothing of his recent doing . 
 ' be infernally quiet these last two or three year , ' the squire mutter of the object of his aversion . ' I hear of a City widow last , sick as a Dover packet - boat 'bout the fellow ! well , the woman be ninny , but you be a man , Harry ; you be not to be take in any long , eh ? ' 
 I reply that I know my father well now , and be ask how the deuce I know he well ; it be the world I know well after my stay on the continent . 
 I contain myself enough to say , ' very well , the world , sir . ' 
 ' flirt with one of their princess ? ' he wink . 
 ' on that subject I will talk to you some other time , ' say I. 
 ' got to pay an indemnity ? or what ? ' he profess alarm , and push for explanation , with the air of a man of business ready to help I if need be . ' make a clean breast of it , Harry . you be not the son of Tom Fool the Bastard for nothing , I will swear . all the same you be Beltham ; you be my grandson and heir , and I will stand by you . out with ' t ! she be a princess , be she ? ' 
 the necessity for correct his impression teach I to think the moment favourable . I say , ' I be engaged to she , sir . ' 
 he return promptly : ' then you will break it off . ' 
 I shake my head . 
 ' why , you can not   jilt my girl at home ! ' say he . 
 ' do you find a princess objectionable , sir ? ' 
 ' objectionable ? she be a foreigner . I do not   know she . I never see she . here be my Janet I have   bring up for you , under my own eye , out of the way of every damned soft - sawderer , safe and plump as a melon under a glass , and you fight shy of she , and go and engage yourself to a foreigner I do not   know and never see ! by George , Harry , I will call in a parson to settle you soon as ever we sight Riversley . I will couple you , by George , I will ! ' fore either of you know whether you be on your leg or your back . ' 
 we be in the street of London , so he be oblige to moderate his vehemence . 
 ' have you consult Janet ? ' say I. 
 ' consult she ? ever since she be a chick with half a feather on . ' 
 ' a chick with half a feather on , ' I remark , ' be not always of the same mind as a piece of poultry of full plumage . ' 
 ' hang your sneering and your talk of a fine girl , like my Janet , as a piece of poultry , you young rooster ! you toss your head up like a cock too conceited to crow . I will swear the girl be in love with you . she do you the honour to be fond of you . she be one in a million . a handsome girl , straight - back , honest , just a dash , and not too much , of our blood in she . ' 
 ' consult she again , sir , ' I break in . ' you will discover she be not of your way of thinking . ' 
 ' do you mean to say she be give you a left - hander , Harry ? ' 
 ' I have only to say that I have not give she the option . ' 
 he groan go up the step of his hotel , face I once or twice , and almost gain my sympathy by observe , ' when we be boy , the old one worry we ; when we be old one , the boy begin to tug ! ' he rarely speak so humanely , rarely , at least , to I . 
 for a wonder , he let the matter drop : possibly because he find I temperate . I try the system on he with good effect during our stay in London ; that be , I take upon myself to be always cool , always courteous , deliberate in my reply , and not uncordial , though I be for represent the reserved young man . I obtain some praise for my style and bear among his acquaintance . to one lady pass an encomium on I , he say , ' oh , some foreign princess have be train he , ' which seem to I of good augury . 
 my friend Temple and Heriot be among the Riversley guest at Christmas . we ride over to John Thresher 's , of whom we hear that the pretty Mabel Sweetwinter have disappear , and understand that suspicion have fall upon one of us gentleman . Bob , her brother , have go the way of the brave english fellow of his class - to America . we call on the miller , a sour old man . Bob 's evasion affect he more than Mabel 's , Martha Thresher say , in derision of our sex . I be pain to hear from she that Bob suppose I the misleader of his sister ; and that he have , as she believe , leave England , to avoid the misery of ever meet I again , because he like I so much . she have be see walk down the lane with some one resemble I in figure . Heriot take the miller 's view , count the loss of one stout young Englishman to his country of far great importance than the escapade of dozen of girl , for which simple creature he have no compassion : he hold the expression of it a sham . he have grow coxcombical . without talk of his conquest , he talk largely of the lady who be possibly in the situation of victim to his grace of person , though he do not do so with any unctuous boasting . on the contrary , there be a rather take undertone of regret that his enfeeble over - fat country would give her military son no worthy occupation . he laugh at the mention of Julia Bulsted 's name . ' she prove , Richie , marriage be the good of all receipt for woman , just as it be the bad for man . Poor Billy bulste , for instance , a first - rate seaman , and his heart 's only half in his profession since he and Julia swear their oath ; and no wonder , he make something his own that will not   go under lock and key . no military or naval man ought ever to marry . ' 
 ' stop , ' say Temple , ' be the poor old country how about continue the race of hero ? ' 
 Heriot commend he to rectory , vicarage , and curate ' lodging for breeding ground , and come round to Julia relate one of the racy dialogue of her married life . ' the saltwater widow 's delicious . Billy rush home from his ship in a hurry . what be this Greg write I ? that he be get a friend of his to drink with he , d ' ye mean , William ? a friend of your , ma'am . and will you say a friend of mine be not a friend of your , William ? Julia , you be drive I mad ! and be that far from crazy , where you say I drive you at first sight of I , William ? back to his ship go Billy with a song of love and constancy . ' 
 I say nothing of my chagrin at the behaviour of the pair who have furnish my first idea of the romantic beauty of love . 
 ' why do she talk twice as irish as she use to , Heriot ? ' 
 ' just to coax the world to let she be as nonsensical as she like . she be awfully dull ; she have only her nonsense to amuse she . I repeat : soldier and sailor ought not   to marry . I be her good friend . I be , on my honour : for I ' m go to make Billy give up the service , since he can not   give she up . there she be ! ' he cry out , and wave his hat to a lady on horseback some way down the slope of a road lead to the view of our heathland : 
 ' there be the only girl live fit to marry a man and swear she will stick to he through life and death . ' 
 he start at a gallop . Temple would have go too at any possible speed , for he know as well as I do that Janet be the girl alone capable of win a respectful word from Heriot ; but I detain he to talk of Ottilia and my dismal prospect of persuade the squire to consent to my proposal for she , and to dower she in a manner worthy a princess . he dole out his yes and no to I vacantly . Janet and Heriot come at a walk pace to meet we , he question she , she replying , but a little differently from her usual habit of turn her full face to the speaker . he be evidently startle , and , to judge from his posture , repeat his question , as one would say , ' you do this ? ' she nod , and then utter some rapid word , glance at he , laugh shyly , and sink her feature into repose as we draw near . she have a deep blush on her face . I think it might be , that Janet and her loud champion have come to particular term , a supposition that touch I with regret for Temple 's sake . but Heriot be not look pleased . it happen that whatever Janet utter strike a chord of opposition in I . she like the Winter and the Winter sunset , have hope of a frost for skating , like our climate , think our way of keep Christmas venerable , rejoice in dispense the squire 's bounty call they bounty , join Heriot in abuse foreign country to the exaltation of her own : all this with ' well , Harry , I be sorry you do not   think as we do . and we do , do not   we ? ' she address he . 
 ' I reserve a point , ' he say , and not playfully . 
 she appear distressed , and court a change of expression in his feature , and I have to confess that never have see her gaze upon any one save myself in that fashion , which be with her very winning , especially where some of her contralto tone of remonstrance or entreaty aid it , I feel as a man do at a neighbour 's shadow cast over his right of property . 
 Heriot drop to the rear : I be glad to leave she with Temple , and glad to see they canter ahead together on the sand of tie heath . 
 ' she have do it , ' Heriot burst out abruptly . ' she have do it ! ' he say again . ' upon my soul , I never wish in my life before that I be a marry man : I might have a chance of end worth something . she have win the squire round with a thunder fib , and you be to have the german if you can get she . do not   be in a hurry . the squire will speak to you to - night : but think over it . will you ? think what a girl this be . I believe on my honour no man ever have such an offer of a true woman . come , do not   think it be Heriot speak I have   always like she , of course . but I have always respect she , and that be not of course . depend upon it , a woman who can be a friend of man be the right sort of woman to make a match with . do you suppose she could not   have a dozen fellow round she at the lift of her finger ? the pick of the land ! I would trust she with an army . I tell you , Janet Ilchester be the only girl alive who will double the man she marry . I do not   know another who would not   make the name of wife laugh the poor devil out of house and company . she be firm as a rock ; and sweet as a flower on it ! will that touch you ? Bah ! Richie , let us talk like man . I feel for she because she be fond of you , and I know what it be when a girl like that set her heart on a fellow . there , ' he conclude , ' I would ask you to go down on your knee and pray before you decide against she ! ' 
 Heriot succeed in raise a certain dull indistinct image in my mind of a well - mean girl , to whom I be bind to feel thankful , and feel so . I thank Heriot , too , for his friendly intention . he have never see the Princess Ottilia . and at night I thank my grandfather . he bear himself , on the whole , like the good and kindly old gentleman Janet love to consider he . he would not stand in my light , he say , recur to that sheet - anchor of a tolerant sentence whenever his forehead begin to gather cloud . he regret that Janet be no well than her sex in her preference for rake , and wish I to the deuce for bring Heriot into the house , and not know when I be lucky . ' german grandchild , eh ! ' he mutter . no Beltham have ever marry a foreigner . what be the time fix between we for the marriage ? he want to see his line safe before he die . ' how do I know this foreign woman'll bear ? ' he ask , expect an answer . his hand be on the back of a chair , grasp and rock it ; his eye bent stormily on the carpet ; they be set blink rapidly after a glance at I . altogether his self - command be creditable to Janet 's tuition . 
 Janet meet I next day , say with some insolence   so it strike I from her liveliness : ' well , it be all right , Harry ? now you will be happy , I hope . I do not shine in my reply . her amiable part appear to be to let I see how brilliant and gracious the commonplace could be make to look . she keep Heriot at the Grange , against the squire 's remonstrance and her mother 's . ' it be to keep he out of harm 's way : the woman he know be not of the good kind for he , ' she say , with astounding fatuity . he submit , and seem to like it . she must be teach Temple to skate figure in the frost , with a great display of good - humour patience , and her voice at musical pitch . but her principal affectation be to talk on matter of business with Mr. Burgin and Mr. Trewint , the squire 's lawyer and bailiff , on mine and interest , on money and economical question ; not shrink from politic either , until the squire cry out to the male assist in the performance , ' Gad , she be a head as good as our half - dozen put together , ' and they servilely join their fragmentary capital in agreement . she go so far as to retain Peterborough to teach she Latin . he be idle in the expectation of a living in the squire 's gift . 
 the annoyance for I be that I could not detach myself from a contemplation of these various scene , by revert to my life in Germany . the preposterous closing of my interview with Ottilia block the way , and I be unable to write to her unable to address she even in imagination , without pang of shame at the review of the petty conspiracy I have sanction to entrap she to plight her hand to I , and without perpetually multiply excuse for my conduct . so to escape they I be reduce to study Janet , form one of her satellite . she could say to I impudently , with all the air of a friendly comrade , ' have your letter from Germany yet , Harry ? ' she fly she be always on the chase . I see her permit Heriot to kiss her hand , and then the squire appear , and Heriot and she burst into laughter , and the squire , with a puzzled face , would have the game explain to he , but understand not a bit of it , only growl at I ; upon which Janet become serious and chid he . I be tell by my aunt Dorothy to admire this behaviour of her . one day she certainly do I a service : a paragraph in one of the newspaper speak of my father , not flatteringly : ' Richmond be in the field again , ' it commence . the squire be wait for she to hand the paper to he . none of we could comprehend why she play he off and deny he his right to the first perusal of the news ; she be voluble , almost witty , full of sprightly Roxalana petulance . 
 ' this paper , ' she say , ' deserve to be burn , ' and she be allow to burn it money article , mining column as well on the pretext of an infamous anti - tory leader , of which she herself compose the first sentence to shock the squire completely . I have sight of that paper some time afterwards . Richmond be in the field again , it state , with mock flourish . but that be not the bad . my grandfather 's name be down there , and mine , and Princess Ottilia 's . my father 's connection with the court of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld be allude to as the late , and next to his win the heiress of Riversley , the most successful of his venture , inasmuch as his son , if rumour be to be trust , have obtain the promise of the hand of the princess . the paragraph be an excerpt from a gossip weekly journal , perhaps less malevolent than I think it . there be some fun to be get out of a man who , the journal in question be inform , have join the arm of England and a petty german principality stamp on his plate and furniture . 
 my gratitude to Janet be fervent enough when I see what she have save I from . I press her hand and hold it . I talk stupidly , but I make my cruel position intelligible to she , and she have the delicacy , on this occasion , to keep her sentiment regard my father unuttere . we sit hardly less than an hour side by side I know not how long hand in hand . the end be an extraordinary trembling in the limb abandon to I . it seize her frame . I would have detain she , but it be plain she suffer both in her heart and her pride . her voice be under fair command - more than mine be . she counsel I to go to London , at once . ' I would be off to London if I be you , Harry , ' for the purpose of check my father 's extravagance , would have be the further wording , which she spar I ; and I thank she , wish , at the same time , that she would get the habit of use choicer phrase whenever there might , by chance , be a stress of emotion between we . her trembling , and she ' I would be off , ' come into unpleasant collision in the recollection . 
 I acknowledge to myself that she be a true and hearty friend . she listen with interest to my discourse on the necessity of my be in Parliament before I could venture to propose formally for the hand of the princess , and undertake to bear the burden of all consequent negotiation with my grandfather . if she would but have allow I to speak of Temple , instead of say , ' do not , Harry , I like he so much ! ' at the very mention of his name , I should have sincerely feel my indebtedness to she , and some admiration of her fine spirit and figure besides . I could not even agree with my aunt Dorothy that Janet be handsome . when I have to grant she a pardon I appreciate she well . 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII . MY banker ' BOOK 

 the squire again do honour to Janet 's eulogy and good management of he . 
 ' and where , ' say she , ' would you find a Radical to behave so generously , Harry , when it touch he so ? ' 
 he accord I his permission to select my side in politic , merely insist that I be never to change it , and this he request I to swear to , for   he call the ghost of old Sewis to witness   he abhor a turncoat . 
 ' if you be to be a Whig , or a sneaking half - and - half , I can not   help you much , ' he remark . ' I can pop a young Tory in for my borough , maybe ; but I can not   insult a number of independent Englishmen by ask they to vote for the opposite crew ; that be reasonable , eh ? and I can not   promise you plumper for the county neither . you can date your Address from Riversley . you will have your house in town . tell I this princess of yours be ready with her hand , and , ' he throw in roughly , ' be a respectable young woman , I will commence building . you will have a house fit for a prince in town and country , both . ' 
 Temple have produce an effect on he by inform he that ' this princess of mine ' be entitle to be consider a fit and proper person , in rank and blood , for an alliance with the proud royal Houses of Europe , and my grandfather be not quite destitute of consolation in the prospect I present to he . he be a curious study to I , of the Tory mind , in its attachment to solidity , fixity , certainty , its unmatched generosity within a limit , its devotion to the family , and its family eye for the country . an immediate introduction to Ottilia would have win he to enjoy the idea of his grandson 's marriage ; but not have see she , he could not realize her dignity , nor even the womanliness of a ' foreign woman . ' 
 ' thank God for one thing , ' he say : ' we shall not   have that fellow bother shall not   have the other half of your family mess the business . you will have to account for he to your wife as you good can . I ' ve   nothing to do with he , mind that . he come to my house , steal my daughter , craze her wit , drag we all ... ' 
 the excuse to turn away from the hearing of abuse of my father be too good to be neglect , though it be horribly humiliating that I should have to take advantage of it vexatious that I should seem chargeable with tacit lie in allow the squire to suppose the man he hat to be a stranger to the princess . not feel sure whether it might be common prudence to delude he even passively , I think of ask Janet for her opinion , but refrain . a stout deceiver have his merit , but a feeble hypocrite apply to friend to fortify he in his shift and tergiversation must provoke contempt . I desire that Janet might continue to think well of I . I be begin to drop in my own esteem , which be the mirror of my conception of Ottilia 's view of her lover . 
 now , have I consult Janet , I believe the course of my history would have be different , for she would not then , I may imagine , have be guilty of her fatal slip of the tongue that throw we into heavy sea when we think ourselves float on canal water . a canal barge   an image to I of the most perfect attainable peace , suddenly , on its passage through our long fir - wood , with their scented reed and flow rush , wild balsam and silky cotton - grass bed , sluice out to sea and storm , would be somewhat in my likeness soon after a single luckless observation have pass at our Riversley breakfast - table one Sunday morning . 
 my aunt Dorothy and Mr. Peterborough be converse upon the variety of christian sect , and particularly such as approach near to Anglicanism , together with the strange , sadden fact that the christian religion appear to be more divided than , Peterborough regret to say , the form of idolatry establish by the Buddha , Mahomet , and other impostor . he claim the audacious merit for we , that we do not discard the reason of man we admit man 's finite reason to our school of faith , and it be find refractory . hence our many division . 
 ' the Roman Catholics admit reason ? ' say Janet , who have too strong a turn for show her keenness in little encounter with Peterborough . 
 ' no , ' say he ; ' the Protestants . ' and , anxious to elude she , he press on to enchain my aunt Dorothy 's attention . Janet plague he meanwhile ; and I help she . we run he and his schoolboy , the finite refractory , up and down , until Peterborough be glad to abandon he , and Janet say , ' do you preach to the Germans much ? ' he have officiate in Prince Ernest 's private chapel : not , he add in his egregious modesty , not that he personally wish to officiate . 
 ' it be Harry 's wish ? ' Janet say , smile . 
 ' my post of tutor , ' Peterborough hasten to explain , ' be almost entirely supernumerary . the circumstance be so , I the more readily acquiesced in the title of private chaplain , prepare to fulfil such duty as devolve upon I in that capacity , and acting thereon I proffer my occasional service . Lutheranism and Anglicanism be not , doubtless you be aware , divide on the broad basis . we be common protestant . the Papacy , I can assure you , find as little favour with one as with the other . yes , I hold forth , as you would say , from time to time . my assumption of the title of private chaplain , it be think , improve the family dignity that be , on our side . ' 
 ' thought by Harry ? ' say Janet ; and my aunt Dorothy say , ' you and Harry have a consultation about it ? ' 
 ' want to appear as grand as they could , ' quoth the squire . 
 Peterborough signify an assent , design to modify the implication . ' not beyond due bound , I trust , sir . ' 
 ' oh ! now I understand , ' Janet break out in the falsetto note of a puzzle solve in the mind . ' it be his father ! Harry proclaim his private chaplain ! ' 
 ' Mr. Harry 's father do first suggest ' say Peterborough , but her quickly - altered feature cause he to draw in his breath , as she have do after one short laugh . 
 my grandfather turn a round side - eye on I , hard as a cock 's . 
 Janet immediately start topic to fill Peterborough 's mouth : the weather , the walk to church , the probable preacher . ' and , grandada , ' say she to the squire , who be mutter ominously with a grim under - jaw , ' his private chaplain ! ' and for this once would not hear she , ' Grandada , I shall drive you over to see papa this afternoon . ' she talk as if nothing have go wrong . Peterborough , criminal red , attack a jam - pot for a diversion . ' such sweet be rare indeed on the continent , ' he observe to my aunt Dorothy . ' our homemade dainty be matchless . ' 
 ' private chaplain ! ' the squire growl again . 
 ' it be you that preach this afternoon , ' Janet say to Peterborough . ' do you give we an extempore sermon ? ' 
 ' you remind I , Miss Ilchester , I must look to it ; I have a little trimming to do . ' 
 Peterborough think he might escape , but the squire arrest he . ' you will give I five minute before you be out of the house , please . D ' ye smoke on Sundays ? ' 
 ' not on Sundays , sir , ' say Peterborough , openly and cordially , as to signify that they be of one mind regard the perniciousness of Sunday smoking . 
 ' see you do not   set fire to my rick with your foreign chaplain 's trick . I spy you puff behind one t ' other day . there , ' the squire disperse Peterborough 's unnecessary air of abstruse recollection , ' do not   look as though you be try to hit on a pin 's head in a bushel of oats . do not   set my rick on fire that be all . ' 
 ' Mr. Peterborough , ' my aunt Dorothy interpose her voice to soften this rough treatment of he with the offer of some hot - house flower for his sitting - room . 
 ' oh , I thank you ! ' I hear the garlanded victim lowing as I leave he to the squire 's mercy . 
 Janet follow I out . ' it be my fault , Harry . you will not   blame he , I know . but will he fib ? I do not   think he be capable of it , and I be sure he can not   run and double . Grandada will have he fast before a minute be over . ' 
 I tell she to lose no time in go and extract the squire 's promise that Peterborough should have his living , so much it seem possible to save . 
 she fly back , and in Peterborough 's momentary absence , do her work . nothing could save the unhappy gentleman from a distracting scene and much archaic English . the squire 's power of vituperation be notorious : he could be more than a match for roadside navvy and predatory tramp in cogency of epithet . Peterborough come to I drench , and wail that he have never hear such language , never dream of it . and to find himself the object of it ! and , bad , to be unable to conscientiously defend himself ! the pain to he be in the conscience , which be , like the spleen , a function whose us be only to be understand in its derangement . he have ease his conscience to every question right out , and he rejoice to I at the immense relief it give he . conscientiously , he could not deny that he know the squire 's objection to my being in my father 's society ; and he have connive at it ' for reason , my dear Harry , I can justify to God and man , but not I have to confess as much not , I grieve to say , to your grandfather . I attempt to do justice to the amiable quality of the absent . in a moment I be assail with epithet that ... and not a word be to be get in when he be so violent . one have to make up one 's mind to act Andromeda , and let he be the sea - monster , as somebody have say ; I forget the exact origin of the remark . ' 
 the squire certainly have a whole ocean at command . I string myself to pass through the same performance . to my astonishment I go unchallenged . Janet vehemently assert that she have mollify the angry old man , who , however , be dark of visage , though his tongue keep silence . he be gruff over his wine - glass the blandishment of his favourite do not brighten he . from his point of view he have be treat vilely , and he be apparently inclined to nurse his rancour and keep my fortune tremble in the balance . under these circumstance it be impossible for I to despatch a letter to Ottilia , though I find that I could write one now , and I sit in my room write all day , most eloquent stuff it be . the shadow of misfortune restore the sense of my heroical situation , which my father have extinguish , and this unlock the power of speech . I write so admirably that my wretchedness could enjoy the fine millinery I decorate it in . then to tear the noble composition to piece be a bitter gratification . Ottilia 's station repel and attract I mysteriously . I could not separate she from it , nor keep my love of she from the contention into which it throw I . in vain I rave , ' what be rank ? ' there be a magnet in it that could at least set I quiver and twisting , behave like a man spellbound , as madly as any hero of the ballad under a wizard 's charm . 
 at last the squire relieve we . he fix that side - cast cock 's eye of his on I , and say , ' where be your banker ' book , sir ? ' 
 I presume that it be with my banker , but do not suggest the possibility that my father might have it in his custody ; for he have a cheque - book of his own , and regulate our account . why not ? I think , and flush somewhat defiantly . the money be mine . 
 ' any objection to my seeing that book ? ' say the squire . 
 ' none whatever , sir . ' 
 he nod . I make it a point of honour to write for the book to be send down to I immediately . 
 the book arrive , and the squire hand it to I to break the cover , insist , ' you be sure you would not   rather not have I look at it ? ' 
 ' quite , ' I reply . the question of money be to I perfectly unimportant . I do not see a glimpse of danger in his peruse the list of my expense . 
 " cause I give you my word I know nothing about it now , ' he say . 
 I compliment he on his frank method of deal , and tell he to look at the book if he please , but with prudence sufficiently awake to check the declaration that I have not once look at it myself . 
 he open it . we have just assemble in the hall , where breakfast be lay during Winter , before a huge wood fire . Janet have her tooth on her low lip , watch the old man 's face . I do not condescend to be curious ; but when I turn my head to he he be puff through thin lip , and then his mouth crumple in a knob . he have see sight . 
 ' by George , I must have breakfast ' fore I go into this ! ' he exclaim , and star as if he have come out of an oven . 
 Dorothy Beltham remind he that Prayers have not be read . 
 ' Prayers ! ' he be about to objurgate , but affirmative her motion to ring the bell for the servant , and address Peterborough : ' you read them abroad every morning ? ' 
 Peterborough 's conscience start off on its inevitable jog - trot at a touch of the whip . ' a - yes ; that be oh , it be my office . ' he have to recollect with exactitude : 
 ' I should specify exception ; there be interval ... ' 
 ' please , open your Bible , ' the squire cut he short ; ' I do not   want a damned fine edge on everything . ' 
 partly for an admonition to he , or in pure nervousness , Peterborough blow his nose monstrously : an unlucky note ; nothing go well after it . ' a slight cold , ' he murmur and resume the note , and throw himself maniacally into it . the unexpected figure of Captain bulste on tiptoe , wear the ceremonial depressed air of intruder on these occasion , distract our attention for a moment . 
 ' fresh from ship , William ? ' the squire call out . 
 the captain ejaculate a big word , to judge of it from the aperture , but it be mute as his footing on the carpet , and he sit and gaze devoutly toward Peterborough , who have wait to see he take his seat , and must now , in his hurry to perform his duty , sweep the peccant little redbound book to the floor . ' here , I will have that , ' say the squire . ' allow I , sir , ' say Peterborough ; and they spring into a collision . 
 ' would you jump out of your pulpit to pick up an old woman 's umbrella ? ' the squire ask he in wrath , and mutter of require none of his clerical legerdemain with book of business . tear be in Peterborough 's eye . my aunt Dorothy 's eye dwelt kindly on he to encourage he , but the man 's irritable nose be again his enemy . 
 Captain Bulsted chance to say in the musical voice of inquiry : ' prayer be not yet over , be they ? ' 
 ' no , nor never will be with a parson blow his horn at this rate , ' the squire rejoin . ' and mind you , ' he say to Peterborough , after dismiss the servant , to whom my aunt Dorothy read the morning lesson apart , ' I would not have have this happen , sir , for money in lump . I have   always know I should hang the day when my house be not   bless in the morning by prayer . so do my father , and his before he . fiddle ! sir , you can not   expect young people to wear decent face when the parson 's hopping over the floor like a flea , and trumpet as if the organ - pipe would not   have the sermon at any price . you try to juggle I out of this book here . ' 
 ' on my ! indeed , sir , no ! ' Peterborough proclaim his innocence , and it be unlikely that the squire should have suspect he . 
 Captain Bulsted have come to we for his wife , whom he have not find at home on his arrival last midnight . 
 ' God bless my soul , ' say the squire , ' you do not   mean to tell I she be go off , William ? ' 
 ' oh ! dear , no , sir , ' say the captain , ' she be only cruise . ' 
 the squire recommend a draught of old ale . the captain accept it . his comportment be cheerful in a sober fashion , notwithstanding the transparent perturbation of his spirit . he answer my aunt Dorothy 's question relate to Julia simply and manfully , as become a gallant seaman , cordially excuse his wife for not have be at home to welcome he , with the singular plea , base on his knowledge of the sex , that the nearer she know he to be the less able be she to sit on her chair wait like Patience . he drink his ale from the hand of Sillabin , our impassive new butler , who have succeed Sewis , the squire tell he , like a Whig Ministry the Tory ; proof that thing be not improve . 
 ' I think , sir , thing be get well , ' say the captain . 
 ' the damnedest mistake ever make , William . how about the Fall of Man , then ? eh ? you talk like a heathen Radical . it be scripture say we be go from well to bad , and that be Tory doctrine . and stick to the good as long as you can ! why , William , you be a jolly bachelor once . ' 
 ' Sir , and ma'am , ' the captain bow to Dorothy Beltham , ' I have , thank to you , never know happiness but in marriage , and all I want be my wife . ' 
 the squire fret for Janet to depart . ' I ' m go , grandada , ' she say . ' you will oblige I by not attend to any matter of business to - day . give I that book of Harry 's to keep for you . ' 
 ' how d ' ye mean , my dear ? ' 
 ' it be bad work do on a Sunday , you know . ' 
 ' so it be . I will lock up the book . ' 
 ' I have your word for that , grandada , ' say Janet . 
 the lady retire , take Peterborough with they . 
 ' good - bye to the frock ! and now , William , out with your trouble , ' say the squire . 
 the captain 's eye be turn to the door my aunt Dorothy have pass through . 
 ' you remember the old custom , sir ! ' 
 ' ay , do I , William . sorry for you then ; infernally sorry for you now , that I be ! but you have   run your head into the halter . ' 
 ' I love she , sir ; I love she to distraction . let any man on earth say she be not an angel , I flatten he dead as his lie . by the way , sir , I be bind in duty to inform you I be speak of my wife . ' 
 ' to be sure you be , William , and a trim schooner - yacht she be . ' 
 ' she be off , sir ; she be off ! ' 
 I think it time to throw in a word . ' Captain Bulsted , I should hold any man but you accountable to I for hint such thing of my friend . ' 
 ' Harry , your hand , ' he cry , sparkle . 
 ' Hum ; his hand ! ' growl the squire . ' his hand be be pretty lively on the Continent , William . here , look at this book , William , and the bundle o ' cheque ! no , I promise my girl . we will go into it to - morrow , he and I , early . the fellow have shoot away thousand and thousand be gallivant among his foreign duchess and countess . there be a petticoat in that bank - book of his ; and more than one , I wager . now he be for marry a foreign princess get himself in a tangle there , it seem . ' 
 ' mightily well do , Harry ! ' Captain Bulsted strike a terrific encomium on my shoulder , groan , ' may she be true to you , my lad ! ' 
 the squire ask he if he be go to church that morning . 
 ' I go to my post , sir , by my fireside , ' the captain reply ; nor could he be induce to leave his post vacant by the squire 's promise to he of a sermon that would pickle his temper for a whole week 's wear and tear . he regret extremely that he could not enjoy so excellent a trial of his patience , but he feel himself bind to go to his post and wait . 
 I walk over to Bulsted with he , and hear on the way that it be Heriot who have call for she and drive she off . ' the man have be , I suppose , ' Captain Bulsted say , ' depute by some of you to fetch she over to Riversley . my servant mention his name . I think it adviseable not to trouble the lady with it to - day . ' he meditate . ' I hop I should find she at the Grange in the morning , Harry . I sleep on it , rather than startle the poor lamb in the night . ' 
 I offer he to accompany he at once to Heriot 's quarter . 
 ' what ! and let my wife know I doubt her fidelity . my girl shall never accuse I of that . ' 
 as it turn out , Julia have be take by Heriot on a visit to Lady Maria Higginson , the wife of the intrusive millionaire , who particularly desire to know she more intimately . Thoughtless Julia , accept the impudent invitation without scruple , have allow herself to be drive away without state the place of her destination . she and Heriot be in the Higginsons ' pew at church . hear from Janet of her husband 's arrival , she rush home , and there , instead of have to beg forgiveness , be summon to grant pardon . Captain Bulsted have draw largely on Squire Gregory 's cellar to assist he in keep his post . 
 the pair appear before we fondle ineffably next day , neither one of they capable of see that our domestic peace at the Grange be unseat . ' we be the two wretched creature alive ; have not   any of ye to spare a bit of sympathy for we ? ' Julia begin . ' we be like on a pitchfork . there be William 's duty to his country , and there be his affection for I , and they will not   go together , because Government , which be that horrid Admiralty , fear pitch and toss for post - captain ' wife . and William away , I ' m distract , and the Admiralty 's hair be on end if he stop . and , ' deed , Miss Beltham , I be not more than married to just half a husband . ' 
 the captain echo she , ' half ! but happy enough for twenty whole one , if you will be satisfied , my duck . ' 
 Julia piteously entreat I , for my future wife 's sake , not to take service under Government . as for the Admiralty , she say , it have no characteristic but the abominable one , that it hat a woman . the squire lay two or three moderately coarse trap for the voluble frank creature , which she evade with surprising neatness , show herself more awake than one would have imagine she . Janet and I fancy she must have come with the intention to act uxorious husband and irish wife for the distinct purpose of divert the squire 's wrath from I , for he greatly delight in the sight of merry wed pair . but they be as simple as possible in their display of happiness . 
 it chance that they come opportunely . my banker ' book have be the theme all the morning , and an astonishing one to I equally with my grandfather : since our arrival in England , my father have draw nine thousand pound . the sum expend during our absence on the continent reach the perplexing figure of forty - eight thousand . I know it too likely , besides , that all debt be not pay . self self self draw for thousand at a time ; sometimes , as the squire 's convulsive forefinger indicate , for many thousand within a week . it be incomprehensible to he until I , drive at bay by question and insult , and perceive that concealment could not long be practise , make a virtue of the situation by tell he   what he in fact must have see   that my father possess a cheque - book as well as I , and likewise draw upon the account . we have require the money ; it be mine , and I have sell out Bank Stock and Consols , which give very poor interest , I remark cursorily - and have keep the money at my banker ' , to draw upon accord to our necessity . I pity the old man while speak . his face be livid ; language die from his lip . he ask to have little thing explain to he the two cheque - book , for instance , and what I think of do when this money be all go : for he suppose I do not expect the same amount to hand every two year ; unless , he add , I have give he no more than a couple of year ' lease of life when I start for my tour . ' then the money 's go ! ' he sum up ; and this be the signal for redemande explanation . have he not treat I fairly and frankly in handing over my own to I on the day of my majority ? yes . 
 ' and like a fool , you think eh ? ' 
 ' I have no such thought in my head , sir . ' 
 ' you have be keep that fellow in his profligacy , and you be keep he now . why , you be all but a beggar ! ... come to my house , talk of his birth , carry off my daughter , make she mad , let her child grow up to lay hold of her money , and then grip he fast and peck he , fleece he ! ... you be beggar d ' ye know that ? he be have the two year of you , and suck you dry . what be you about ? what be you do ? do you have your head on ? you share cheque - book ? good ! ... the devil in hell never find such a fool as you ! you have your house full of your foreign bonyrober eh ? out with it ! how do you pass your time ? Drunk and dancing ? ' 
 by such degree my grandfather work himself up to the pitch for his style of eloquence . I have give a faint speciman of it . when I take the liberty to consider that I have hear enough , he follow I out of the library into the hall , where Janet stand . in her presence , he charge the princess and her family with be a pack of greedy adventurer , conspirator with ' that fellow ' to plunder I ; and for a proof of it , he quote my word , that my father 's time have be spend in superintend the opening of a coal - mine on Prince Ernest 's estate . ' that fellow pretend to manage a coal - mine ! ' could not a girl see it be a shuffle to hoodwink a greenhorn ? and now he remember it be Colonel Goodwin and his daughter who have tell he of have see ' the fellow ' engage in play Court - buffoon to a petty german prince , and perform his antic , cut caper like a clown at a fair . 
 ' Shame ! ' say Janet . 
 ' hear she ! ' the squire turn to I . 
 but she cry : ' oh ! grandada , hear yourself ! or do not , be silent . if Harry have offend you , speak like one gentleman to another . do not   rob I of my love for you : I have not   much besides that . ' 
 ' no , because of a scoundrel and his young idiot ! ' 
 Janet frown in earnest , and say : ' I do not   permit you to change the meaning of the word I speak . ' 
 he mutter a proverb of the stable . reduce to behave temperately , he begin the whole history of my banker ' book anew the same query , the same explosion and imprecation . 
 ' come for a walk with I , dear Harry , ' say Janet . 
 I decline to be protect in such a manner , absurdly on my dignity ; and the refusal , together possibly with some air of contemptuous independence in the tone of it , bring the squire to a climax . ' you will not   go out and walk with she ? you shall go down on your knee to she and beg she to give you her arm for a walk . by God ! you shall , now , here , on the spot , or off you go to your german princess , with your butler 's legacy , and nothing more from I but good - bye and the door bolt . now , down with you ! ' 
 he expect I to descend . 
 ' and if he do , he would never have my arm . ' Janet 's eye glitter hard on the squire . 
 ' before that rascal die , my dear , he shall whine like a beggar out in the cold for the tip of your finger ! ' 
 ' not if he ask I first , ' say Janet . 
 this set he off again . he realize her prospective generosity , and contrast it with my actual obtuseness . Janet change her tactic . she assume indifference . but she want experience , and a Heriot to help she in play a part . she do it badly overdo it ; so that the old man , now imagine both of we to be against his scheme for unite we , count my iniquity as twofold . her phrase , ' Harry and I will always be friend , ' rouse the loud of his denunciation upon I , as though there never have be question of the princess , so inveterate be his mind 's grasp of its original design . friend ! would our be friend give he heir by law to his estate and name ? and so forth . my aunt Dorothy come to moderate his invective . in her room the heavily - burden little book of figure be produce , and the item read aloud ; and her task be to hear they without astonishment , but with a business - like desire to comprehend they accurately , a method that soften the squire 's outburst by degree . she throw out hasty running commentary : ' yes , that be for a yacht ' ; and ' they be live at the Court of a prince ' ; such and such a sum be ' large , but Harry know his grandfather do not wish he to make a poor appearance . ' 
 ' why , do you mean to swear to I , on your oath , Dorothy Beltham , ' say the squire , amazed at the small amazement he create ' you think these two fellow have be spend within the right margin ? what will be woman 's idea next ! ' 
 ' no , ' she answer demurely . ' I think Harry have be extravagant , and have have his lesson . and surely it be well now than later ? but you be , not make allowance for his situation as the betrothed of a princess . ' 
 ' that be what turn your head , ' say he ; and she allow he to have the notion , and sneer at herself and her sex . 
 ' how about this money draw since he come home ? ' the squire persist . 
 my aunt Dorothy redden . he strike his finger on the line mark the sum , repeat his demand ; and at this moment Captain Bulsted and Julia arrive . the lady manoeuvre so that the captain and the squire be leave alone together . some time afterward the captain send out word that he beg his wife 's permission to stay to dinner at the Grange , and request I to favour he by conduct his wife to Bulsted : proof , as Julia say , that the two be engage in a pretty hot tussle . she be sure her William would not be the one to be beat . 
 I lead she away , rather depressed by the automaton performance assign to I ; from which condition I awake with a touch of horror to find myself pay her very warm compliment ; for she have be coquettish and charming to cheer I , and her voice be sweet . we reach a point in our conversation I know not where , but I must have speak with some warmth . ' then guess , ' say she , ' what William be suffer for your sake now , Harry ' ; that be , ' suffer in remain away from I on your account ' ; and thus , in an instant , with a skill so intuitive as to be almost unconscious , she twirl I round to a right sense of my position , and set I reflect , whether a love that clothe I in such imperfect armour as to leave I penetrable to these feminine grace a plump figure , swing skirt , dewy dark eyelid , laugh red lip could indeed be absolute love . and if it be not love of the immortal kind , what be I ? I look back on the thought like the ship on its furrow through the water , and see every mortal perplexity , and death under . my love of Ottilia delusion ? then life be delusion ! I contemplate Julia in alarm , somewhat in the light fair witch be look on when the faggot be pile for they . the sense of her unholy attraction abase and mortify I : and it set I think on the strangeness of my disregard of Mdlle . Jenny Chassediane when in Germany , who be far sprightly , if not pretty , and , as I remember , have do I the favour to make discreet play with her eyelid in our encounter , and long eye in pass . I catch myself regret my coldness of that period ; for which regret I could have swing the scourge upon my miserable flesh . Ottilia 's feature seem die out of my mind . ' poor darling Harry ! ' Julia sigh . ' and d ' ye know , the sight of a young man far go in love give I the tremble ? ' I rally she concern the ladder scene in my old schoolday , and the tender thing she have utter to Heriot . she answer , ' oh , I think I get they out of poet and chapter about lovemake , or I feel it very much . and that be what I miss in William ; he can not   talk soft nice nonsense . I believe he , he would if he could , but he be like a lion of the desert it be a roar ! ' 
 I rejoice when we hear the roar . Captain Bulsted return to take command of his ship , not soon than I want he , and tell we of a fierce tussle with the squire . he have stick to he all day , and up to 11 P.M. ' by George ! Harry , he have to make humble excuse to dodge out of eyeshot a minute . conquer he over the fourth bottle ! and now all be right . he will see your dad . " in a barn ? " say the squire . " here be to your well health , sir , " I bow to he ; " gentleman do not   meet in barn ; none but mouse and trap make appointment there . " to shorten my story , my lad , I have arrange for the squire and your excellent progenitor to meet at Bulsted : we may end by bring they over a bottle of old Greg 's good . " see the boy 's father , " I keep on insist . the point be , that this confound book must be off your shoulder , my lad . a dirty dog may wash in a duck - pond . you see , Harry , the dear old squire may set up your account twenty time over , but he have a right to know how you twirl the coin . he say you do not   supply the information . I suggest to he that your father can , and will . so we get they into a room together . I will be answerable for the rest . and now top your boom , and to bed here : off in the morning and tug the big vessel into port here ! and , Harry , three cheer , and another bottle to crown the victory , if you be the man for it ? ' 
 Julia interpose a decide negative to the proposal ; an ordinarily unlucky thing to do with bibulous husband , and the captain look uncomfortably check ; but when he seem to be collect to assert himself , the humour of her remark , ' now , no bravado , William , ' disarm he . 
 ' Bravado , my sweet chuck ? ' 
 ' will not   another bottle be like flash your sword after you have   win the day ? ' say she . 
 he sling his arm round she , and send a tremendous whisper into my ear ' a perfect angel ! ' 
 I start for London next day , more troubled aesthetically regard the effect produce on I by this order of perfect angel than practically anxious about material affair , though it be true that when I come into proximity with my father , the thought of his all but purely mechanical power of make money spin , fly , and vanish , like spark from a fire - engine , awaken a serious disposition in I to bring our monetary partnership to some definite settlement . he be live in splendour , next door but one to the grand establishment he have drive I to from Dipwell in the old day , with Mrs. Waddy for his housekeeper once more , alphonse for his cook . not live on the same scale , however , the troubled woman say . she signify that it be now the whirlwind . I could not help smile to see how proud she be of he , nevertheless , as a god - like charioteer in pace , at least . 
 ' opera to - night , ' she answer my inquiry for he , admonish I by her tone that I ought not to be behindhand in know his regal rule and habit . praise his generosity , she inform I that he have spend one hundred pound , and offer a reward of five time the sum , for the discovery of Mabel Sweetwinter . ' your papa never do thing by half , Mr. Harry ! ' soon after she be whimpering , ' oh , will it last ? ' I be show into the room call ' the princess 's room , ' a miracle of furniture , not likely to be occupy by she , I think , the very magnificence of the apartment strike down hope in my heart like cold on a nerve . your papa say the whole house be to be for you , Mr. Harry , when the happy day come . ' could it possibly be that he have talk of the princess ? I take a hasty meal and fortify myself with claret to have matter clear with he before the night be over . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX . I see my FATHER take the TIDE and AM carry on IT MYSELF 

 my father stand in the lobby of the Opera , hold a sort of open court , it appear to I , for a cluster of gentleman hang round he ; and I have presently to bow to greeting which be rather of a kind to flatter I , lead I to presume that he be respect as well as marvel at . the name of Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn , Mr. Jennings , Lord Alton , Sir Weeton Slater , Mr. Monterez Williams , Admiral Loftus , the Earl of Witlington , be among those which strike my ear , and strike I as good one . I could not perceive anything of the air of cynical satellite in these gentleman on the contrary , they be cordially deferential . I feel that he be encompass by undoubted gentleman , and my warm feeling to my father return when I become sensible of the pleasant sway he hold over the circle , both in speak and listen . his sympathetic smile and semi - droop of attention ; his readiness , when occasion demand it , to hit the key of the subject and help it on with the right word ; his air of unobtrusive appreciation ; his sensibility to the moment when the run of conversation depend upon he show inimitable art come of natural genius ; and he do not lose a shade of his superior manner the while . Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn , professionally voluble , a lively talker , brim with anecdote , but too sparkling , too prompt , too full of personal relish of his point , throw my father 's urbane supremacy into marked relief ; and so in another fashion do the Earl of Witlington , ' a youth in the season of guffaw , ' as Jorian DeWitt describe he , whom a jest would seize by the throat , shake his saple frame . Jorian stroll up to we goutily . no effort of my father 's would induce he to illustrate his fame for repartee , so it remain establish . ' very pretty waxwork , ' he say to I of our english beauty swim by . ' now , those woman , young Richmond , if they be inflammable to the fiftieth degree , that is , if they have the fiftieth part of a Frenchwoman in they , would have canvass society on the great man 's account long before this , and send he to the top like a bubble . he waste his time on they . that fat woman he be bow to be Viscountess Sedley , a porcine empress , widow of three , with a soupcon of bigamy to flavour they . she mount from a grocer 's shop , I be tell . Constitution have do everything for that woman . so it will everywhere it beat the world ! now he be on all - four to Lady Rachel Stokes , our pure aristocracy ; she walk as if she be go through a doorway , and could not   risk an eyelid . I would like to see her tempting St. Anthony . that be little Wreckham 's wife : she be have as many adventure as Gil Blas before he enter the Duke of Lerma 's service . ' he review several lady , certainly not very witty when malignant , as I remember my father to have say of he . ' the style of your Englishwoman be to keep the nose exactly at one elevation , to show you be bear to it . they dare not   run a gamut , these woman . these Englishwomen be a fiction ! the model of they be the nursery - miss , but they be like the name of true lover cut on the bark of a tree awfully stiff and longitudinal with the advance of time . we have   our Lady Jezebels , my boy ! they be in the pay of the bishop , or the police , to make vice hideous . the rest do the same for virtue , and get their pay for it somewhere , I do not   doubt ; perhaps from the newspaper , to keep up the fiction . I tell you , these Englishwomen have either no life at all in they , or they be nothing but animal life . ' Gad , how they dizen themselves ! they have   no other use for their finger . the wealth of this country 's frightful ! ' 
 Jorian seem annoyed that he could not excite I to defend my countrywoman ; but I have begin to see that there be no necessity for the sanguine to encounter the bilious on their behalf , and be myself inclined to be critical . besides I be engage in watch my father , whose bear toward the lady he accost do not dissatisfy my critical taste , though I have repeat fear of see he overdo it . he summon I to an introduction to the Countess Szezedy , a merry little hungarian dame . 
 ' so , ' say she at once , speak German , ' you be to marry the romantic head , the Princess Ottilia of Eppenwelzen ! I know she well . I have meet she in Vienna . Schone Seele , and bas bleu ! it be just those that be win with a duel . I know Prince Otto too . ' she prattle away , and ask I whether the marriage be to take place in the Summer . I be too astounded to answer . 
 ' no date be yet fix , ' my father strike in . 
 ' it be the talk of London , ' she say . 
 before I could demand explanation of my father with regard to this terrible rumour involve Ottilia , I find myself in the box of the City widow , Lady Sampleman , a grievous person , of the complexion of the autumnal bramble - leaf , whose first word be : ' ah ! the young suitor ! and how be our german princess ? ' I have to reply that the theme be more of german prince than princess in England . ' oh ! but , ' say she , ' you be have a shall I call it national revenge on they ? " I will take one of your princess , " say you ; and as soon as say do ! I be die for a sight of her portrait . Captain DeWitt declare she heavenly I mean , he say she be fair and nice , quite a lady - that of course ! and never mind she not be rich . you can do the decoration to the match . H'm , ' she peruse my feature ; ' pale ! lovelorn ? Excuse an old friend of your father 's . one of his very old , I would say , if it do not   impugn . as such , proud of your alliance . I be . I speak of it everywhere everywhere . ' 
 here she dramatize the circulation of the gossip . ' have you hear the news ? no , what ? Fitz - George 's son marry a princess of the german realm . indeed ! true as gospel . and how soon ? in a month ; and now you will see the dear , neglected man command the Court .... ' 
 I look at my father : I feel stifle with confusion and rage . he leant over to she , impart some ecstatic news about a great lady have determine to call on she to regulate the affair of an approach grand Ball , and under cover of this we escape . 
 ' if it be not , ' say he , ' for the Chassediane you be aware , Richie , poor Jorian be lose to she ? he have fall at her quicksilver foot . she be now in London . half the poor fellow 's income expend in bouquet ! her portrait , in the character of the widow Lefourbe , have become a part of his dress apparatus ; he shave front her playbill . his first real affaire de coeur , and he be forty - five ! so he be take in the stomach . that be why love be such a dangerous malady for middle age . as I say , but for Jenny Chassediane , our Sampleman would be the fortune for Jorian . I have hint it on both side . woman , Richie , be clever than the illustrious Lord Nelson in not see what their inclination decline to see , and Jorian would do I any service in the world except that one . you be restless , my son ? ' 
 I beg permission to quit the house , and wait for he outside . he , in return , beg I most urgently to allow myself to be introduce to Lady Edbury , the stepmother of Lord Destrier , now Marquis of Edbury ; and , use conversational pressure , he adjure I not to slight this lady , add , with more significance than the word convey , ' I be take the tide , Richie . ' the tide take I , and I bow to a lady of impressive languor , pale and young , with pleasant manner , show her character in outline , like a glove on the hand , but little of its quality . she accuse my father of come direct from ' that person 's ' box . he reply that he never forsook old friend . ' you should , ' be her rejoinder . it suggest to I an image of one of the sister Fates cut a thread . 
 my heart sink when , from Lady Edbury too , I hear the allusion to Germany and its princess . ' some one tell I she be dark ? ' 
 ' blonde , ' my father correct the report . 
 Lady Edbury ' think it singular for a german woman of the blood to be a brunette . they have not much dark mixture among they , particularly in the North . her name ? she have forget the name of the princess . ' 
 my father repeat : ' the Princess Ottilia , Princess of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld . ' 
 ' Brunette , you say ? ' 
 ' the pure blonde . ' 
 ' a complexion ? ' 
 ' a complexion to dazzle the righteous ! ' 
 Lady Edbury throw a flying glance in a mirror : ' the unrighteous you leave to we then ? ' 
 they bandy the weariful shuttlecock of gallantry . I bow and flee . my excuse be that I have see Anna Penrhys in an upper tier of box , and I make my way to she , doubt how I should be welcome . ' the happy woman be a german princess , we hear ! ' she set I shiver . her welcome be perfectly unreserved and friendly . 
 she ask the name of the lady whose box I have quit , and after bend her opera - glass on it for a moment , say , with a certain air of satisfaction , ' she be young ' ; which lead I to guess that Lady Edbury be repute to be Anna 's successor ; but why the latter should be flatter by the former 's youth be one of the mystery for I then . her aunt be awaken from sleep by the mention of my name . ' be the man here ? ' she exclaim , start . Anna smile , and talk to I of my father , say , that she be glad to see I at his right hand , for he have a hard battle to fight . she speak of he with affectionate interest in his fortune ; no well proof of his generosity as well as hers could have be give I . I promise she heartily I would not be guilty of let our intimacy drop , and hand the lady down to the crush - room , where I see my father lead Lady Edbury to her carriage , much observe . Destrier , the young marquis , come in to meet the procession from other haunt , link his arm to his friend Witlington 's , and say something in my hearing of old ' Duke Fitz , ' which provoke , I fancy , sign of amusement equivalent to titter in a small ring of the select assembly . Lady Sampleman 's carriage be call . ' another victim , ' say a voice . Anna Penrhys walk straight out to find her footman and carriage for herself . 
 I stand alone in the street , wonder , fret , fill with a variety of ugly sensation , when my father join I hum an air of the opera . ' I be look for Jorian , Richie . he have our Sampleman under his charge . he be off to the Chassediane . well ! and well , Richie , you could not bear the absence from your dada ? you find I in full sail on the tide . I be at home , if our fortune demand it , in a little german principality , but there be , ' he throw out his chest , ' a breadth in London ; nowhere else do I breathe with absolute freedom so largely : and this be my battlefield . by the way , Lady Edbury account you complete ; which be no more to say than that she be a woman of taste . the instance : she positively would not notice that you wear a dress - coat of a foreign cut . correct it to - morrow ; my tailor shall wait on you . I mean to point out to you that when a London woman have not take note of that , the face and the man have make the right impression on she . Richie , dear boy , how shall I speak the delight I have in see you ! my arm in your , old Richie ! stroll home from the fashion : this seem to I what I dream of ! all in sound health at the Grange ? she too , the good of woman ? ' 
 ' I have come on very particular business , ' I interpose briefly . 
 he reply , ' I be alive to you , Richie ; speak . ' 
 ' the squire have see my banker ' book . he think I have   be draw rather wildly : no doubt he be right . he want some sort of explanation . he consent to an interview with you . I have come to ask you to go down to he , sir . ' 
 ' to - morrow morning , without an hour 's delay , my dear boy . very agreeable will be the sight of old Riversley . and in the daylight ! ' 
 ' he prefer to meet you at Bulsted . Captain Bulsted offer his house for the purpose . I have to warn you , sir , that we stand in a very exceptional position . the squire insist upon have a full account of the money render to he . ' 
 ' I invite he to London , Richie . I refer he to Dettermain and Newson . I request he to compute the value of a princess . ' 
 ' you be aware that he will not come to your invitation . ' 
 ' tell I , then , how be he to understand what I have establish by the expenditure , my son ? I refer he to Dettermain and Newson . ' 
 ' but you must know that he set his face against legal proceeding involve exposure . ' 
 ' but surely , Richie , exposure be the very thing we court . the innocent , the unjustly treat , court it . we would be talk about ; you shall hear of we ! and into the bargain an hereditary princess . upon my faith , Mr. Beltham , I think you have mighty little to complain of . ' 
 my temper be begin to chafe at the curb . ' as regard any feeling about the money , personally , sir , you know I have none . but I must speak of one thing . I have hear to - night , I confess with as much astonishment as grief , the name ... I could not have guess that I should hear the princess 's name associate with mine , and quite openly . ' 
 ' as a matter of course . ' he nod , and strike out a hand in wavy motion . 
 ' well , sir , if you can not   feel for she or her family , be good enough to think of I , and remember that I object to it . ' 
 ' for you all , ' say he , buoyantly ; ' I feel for you all , and I will act for you all . I bring the princess to your arm , my dear boy . you have write I word that the squire give she a royal dowry have you not ? my combination permit of no escape to any one of you . Nay , ' tis do . I think for you I feel for you I act for you . by heaven , you shall be happy ! Sigh , Richie , sigh ; your destiny be now entrust to I ! ' 
 ' I daresay I be waste my breath , sir , but I protest against false pretence . you know well that you have make use of the princess 's name for your own purpose . ' 
 ' most indubitably , Richie , I have ; and be they not yours ? I must have social authority to succeed in our main enterprise . possibly the princess 's name serve for a temporary chandelier to cast light on we . she belong to we . for her sake , we be bring the house she enter into order . thus , Richie , I could tell Mr. Beltham : you and he supply the money , the princess the name , and I the energy , the skilfulness , and the estimable cause . I pay the princess for the use of her name with the dowry , which be royal ; I pay you with the princess , who be royal too ; and I , Richie , be pay by your happiness most royally . together , it be past contest that we win . here , my little one , ' he say to a woman , and drop a piece of gold into her hand , ' on condition that you go straight home . ' the woman thank he and promise . ' as I be observe , we be in the very tide of success . curious ! I have a slight inclination to melancholy . Success , quotha ? why , hundred before we have pace the identical way homeward at night under these lamp between the mansion and the park . the bare thought make they resemble a double line of undertaker . the tomb be down there at the end of they costly or not . at the age of four , on my birthday , I be inform that my mother lie dead in her bed . I remember to this day my astonishment at she not move . " her heart be break , " my old nurse say . to I she appear intact . her sister take possession of I , and of her paper , and the wedding - ring now in the custody of Dettermain and Newson together with the portrait of both my parent ; and she , poor soul , to sustain I , as I verily believe she have a great idea of my never ask unprofitably for anything in life barter the most corroborative of the testificatory document , which would now make the establishment of my case a comparatively light task . have I never speak to you of my boyhood ? my maternal uncle be a singing - master and master of elocution . I be indebted to he for the cultivation of my voice . he teach I an effective delivery of my sentence . the English of a book of his call the Speaker be still to my mind a model of elegance . remittance of money come to he from an unknown quarter ; and , with a break or two , have come ever since up to this period . my old nurse - heaven bless she resume the occupation of washing . I have stand by her tub , Richie , blow bubble and listen to her prophecy of my exalt fortune for hour . on my honour , I doubt , I seriously doubt , if I have ever be happy . I depend just now I have to avow it to you slightly upon stimulant ... of a perfectly innocuous character . Mrs. Waddy will allow I a pint of champagne . the truth be , Richie you see these two or three poor pensioner of mine , honi soit qui mal y pense my mother have have hard name throw at she . the stone of these street cry out to I to have she vindicate . I be not tired ; but I want my wine . ' 
 he repeat several time before he reach his housedoor , that he want his wine , in a manner to be almost alarming . his unwonted effort of memory , the singular picture of he which it have flash before I , and a sort of impatient compassion , make I forget my wrath . I see he take his restorative at one draught . he lie down on a sofa , and his valet draw his boot off and throw a cloak over he . lie there , he wish I gaily good - night . Mrs. Waddy tell I that he have adopt this system of sleep for the last month . ' bless you , as many people call on he at night now as in the day , ' she say ; and I be induce to suppose he have some connection with the Press . she have implicit faith in his power of constitution , and would affirm , that he have be the death of dozen whom the attraction have dupe to imitate his habit . ' he be now a field - Marshal on his campaign . ' she betray a twinkle of humour . he must himself have favour she with that remark . the report of the house - door frequently shut in the night suggest the passage of his aide - de - camp . 
 early in the morning , I find he pace through the open door of the dining - room and the library dictate to a secretary at a desk , now and then toss a word to Dettermain and Newson 's chief clerk . the floor be strew with journal . he wear hessian boot ; a voluminous black cloak hang loosely from his shoulder . 
 ' I be just settle the evening paper , ' he say after greet I , with a show of formality in his warmth ; and immediately add , ' that will do , Mr. Jopson . put in a note " Mr. Harry Lepel Richmond of Riversley and Twn - y - glas , my son , take no step to official distinction in his native land save through the ordinary parliamentary channel . " your pardon , Richie ; presently . I be reply to a morning paper . ' 
 ' what be this ? why print my name ? ' I cry . 
 ' merely the correction of an error . I have to insist , my dear boy , that you claim no privilege : you be apart from they . Mr. Jopson , I beseech you , not a minute 's delay in deliver that . fetch I from the printer 's my pamphlet this afternoon . Mr. Jacobs , my compliment to Dettermain and Newson : I request they to open proceeding instanter , and let the world know of it . good - morning , gentleman . ' 
 and now , turn to I , my father fence I with the whole weight of his sententious volubility , which be the force of a river . why do my name appear in the paper ? because I be his son . but he assure I that he carefully separate I from public companionship with his fortune , and place I on the side of my grandfather , as a plain gentleman of England , the heir of the most colossal wealth possible in the country . 
 ' I dis - sociate you from I , Richie , do you see ? I cause it to be declare that you need , on no account , lean on I . Jopson will bring you my pamphlet my Declaration of Rights to peruse . in the Press , in Literature , at Law , and on social ground , I meet the enemy , and I claim my own ; by heaven , I do ! and I will down to the squire for a distraction , if you esteem it necessary , certainly . half - a - dozen word to he . why , do you maintain he to be insensible to a title for you ? no , no . and ask my friend . I refer he to any dozen of my friend to convince he I have the prize almost in my possession . why , dear boy , I have witness , living witness , to the ceremony . be I , tell I , to be deprive of money now , once again , for the eleventh time ? oh ! and put aside my duty to you , I protest I be bind in duty to she who bear I you have see her miniature : how lovely that dear woman be ! how gentle ! bind in duty to she to clear her good name . this do not affect you ... ' 
 ' oh , but it do , ' he allow I to plead . 
 ' ay , through your love for your dada . ' 
 he shake I by both hand . I be touch with pity , and at the same time in doubt whether it be not an actor that sway I ; for I be discontent , and could not speak my discontent ; I be overborne , overflow . his evasion of the matter of my objection relate to the princess I feel to be a palpable piece of artfulness , but I have to acknowledge to myself that I know what his argument would be , and how overwhelmingly his defence of it would spring forth . my cowardice shrank from provoke a recurrence to the theme . in fact , I submit consciously to his masterful fluency and emotional power , and so I be carry on the tide with he , remain in London several day to witness that I be not the only one . my father , admit that money serve he in his conquest of society , and defy any other man to do as much with it as he do , reply to a desperate insinuation of mine , ' this money I spend I be actually put out to interest as much as , or more than , your grandad . ' he murmur confidentially , ' I have alarm the Government . indeed , I have warrant for say I be in communication with its agent . they be bribe I ; they be positively bribe I , Richie . I receive my stipend annually . they be mighty discreet . so be I. but I push they hard . I take what they offer : I renounce none of my claim . ' 
 Janet write that it would be prudent for I to return . 
 ' I be prepare , ' my father say . ' I have only to meet Mr. Beltham in a room I stipulate that it shall be between square wall to win he . the squire to back we , Richie , we have command of the entire world . his wealth , and my good cause , and your illustrious union by the way , it be announce definitely in this morning 's paper . ' 
 Dismayed , I ask what be announce . 
 ' read , ' say he . ' this will be something to hand to Mr. Beltham at our meeting . I might trace it to one of the embassy , Imperial or Royal . no matter there it be . ' 
 I read a paragraph in which Ottilia 's name and title be set down ; then follow mine and my wealthy heirship , and woe be I in the perusing of it ! a roundabout vindication of I as one not likely to be rank as the first of english commoner who have gain the hand of an hereditary foreign princess , though it be undoubtedly in the light of a commoner that I be most open to the congratulation of my countryman upon my unparalleled felicity . a display of historical erudition cite the noble inferior by birth who have catch princess to their arm Charles , Humphrey , William , John . under this list , a late Harry ! 
 the paragraph close by fix the nuptial to take place before the end of the Season . 
 I look at my father to try a struggle with he . the whole man be efflorescent . 
 ' can not   it be stop ? ' I implore he . 
 he signify the impossibility in a burst of gesticulation , motion of the mouth , smile frown ; various pattern of an absolute negative beat down opposition . 
 ' thing print can never be stop , Richie . our Jorian compare they to baby baptize . they have a soul from that moment , and go on for ever ! an admirable word of Jorian 's . and a word to you , Richie . will you swear to I by the veracity of your lover 's heart , that paragraph afford you no satisfaction ? he can not swear it ! ' my father exclaim , see I swing my shoulder round , and he make I feel that it would have be a false oath if I have swear it . but I could have swear , that I have rather we two be at the bottom of the sea than that it should come under the princess 's eye . I read it again . it be in print . it look like reality . it be at least the realization of my dream . but this play traitor and accuse I of be crown with no more than a dream . the sole practical thing I could do be to insist on our starting for Riversley immediately , to make sure of my own position . ' name your hour , Richie , ' my father say confidently : and we wait . 
 a rather plainer view of my father 's position , as I incline to think , be afford to I one morning at his breakfast - table , by a conversation between he and Jorian DeWitt , who bring I a twisted pink note from Mdlle . Chassediane , the which he deliver with the air of a dog make to disgorge a bone , and he be very cool to I indeed . the cutlet of Alphonse be subject to snappish criticism . ' I assume , ' he say , ' the fellow know I be come ? ' 
 ' he see it in my handwriting of yesterday , ' reply my father . ' but be just to he , acknowledge that he be one of the few that perform their daily duty with a tender conscience . ' 
 ' this english climate have bedevil the fellow ! he pepper his dish like a mongrel Indian rear on mango . ' 
 ' ring he up , ring he up , Jorian . all I beg of you be not to disgust he with life , for he quit any service in the world to come to I , and , in fact , he suit I . ' 
 ' exactly so : you spoil he . ' 
 my father shrug . ' the state of the case be , that your stomach be grow delicate , friend Jorian . ' 
 ' the actual state of the case be , that my palate be never keener , and consequently my stomach know its business . ' 
 ' you should have try the cold turbot with oil and caper . ' 
 ' your man have well stick to buttered egg , in my opinion . ' 
 ' say , porridge ! ' 
 ' no , I will be hang if I think he be equal to a bowl of porridge . ' 
 ' careme might have confess to the same ! ' 
 ' with this difference , ' cry Jorian in a heat , ' that he would never have allow the thought of any of your barbarous mess to occur to a man at table . let I tell you , Roy , you astonish I : up till now I have never know you guilty of the bad taste of defend a bad dish on your own board . ' 
 ' then you will the more readily pardon I , Jorian . ' 
 ' oh , I pardon you , ' jorian sneered , trip to the carpet by such ignoble mildness . ' a breakfast be no great loss . ' 
 my father assure he he would have a serious conversation with Alphonse , for whom he apologize by say that Alphonse have not , to his knowledge , serve as hospital cook anywhere , and be therefore quite possibly not sufficiently solicitous for appetite and digestion of invalid . 
 Jorian throw back his head as though to discharge a spiteful sarcasm with good aim ; but turn to I , say , ' Harry , the thing must be do ; your father must marry . Notoriety be the season for a pick and choice of the wealthy and the lovely . I refuse to act the part of warming - pan any long ; I refuse point blank . it be not a personal feeling on my part ; my advice be that of a disinterested friend , and I tell you candidly , Roy , set aside the absurd exhibition of my dancing attendance on that last rise of Guildhall , egad , the alderman go like Summer , and leave we the very picture of a fruity Autumn , I say you can not   keep she hang on the tree of fond expectation for ever . she will drop . ' 
 ' catch she , Jorian ; you be on guard . ' 
 ' Upwards of three hundred thousand , if a penny , Roy Richmond ! who ? I ? I be not a fortune - hunter . ' 
 ' nor be i , friend Jorian . ' 
 ' no , it be because you be not thorough : you will fall between the stool . ' 
 my father remark that he should visit this upon Mr. Alphonse . 
 ' you shake off that fine Welsh girl , and she be in your hand the act of a madman ! ' Jorian continue . ' you be get old : the day will come when you be a flat excitement . you know the first Lady Edbury spoil one of your good chance when you have the market . now you be trifle with the second . she be the head of the Light Brigade , but you might fix she down , if she be not too much in debt . you be not at the end of your run , I dare say . only , my good Roy , let I tell you , in life you must not   wait for the prize of the race till you touch the goal if you prefer metaphor . you generally come forward about every seven year or so . add on another seven , and women'll begin to think . you can not   beat Time , mon Roy . ' 
 ' so , ' say my father , ' I touch the goal , and woman begin to think , and I can not   beat time to they . Jorian , your mind be in a state of confusion . I do not marry . ' 
 ' then , Roy Richmond , hear what a friend say ... ' 
 ' I do not marry , Jorian , and you know my reason . ' 
 ' Sentiments ! ' 
 ' they be a part of my life . ' 
 ' just as I remark , you be not thorough . you have genius and courage out of proportion , and you be a dead failure , Roy ; because , no soon have you get all Covent Garden before you for the fourth or fifth time , than in go your hand into your pocket , and you say no , there be an apple I can not   have , so I will none of these ; and , by the way , the apple must be tolerably wither by this time . and you know perfectly well   for you do not   lack common sense at a shaking , Roy Richmond , that you be guilty of simple madness in refuse to make the good of your situation . you have not   to be teach what money mean . with money and a wife to take care of it , mind you you be pre - eminently the man for which you want to be recognize . without it Harry will excuse I , I must speak plainly you be a sort of a spectacle of a bob - cherry , down on your luck , up on your luck , and get dead stale and never bite ; a familiar curiosity ' 
 Jorian add , ' oh , by Jove ! it be not nice to think of . ' my father say : ' Harry , I be sure , will excuse you for talk , in your extreme friendliness , of matter that he and I have not and they interest we deeply yet think fit to discuss . and you may take my word for it , Jorian , that I will give Alphonse his medical dose . I be quite of your opinion that the king of cook require it occasionally . Harry will inform we of Mdlle . Chassediane 's command . ' 
 the content of the letter permit I to read it aloud . she desire to know how she could be amuse on the Sunday . 
 ' we will undertake it , ' say my father . ' I depute the arrangement to you , Jorian . respect the prejudice , and avoid collision , that be all . ' 
 Captain DeWitt become by convenient stage cheerful , after the pink slip of paper have be make common property , and from a seriously - advise friend , in his state of spite , relapse to the idle and shadow - like associate , when please . I have to thank he for the gift of fresh perception . surely it would be as well if my father could get a woman of fortune to take care of he ! 
 we have at my request a consultation with Dettermain and Newson on the eve of the journey to Riversley , Temple and Jorian DeWitt assist . strange documentary evidence be unfold and compare with the date of a royal decree : affidavit of person now dead ; a ring , the ring ; fan , and lace , and handkerchief with notable initial ; jewelry stamp ' to the Divine Anastasia ' from an adore christian name : old brown letter that shriek ' wife ' when ' charmer ' seem to have pal ; oath of fidelity run through they like bass note . Jorian hold up the discolour sheet of ancient paper say : 
 ' here you behold the mummy of the villain love . ' such love as it be the love of the privileged butcher for the lamb . the burden of the letter , put in epigram , be rattlesnake and bird . a narrative of Anastasia 's sister , Elizabeth , sign and seal , with name of witness append , relate in brief bald English the history of the event which have kill she . it warm pathetically when dwell on the writer 's necessity to part with letter and paper of great moment , that she might be enable to sustain and educate her sister 's child . she name the certificate ; she swear to the tampering with witness . the number and exact indication of the house where the ceremony take place be state a house in Soho ; the date be give , and the incident on that night of the rape of the beautiful Miss Armett by mad Lord Beaumaris at the theatre door , aid by mask ruffian , after Anastasia 's performance of Zamira . 
 ' there be witness I know to be still live , Mr. Temple , ' my father say , see the young student - at - law silent and observant . ' one of they I have under my hand ; I feed he . listen to this . ' 
 he read two or three insufferable sentence from one of the love - epistle , and break down . I be usher aside by a member of the firm to inspect an instrument prepare to bind I as surety for the cost of the appeal . I sign it . we quit the attorney 's office convince   I speak of Temple and myself   that we have see the shadow of something . 




 CHAPTER XL . MY FATHER 's meeting with MY GRANDFATHER 

 my father 's pleasure on the day of our journey to Bulsted be to drive I out of London on a lofty open chariot , with which he make the circuit of the fashionable district , and cause innumerable head to turn . I would have prefer to go the way of other man , to be unnoticed , but I be subject to an occasional glowing of undefined satisfaction in the observance of the universally acknowledge harmony exist between his pretension , his taste and habit , and his person . he contrive by I know not what persuasiveness and simplicity of manner and speech to banish from I the idea that he be engage in play a high stake ; and though I know it , and he more than once admit it , there be an ease and mastery about he that afford I some degree of positive comfort still . I be still most securely attach to his fortune . suppose the ghost of dead Hector to have hang over his body when the inflame son of Peleus whirl he at his chariot wheel round Troy , he would , with his natural passion sober by Erebus , have have some of my reflection upon force and fate , and my partial sense of exhilaration in the tremendous speed of the course during the whole of the period my father term his Grand Parade . I show just such acquiescence or resistance as be superinduce by the variation of the ground . otherwise I be spell - bind ; and beyond interdict any further public mention of my name or the princess 's , I do nothing to thwart he . it would have be no light matter . 
 we strike a station at a point half - way down to Bulsted , and find little Kiomi there , thunder in her brow , carry a bundle , and purchase a railway - ticket , not to travel in our direction . she give I the singular answer that she could not tell I where her people be ; nor would she tell I whither she be go , alone , and by rail . I chance to speak of Heriot . one of her sheet - lightning flash shoot out . ' he will not   be at Bulsted , ' she say , as if that have a significance . I let she know we be invite to Bulsted . ' oh , she be at home ' ; Kiomi blink , and her feature twitch like whip - cord . I see that she be possess by one of her fury . that girl 's face have the art of make I forget beautiful woman , and what beauty be by comparison . 
 it happen that the squire come across we as we be round the slope of larch and fir plantation near a part of the Riversley hollow , lead to the upper heath - land , where , behind a semicircle of birch , Bulsted lay . he be on horseback , and call hoarsely to the captain 's coachman , who be drive we , to pull up . ' here , Harry , ' he sing out to I , in the same rough voice , ' I do not   see why we should bother Captain William . it be a bit of business , not pleasure . I have   get the book in my pocket . you ask be it convenient to step into my bailiff 's cottage hard by , and run through it ? ten minute will tell I all I want to know . I want it do with . Ask . ' 
 my father stand up and bow , bareheade . 
 my grandfather strike his hat and bobbed . 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I trust I see you well . ' 
 ' well , sir , when I have   get rid of a damned unpleasant bit o ' business . ' 
 ' I offer you my hearty assistance . ' 
 ' do you ? then step down and come into my bailiff 's . ' 
 ' I come , sir . ' 
 my father alight from the carriage . the squire cast his gouty leg to be quit of his horse , but not in time to check my father 's advance and ejaculation of condolence . 
 ' Gout , Mr. Beltham , be a little too much a proof to we of a long line of ancestry . ' 
 his hand and arm be raise in the form of a splint to support the squire , who glare back over his cheekbone , horrify that he could not escape the contact , and in too great pain from arthritic throe to protest : he resemble a burglar surprise by justice . ' what infernal nonsense , ... fellow talk now ? ' I hear he mutter between his hopping and dancing , with one foot in the stirrup and a toe to earth , the enemy at his heel , and his inclination half bend upon swing to the saddle again . 
 I go to relieve he . ' damn ! ... oh , it be you , ' say he . 
 the squire direct Uberly , act as his groom , to walk his horse up and down the turf front young Tom Eckerthy 's cottage , and I to remain where I be ; then hobble up to the door , follow at a leisurely march by my father . the door open . my father sweep the old man in before he , with a bow and flourish that admit of no contradiction , and the door close on they . I catch a glimpse of Uberly screw his wrinkle in a queer grimace , while he work his left eye and thumb expressively at the cottage , by way of communicate his mind to Samuel , Captain Bulsted 's coachman ; and I become quite of his opinion as to the nature of the meeting , that it be comical and not likely to lead to much . I think of the princess and of my hope of she depend upon such an interview as this . from that hour when I step on the sand of the Continent to the day of my quit they , I have be fold in a dream : I have stretch my hand to the high thing of earth , and here now be the retributive material money - question , like a keen scythe - blade ! 
 the cottage - door continue shut . the heath be darken . I hear a noise of wheel , and presently the unmistakable voice of Janet say , ' that must be Harry . ' she be drive my aunt Dorothy . both of they hush at hear that the momentous duel be in progress . Janet 's first thought be of the squire . ' I will not   have he ride home in the dark , ' she say , and order Uberly to walk the horse home . the lady have a lady ' altercation before Janet would permit my aunt to yield her place and proceed on foot , accompany by I . naturally the good driver of the two keep the whip . I tell Samuel to go on to Bulsted , with word that we be come : and Janet , nod bluntly , agree to direct my father as to where he might expect to find I on the Riversley road . my aunt Dorothy and I go ahead slowly : at her request I strike a pathway to avoid the pony - carriage , which be soon audible ; and when Janet , chatter to the squire , have go by , we turn back to intercept my father . he be speechless at the sight of Dorothy Beltham . at his solicitation , she consent to meet he next day ; his account of the result of the interview be unintelligible to she as well as to I . even after leave she at the park - gate , I could get nothing definite from he , save that all be well , and that the squire be eminently practical ; but he believe he have do an excellent evening 's work . ' yes , ' say he , rub his hand , ' excellent ! make due allowance for the emphatically commoner 's mind we have to deal with . ' and then to change the subject he dilate on that strange story of the man who , an enormous number of year back in the date of the world 's history , carry his little son on his shoulder one night when the wind be not so boisterous , though we be deep in Winter , along the identical road we traverse , between the gorsemound , across the heath , with yonder remember fir - tree clump in sight and the waste - water visible to footfarer round under the fir . at night - time he vow , that as far as nature permit it , he have satisfy the squire ' completely satisfied he , I mean , ' he say , to give I sound sleep . ' no doubt of it ; no doubt of it , Richie . ' 
 he win Julia 's heart straight off , and Captain Bulsted 's profound admiration . ' now I know the man I have   always be adore since you be so high , Harry , ' say she . Captain Bulsted sigh : ' your husband bow to your high good taste , my dear . ' they relish he sincerely , and between they and he I suffer myself to be dandle once more into a state of credulity , until I see my aunt Dorothy in the afternoon subsequent to the appoint meeting . his deep respect and esteem for she have stay he from answer any of her question falsely . to that extent he have be veracious . it appear , that drive hard by the squire , who would have no waving of flag and lighting of firework in a matter of business , and whose ' commoner 's mind ' chafe sturdily at a hint of the necessity for lavish outlay where there be a princess to win , he have rally on the fiction that many of the cheque , stand for the bulk of the sum expend , be money borrow by he of I , which he design to repay , and be prepared to repay instantly could in fact , the squire demand it , repay , as it be , on the spot ; for behold , these borrow money be not spend ; they be money invest in undertaking , put out to high rate of interest ; money that perhaps it would not be adviseable to call in without a season of delay ; still , if Mr. Beltham , act for his grandson and heir , insist , it should be do . the money have be borrow purely to invest they with profit on my behalf : a gentleman 's word of honour be pledge to it . 
 the squire grimly give he a couple of month to make it good . 
 Dorothy Beltham and my father be together for about an hour at Eckerthy 's farm . she let my father kiss her hand when he be bend to take his farewell of she , but hold her face away . he be in manifest distress , hardly master of his voice , beg I to come to he soon , and bow , with ' God bless you , madam , my friend on earth ! ' turn his heel , bear his elastic frame lamentably . a sad or a culprit air do not befit he : one reckon up his foible and error when see he under a partly beat aspect . at least , I do ; not my dear aunt , who be compassionate of he , however thoroughly she condemn his ruinous extravagance , and the shift and evasion it put he to . she fear , that instead of mend the difficulty , he have postpone merely to exaggerate it in the squire 's mind ; and she be now of opinion that the bring he down to meet the squire be very bad policy , likely to result in danger to my happiness ; for , if the money should not be forthcoming on the date name , all my father 's fault would be transfer to I as his accomplice , both in the original wastefulness and the subterfuge invent to conceal it . I recollect that a sum of money have really be sink in Prince Ernest 's coal - mine . my aunt say she hop for the good . 
 mount the heath , we look back on the long yellow road , where the carriage convey my father to the railway - station be visible , and talk of he , and of the element of antique tragedy in his history , which be at that period , let I say , precisely what my incessant mental effort be strained to expel from the idea of our human life . the individual 's freedom be my tenet of faith ; but pity plead for he that he be well - nigh irresponsible , be shamefully sin against at his birth , one who could charge the Gods with vindictiveness , and complain of the persecution of natal Furies . my aunt Dorothy advise I to take he under my charge , and sell his house and furniture , make he live in bachelor chamber with his faithful waiting - woman and a single manservant . 
 ' he will want money even to do that , ' I remark . 
 she murmur , ' be there not some annual income pay to he ? ' 
 her quick delicacy make her redden in allude so closely to his personal affair , and I love she for the nice feeling . ' it be not much , ' I say . the miserable attempt to repair the wrong do to he with this small annuity anger I and I remember , little please , the foolish expectation he found on this secret acknowledgement of the justice of his claim . ' we will not   talk of it , ' I pursue . ' I wish he have never touch it . I shall interdict he . ' 
 ' you would let he pay his debt with it , Harry ? ' 
 ' I be not sure , aunty , that he do not incur a great debt by accept it . ' 
 ' one 's wish would be , that he might not ever be in need of it . ' 
 ' ay , or never be care to find the key of it . ' 
 ' that must be waste of time , ' she say . 
 I mean something else , but it be useless to tell she so . 




 CHAPTER XLI . commencement of the SPLENDOURS and perplexitie of MY FATHER 's GRAND 

 PARADE 
 Janet , in reply to our inquiry as to the condition of the squire 's temper , point out in the newspaper a notification of a grand public Ball to be give by my father , the first of a series of three , and say that the squire have see it and shrug . she think there be no positive cause for alarm , even though my father should fail of his word ; but express her view decidedly , that it be an unfortunate move to bring he between the squire and I , and so she blame Captain Bulsted . this be partly for the reason that the captain and his wife , charm by my father , be for advocate his merit at the squire 's table : our ingenuity be ludicrously tax to mystify he on the subject of their extravagant eulogy . they tell he they have be invite , and be go to the great London Balls . 
 ' Subscription Balls ? ' ask the squire . 
 ' no , sir , ' rejoin the captain . 
 ' Tradesmen 's Balls , d ' ye call them , then ? ' 
 ' no , sir ; they be Balls give by a distinguished gentleman . ' 
 ' take care it be not another name for tradesman 's Balls , William . ' 
 ' I do not attend tradesman 's Balls , sir . ' 
 ' take care o ' that , William . ' 
 the captain be very angry . ' what , ' say he , turn to we , ' what do the squire mean by tell an officer of the Royal Navy that he be conduct his wife to a tradesman 's ball ? ' 
 Julia threaten malicious doing for the insult . she and the squire have a controversy upon the explication of the word gentleman , she describe my father 's appearance and manner to the life . ' now listen to I , squire . a gentleman , I say , be one you would say , if he be not   bear a duke , he ought to have be , and more shame to the title ! he turn the key of a lady 's heart with a twinkle of his eye . he be never mean what he have be yours . he be a true friend ; and if he do not   keep his word , you know in a jiffy it be the fault of affair ; and stand about five foot eleven : he be a full - blow man ' : and so forth . 
 the squire listen , and perspire at find the object of his abhorrence crown thus in the unassailable realm of the abstract . Julia might have do it more elegantly ; but her husband be rapturous over her skill in portraiture , and he add : ' that be a gentleman , squire ; and that be a man pretty sure to be abuse by half the world . ' 
 ' three - quarter , William , ' say the squire ; ' there be about the computation for your gentleman 's creditor , I suspect . ' 
 ' ay , sir ; well , ' return the captain , to whom this kind of fencing in the dark be an affliction , ' we make it up in quality in quality . ' 
 ' I will be bind you do , ' say the squire ; ' and so you will so long as you be only ask to dance to the other poor devil ' fiddle . ' 
 Captain Bulsted bow . ' the last word to you , squire . ' 
 the squire nod . ' I will hand it to your wife , William . ' 
 Julia take it graciously . ' a perfect gentleman ! perfect ! confound his enemy ! ' 
 ' why , ma'am , you might keep from swearing , ' the squire bawl . 
 ' La ! squire , ' say she , ' why , do not   you know the National Anthem ? ' 
 ' National Anthem , ma'am ! and a fellow , a velvet - tongue confound he , if you like . ' 
 ' and where be my last word , if you please ? ' Julia jump up , and drop a provoking curtsey . 
 ' you silly old grandada ! ' say Janet , go round to he ; ' do not   you see the cunning woman want to dress you in our garment , and mean to boast of it to we while you be finish your wine ? ' 
 the old man fondle she . I could have do the same , she bend over he with such homely sweetness . ' one comfort , you will not   go to these gingerbread Balls , ' he say . 
 ' I be not invite , ' she moan comically . 
 ' no ; nor shall not   be , while I can keep you out of bad company . ' 
 ' but , grandada , I do like dancing . 
 ' dance away , my dear ; I have   no objection . ' 
 ' but where be the music ? ' 
 ' oh , you can always have music . ' 
 ' but where be my partner ? ' 
 the squire point at I . 
 ' you do not   want more than one at a time , eh ? ' he correct his error : ' no , the fellow 's engage in another quadrille . mind you , Miss Janet , he shall dance to your tune yet . D ' ye hear , sir ? ' the irritation excite by Captain Bulsted and Julia break out in fury . ' who be that fellow dance when Rome be burn ? ' 
 ' the Emperor Nero , ' say Janet . ' he kill Harry 's friend Seneca in the eighty - somethingth year of his age ; an old man , and hush , grandada ! ' she could not check he . 
 ' hark you , Mr. Harry ; dance your hard up in town with your rip and rep , and the lot of ye ; all very fine while the burning go on : you will not   see the fun of dance on the ash . a nice king of Rome Nero be next morning ! by the Lord , if I could not   swear you will be down on your knee to an innocent fresh - hearted girl 's worth five hundred of the crew you be for partner now while you have   a penny for the piper . ' 
 Janet shut his mouth , kiss he , and hold his wine up . he drank , and thump the table . ' we will have party here , too . the girl shall have her choice of partner : she shall not   be keep in the background by a young donkey . take any six of your own age , and six sensible man , to try you by your chance . by George , the whole dozen would bring you in non - compos . you have   only get the woman on your side because of a smart face and figure . ' 
 Janet exclaim indignantly , ' Grandada , I be offend with you ' ; and walk out on a high step . 
 ' come , if he have the woman on his side , ' say Captain Bulsted , mildly . 
 ' he will be able to go partner and gallopade as long as his banker will let he , William like your gentleman ! that be true . we shall soon see . ' 
 ' I leave my character in your hand , sir , ' say I , rise . ' if you would scold I in private , I should prefer it , on behalf of your guest ; but I be bind to submit to your pleasure , and under any circumstance I remember , what you appear to forget , that you be my grandfather . ' 
 so say , I follow the lady . it be not the wise of speech , and happen , Captain Bulsted inform I , to be deliver in my father 's manner , for the squire pronounce emphatically that he see very little Beltham in I . the right course would have be for I to ask he then and there whether I have his consent to start for Germany . but I be the sport of resentment and apprehension ; and , indeed , I should not have go . I could not go without some title beyond that of the heir of great rich . 
 Janet keep out of my sight . I find myself strangely anxious to console she : less sympathetic , perhaps , than desirous to pour out my sympathy in her ear , which be of a very pretty shape , with a soft unpierced lobe . we dance together at the Riversley Ball , give by the squire on the night of my father 's Ball in London . Janet compliment I upon have attain wisdom . ' now we get on well , ' she say . ' Grandada only want to see we friendly , and feel that I be not neglect . ' 
 the old man , a martyr to what he consider due to his favourite , endure the horror of the Ball until suppertime , and keep his eye on we two . he forget , or pretend to forget , my foreign engagement altogether , though the announcement in the newspaper be speak of by Sir Roderick and Lady Echester and other . 
 ' how do you like that ? ' he remark to I , see she twirl away by one of the young Rubreys . 
 ' she seem to like it , sir , ' I reply . 
 ' like it ! ' say he . ' in my day you would not   have catch I let the bloom be take off the girl I care for by a parcel o ' scampish young dog . right in their arm ! look at her build . she be strong ; she be healthy ; she go round like a tower . if you want a girl to look like a princess ! ' 
 his eulogy be not undeserved . but she dance as lightly and happily with Mr. Fred Rubrey as with Harry Richmond . I congratulate myself on her lack of sentiment . later , when in London , where Mlle . Jenny Chassediane challenge I to perilous sarabande , I wish that Janet have ever so small a grain of sentiment , for a preservative to I . Ottilia glow high and distant ; she send I no message ; her image do not step between I and disorder . the whole structure of my idea of my superior nature seem to be crumble to fragment ; and begin to feel in despair that I be wretchedly like other man , I lose by degree the sense of my hold on she . it strike I that my bad fear of the effect produce on the princess 's mind by that last scene in the lake - palace must be true , and I abandon hope . Temple think she try I too cruelly . under these circumstance I become less and less resolutely disposed to renew the forlorn conflict with my father concern his prodigal way of living . ' let it last as long as I have a penny to support he ! ' I exclaim . he say that Dettermain and Newson be now urge on his case with the utmost despatch in order to keep pace with he , but that the case rely for its life on his preserve a great appearance . he hand I his division of our twin cheque - book , tell I he prefer to depend on his son for supply , and I be in the mood to think this a partial security . 
 ' but you can take what there be , ' I say . 
 ' on the contrary , I will accept nothing but minor sum so to speak , the fractional shilling ; though I confess I be always bewilder by silver , ' say he . 
 I question he upon his mean of carry on his expenditure . his answer be to refer to the pavement of the city of London . by pave here and there he have , he inform I , make a concrete for the wheel to roll on . he calculate that he now have credit for the space of three new year ample time for he to fight his fight and win his victory . 
 ' my tradesman be not like the tradesman of other person , ' he break out with a curious neigh of supreme satisfaction in that retinue . ' they believe in I . I have de facto harness they to my fortune ; and if you doubt I on the point of success , I refer you to Dettermain and Newson . all I stipulate for be to maintain my position in society to throw a lustre on my case . so much I must do . my failure hitherto have be entirely owe to the fact that I have not my son to stand by I . ' 
 ' then you must have money , sir . ' 
 ' yes , money . ' 
 ' then what can you mean by refuse mine ? ' 
 ' I admit the necessity for it , my son . say you hand I a cheque for a temporary thousand . your credit and mine in conjunction can replace it before the expiration of the two month . or , ' he meditate , ' it might be well to give a bond or so to a professional lender , and preserve the account at your banker intact . the truth be , I have , in my interview with the squire , draw in advance upon the material success I have a perfect justification to anticipate , and I can not allow the old gentleman to suppose that I retrench for the purpose of give a large array of figure to your banker ' book . it would be sheer madness . I can not do it . I can not afford to do it . when you be on a runaway horse , I prefer to say a racehorse , Richie , you must ride he . you dare not throw up the rein . only last night Wedderburn , appeal to Loftus , a practical sailor , be approve when he offer I forget the subject - matter the illustration of a ship on a lee - shore ; you be lose if you do not spread every inch of canvas to the gale . retrenchment at this particular moment be perdition . count our gain , Richie . we have win a princess ... ' 
 I call to he not to name she . 
 he persist : ' half a minute . she be win ; she be ours . and let I , in pass , bear with I one second counsel you to write to Prince Ernest instanter , propose formally for his daughter , and , in your grandfather 's name , state her dowry at fifty thousand per annum . ' 
 ' oh , you forget ! ' I interject . 
 ' no , Richie , I do not forget that you be off a leeshore ; you be mount on a skittish racehorse , with , if you like , a New Forest fly operate within an inch of his belly - girth . our situation be so far ticklish , and prompt invention and audacity . ' 
 ' you must forget , sir , that in the present state of the squire 's mind , I should be simply lie in write to the prince that he offer a dowry . ' 
 ' no , for your grandfather have yield consent . ' 
 ' by implication , you know he withdraw it . ' 
 ' but if I satisfy he that you have not be extravagant ? ' 
 ' I must wait till he be satisfied . ' 
 ' the thing be do , Richie , do . I see it in advance it be do ! whatever befall I , you , my dear boy , in the space of two month , may grasp your fortune . besides , here be my hand . I swear by it , my son , that I shall satisfy the squire . I go far ; I say I shall have the mean to refund to you the mean , the money . the marriage be announce in our print for the Summer say early June . and I undertake that you , the husband of the princess , shall be the first gentleman in England that be , Europe . oh ! not rule a coterie : not dazzle the world with entertainment . ' he think himself in earnest when he say , ' I attach no mighty importance to these thing , though there be no harm I can perceive in lead the fashion none that I see in have a consummate style . I know your taste , and her , Richie , the noble lady 's . she shall govern the intellectual world your poet , your painter , your man of science . they reflect a beautiful sovereign mistress more exquisitely than almost aristocracy do . but you head our aristocracy also . you be a centre of the political world . so I scheme it . between you , I defy the Court to rival you . this I call distinction . it be no mean aim , by heaven ! I protest , it be an aim with the mark in sight , and not out of range . ' 
 he whip himself up to one of his oratorical frenzy , of which a cheque be the common fruit . the power of his persuasiveness in speech , back by the spectacle of his social accomplishment , continue to subdue I , and I protest only inwardly even when I know that he be gamble with fortune . I write out many cheque , and still it appear to I that they be barely sufficient to meet the current expense of his household . Temple and I calculate that his Grand Parade would try the income of a duke , and could but be a matter of month . Mention of it reach Riversley from various quarter , from Lady Maria Higginson , from Captain Bulsted and his wife , and from Sir Roderick Ilchester , who say to I , with fine accentuation , ' I have meet your father . ' Sir Roderick , an Englishman repute of good breeding , inform the son that he have actually meet the father in lofty society , at Viscountess Sedley 's , at Lady Dolchester 's , at Bramham DeWitt 's , and hear of he as a frequenter of the prussian and Austrian Embassy entertainment ; and also that he be admit to the exclusive dinner - party of the Countess de Strode , ' which be , ' he observe , in the moderated tone of an astonishment devote itself to propagation , ' the cream of society . ' indubitably , then , my father be an impostor : more Society prove it . the squire listen like one pelt by a storm , sure of his day to come at the close of the two month . I gain his commendation by shun the metropolitan Balls , nor do my father press I to appear at they . it be tacitly understand between we that I should now and then support he at his dinner - table , and pass bow among the most select of his great lady . and this I do , and I feel at home with they , though I have to bear with roughness from one or two of the more venerable dame , which be not quite proper to good breeding . Old Lady Kane , great - aunt of the Marquis of Edbury , be particularly my tormentor , through her plain - speak comment on my father 's legal suit ; for I have to listen to she without wince , and agree in her general contempt of the george , and foil her query coolly , when I should have like to perform Jorian DeWitt 's express wish to ' squeeze the acid out of she in one grip , and toss she to the Gods that collect exhausted lemon . ' she take extraordinary liberty with I . 
 ' why not marry an Englishwoman ? rich young man ought to choose wife from their own people , out of their own set . foreign woman never get on well in this country , unless they join the hound to hunt the husband . ' 
 she cite naturalize lady famous for the pastime . her world and its outskirt she know thoroughly , even to the fact of my grandfather 's desire that I should marry Janet Ilchester . she name a duke 's daughter , an earl 's . of course I should have to stop the scandal : otherwise the choice I have be unrestricted . my father she evidently dislike , but she just as much dislike an encounter with his invincible bonhomie and dexterous tongue . she hint at family reason for be shy of he , assure I that I be not implicate in they . 
 ' the Guelph pattern be never much to my taste , ' she say , and it console I with the thought that he be not rank as an adventurer in the house he enter . I learn that he be suppose to depend chiefly on my vast resource . Edbury act the part of informant to the inquisitive harridan : ' her poor dear good - for - nothing Edbury ! whose only cure would be a nice , well - conduct girl , an heiress . ' she have cast her eye on Anna Penrhys , but consider her antecedent doubtful . spotless innocence be the sole receipt for Edbury 's malady . my father , in a fit of bold irony , propose Lady Kane for President of his Tattle and Scandal Club , a club of lady dot with select gentleman , the idea of which Jorian DeWitt claim the merit of starting , and my father surrender it to he , with the reservation , that Jorian intend an association of backbiter pledge to reveal all they know , whereas the Club , in its present form , be an engine of morality and decency , and a social safeguard , as well as an amusement . it comprise a Committee of Investigation , and a Court of Appeal ; its object be to arraign slander . Lady Kane decline the honour . ' I be not a washerwoman , ' she say to I , and speak of where dirty linen should be wash , and be distressingly broad in her innuendo concern Edbury 's stepmother . this Club sit and become a terror for a month , add something to my father 's reputation . his inexhaustible conversational art and humour give it such vitality as it have . lady of any age might apply for admission when well seconded : gentleman under forty - five year be rigidly exclude , and the senior must also have pass through the marriage ceremony . 
 outside tattle and scandal declare , that the Club be originate to serve as a club for Lady Edbury , but I choose to have no opinion upon what I know nothing of . 
 these matter be all ephemeral , and freak ; they produce , however , somewhat of the same effect on I as on my father , in persuade I that he be bear for the sphere he occupy , and render I rather callous as to the source of way and mean . I put my name to a bond for several thousand pound , in conjunction with Lord Edbury , think my father right in wish to keep my cheque - book unworried , lest the squire should be seize with a spasm of curiosity before the two month be over . ' I promise you I surprise he , ' my father say repeatedly . he do not say how : I have the suspicion that he do not know . his confidence and my grow recklessness act in unison . 
 happily the newspaper be quiet . I hop consequently to find peace at Riversley ; but there the rumour of the Grand Parade be fabulous , thank to Captain Bulsted and Julia , among other . these two again provoke an outbreak of rage from the squire , and I , after hear they , be almost disposed to side with he ; they suggest an inexplicable magnificence , and create an image of a man portentously endow with the capacity to throw dust in the eye . no description of the Balls could have furnish I with such an insight of their brilliancy as the consume ardour they awaken in the captain and his wife . he review they : ' princely entertainment ! Arabian Nights ! ' 
 she build they up piecemeal : ' the company ! the dress ! the band ! the supper ! ' the host be a personage supernatural . ' Aladdin 's magician , if you like , ' say Julia , ' only - good ! a perfect gentleman ! and I will say again , confound his enemy . ' she presume , as she be aware she might do , upon the squire 's prepossession in her favour , without reckon that I be always the victim . 
 ' hear o ' that new story 'bout a Dauphin ? ' he ask . 
 ' a dauphin ? ' quoth Captain bulste . ' I do not   know the fish . ' 
 ' you have   be in a pretty kettle of them lately , William . I hear of it yesterday on the Bench . Lord Shale , our new Lord - Lieutenant , bring it down . a trick they play the fellow 'bout a dauphin . serve he right . you hear anything 'bout it , Harry ? ' 
 I have not . 
 ' but I tell ye there be a dauphin mix up with he . a Dauphin and Mr. Ik Dine ! ' 
 ' Mr. Ik Dine ! ' exclaim the captain , perplexed . 
 ' ay , that be german lingo , William , and you ought to know it if you be a loyal sailor mean " I serve . " ' 
 ' Mr. Beltham , ' say the captain , seriously , ' I give you my word of honour as a man and a british officer , I do not   understand one syllable of what you be say ; but if it mean any insinuation against the gentleman who condescend to extend his hospitality to my wife and I , I must , with regret , quit the place where I have have the misfortune to hear it . ' 
 ' you stop where you be , William , ' the squire motion to he . ' Gad , I shall have to padlock my mouth , or I shall not   have a friend leave soon ... confound fellow ... I tell you they call he Mr. Ik Dine in town . Ik Dine and a Dauphin ! they make a regular clown and pantaloon o ' the pair , I be tell . couple o ' pretender to Thrones invite to dine together and talk over their chance and show their private mark . Oho ! by - and - by , William ! you and I ! never a man make such a fool of in his life ! ' 
 the lady retire . the squire continue , in a furious whisper : 
 ' they get the two together , William . who be you ? I be a Dauphin ; who be you ? I be Ik Dine , bar sinister . oh ! say the other , then I take precedence of you ! devil a bit , say the other ; I have   get more spot than you . Proof , say one . you first , t ' other . count , one cry . t ' other sing out , Measles . well than a die Dauphin , roar t ' other ; and swear both of ' m ' twa nothing but port - wine stain and pimple . ha ! ha ! and , William , will you believe it ? the couple go round beg the company to count spot ha ! ha ! to prove their big birth ! oh , Lord , I would ha ' pay a penny to be there ! a Jack o ' Bedlam Ik Dine damn idiot ! make name o ' Richmond stink . '   Captain Bulsted shoot a wild stare round the room to make sure that the lady have go .   ' I tell ye , William , I have it from Lord Shale himself only yesterday on the Bench . he bring it to we hot from town do not   know I know the fellow ; say the fellow 's charge and fire himself off all day and all night too - can't   make he out . say London 's mad about he : lot o ' woman , the fool ! ha , ha ! a Dauphin ! ' 
 ' ah , well , sir , ' Captain Bulsted supplicate feverishly , rub his brow and whisker . 
 ' it be true , William . Fellow ought to be take up and commit as a common vagabond , and would be anywhere but in London . I would jail he ' fore you cock your eye twice . Fellow come here and talk I over to grant he a couple o ' month to prove he have not   swindle his son of every scrap of his money . we shall soon see . not many week to run ! and pretend fellow swear to I can get he into Parliament ; swear he will get he in ' fore the two month be over ! an infernal ' 
 ' please to recollect , sir ; the old hereditary shall excuse you ' 
 ' Gout , you mean , William ? by ' 
 ' you be speak in the presence of his son , sir , and you be try the young gentleman 's affection for you hard . ' 
 ' eh ? 'cause I be his friend ? Harry , ' my grandfather face round on I , ' do not   you know I ' m the friend you can trust ? Hal , do I ever borrow a farthing of you ? do not   I , the day of your majority , hand you the whole of your inheritance from your poor break - hearted mother , with interest , and treat you like a man ? and never play spy , never make an inquiry , till I hear the scamp have be fasten on you like a blood - sucker , and sing hymn into the ear of that squeamish dolt of a pipe - smoking parson , Peterborough never think of do it ! be I the man that drag your grandmother 's name through the street and soil your ? ' 
 I remark that I be sensible of the debt of gratitude I owe to he , but would rather submit to the scourge , or to destitution , than listen to these attack on my father . 
 ' cut yourself loose , Harry , ' he cry , a trifle mollify . ' do not   season his stew d ' ye hear ? Stick to decent people . why , you do not   expect he will be lock up in the Tower for a finish , eh ? it will be newgate , or the Bench . he and his dauphin ha ! ha ! a rascal crow and a Jack Dauphin ! ' 
 Captain Bulsted reach I his hand . ' you have a great deal to bear , Harry . I commend you , my boy , for take it manfully . ' 
 ' I say no more , ' quoth the squire . ' but what I say be true . the fellow give his little dinner and supper to his marchioness , countess , duchess , and play clown and pantaloon among the man . he think a parcel o ' broidered petticoat will float he . so they may till a tradesman send stark mad pop a pin into he . Harry , I would as lief hang on to a fire - ship . here 's Ilchester tell I ... and Ilchester speak of he under his breath now as if he be sit in a pew funk the parson . confound the fellow ! I say he be guilty of treason . Pooh ! who care ! he cut out the dandy of his day , do he ? he be past sixty , if he be a month . it be all damned harlequinade . let he twirl off one columbine or another , or a dozen , and then the last of he ! fellow make the world look like a farce . he be get about eight foot by five to caper on , and all London gap at he geese ! be you a gentleman and a man of sense , Harry Richmond , to let yourself be lug about in public by the Lord ! like a pair of street - tumbler in spangled haunch - bag , father and boy , on a patch of carpet , and a drum banging , and toss and turn inside out , and my God ! the ass of a fellow strut the ring with you on his shoulder ! that be the spectacle . and you , Harry , now I will ask you , do you mean your wife egad , it would be a pretty scene , with your princess in hip - up petticoat , stiff as bottle - funnel top down'ard , air a whole leg , and knuckle a tambourine ! ' 
 ' not cry , my dear lad ? ' Captain Bulsted put his arm round I kindly , and try to catch a glimpse of my face . I let he see I be not go through that process . ' whew ! ' say he , ' and enough to make any christian sweat ! you be in a bath , Harry . I would not   expect the man who murder his godmother for one shilling and fivepence three - farthing the other day , to take such a slinging , and think he deserve it . ' 
 my power of endurance have reach its limit . 
 ' you tell I , sir , you have this brutal story from the Lord - Lieutenant of the county ? ' 
 ' ay , from Lord Shale . but I will not   have you go to he and betray our connection with a ' 
 ' Halloo ! ' Captain Bulsted sing out to his wife on the lawn . ' and now , squire , I have have my dose . and you will permit I to observe , that I find it emphatically what we use to call at school black - jack . ' 
 ' and you be all the well for it afterwards , William . ' 
 ' we do not arrive at that opinion , sir . Harry , your arm . an hour with the lady will do we both good . the squire , ' he murmur , wipe his forehead as he go out , ' have a knack of bring we into close proximity with hell - fire when he please . ' 
 Julia scream on behold we , ' be not   you two man as pale as death ! ' 
 Janet come and look . ' merely a dose , ' say the captain . ' we be anxious to play battledore and shuttlecock madly . ' 
 ' so he shall , the dear ! ' Julia caress he . ' we will all have a tournament in the wet - weather shed . ' 
 Janet whisper to I , ' be it the return thank ? ' 
 ' the what ? ' say I , with the dread at my heart of something bad than I have hear . 
 she hail Julia to run and fetch the battledore , and then tell I she have be oblige to confiscate the newspaper that morning and cast the burden on post - office negligence . ' they reach grandada 's hand by afternoon post , Harry , and he find objectionable passage blot or cut out ; and as long as the scissor do not   touch the business column and the debate , he never ask I what I have be do . he think I keep a scrap - book . I have not   often time in the morning to run an eye all over the paper . this morning it be the first thing I see . ' 
 what have she see ? she lead I out of view of the window and show I . 
 my father be accuse of have stand up at a public dinner and return thank on behalf of an Estate of the Realm : it read monstrously . I cease to think of the suffering inflict on I by my grandfather . 
 Janet and I , side by side with the captain and Julia , carry on the game of battledore and shuttlecock , in a match to see whether the unmarried could keep the shuttle fly as long as the marry , with vary fortune . she gaze on I , to give I the comfort of her sympathy , too much , and I be too intent on the vision of my father either persecute by lie or guilty of hideous folly , to allow the match to be a fair one . so Julia could inform the squire that she and William have give the unmarried pair a handsome beating , when he appear peep round one of the shed - pillar . 
 ' of course you beat them , ' say the squire . ' it be not my girl 's fault . ' he say more , to the old tune , which drive Janet away . 
 I remember , when back in the London vortex , the curious soft beauty she win from cast up her eye to watch the descend feather , and the brilliant direct beam of those thick - browed , firm , clear eye , with her frown , and her set lip and brave figure , when she be in the act of strike to keep up a regular quick fusilade . I have need of calm memory . the town be astir , and hum with one name . 




 CHAPTER XLII . the MARQUIS of EDBURY and his PUPPET 

 I pass from man to man , hear hint and hesitation , alarm half - remark , presume to be address to one who could supply the remainder , and deduce consequence . there be a clear atmosphere in the street of Clubs . Jennings be the first of my father 's more intimate acquaintance to meet I frankly . he speak , though not with great seriousness , of the rumour of a possible prosecution . Sir Weeton Slater trip up to we with a mixed air of solicitude and restraint , ask whether I be well , and whether I have see the newspaper that morning ; and on my inform he that I have just come up from Riversley , on account of certain rumour , advise I to remain in town strictly for the present . he also hint at rumour of prosecution . ' the fact be ' he begin several time , render discreet , I suppose , by my juvenility , fierte , and repute wealth . 
 we be join by Admiral Loftus and Lord Alton . they query and counterquerie as to passage between my father and the newspaper , my father and the committee of his Club , preserve sufficient consideration for I to avoid the serious matter in all but distant allusion ; a point upon which the breeding of Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn be not so accurate a guide to he . an exciting public scandal soon gather knot of gossip in Clubland . we see Wedderburn break from a group some way down the pavement and pick up a fresh crumb of amusement at one of the doorstep . ' Roy Richmond be have his benefit to - day ! ' he say , and repeat this and that , half audible to I . for the rest , he pooh - poohe the idea of the Law intervene . his ' how d ' ye do , Mr. Richmond , how d ' ye do ? ' be almost congratulatory . ' I think we meet at your father 's table to - night ? it will not   be in the Tower , take my word for it . oh ! the paper ! there be no Act to compel a man to deny what appear in the paper . no such luck as the Tower ! though Littlepitt   Mr. Wedderburn 's nickname for our Premier   would be fool enough for that . he would . if he could turn attention from his Bill , he would do it . we should have to dine off Boleyn 's block : coquite horum obsonia he would say , eh ? " 
 Jennings espy my father 's carriage , and step to speak a word to the footman . he return , say , with a puff of his cheek : ' the Grand Monarque have be send his state equipage to give the old backbiting cripple Brisby an airing . he be for horse exercise to - day they have   drop he in Courtenay Square . there go Brisby . he would take the good Samaritan 's shilling to buy a flask of poison for he . he will use Roy 's carriage to fetch and carry for that venomous old woman Kane , I will swear . ' 
 ' she be a male in scripture , ' say Wedderburn , and this remind I of an anecdote that remind he of another , and after tell they , he hand round his hat for the laugh , as my father would have phrase it . 
 ' have her ladyship declare war ? ' Sir Weeton Slater inquire . 
 ' no , that be not her preliminary to wage it , ' Wedderburn reply . these high - pressure smart talker have a moment of dulness , and he bethink he that he must run into the Club for letter , and be busy at Westminster , where , if anything fresh occur between meridian and six o'clock , he should be glad , he say , to have word of it by messenger , that he might not be behind his Age . 
 the form of humour to express the speed of the world be common , but it strike I as a terrible illustration of my father 's . I have still a sense of pleasure in the thought that these intimate of his be gentleman who relish and , perhaps , really like he . they be not parasite ; not the kind of man find hang about vulgar profligate . 
 I quit they . Sir Weeton Slater walk half - a - dozen step beside I . ' may I presume on a friendly acquaintance with your father , Mr. Richmond ? ' he say . ' the fact be you will not be offend ? he be apt to lose his head , unless the Committee of Supply limit he very precisely . I be aware that there be no material necessity for any restriction . ' he nod to I as to one of the marvellously endow , as who should say , the Gods preside at your birth . the worthy baronet struggle to impart his meaning , which be , that he would have I define something like an allowance to my father , not so much for the purpose of curtail his expenditure he do not venture upon private ground as to bridle my father 's idea of thing possible for a private gentleman in this country . in that character none be like he . as to his suit , or appeal , he could assure I that Serjeant Wedderburn , and all who would or could speak on the subject , see no prospect of success ; not any . the bad of it be , that it cause my father to commit himself in sundry way . it give a handle to his enemy . it he glance at I indicatively . 
 I thank the well - mean gentleman without encourage he to continue . 
 ' it lead he to perform once more as a Statue of Bronze before the whole of gap London ! ' I could have add . that scene on the pine - promontory arise in my vision , follow by other scene of the happy german day . I have no power to conjure up the princess . 
 Jorian DeWitt be the man I want to see . after application at his Club and lodging I find he drag his Burgundy leg in the Park , on his road to pay a morning visit to his fair french enchantress . I impeach he , and he plead guilty , clearly not wish to take I with he , nor would he give I Mlle . Jenny 's address , which I have . by virtue of the threat that I would accompany he if he do not satisfy I , I manage to extract the story of the Dauphin , aghast at the discovery of its be true . the fatal after - dinner speech he believe to have be actually speak , and he touch on that first . ' a trap be lay for he , Harry Richmond ; and a deuced clever trap it be . they smuggle in special reporter . there be not   a bit of necessity for the toast . but the old vixen have show her hand , so now he must fight . he can beat her single - handed on settee . he will find she a tartar at long bowl : she stick at nothing . she blaze out , that he scandalize her family . she have a dozen indictment against he . you must stop in town and keep watch . there be fire in my leg to explode a powder - magazine a mile off ! ' 
 ' be it the Margravine of Rippau ? ' I inquire . I could think of no other waspish old woman . 
 ' Lady Dane , ' say Jorian . ' she set Edbury on to face he with the Dauphin . you do not   fancy it come of the young dog " all of himself , " do you ? why , it be clever ! he trot about a briefless little barrister , a scribbler , devilish clever and impudent , who do his farce for he . Tenby be the fellow 's name , and it be the only thing I have not   hear he pun on . pun be the smallpox of the language ; we be curse with an epidemic . by gad , the next time I meet he I will roar out for vaccine matter . ' 
 he describe the dinner give by Edbury at a celebrated City tavern where my father and this so - call Dauphin be bring together . ' dinner to - night , ' he nod , as he limp away on his blissful visit of ceremony to sprightly Chassediane   a bouquet have go in advance : he leave I stupefy . the sense of ridicule envelop I in suffocating fold , howl sentence of the squire 's boeotian burlesque by fit . I feel that I could not but take the world 's part against the man who allow himself to be make preposterous externally , when I know he to be stake his frail chance and my fortune with such rashness . it be unpardonable for one in his position to incur ridicule . nothing but a sense of duty keep I from rush out of London , and I might have indulge the impulse advantageously . Delay throw I into the clutch of Lady Kane herself , on whom I look with as compose a visage as I could command , while she lean out of her carriage chattering at I , and sometimes over my head to pass gentleman . 
 she want I to take a seat beside she , she have so much to say . be there not some funny story abroad of a pretender to the Throne of France ? she ask , wrinkle her crow'sfeet eyelid to peer at I , and wish to have the particular . I have none to offer . ' ah ! well , ' say she ; ' you stay in London ? come and see I . I be sure you be sensible . you and I can put our head together . he be too often in Courtenay Square , and he be ten year too young for that , still . he ought to have good advice . tell I , how can a woman who can not   guide herself help a man ? and the most difficult man alive ! I be sure you understand I . I can not   drive out in the afternoon for they . they make a crush here , and a clatter of tongue ! ... that be my private grievance . but he be now keep person away who have the first social claim ... I know they can not   appear . do not   look confuse ; no one accuse you . only I do say it be get terribly hot in London for somebody . call on I . will you ? ' 
 she name she hour . I bow as soon as I perceive my opportunity . her allusion be to Lady Edbury , and to impute usurpation of my father 's . I walk down to the Chambers where Temple be read Law , for a refuge from these annoyance . I be in love with the modest shadow life Temple live , diligently read , and glance on the world as through a dusky window , happy to let it run its course while he sharpen his weapon . a look at Temple 's face tell I he have hear quite as much as be know in the West . dining - hall of lawyer be not cistercian ; he be able to give I three distinct version of the story of the Dauphin . no one could be friendly . indeed Temple now urge I forcibly to prevent my father from spend money and wear his heart out in vain , by stop the case in Dettermain and Newson 's hand . they be respectable lawyer , he say , in a lawyer 's ordinary tone when include such of his specie as be not black sheep . he think it possible that my father 's personal influence overbore their judgment . in fact , nothing bind they to refuse to work for he , and he believe that they have submit their view for his consideration . 
 ' I do wish he would throw it up , ' Temple exclaim . ' it make he enemy . and just examine it , you see he could get no earthly good out of it : he might as well try to scale a perpendicular rock . but when I be with he , I be ready to fancy what he please I acknowledge that . he have excess of phosphorus , or he be ultra - electrical ; doctor could tell we well than lawyer . ' Temple speak of the clever young barrister Tenby as the man whom his father have hear laugh over the trick play upon ' Roy Richmond . ' I conceive that I might furnish Mr. Tenby a lively kind of amusement , and the thought that I have once be sur le terrain , and have bitterly regret it , by no mean deter I from the idea of a second expedition , so black be my mood . a review of the circumstance , aid by what reach my ear before the night go over , convince I that Edbury be my man . his subordinate help he to the instrument , and possibly to the plot , but Edbury be the capital offender . 
 the scene of the prank be not in itself so bad as the stuff which a cunning anecdotist could make out of it . Edbury invite my father to a dinner at a celebrated City tavern . he keep his guest   Jennings , Jorian DeWitt , Alton , Wedderburn , be among the few I be acquaint with who be present   await the arrival of a person for whom he profess extraordinary respect . the Dauphin of France be announce . a mild , flabby , amiable - look old person , with shelve forehead and grey lock excellently build for the object , Jorian say enter . the capet head and embonpoint be there . as far as a personal resemblance might go , his pretension to be the long - lose Dauphin be grotesquely convincing , for , notwithstanding the accurate picture of the Family present by he , the man be a pattern bourgeois : a sturdy impostor , one would have think , and I think so when I hear of he ; but I have be assure that he have actually grow old in the delusion that he , carry on his business in the City of London , be the identical Dauphin . 
 Edbury play his part by lead his poor old victim half way to meet his other most honoured guest , hesitate then and craving counsel whether he be right in etiquette to advance the dauphin so far . the Dauphin leave he mildly to decide the point : he be eminently mild throughout , and seem to have think himself in good faith surround by believer and adherent . Edbury 's task soon grow too delicate for that coarse boy . in my father 's dexterous hand he at once lose his assumption of the gallantry of manner which could alone help he to retain his advantage . when the wine be in he he begin to bawl . I could imagine the sort of dialogue he raise . bet on the Dauphin , bet on Roy : they be match as on a racecourse . the Dauphin remember incident of his residence in the Temple , with a beautiful juvenile faintness : a conscientious angling for recollection , Wedderburn say . Roy be request to remember something , to drink and refresh his memory infantine incident be suggest . he fence the treacherous host during dinner with superb complacency . 
 the Dauphin be of an immoveable composure . he ' state simple fact : he be the Dauphin of France , providentially rescue from the Temple in the day of the Terror . ' for this deliverance , somewhat to the consternation of the other , he offer up a short prayer of thanksgive over his plate . he have , he say , encounter incredulity . he have his proof . he who have never be on the soil of France since early boyhood , speak French with a pure accent : he have the physical and moral constitution of the Family : owe to event attend his infant day , he be timid . Jorian imitate he : ' I start at the opening of a door ; I see dark face in my sleep : it be a dungeon ; I be at the knee of my Unfortunate Royal Father , with my Beautiful Mother . ' his French be quaint , but not absurd . he become loquacious , apostrophize vacancy with uplifted hand and eye . the unwonted invitation to the society of nobleman make he conceive his dauphinship to be on the high road to a recognition in England , and he be persuade to drink and exhibit proof : which be that he have the constitution of the Family , as aforesaid , in every particular ; that he be peculiarly mark with testificatory spot ; and that his mere aspect inspire all member and branch member of the Family with awe and stupefaction . one of the latter hearing of he , have appoint to meet he in a pastrycook 's shop . he meet he , and leave the place with a cloud on his brow , show token of respectful sympathy . 
 conceive a monomaniacal obese old english citizen , give to lift hand and eye and address the cornice , claim to be an illustrious boy , and call on a beautiful historic mother and unfortunate Royal sire to attest it ! no wonder the table be shake with laughter . he appeal to Tenby constantly , as to the one man he know in the room . Tenby it be who make the discovery of he somewhere in the City , where he earn his livelihood either as a corn - merchant ; or a stockbroker , or a chronometer - maker , or a drysalter , and be always willing to gratify a customer with the sight of his proof of identity . Mr. Tenby make it his business to push his clamorous waggishness for the exhibition . I could readily believe that my father be more than his match in disposable sally and weight of humour , and that he shield the old creature successfully , so long as he have a tractable be to protect . but the Dauphin be ply with wine , and the marquis have his fun . proof upon proof in verification of his claim be proffer by the now - tremulous son of St. Louis so he call himself . with , Jorian admit , a real courtly dignity , he stand up and propose to lead the way to any neighbouring cabinet to show the spot on his person ; live witness to the truth of his allegation , he declare they to be . the squire have authority for his broad farce , except in so far as he mix up my father in the swinery of it . 
 I grow more and more convinced that my father never could have lose his presence of mind when he find himself in the net of a plot to cover he with ridicule . he be the only one who do not retire to the Dauphin 's ' chamber of testification , ' to return convulse with vinous laughter after gravely inspect the evidence ; for which abstention the Dauphin reproach he violently , in round term of abuse , challenge he to go through a similar process . this be the signal for Edbury , Tenby , and some of the rest . they form a circle , one - half for the Dauphin , one for Roy . how long the boorish fun last , and what exactly come of it , I do not hear . Jorian DeWitt say my father lose his temper , a point contest by Wedderburn and Jennings , for it be unknown of he . anyhow , he thunder to some effect , inasmuch as he detach those that have gentlemanly feeling from the wanton roysterer , and next day the latter plead wine . but they tell the story , not without embellishment . the world follow their example . 
 I din and sleep at Temple 's house , not care to meet my incarnate humiliation . I send to hear that he be safe . a quiet evening with a scholarly man , and a man of strong practical ability and shrewdness , like Mr. Temple , do I good . I wish my father and I be on the same footing as he and his son , and I may add his daughter . they all talk sensibly ; they be at feud with nobody ; they reflect their condition . it be a simple orderly english household , of which the father be the pillar , the girl the ornament , the son the hope , grow to take his father 's place . my envy of such a home be acute , and I think of Janet , and how well she be fashion to build one resemble it , if only the mate allot to she should not be a fantastical dreamer . Temple 's character seem to I to demand a wife like Janet on its merit ; an idea that depress I exceedingly . I have introduce Temple to Anna Penrhys , who be very kind to he ; but these two be not frame to be other than friend . Janet , on the contrary , might some day perceive the sterling fellow Temple be , notwithstanding his moderate height . she might , I think . I remember that I have once wish that she would , and I be amazed at myself . but why ? she be a girl sure to marry . I brush these meditation away . they recur all the time I be in Temple 's house . 
 Mr. Temple wait for my invitation to touch on my father 's Case , when he distinctly pronounce his opinion that it could end but in failure . though a strict Constitutionalist , he have word of disgust for prince , acknowledging , however , that we be not practical in our use of they , and keep they for political purpose often to the perversion of our social law and their natural disposition . he speak of his son 's freak in join the Navy . ' that be the princess 's doing , ' say Temple . ' she talk of our naval hero , till she make I feel I have only to wear the anchor button to be one myself . do not   tell she I be invalid from the service , Richie , for the truth be , I believe , I half - sham . and the time will not   be lose . you will see I shall extract guineas from " old ocean " like salt . precious few barrister understand maritime case . the other day I be in Court , and prompt a great Q.C. in a case of collision . do not   I , sir ? ' 
 ' I think there be a hoarse whisper audible up to the Judge 's seat at interval , ' say Mr. Temple . 
 ' the Bar can not confess to obligation from those who do not   wear the robe , ' Temple rejoin . 
 his father advise I to read for the Bar , as a piece of very good training . 
 I appeal to Temple , whether he think it possible to read law - book in a cockboat in a gale of wind . 
 Temple grimace and his father nod . still it strike I that I might one day have the felicity of quiet hour to sit down with Temple and read Law far behind he in the race . and he envy I , in his friendly manner , I know . my ambition have be blow to tatter . 
 a new day dawn . the household rise and meet at the breakfast - table , devoid of any dread of the morning newspaper . their talk be like the chirrup of bird . Temple and his father walk away together to chamber , bent upon actual business upon do something ! I reflect emphatically , and compare they to ship with rudder , while I be at the mercy of wind , tide , and wave . I call at Dettermain and Newson 's , and hear there of a discovery of a witness essential to the case , either in North Wales or in New South . I do not , as I have intend , put a veto on their proceeding . the thing to do be to see my father , and cut the case at the fountain head . for this purpose , it be imperative that I should go to he , and prepare myself for the interview by look at the newspaper first . I buy one , hastily run my eye down the column in the shop . his name be print , but merely in a fashionable notification that carriage take up and set down for his costume Ball , accord to certain regulation . the relief of comparative obscurity help I to breathe freely : not to be laugh at , be a gain . I be rather inclined to laud his courage in enter assembly - room , where he must be aware that he would see the Dauphin on every face . perhaps he be guilty of some new extravagance last night , too late for scandal to reinforce the reporter ! 
 Mrs. Waddy have a woeful visage when inform I that he be out , go to Courtenay Square . she venture a murmur of bill come in . like everybody else , she fancy he draw his supply from my inexhaustible purse ; she hop the bill would be pay off immediately : the servant ' wage be overdue . ' never can I get he to attend to small account , ' she whimper , and be so ready to cry outright , that I say , ' Tusk , ' and with the one word give her comfort . ' of course , you , Mr. Harry , can settle they , I know that . ' we be draw near to poor old Sewis 's legacy , even for the settling of the small account ! 
 London be a narrow place to one not care to be see . I could not remain in this creditor - riddled house ; I shun the Parks , the Clubs , and the broad , bright street of the West . musing on the refreshing change it would be to I to find myself suddenly on board Captain Jasper Welsh 's barque Priscilla , bear away to strange clime and tongue , the world before I , I put on the stride pace which do not invite interruption , and no one but Edbury would have take the liberty . I hear his shout . ' Halloa ! Richmond . ' he be drive his friend Witlington in his cabriolet . ' Richmond , my hearty , where the deuce have you be ? I want you to dine with I the other night . ' 
 I reply , look at he steadily , that I wish I have be there . 
 ' compendious lark ! ' cry he , in the slang of his dog 's day . ' I say ; you be one at Duke Fitz 's masquerade to - night ? tell we your toggery . hang it , you might go for the Black Prince . I be Prince Hal . get a headache ? come to my Club and try my mixture . yoick ! it would make Methuselah and Melchisedec jump up and have a twirl and a fandango . I say , you be thick with that little french actress Chastedian jolly little woman ! too much to say for herself to suit I . ' 
 he describe the style of woman that delight he an ideal english shepherdess of the print - shop , it appear , and of extremely remote interest to I , I think at the time . eventually I appoint to walk round to his Club , and he touch his horse gently , and bob his diminutive henchman behind his smart cabriolet , the admiration of the street . 
 I find he wait for I on the step of his Club , puff a cigar with all his vigour , in the classic attitude of a trumpeter . my first word be : ' I think I have to accuse you of insult I . ' 
 ' insult you , Richmond ! ' he cry , much surprised , hold his cigar in transit . 
 ' if you insult my father , I make you responsible to I . ' 
 ' insult old Duke Fitz ! I give you my word of honour , Richmond why , I like he ; I like the old boy . would not   hurt he for the world and all Havannah . 
 what the deuce have you get into your head ? come in and smoke . ' 
 the mention of his dinner and the Dauphin craze he with laughter . he beg I as a man to imagine the scene : the old Bloated Bourbon of London Wall and Camberwell ! an Illustrious boy ! drink like a fish ! ready to show himself to the waiter ! and then with ' Gee ' and ' Gaw , ' the marquis spout out reminiscence of scene , the good ever witness ! ' up start the Dauphin . " damn you , sir ! and damn I , sir , if believe you have a spot on your whole body ! " and snuffle and puff you should have be there Richmond , I write to ask you : do , upon my life ! want you there . Lord ! why , you will not   get such fun in a century . and old Roy ! he behave uncommonly finely : say capital thing , by Jove ! never see he shine so ; old trump ! say Dauphin , " my beautiful mother have a longing for strawberry out of season . I be mark with a strawberry , here . " say Roy : " it be an admirable and roomy site , but as I be not your enemy , sir , I doubt if I shall often have the opportunity to behold it . " ha ! ha ! gee ! Richmond , you have   miss the deuced good scene ever act . ' 
 how could I , after have have an adversary like Prince Otto , call upon a fellow such as Edbury to give I reason for his conduct ? he rollick and laugh until my ungovernable impatience bring he to his sens . 
 ' dash it , you be a fire - eater , I know , Richmond . we can not   fight in this country ; be not   allow . and fighting 's infernal folly . by Jove ! if you be go to tumble down every man who enjoy old Roy , you have   your work cut out for you . he be long chalk the good joke out . ' twixt you and I , he do return thank . what do it matter what old Duke Fitz do ? I give he a lift on his ladder with all my heart . he keep a capital table . and I will be hang if he have not   get the secret of the woman . how he do it old Roy ! if the lord be lady they would vote he premier peer , double quick . and I will tell you what , Richmond , I be think a devil of a good - temper fellow for not keep watch over Courtenay Square . I do not   call it my business to be house dog for a pretty stepmother . but there be talk and nodding , and oh ! leave all that : come in and smoke , and let I set you up ; and I will shake your hand . Halloa ! I be hail . ' 
 a lady , grasp the veil across her face , beckon her hand from a closed carriage below . Edbury run down to she . I catch sight of ravish golden lock , remind I of Mabel Sweetwinter 's hair , and prick I with a sensation of spite at the sex for their deplorable madness in the choice of favourite . Edbury call I to come to the carriage window . I move slowly , but the carriage wheel about and roll away . I could just see the outline of a head muffle in fur and lace . 
 ' Queer fish , woman ! ' he deliver himself of the philosophical ejaculation cloudily . I be not on term with he to offer any remark upon the one in question . his imperturbable good humour foil I , and I leave he , merely give he a warning , to which his answer be : 
 ' oh ! come in and have a bottle of claret . ' 
 Claret or brandy have do its work on he by the time I encounter he some hour later , in the Park . Bramham DeWitt , whom I meet in the same neighbourhood , offer I a mount after lunch , advise I to keep near my father as much as I conveniently could ; and he be sure to appear in the Park , I go , and hear his name to the right and leave of I . he be now , as he say to I once that he should become , ' the tongue of London . ' I could hardly expect to escape from curious scrutiny myself ; I be look at . here and there I have to lift my hat and bow . the stultification of one 's feeling and idea in circumstance which divide and set they at variance be bad than positive pain . the look shed on I be rather flattering , but I know that in the background I be feel to be the son of the notorious . Edbury come trot up to we like a shaken sack , call , ' Neigh ! any of you see old Roy ? ' Bramham DeWitt , a stiff , fashionable man of fifty , proud of his blood and quick as his cousin Jorian to resent an impertinence , reply : 
 ' be you the Marquis of Edbury , or a drunken groom , sir ? ' 
 ' Gad , old gentleman , I have   half a mind to ride you down , ' say Edbury , and , espy I , challenge I to a race to run down the fogy . 
 a cavalcade of six abreast come canter along . I see my father listen to a word from Lady Edbury , and push his horse to intercept the marquis . they speak . ' presently , presently , ' my father say ; ' ride to the rear , and keep at half a stone 's throw - say , a groom 's distance . ' 
 ' Groom be hang ! ' Edbury retort . ' I make a bet I would drive you out of the Park , old Roy ! ' 
 ' ride behind , then , ' say my father , and to my astonishment Edbury obey he , with laughter . Lady Edbury smile to herself ; and I experience the esteem I perceive in she for a masterful manner . a few minute later my father beckon I to pay my respect to Graf Kesensky , an ambassador with strong english predilection and some influence among we . he ask I if he be right in suppose I wish to enter Parliament . I say he be , wonder at the interest a foreigner could find in it . the count stop a quiet - pace gentleman . Bramhaxri DeWitt join they , and a group of friend . I be introduce to Mr. Beauchamp Hill , the Government whip , who beg I to call on he with reference to the candidature of a Sussex borough : ' that be , ' say he , turn to Graf Kesensky , ' if you be sure the place be open ? I have   hear nothing of Falmouth 's accident . ' the count reply that Falmouth be his intimate friend ; he have receive a special report that Falmouth be die , just as he be on the point of mount his horse . ' we shall not   have lose time , ' say Mr. Hill . the Government want vote . I go down to the House of Commons at midnight to see he . he have then hear of Falmouth 's hopeless condition , and after extract my political view , which be for the nonce those of a happy subserviency , he express his belief that the new writ for the borough of Chippenden might be out , and myself seat on the Government bench , within a very short period . nor would it be necessary , he think , for the Government nominee to spend money : ' though that do not affect you , Mr. Richmond ! ' my suppose wealth give I currency even in political circle . 




 CHAPTER XLIII . I become one of the chosen of the nation 

 an entire revulsion in my feeling and my way of thinking be cause by this sudden change of prospect . a member of our Parliament , I could then write to Ottilia , and tell she that I have not waste time . and it be due to my father , I confess , when he return from his ball at dawn , that I should thank he for speak to Graf Kesensky . ' oh ! ' say he , ' that be our luck , Richie . I have be speak about you to hundred for the last six month , and now we owe it to a foreigner ! ' I thank he again . he look eminently handsome in his Henry III . costume , and be dispose to be as luxurious as his original . he have bring Count Lika , Secretary of Legation to the Austrian Embassy , dress as an Albanian , with he . the two be stretch on couch , and discourse of my father 's reintroduction of the sedan chair to society . my father explain that he have order a couple of dozen of these chair to be build on a pattern of his own . and he add , ' by the way , Richie , there will be sedanier porter to pay to - day . poor man should be pay immediately . ' I agree with the monarch . contemplate he , I become insensible to the sting of ridicule which have be shoot through I , agonize I for the last eight - and - forty hour . still I think : can I never escape from the fascination ? let I only get into Parliament ! the idea in I be that Parliament lift I near to Ottilia , and would prompt I to resolute action , out of his tangle of glitter cobwebs . I tell he of my interview with Beauchamp Hill . ' I have never know Kesensky wrong yet , ' say he ; ' except in his backing of Falmouth 's horse . ' Count Lika murmur that he hop his Chief would be wrong in something else : he speak significantly . my father raise his eyebrow . ' in his opinion , ' Lika accept the invitation to pursue , ' Prince Ernest will not let that announcement stand uncontradicted . ' 
 my father 's eye dwelt on he . ' be we accuse of it ? ' 
 Lika slip from the question . ' who be accuse of a newspaper 's doing ? it be but the denial of a statement . ' 
 ' I dare they to deny it ! and , Lika , my dear fellow , light I a cigarette , ' say my father . 
 ' then , ' say Lika , touch the flame delicately , ' you take the view that Kesensky be wrong in another thing besides horse . ' 
 I believe he strike on the subject casually : there be nothing for he to gain or lose in it ; and he have a liking for my father . 
 after puff the cigarette twice or thrice my father throw it down , resume his conversation upon the sedan , the appropriate dress of certain of the great masquerade lady , and an incident that appear to charge Jorian DeWitt with have misconduct himself . the moment Lika have go upstairs for two or three hour ' sleep , he say to I : ' Richie , you and I have no time for that . we must have a man at Falmouth 's house by eight o'clock . if the scrubbing - maid on all four - not an inelegant position , I have remark declare he dead , we be at Bartlett 's   money - lender   by ten : and in Chippenden borough before two post meridian . as I be a tactician , there be mischief ! but I will turn it to my us , as I do our poor Jorian to - night ; he smuggle in the chassediane : I lead she out on my arm . of that by and by . the point be , that from your oath in Parliament you fly to Sarkeld . I implore you now , by your love for I and the princess , not to lose precious minute . Richie , we will press thing so that you shall be in Sarkeld by the end of the month . my son ! my dear boy ! how you love I once ! you do still ! then follow my direction . I have a head . ay , you think it wild ? ' tis true , my mother be a poetess . but I will convince my son as I be convince the world - tut , tut ! to avoid swell talk , I tell you , Richie , I have my hand on the world 's wheel , and now be the time for you to spring from it and gain your altitude . if you fail , my success be emptiness . ' 
 ' will you avoid Edbury and his like , and protect yourself ? ' be my form of stipulation , speak to counteract his urgency . 
 he give no answer beyond a wave of the hand suitable to his princely one - colour costume of ruffle lavender silk , and the magnificent leg he turn to front I . my sens even up to that period be so impressionable as to be sway by a rich dress and a grand manner when circumstance be not too unfavourable . now they seem very favourable , for they offer I an upward path to tread . his appearance propitiate I less after he have pass through the hand of his man Tollingby , but I have again surrender the lead to he . as to the risk of proceeding be take against he , he laugh scornfully at the suggestion . ' they dare not . the more I dare , the less dare they . ' again I listen to his curious roundabout reasoning , which drag humour at its heel like a comical cur , proclaim itself imposingly , in spite of the mongrel 's barking , to be prudence and common sense . could I deny that I owe he gratitude for the thing I cherish most ? for my acquaintance with Ottilia ? for his service in Germany ? for the prospect of my elevation in England ? I could not ; and I try hard to be recklessly grateful . as to money , he reiterate that he could put his hand on it to satisfy the squire on the day of account : for the present , we must borrow . his argument upon borrowing which I know well , and wonder that I do not at the outset disperse with a breath of contempt gain on I singularly when review under the light of my immediate interest : it run thus : we have a rich or a barren future , just as we conceive it . the art of generalship in life consist in gather your scatter supply to suit a momentous occasion ; and it be the future which be chiefly in debt to we , and adjure we for its sake to fight the fight and conquer . that man be vile and fit to be trample on who can not count his future in gold and victory . if , as we find , we be always in debt to the past , we should determine that the future be in our debt , and draw on it . why let our future lie idle while we need succour ? for instance , to - morrow I be to have what save my reputation in the battle to - day ; shall I not take it at once ? the military commander who act on that principle overcome his adversary to a certainty . 
 ' you , Richie , the member for this borough of Chippenden , have win solid ground . I guarantee it to you . and you go straight from the husting , or the first taste of parliamentary bench , to sarkeld : you take your grandad 's proposition to Prince Ernest : you bring back the prince 's acceptance to the squire . can you hope to have a princess without a battle for she ? ' more and much more in this strain , until for he could read I and most human being swiftly on the surface , notwithstanding the pressure of his fancifulness he perceive that talking influence I far less than activity , and so after a hurried breakfast and an innocuous glance at the damp morning paper , we start to the money - lender 's , with Jennings to lend his name . we be in Chippenden close upon the hour my father have name , bring to the startled elector the first news of their member 's death . 
 during the heat of the canvass for vote I receive a kind letter from the squire in reply to one of mine , wherein he congratulate I on my prospect of success , and wound up : ' glad to see it announce you be off with that princess of your . show they we be as proud as they be , Harry , and a fig for the whole foreign lot ! come to Riversley soon , and be happy . ' what do that mean ? Heriot likewise say in a letter : ' so it be over ? the proud prince kick ? you will not thank I for tell you now what you know I think about it . ' I appeal to my father . ' Canvass ! canvass ! ' cry he ; and he persistently baffle I . it be from Temple I learn that on the day of our starting for Chippenden , the newspaper contain a paragraph in large print flatly deny upon authority that there be any foundation for the report of an intended marriage between the Princess of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld and an english gentleman . then I remember how that morning my father have fling the paper down , complain of their dampness . 
 would such denial have appear without Ottilia 's sanction ? 
 my father prove that I be harness to he ; there be no stopping , no time for grieve . Pace be his specific . he drag I the round of the voter ; he give dinner at the inn of true Liberals , and eat of they contentedly ; he deliver speech incessantly . the whole force of his . serio - comic genius be alive in its element at Chippenden . from ball and dinner , and a sharp contest to maintain his position in town , he be down among we by the first morning train , bright as Apollo , and quite the sun of the place , dazzle the independent elector and their wife , and even I somewhat ; amazing I , certainly . Dettermain , his lawyer , who have never see he in action , and suppose he would treat an election as he do his case , with fit and start of energy , be not less astonished , and try to curb he . 
 ' Mr. Dettermain , my dear sir , I apprehend it be the electoral maxim to woo the widow borough with the tear in its eye , and I shall do so hotly , in a right masculine manner , ' my father say . ' we have the start ; and if we beat the enemy by nothing else we will beat he by constitution . we be the first in the field , and not to reap it be to acknowledge oneself deficient in the very first instrument with which grass be cut . ' 
 our difficulty all through the election be to contend with his humour . the many triumph it win for he , both in speech and in action , turn at least the dialectic of the argument against we , and amusing , flattering , or bewildering , contribute to silence and hold we passive . political conviction of his own , I think I may say with truth , he have none . he would have be just as powerful , after his fashion , on the Tory side , plead for Mr. Normanton Hipperdon ; more , perhaps : he would have be more in earnest . his store of political axiom be Tory ; but he do remarkably well , and with no great difficulty , in confute they to the wife of voter , to the voter themselves , and at public assembly . our adversary be redoubtable ; a promising opposition member , oust from his seat in the North a handsome man , too , which my father admit , and wealthy , be junior partner in a City banking firm . Anna Penrhys know he , and treacherously reveal some of the enemy 's secret , notably concern what he term our incorrigible turn for bribery . 
 ' and that mean , ' my father say , ' that Mr. Hipperdon do not possess the art of talk to the lady . I shall try he in repartee on the husting . I must contrive to have our Jorian at my elbow . ' 
 the task of get Jorian to descend upon such a place as Chippenden worry my father more than electoral anxiety . Jorian write , ' my good wish to you . be careful of your head . the habit of the Anglo - Saxon be to conclude his burlesque with a play of cudgel . it be his notion of freedom , and at once the exordium and peroration of his eloquence . spare I the Sussex accent on your return . ' 
 my father read out the sentence of this letter with admire burst of indignation at the sarcasm , and an evident idea that I incline to jealousy of the force display . 
 ' but we must have he , ' he say ; ' I do not feel myself complete without Jorian . ' 
 so he make disposition for a concert to be give in Chippenden town . Jenny Chassediane be invite down to sing , and Jorian come in her wake , of course . he come to suffer torture . she be oblige enough to transform I into her weapon of chastisement upon the poor fellow for his behaviour to she at the ball - atrocious , I be bind to confess . on this point she hesitate just long enough to imply a doubt whether , under any circumstance , the due of man should be consider before those of her sex , and then strike her hand together with enthusiasm for my father , who be , she observe critical in millinery in the height of her ecstasy the most majestic , charming , handsome Henri III . imaginable , the pride and glory of the assembly , only one degree too rosy at night for the tone of the lavender , need a touch of french hand , and the mere trifle in want of compression about the waistband . she relate that a certain Prince Henri d'Angleterre have buzz at his ear annoyingly . ' Et Gascoigne , ou est - il ? ' call the King , and the Judge step forth to correct the obstreperous youth . the Judge be Jennings , clearly prepare by my father to foil the Prince no other than Edbury . it be incomprehensible to I that my father should tolerate the tatter 's prank ; unless , indeed , he borrow his name to bond of which I hear nothing . 
 Mademoiselle Chassediane vow that her own dress be ravish . she go attire as a boudoir - shepherdess or demurely - coquettish Sevres - china Ninette , such of whom Louis Quinze would chuck the chin down the deadly introductory walk of Versailles . the reason of her desiring to go be the fatal sin of curiosity , and , therefore , her sex 's burden , not her . Jorian be a Mousquetaire , with plume and ruffle prodigious , and a hen 's heart beneath his cock 's feather . ' Pourtant j'y allai . I see your great lady , how they carry themselves when they would amuse themselves , and , mon Dieu ! Paris have do its utmost to grace their person , and the length of their robe do the part of Providence in bestow height upon they , parceque , vous savez , Monsieur , c'est extraordinaire comme ils ont les jambes courte , ce anglaise ! ' our aristocracy , however , be not so bad in that respect as our bourgeoisie ; yet it be easy to perceive that our female aristocracy , though they could ride , have never be drill to walk : ' de belle femme , oui ; seulement , tenez , je n'admire ni les yeux de vache , ni de souris , ni mime ceux de verre comme ornement feminin . Avec de l'embonpoint elle font de l'effet , mais maigre il n'y a aucune illusion possible . ' 
 this vindictive critic smart , with cause , at the recollection of her walk out of her room . Jorian 's audacity or infatuation quit he immediately after he have gratify her whim . the stout Mousquetaire place she in a corner , and envelop she there , declare that her petition have be that she might come to see , not to be see , as if , she cry out tearfully , the two wish must not necessarily exist together , like the masculine and the feminine in this world ! Prince Hal , act the most profligate period of his career , espy she behind the Mousquetaire 's moustache , and do not fail to make much of his discovery . in a perilous moment for the reputation of the Ball , my father hand he over to Gascoigne , and conduct Jenny in a leisurely walk on his arm out of the room . 
 ' il est comme les Romains , ' she say : ' he never despair of himself . it be a Jupiter ! if he must punish you he confer a dignity in do it . now I comprehend , that with such woman as these grande dame Anglaises I should have do he harm but for his greatness of soul . ' 
 some harm , I fancy , must have be do , in spite of his boast to the contrary . he have to be in London every other night , and there be tale current of intrigue against he which have their source from very lofty region . but in Chippenden he throw off London , just as lightly as in London he discard Chippenden . no symptom of personal discouragement , or of fatigue , be betray in his face . I speak once of that paragraph purport to emanate from Prince Ernest . 
 ' it may , ' he say . ' Business ! Richie . ' 
 he set to count the promise of vote , disdain fear and reflection . concert , cricket - match , Balls , dinner - party , and the round of the canvass , and speech - making at our gathering , occupy every minute of my time , except on Saturday evening , when I ride over to Riversley with Temple to spend the Sunday . Temple , always willing to play second to I , and a trifle melancholy under his partial eclipse - which , perhaps , suggest the loss of Janet to he would have it that this election be one of the realization of our boyish dream of greatness . the lady be work rosette for I . my aunt Dorothy talk very anxiously about the day appoint by my father to repay the large sum expend . all hang upon that day , she say , speak from her knowledge of the squire . she be move to an extreme distress by the subject . 
 ' he be confident , Harry ; but where can he obtain the money ? if your grandfather see it invest in your name in Government security , he will be satisfied , not otherwise : nothing less will satisfy he ; and if that be not do , he will join you and your father together in his mind ; and as he have hitherto treat one he will treat both . I know he . he be just , to the extent of his vision ; but he will not be able to separate you . he be aware that your father have not restrict his expense since they meet ; he will say you should have use your influence . ' 
 she insist on this , until the tear stream from her eye , tell I that my grandfather be the most upright and unsuspicious of man , and precisely on that account the severest when he think he have be deceive . the fair chance of my election do not console she , as it do I , by dazzle I . she affirm strongly that she be sure my father expect success at the election to be equivalent to the promise restitution of the money , and beg I to warn he that nothing short of the sum squander would be deem sufficient at Riversley . my dear aunt , good woman though she be , seem to I to be wax miserly . the squire have give she the name of Parsimony ; she have vex he , Janet tell I , by subscribe a miserable sum to a sailor ' asylum that he patronize a sum he be ashamed to see stand as the gift of a Beltham ; and she have stop the building of a wing of her village school - house , design upon his plan . altogether , she be fretful and distressful ; she appear to think that I could have keep my father in well order . Riversley be hear new and strange report of he . but how could I at Chippenden thwart his proceeding in London ? besides , he be serve I indefatigably . 
 it can easily be imagine what description of banter he have to meet and foil . 
 ' this gentleman be oblige enough to ask I , " how about the Royal Arms ? " if in his extreme consideration he mean to indicate my arm , I will inform he that they be open to he ; he shall find entertainment for man and beast ; so he be doubly assured of a welcome . ' 
 question whether he do not think he be entitle to be rat at the value of half - a - crown , he protest that whatever might be the sum of his worth , he be pure coin , of which neither party in Chippenden could accuse the silver of rub off ; and he offer forthwith an impromptu apologue of a copper penny that pass itself off for a crown - piece , and deceive a portion of the country : that be why   with a wave of the arm over the Hipperdon faction   it have a certain number of backer ; for everybody on whom the counterfeit have be foist , praise it to keep it in the currency . 
 ' now , gentleman , I apprehend that Chippenden be not the pocket - borough for Hipperdon coin . back with he to the Mint ! and , with your permission , we will confiscate the first syllable of his name , while we consign he to oblivion , with a hip , hip , hip , hurrah for Richmond ! ' 
 the cheer respond thunderingly , and be as loud when he answer a ' how 'bout the Dauphin ? ' by say that it be the Tory hotel , of which he know nothing . 
 ' a cheer for old Roy ! ' Edbury sing out . 
 my father check the roar , and turn to he . 
 ' Marquis of Edbury , come to the front ! ' 
 Edbury decline to budge , but the fellow round he edge aside to show he a mark for my father 's finger . 
 ' gentleman , this be the young Marquis of Edbury , a member of the House of Lords by right of his birth , bear to legislate for you and I . he , gentleman , make our law . examine he , hear he , meditate on he . ' 
 he pause cruelly for Edbury to open his mouth . the young lord look confounded , and from that moment behave becomingly . 
 ' he might have be do mischief to - morrow , ' my father say to I , and by let I conceive his adroitness a matter of design , comfort I with proof of intelligent power , and make I feel less the melancholy conjunction of a piece of mechanism and a piece of criticism , which I be fast grow to be in the contemplation of the agency lead to honour in our land . Edbury whip his four - in - hand to conduct our voter to the poll . we have to pull hard against Tory interest . it be a sharp , dubious , hot day a day of outcry against undue influence and against bribery a day of beer and cheer and the insanest of trick to cheat the polling - booth . Old John Thresher of Dipwell , and Farmer Eckerthy drive over to Chippenden to afford I aid and countenance , disconcert I by the sight of they , for I associate they with Janet rather than with Ottilia , and it be to Ottilia that I should have feel myself rise when the figure increase their pace in my favour , and the yeasty mob surround my father 's superb four - horse chariot respond to his oration by proclaim I victor . 
 ' I congratulate you , Mr. Richmond , ' Dettermain say . ' up to this day I have have my fear that we should haul more moonshine than fish in our net . your father have accomplish prodigy . ' 
 my father , with the bloom of success on his face , lead I aside soon after a safe majority of upward of seventy have be officially announce . ' now , Richie , ' say he , ' you be a Member . now to the squire away ! thank the multitude and off , and as quick to sarkeld as you well can , and tell the squire from I that I pardon his suspicion . I have land you a Member that will satisfy he . I be willing , tell he ... you know I competent to direct mine ... bailiff of his estate whatever he please , to effect a reconciliation . I must be in London to - night I be in the thick of the fray there . no matter : go , my son . ' he embrace I . it be not a moment for I to catechize he , though I could see that he be utterly delude . 
 between moonlight and morning , rid with Temple and Captain bulste on either side of I , I draw rein under the red Grange window , tired , and in love with its air of sleepy grandeur . Janet 's window be open . I hail she . ' has he win ? ' she sing out in the dark of her room , as though the cry of delight come upon the leap from bed . she be dress . she have commission Farmer Eckerthy to bring she the news at any hour of the night . see I , she clap hand . ' Harry , I congratulate you a thousand time . ' she have wit to guess that I should never have think of come have I not be the winner . I could just discern the curve and roll of her famed thick brown hair in the happy shrug of her shoulder , and imagine the full stream of it as she lean out of window to talk to we . 
 Janet herself , unfasten the hall - door bolt . she caress the horse , feverishly exulting , with charming subdue laughter of victory and welcome , and amuse we by lead my horse round to stable , and whistle for one of the lad , play what may , now and then , be a pretty feature in a young woman of character the fair tom - boy girl . she and she maid prepare coffee and toast for we , and enter the hall , one after the other , laden with dish of cold meat ; and not until the captain have eat well do she tell he slyly that somebody , whom she have bring to Riversley yesterday , be abe and asleep upstairs . the slyness and its sisterly innocence light up our eye , and our heart laugh . her cheek be deliciously overcoloure . we steal I know not what from the night and the day , and conventional circumstance , and rally Captain Bulsted , and behave as decorous people who treat the night properly , and live by rule , do not quite do . never since Janet be a girl have I see she so spirited and responsive : the womanly armour of half - reserve be put away . we chat with a fresh - hearted natural young creature who forfeit not a particle of her ladyship while she make herself our comrade in talk and frolic . 
 Janet and I walk part of the way to the station with Temple , who have to catch an early train , and return the song of skylark cover we join hand , have our choice between nothing to say , and the excess ; perilous both . 




 CHAPTER XLIV . my FATHER be miraculously relieve by FORTUNE 

 my grandfather have a gratification in my success , mingle with a transparent jealousy of the chief agent in procure it . he warn I when I leave he that he be not to be hoodwink : he must see the money stand in my name on the day appoint . his doubt be evident , but he affect to be expectant . not a word of Sarkeld could be speak . my success appear to be on a more visionary foundation the higher I climb . 
 now Jorian DeWitt have affirm that the wealthy widow Lady Sampleman be to be have by my father for the asking . place as we be , I regard the objection to his alliance with she in a mild light . she might lend I the money to appease the squire ; that do , I would speedily repay it . I admit , in a letter to my aunt Dorothy , the exist objection : but the lady have long be enamour of he , I plead , and he be past the age for passionate affection , and would infallibly be courteous and kind . she be rich . we might count on she to watch over he carefully . of course , with such a wife , he would sink to a secondary social sphere ; be it to be regret if he do ? the letter be a plea for my own interest , barely veil . 
 at the moment of write it , and moreover when I treat my father with especial coldness , my heart be far less warm in the contemplation of its pre - eminent aim than when I be suffer he to endanger it , almost without a protest . Janet and a peaceful Riversley , and a life of quiet english distinction , beckon to I visibly , and not hatefully . the image of Ottilia conjure up picture of a sea of shipwreck , a scene of immeasurable hopelessness . still , I strove toward that . my striving be against my leaning , and imagine the latter , which involve no sacrifice of the fine sense of honour , to be in the direction of my low nature , I repel they to preserve a lofty aim that lead I through questionable way . 
 ' can it be you , Harry , ' my aunt Dorothy 's reply run   I have anticipate her line of reasoning , though not her warmth , ' who advise he to this marriage from a motive so inexplicably unworthy ? that you will repay she the money , I do not require your promise to assure I . the money be nothing . it be the prospect of her life and fortune which you be consent , if not urge he , to imperil for your own purpose . be you really prepared to imitate in he , with less excuse for do it , the thing you most condemn ? let it be check at the outset . it can not be . a marriage of inclination on both side , prudent in a worldly sense , we might wish for he , perhaps , if he could feel quite sure of himself . his wife might persuade he not to proceed in his law - case . there I have long see his ruin . he build such expectation on it ! you speak of something bad than a mercenary marriage . I see this in your handwriting ! your approval of it ! I have to check the whisper that tell I it read like a conspiracy . be she not a simpleton ? can you withhold your pity ? and pity , can you possibly allow she to be entrap ? forgive my seem harshness . I do not often speak to my Harry so . I do now because I must appeal to you , as the one chiefly responsible , on whose head the whole weight of a dreadful error will fall . oh ! my dearest , be guide by the purity of your feeling to shun doubtful mean . I have hope that after the first few week your grandfather will I know he do not ' expect to find the engagement fulfil be the same to you that he be before he discover the extravagance . you be in Parliament , and I be certain , that by keep as much as possible to yourself , and live soberly , your career there will persuade he to meet your wish . ' 
 the letter be of great length . in conclusion , she entreat I to despatch an answer by one of the early morning train ; entreat I once more to cause ' any actual deed ' to be at least postpone . the letter reveal what I have often conceive might be . 
 my rejoinder to my aunt Dorothy lay stress on my father 's pledge of his word of honour as a gentleman to satisfy the squire on a state day . I shrink from the idea of the Riversley crow over he . as to the lady , I say we would see that her money be fasten to she securely before she commit herself to the deep . the money to be advanced to I would lie at my banker , in my name , untouched : it would be repay in the bulk after a season . this I dwelt on particularly , both to satisfy she and to appease my sense of the obligation . an airy pleasantry in the tone of this epistle amuse I while write it and vex I when it have go . but a letter send , upon special request , by railway , should not , I think , be couch in the ordinary strain . besides one could not write seriously of a person like Lady Sampleman . 
 I consult my aunt Dorothy 's scruple by stop my father on his way to the lady . his carriage be at the door : I suggest money - lender : he have try they all . he beg I to permit he to start : but it be too ignominious to think of its be do under my very eye , and I refuse . he have try the money - lender yesterday . they require a mortgage solider than expectation for the sum we want . Dettermain and Newson have decline to undertake the hypothecation of his annuity . Providence point to Sampleman . 
 ' you change in a couple of night , Richie , ' say he . ' now I be always the identical man . I shall give happiness to one sincerely good soul . I have only to offer myself let I say in become modesty , I believe so . let I go to she and have it over , for with I a step take be a thing sanctify . I have in fact hold she in reserve . not that I think Fortune have abandon we : but a sagacious schemer will not leave everything to the worthy Dame . I should have drive to she yesterday , if I have not hear from Dettermain and Newson that there be a hint of a negotiation for a compromise . government be fairly frightened . ' 
 he muse . ' however , I sleep on it , and arrive at the conclusion this morning that my old Richie stand in imminent jeopardy of lose the fruit of all my toil . the good woman will advance the money to her husband . when I pledge my word to the squire I have reason to imagine the two month a sufficient time . we have still a couple of day . I have hear of man who lose heart at the eleventh hour , and if they have only hang on , with gallant faith in themselves , they would have be justify by the result . faith work miracle . at least it allow time for they . ' 
 his fertile ingenuity spar mine the task of persuade he to postpone the drive to Lady Sampleman . but that he would have be prompt to go , at a word from I , and be actually about to go when I enter his house , I could not question . 
 he drive in manifest relief of mind to Dettermain and Newson 's . 
 I have an appointment with Mr. Temple at a great political Club , to meet the gentleman who be good enough to undertake the introduction of the infant member to the House of Commons . my incessantly twist circumstance foil the pleasure and pride due to I . from the Club I bent my step to Temple 's district , and meet in the street young Eckart vom Hof , my champion and second on a memorable occasion , fresh upon London , and look very germanic in this drab forest of our city people . he could hardly speak of Deutschland for enthusiasm at the sight of the move mass . his object in come to England , he assure I honestly , be to study certain edition of Tibullus in the British Museum . when he deign to speak of Sarkeld , it be to say that Prince Hermann be frequently there . I give he no chance to be sly , though he push for it , at a question of the Princess Ottilia 's health . 
 the funeral pace of the block of cab and omnibus engross his attention . suddenly the Englishman afford he an example of the reserve of impetuosity we may contain . I have see my aunt Dorothy in a middle line of cab come from the City , and be dart in a twinkling among wheel and shaft and nodding cab - horse nose to take her hand and know the meaning of her presence in London . she have family business to do : she say no more . I mention that I have check my father for a day or two . she appear grateful . her anxiety be extreme that she might not miss the return train , so I relinquish her hand , command the cabman to hasten , and turn to rescue Eckart too young and faithful a collegian not to follow his friend , though it be into the lion 's den - from a terrific entanglement of horseflesh and vehicle brawl over by a splendid collision of tongue . secure on the pavement again , Eckart humbly acknowledge that the english tongue could come out upon occasion . I do my good to amuse he . 
 whether it amuse he to see I take my seat in the House of Commons , and hear a debate in a foreign language , I can not say ; but the only pleasure of which I be conscious at that period lie in the thought that he or his father , Baron vom Hof , might some day relate the circumstance at Prince Ernest 's table , and fix in Ottilia 's mind the recognition of my have try to perform my part of the contract . Beggared myself , and know Prince Hermann to be in Sarkeld , all I hop for be to show she I have follow the path she trace . my state be low : besides misfortune I now find myself exalt only to feel my profound insignificance . 
 ' the standard for the House be a man 's ability to do thing , ' say Charles Etherell , my friendly introductor , by whom I be passingly , perhaps ironically , advise to preserve silence for two or three session . 
 he counsel the study of Foreign Affairs for a present theme . I talk of our management of they , in the strain of Dr. Julius von Karsteg . 
 ' that 's journalism , or clipping from a bilious essay ; it will not   do for the House , ' he say . ' revile the House to the country , if you like , but not the country to the House . ' 
 when I beg he to excuse my absurdity , he reply : 
 ' it be full of promise , so long as you be silent . ' 
 but to be silent be to be merely an obedient hound of the whip . and if the standard for the House be a man 's ability to do thing , I be in the seat of a well man . external sarcasm upon the House , flavour with justness , come to my mind , but if these be my master surround I , how indefinitely small must I be ! 
 leave the House on that first night of my sitting , I receive Temple 's congratulation outside , and , as though the sitting have exhaust every personal sentiment , I become fill with his ; under totally new sensation , I enjoy my distinction through the perception of my old comrade 's friendly jealousy . 
 ' I will be there , too , some day , ' he say , moan at the prospect of an extreme age before such honour would befall he . 
 the society of Eckart prevent I from urge he to puff I up with his talk as I should have wish , and after I have send the German to be take care of by Mrs. Waddy , I have grow so accustomed to the worldly view of my position that I be fear for its stability . threat of a petition against I be abroad . suppose the squire disinherit I , could I stand ? an extraordinary appetite for wealth , a novel appreciation of it which be , in truth , a voluntary enlistment into the army of mankind , and the adoption of its passion prick I with an intensity of hope and dread concern my dependence on my grandfather . I lay sleepless all night , toss from Riversley to Sarkeld , condemn , it seem , to marry Janet and gain rich and power by renounce my hope of the princess and the glory belong to she , unless I should within a few hour obtain a show of figure at my banker . 
 I have promise Etherell to breakfast with he . a note a faint scream despatch by Mrs. Waddy to Mr. Temple 's house inform I that ' the man ' be upon they . if so , they be the forerunner of a horde , and my father be as good as extinguish . he stake everything on success ; consequently , he forfeit pity . 
 good - bye to ambition , I think , and eat heartily , consider robustly the while how far low than the general level I might avoid fall . the report of the debate in morning paper doubtless , more flowing and , perhaps , more grammatical than such as I give ear to overnight have the odd effect on I of relieve I from the fit of subserviency into which the speaker have sink I . 
 a conceit of tower superiority take its place , and as Etherell be kind enough to draw I out and compliment I , I be attack by a tragic sense of contrast between my capacity and my probable fortune . it be open to I to marry Janet . but this mean the loosening of myself with my own hand for ever from she who be my mentor and my glory , to gain whom I be in the very tideway . I could not submit to it , though the view be like that of a green field of the spring pass by a climber up the crag . I go to Anna Penrhys to hear a woman 's voice , and partly tell she of my trouble . she have hear Mr. Hipperdon express his confident opinion that he should oust I from my seat . her indignation be at my service as a loan : it spring up fiercely and spontaneously in allusion to something relate to my father , of which the Marquis of Edbury have be guilty . ' how you can bear it ! ' she exclaim , for I be not wordy . the exclamation , however , sting I to put pen to paper the woman be not so remote in I as not to be rouse by the woman . I write to Edbury , and to Heriot , bid he call on the young nobleman . late at night I be at my father 's door to perform the act of duty of see he , and hear how he have entertain Eckart , if he be still master of his liberty . I should have know he well : I expect silence and gloom . the window be light brilliantly . as the hall - door open , a band of stringed and wood instrument commence an overture . Mrs. Waddy come to I in the hall ; she be unintelligible . one thing have happen to he at one hour of the morning , and another at another hour . he be at one moment suffer the hand of the ' officer ' on his shoulder : 
 ' and behold you , Mr. Harry ! a knock , a letter from a messenger , and he conquer Government ! ' it strike I that the epitome of his life have be play in a day : I be quite incredulous of downright good fortune . he have be give a dinner follow by a concert , and the deafening strain of the music clash with my acerb spirit , irritate I excessively . ' where be those man you speak of ? ' I ask she . ' gone , ' she replied,'gone long ago ! ' 
 ' pay ? ' say I. 
 she be afraid to be precise , but repeat that they be long since go . 
 I single Jorian DeWitt from among the crowd of lounger on the stair and land between the drawing - room . ' oh , yes , Government have strike its flag to he , ' Jorian say . ' why be not   you here to dine ? Alphonse will never beat his achievement of to - day . Jenny and Carigny give we a quarter - of - an - hour before dinner a capital idea ! " VEUVE ET BACHELIER . " as if by inspiration . no preparation for it , no formal taking of seat . it seize amazingly float small talk over the soup beautifully . ' 
 I question he again . 
 ' oh , dear , yes ; there can not   be a doubt about it , ' he answer , airily . ' Roy Richmond have win his game . ' 
 two or three urgent man round a great gentleman be extract his affable approbation of the admirable nature of the experiment of the Chassediane before dinner . I see that Eckart be comfortably seat , and tell Jorian to provide for he in the matter of tobacco , I go to my room , confuse beyond power of thought by the sensible command of fortune my father , fortune 's sport at time , seem really to have . 
 his statement of the circumstance bewilder I even more . he be in no hurry to explain they ; when we meet next morning he wait for I to question he , and say , ' yes . I think we have beat they so far ! ' his mind be pre - occupy , he inform I , concern the defence of a lady much intrigue against , and resume the subject : ' yes , we have beat they up to a point , Richie . and that remind I : would you have I go down to Riversley and show the squire the transfer paper ? at any rate you can now start for Sarkeld , and you do , do you not ? to - day : to - morrow at late . ' 
 I insist : ' but how , and in what manner have this money be pay ? ' the idea strike I that he have succeed in borrow it . 
 ' transfer to I in the Bank , and intelligence of the fact send to Dettermain and Newson , my lawyer , ' he reply . ' beyond that , I know as little as you , Richie , though indubitably I hop to intimidate they . if , ' he add , with a countenance perfectly simple and frank , ' they expect I to take money for a sop , I be not responsible , as I by no mean provoke it , for their mistake . 
 ' I proceed . the money be useful to you , so I rejoice at it . ' 
 five and twenty thousand pound be the amount . 
 ' no stipulation be attach to it ? ' 
 ' none . of course a stipulation be imply : but of that I be not bind to be cognizant . ' 
 ' absurd ! ' I cry : ' it can not   have come from the quarter you suspect . ' 
 ' where else ? ' he ask . 
 I think of the squire , Lady Edbury , my aunt , Lady Sampleman , Anna Penrhys , some one or other of his frantic female admirer . but the largeness of the amount , and the channel select for the payment , preclude the notion that any single person have come to succour he in his imminent need , and , as it chance , mine . 
 observe that my speculation waver , he cite numerous instance in his life of the special action of Providence in his favour , and be bold enough to speak of a star , which his natural acuteness would have check his doing before I , if his imagination have not be seriously strike . 
 ' you hand the money over to I , sir ? ' I say . 
 ' without a moment of hesitation , my dear boy , ' he melt I by answer . 
 ' you believe you have receive a bribe ? ' 
 ' that be my entire belief the sole conclusion I can arrive at . I will tell you , Richie : the old Marquis of Edbury once place five thousand pound to my account on a proviso that I should neglect , be the well word , my Case . I inherit from he at his death ; of course his demise cancel the engagement . he have be the friend of personage implicate . he know . I suspect he apprehend the unpleasant position of a witness . ' 
 ' but what be the stipulation you presume be imply ? ' say I. 
 ' something that pass between lawyer : I be not bind to be cognizant of it . Abandon my claim for a few thousand ? not for ten , not for ten hundred time the sum ! ' 
 to be free from his boisterous influence , which make my judgement as unsteady as the weather - glass in a hurricane , I leave my house and go straight to Dettermain and Newson , who astonish I quite as much by assure I that the payment of the money be a fact . there be no mystery about it . the intelligence and transfer paper , they say , have not be communicate to they by the firm they be oppose to , but by a solicitor largely connect with the aristocracy ; and his letter have briefly declare the unknown donator 's request that legal proceeding should forthwith be stop . they offer no opinion of their own . suggestion of any kind , they seem to think , have weight , and all of they an equal weight , to conclude from the value they assign to every idea of mine . the name of the solicitor in question be Charles Adolphus Bannerbridge . it be , indeed , my old , one of my old friend ; the same by whom I have be lead to a feast and an evening of fun when a little fellow start in the London street . sure of learn the whole truth from old Mr. Bannerbridge , I walk to his office and hear that he have suddenly be take ill . I stride on to his house , and enter a house of mourning . the kind old man , remember by I so vividly , have die overnight . Miss Bannerbridge perceive that I have come on an errand , and with her gentle good breeding lead I to speak of it . she know nothing whatever of the sum of money . she be , however , aware that an annuity have be regularly pay through the intervention of her father . I be refer by she to a Mr. Richards , his recently - establish partner . this gentleman be ignorant of the whole transaction . 
 throughout the day I strove to combat the pressure of evidence in favour of the idea that an acknowledgement of special claim have be wrest from the enemy . Temple hardly help I , though his solid sense be dead against the notion entertain by my father and Jorian DeWitt , and other besides , our elder . the payment of the sum through the same channel which supply the annuity , point distinctly to an admission of a claim , he incline to think , and should be suppose to come from a personage have cause either to fear he or to assist he . he set my speculation astray by hint that the request for the stopping of the case might be a blind . a gift of money , he say shrewdly , be a singularly weak method of induce a man to stop the suit of a life - time . I think of Lady Edbury ; but her income be limited , and her expenditure be not of Lady Sampleman , but it be notorious that she love her purse as well as my aunt Dorothy , and be even more , in the squire 's phrase , ' a petticoate parsimony . ' Anna Penrhys appear the likeli , except for the fact that the commencement of the annuity be long before our acquaintance with she . I try she on the subject . her amazement be without a shadow of reserve . ' it be Welsh , it be not english , ' she remark . I know no Welshwoman save Anna . 
 ' do you know the whole of his history ? ' say she . possibly one of the dozen unknown episode in it might have furnish the clue , I agree with she . 
 the sight of twenty - one thousand pound place to my credit in the fund assuage my restless spirit of investigation . letter from the squire and my aunt Dorothy urge I to betake myself to Riversley , there finally to decide upon what my course should be . 
 ' now that you have the money , pray , ' St. Parsimony write , ' pray be careful of it . do not let it be encroach on . remember it be to serve one purpose . it should be guard strictly against every appeal for aid , ' etc . , with much underlining . 
 my grandfather return the paper . his letter say ' I shall not break my word . please to come and see I before you take step right or left . ' 
 so here be the dawn again . 
 I could in a day or two start for Sarkeld . meanwhile , to give my father a lesson , I discharge a number of bill , and pay off the bond to which Edbury 's name be attach . my grandfather , I know , be too sincerely and punctiliously a gentleman in practical conduct to demand a further inspection of my account . these thing accomplish , I take the train for Riversley , and proceed from the station to Durstan , where I know Heriot to be stay . have I go straight to my grandfather , there would have be another story to tell . 




 CHAPTER XLV . within an INCH of my life 

 a single tent stand in a gully run from one of the gravel - pit of the heath , near an iron - red rillet , and a girl of Kiomi 's tribe lean over the lazy water at half length , strike it with her handkerchief . at a distance of about twice a stone's - throw from the new carriage - road between Durstan and Bulsted , I fancy from old recollection she might be Kiomi herself . this be not the time for her people to be camp on Durstan . besides , I fear it improbable that one would find she in any of the track of her people . the noise of the wheel bring the girl 's face round to I . she be one of those who be baby in the tent when I be a boy . we be too far apart for I to read her feature . I lay back in the carriage , think that it would have be well for my poor little wild friend if I have never cross the shadow of her tent . a life catch out of its natural circle be as much in danger of be lose as a limb give to a wheel in spin machinery ; so it occur to I , until I reflect that Prince Ernest might make the same remark , and deplore the damage do to the superior machinery likewise . 
 my movement appear to interest the girl . she be up on a mound of the fast - purple heath , shade her eye to watch I , when I call at Bulsted lodge - gate to ask for a bed under Julia 's roof that night . her bare leg twinkle in a nimble pace on the way to Durstan Hall , as if she be determined to keep I in sight . I wave my hand to she . she stop . a gipsy 's girl 's figure be often as good an index to her mind as her face , and I perceive that she have not take my greeting favourably ; nor would she advance a step to my repeat beckoning ; I try hat , handkerchief , purse , in vain . my driver observe that she be take with a fit of the obstinacy of ' her lot . ' he shout , ' silver , ' and then ' Fortune . ' she stand look . the fellow discourse on the nature of gipsy . fox be keep for hunting , he say ; there be reason in that . why we keep gipsy none could tell . he once back a gipsy prizefighter , who fail to keep his appointment . ' heart sink too low below his belt , sir . you can not   reckon on they for performance . and that same man afterwards fight the game fight in the chronicle o ' the Ring ! I know he have it in he . but they be like nothing well than the weather ; you can not   put money on them and feel safe . ' consequently he see no good in they . 
 ' she stick to her post , ' he say , as we turn into the Durstan ground . the girl be like a flag - staff on the upper line of heathland . 
 Heriot be stroll , cigar in mouth , down one of the diminutive alley of young fir in this upstart estate . he affect to be prepossess by the case between I and Edbury , and would say nothing of his own affair , save that he mean to try for service in one of the continental army ; he whose susceptible love for his country be almost a malady . but he have give himself to woman it be Cissy this , Trichy that , and the wile of a Florence , the spite of an Agatha , dupery , innocent - seeming , witchery , reptile - trick of the fairest of woman , all through his conversation . he have so saturate himself with the resource , evasion , and desperate cruising of these light creature of wind , tide , and tempest , that , like one who have be gaze on the whirligoround , he see the whole of woman run or only wait for a suitable partner to run the giddy ring to perdition and an atone pathos . 
 I cut short one of Heriot 's narrative by tell he that this pick bone of the dish be not to my taste . he twit I with turn parson . I speak of Kiomi . Heriot flush , muttering , ' the little devil ! ' with his usual contemplative relish of devilry . we part , feel that severe tension of the old link keep we together which indicate the lack of new one : a point where simple affection must bear the strain of friendship if it can . Heriot have promise to walk half - way with I to Bulsted , in spite of Lady Maria 's childish fear of some attack on he . he be now satisfied with a good - bye at the hall - door , and he talk ostentatiously of a method that he have to bring Edbury up to the mark . I know that same loud decreeing talk to be a method on his own behalf of conceal his sensitive resentment at the tone I have adopt : Lady Maria 's carriage have go to fetch her husband from a political dinner . my portmanteau advise I to wait for its return . Durstan and Riversley be at feud , however , owe to some powerful rude English use toward the proprietor of the former place by the squire ; so I think it well to let one of the groom shoulder my luggage , and follow he . 
 the night be dark ; he choose the roadway , and I cross the heath , meet an exhilarate high wind that make my blood race : egoism be not peculiar to any period of life ; it be only especially curious in a young man begin to match himself against his elder , for in he it suffuse the imagination ; he be not merely selfishly sentient , or selfishly scheme : his very conception be selfish . I remember walk at my swift pace , blame everybody I know for insufficiency , for want of subordination to my interest , for poverty of nature , grossness , blindness to the fine light shin in I ; I blame the Fates for harass I , circumstance for not surround I with friend worthy of I . the central ' I ' resemble the sun of this universe , with the difference that it shriek for nourishment , instead of dispense it . 
 my monstrous conceit of elevation will not suffer condensation into sentence . what I can testify to be , that for make you bless the leg you stand on , a knockdown blow be a specific . I have it before I know that a hand be up . I should have fancy that I have run athwart a tree , but for the recollection , as I be reel to the ground , of a hulk of a fellow suddenly front I , and he do not hesitate with his fist . I go over and over into a heathery hollow . the wind sing shrill through the furze ; nothing be visible but black clump , black cloud . astonish though I be , and shake , it flash through I that this be not the attack of a highwayman . he call upon you to stand and deliver : it be a foe that hit without warn . the blow take I on the forehead , and might have be bad . not see the enemy , curiosity be almost as strong in I as anger ; but reflect that I have injure no one I know of , my nerve be quickly at the right pitch . brush some spike of furze off my hand , I prepare for it . a cry rise . my impression seem to be all backward , travel up to I a moment or two behind time . I recognise a strange tongue in the cry , but too late that it be Romany to answer it . instantly a voice be audible above the noisy wind : ' I spot he . ' then begin some good and fair fighting . I get my footing on grass , and like the work . the fellow face I be unmistakably gipsy - build . I , too , have length of arm , and a disposition to use it by hit straight out , with foot firm , instead of dodge and capering , which tell in my favour , and be decidedly the good display of the noble art on a dark night . 
 my dancer go over as neatly as I have precede he ; and therewith I consider enough be do for vengeance . the thrill of a salmon on the gut be know to give a savage satisfaction to our original nature ; it be but an extension and attenuation of the hearty contentment spring from a thorough delivery of the fist upon the prominent feature of an assailant that yield to it perforce . even when you receive such perfect blow you be half satisfied . feel conqueror , my wrath be soothe ; I bent to have a look at my ruffian , and ask he what cause of complaint gipsy camp on Durstan could find against Riversley . a sharp stroke on the side of my neck send I across his body . he bite viciously . in pain and desperation I fly at another of the tawny devil . they multiply . I take to my heel ; but this be the vain of stratagem , they beat I in nimbleness . four of they be round I when I wheel breathless to take my chance at fight the odd . fiery man have not much notion of chivalry : gipsy the least of all . they yell disdain of my summon to they to come on one by one : ' now they have catch I , now they would pay I , now they would pound I ; and , stand at four corner , they commend I to think of become a jelly . four though they be , they keep their position ; they leave it to I to rush in for a close ; the hinder one hold out of arm ' reach so long as I be disengage . I have perpetually to shift my front , think oh , for a stick ! any stout bit of timber ! my fist ache , and a repetition of nasty dull knock on back and neck , slog thump deal by man get to make sure of I , shatter my breathing . 
 I cry out for a pause , offer to take a couple of they at a time : I challenge three - the fourth to bide . I be now the dancer : left , right , and roundabout I have to swing , half - stun , half - strangle with gorge . those terrible blow in the back do the mischief . Sickness threaten to undermine I . boxer have breathing - time : I have none . stiff and sick , I try to run ; I totter , I stand to be knock down , I drop like a log - careless of life . but I smell earth keenly , and the damp grass and the devil 's play of their foot on my chin , chest , and thigh , revive a fit of wrath enough to set I staggering on my leg again . they permit it , for the purpose of batter I far . I pass from down to up mechanically , and enjoy the chestful of air give I in the interval of rise : thought of Germany and my father , and Janet at her window , complacently ; raise a child 's voice in my throat for mercy , quite inaudible , and accept my punishment . one idea I have be , that I could not possibly fail as a speaker after this I want but a minute 's grace to fetch breath for an oration , begin , ' you fool ! ' for I guess that they have fall upon the wrong man . not a second be allow . soon the shrewd physical bracing , act momentarily on my brain , relax ; the fitful illumination cease : all idea fade out - clung about my beat body - flee . the body might have be toss into its grave , for aught I know . 




 CHAPTER XLVI . among GIPSY WOMEN 

 I can not say how long it be after my sens have go when I begin to grope for they on the warm of heave soft pillow , and lose the slight hold I have on they with the effort . then come a series of climbing and falling , rising to the surface and sinking fathom below . any attempt to speculate pitch I back into darkness . gift with a pair of enormous eye , which throw surround object to a distance of a mile away , I could not induce the diminutive thing to approach ; and shut eye lead to such a rolling of mountain in my brain , that , terrify by the gigantic revolution , I lay determinedly star ; clothe , it seem positive , in a tight - fitting suit of sheet - lead ; but why ? I wonder why , and immediately receive an extinguishing blow . my pillow be heavenly ; I be constantly be cool on it , and grow use to hear a croon no more musical than the unstopped reed above my head ; a sound as of a breeze about a cavern 's mouth , more soothing than a melody . conjecture of my state , after hover timidly in dread of relapse , settle and assure I I be lie bake , half - bury in an old river - bed ; moss at my cheek , my body inextricable ; water now and then feebly strive to float I out , with horrid pain , with infinite refreshingness . a shady light , like the light through leafage , I could see ; the water I feel . why do it keep try to move I ? I question and sink to the depth again . 
 the excruciated patient be have his wet bandage fold across his bruise , and could not bear a motion of the mind . 
 the mind 's total apathy be the sign of recover health . kind nature put that district to sleep while she operate on the disquiet low function . I look on my later self as one observe the mossy bearded substance travel blind along the undercurrent of the stream , cling to this and that , twirl absurdly . 
 where be I ? not in a house . but for my condition of absolute calm , owe to skilful treatment , open air , and physical robustness , the scene would have be of a kind to scatter the busy little workman set up the fabric of my wit . a lighted oil - cup stand on a tripod in the middle of a tent - roof , and over it the creased neck and chin of a tall old woman , splendid in age , redden vividly ; her black eye and grey brow , and greyishblack hair fall away in a dusk of their own . I think her marvellous . something she hold in her hand that send a thin steam between she and the light . outside , in the a cutting of the tent 's threshold , a heavy - coloured sunset hang upon dark land . my pillow meantime lift I gently at a regular measure , and it be with untroubled wonder that I come to the knowledge of a human heart beat within it . so soft could only be feminine ; so firm still young . the bosom be Kiomi 's . a girl sidle at the opening of the tent , peep in , and from a mufed rattle of subpectoral thunder discharge at she in quick heated snap , I know Kiomi 's voice . after an altercation of their monotonous gipsy undertone , the girl drop and crouch outside . 
 it be morning when I wake next , strong , and ache bad . I be lie in the air , and she who serve for nurse , pillow , parasol , and bank of herbage , have her arm round beneath mine cherishingly , all the finger outspread and flat on I , just as they have be when I go to sleep . 
 ' Kiomi ! ' 
 ' now , you be quiet . ' 
 ' can I stand up a minute or two ? ' 
 ' no , and you will not   talk . ' 
 I submit . this be our duel all day : she slip from I only twice , and when she do the girl take her place . 
 I begin to think of Bulsted and Riversley . 
 ' Kiomi , how long have I be here ? ' 
 ' you will be twice as long as you have   be . ' 
 ' a couple of day ? ' 
 ' more like a dozen . ' 
 ' just tell I what happen . ' 
 ' Ghm - m - m , ' she growl admonishingly . 
 reflect on it , I feel sure there must have be search party over the heath . 
 ' Kiomi , I say , how be it they miss I ? ' 
 she strike at once on my thought . 
 ' they be fool . ' 
 ' how do you cheat they ? ' 
 ' I do not   tie a handkercher across their eye . ' 
 ' you half smother I once , in the combe . ' 
 ' you go to sleep . ' 
 ' have you be doctor ? ' 
 the growl tigerish ' Ghm - m - m ' constrain I to take it for a lullaby . 
 ' Kiomi , why the deuce do your people attack I ? ' she repeat the sound resemble that which sometimes issue from the vent of a mine ; but I insist upon her answering . 
 ' I will put you down and be off , ' she threaten . 
 ' Brute of a girl ! I hate you ! ' 
 ' hate away . ' 
 ' tell I who find I . ' 
 ' I shall not . you shut your peeper . ' 
 the other and young girl sing out : ' I find you . ' 
 Kiomi send a volley at she . 
 ' I do , ' say the girl ; ' yes , and I nurse you first , I do ; and mother doctor you . Kiomi have not   be here a day . ' 
 the old mother come out of the tent . she feel my pulse , and forthwith squat in front of I . ' you be hard to kill , and oily as a bean , ' say she . ' you have   only to lie quiet in the sun like a handsome gentleman ; I be sure you could not   wish for more . air and water 's the doctor for such as you . you have   get the bound in you to jump the ditch : do not   you fret at it , or you will lose your spring , my good gentleman . ' 
 ' leave off talk to I as a stranger , ' I bawl . ' out with it ; why have you keep I here ? why do your man pitch into I ? ' 
 ' our man , my good gentleman ! ' the old woman ejaculate . there be innocence indeed ! sufficient to pass the whole tribe before a bench of magistrate . she wheedle : ' what have they against a handsome gentleman like you ? they would run for you fifty mile a day , and show you all their trick and secret for nothing . ' 
 my despot Kiomi fire invective at her mother . the old mother retort ; the girl join in . all three be scowl , flash , show tooth , drive the wordy javelin upon one another , indiscriminately , or two to one , without a pause ; all to a sound like the slack silver string of the fiddle . 
 I sing out truce to they ; they rack I with laughter ; and such laughter ! the shaking of husk in a half - empty sack . 
 ultimately , on a sudden cessation of the storm of tongue , they agree that I must have my broth . 
 sheer weariness , season with some hope that the broth would give I strength to mount on my leg and walk , persuade I to drink it . still the old mother declare that none of her man would ever have lay hand on I . why should they ? she ask . what have I do to they ? be it their way ? 
 Kiomi 's arm tighten over my breast . the involuntary pressure be like an illumination to I . 
 no long ask for the ground of the attack on a mistaken person , and bow to the fiction that none of the tribe have be among my assailant , I obtain information . the girl Eveleen have spy I enter Durstan . quite by chance , she be conceal near Bulsted Park gate when the groom arrive and tell the lodge - keeper that Mr. Harry Richmond be come up over the heath , and might have lose his way . ' Richmond ! ' the girl throw a world of meaning into the unexpected name . Kiomi clutch I to her bosom , but no one breathe the name we have in our thought . 
 Eveleen and the old mother have search for I upon the heath , and have hale I head and foot to their tent , despatch a message to bring Kiomi down from London to aid they in their desperate shift . they know Squire Beltham 's temper . he would have scatter the tribe to the shore of the kingdom at a rumour of foul play to his grandson . Kiomi come in time to smuggle I through an inspection of the tent and cross - examination of its ostensible denizen by Captain Bulsted , who have no suspicion , though he be in a state of wonderment . hear all this , I be the first to say it would be well I should get out of the neighbourhood as soon as my leg should support I . the grin that go for a laugh among gipsy follow my question of how Kiomi have manage to smuggle I . Eveleen be my informant when the dread Kiomi happen to be off duty for a minute . by a hasty transformation , due to a nightcap on the bandage about the head , and an old petticoat over my foot , Captain William 's insensible friend be introduce to he as the sore sick great - grandmother of the tribe , mother of Kiomi 's mother , aged ninety - one . the captain pay like a man for doctor and burial fee ; he undertake also to send the old lady a pound of snuff to assist she to a last sneeze or two on the right side of the grave , and he keep his word ; for , deem it necessary to paint she in a characteristic , these prodigious serpent tell he gravely that she delight in snuff ; it be almost the only thing that keep she alive , bar a sip of broth . Captain William 's comment on the interesting piece of longevity whose well - cover length and framework lie expose to his respectful contemplation , be , that she must have be a devilish fine old lady in her day . ' six foot ' be give as her measurement . 
 one pound of snuff , a bottle of rum , and five sovereign be the fruit of the captain 's sensibility . I shatter my rib with laughter over the story . eveleen dwelt on the triumph , twinkle . Kiomi despise laughter or triumph result from the natural exercise of craft in an emergency . ' but my handsome gentleman he will not   tell on we , will he , when we have   nurse he and doctor he , and make he one of we , and as good a stick o ' timber as grow in the forest ? ' whine the old mother . I have to swear I would not . 
 ' he ! ' cry Kiomi . 
 ' he may forget we when he be go , ' the mother say . she would have like I to kiss a book to seal the oath . anxiety about the safety of their ' home , ' that is , the assurance of an untroubled reception upon their customary camping - ground , be a peculiarity of the gipsy , distinguish they , equally with their cleanliness and thriftiness , from mumper and the common wanderer . 
 it be their tribute to civilization , which generally keep they within the law . 
 who that do not know they will believe that under their domestic system I have the good broth and the good tea I have ever taste ! they be very cunning brewer and sagacious buyer too ; their maxim show they to direct all their acuteness upon obtain quality for their money . a compliment not back by silver be hardly intelligible to the pretty one : money be a really credible thing to they ; and when they have it , they know how to use it . apparently because they know so well , so perfectly appreciate it , they have only vague idea of a corresponding sentiment on the opposite side to the bargain , and imagine that they fool people much more often than they succeed in do . once dupe themselves , they be the wary of the dog - burn ; the place be notch where it occur , and for ever avoid . on the other hand , they repose implicit faith in a reputation vouch for by their experience . I be amuse by the girl Eveleen 's dotting of house over the breadth of five county , where for this and that article of apparel she design to expend portion of a golden guinea , confident that she would get the very good , and a shilling besides . the unwonted coin give she the joy of suppose she cheat the Mint of that sum . this guinea be a present to the girl   to whom I owe my thrashing , by the way   that excuse itself under cover of be a bribe for sight of a mirror interdict by the implacable Kiomi . I want to have a look at my face . now that the familiar scene be begin to wear their original feature to I , my dread of personal hideousness be distress , though Eveleen declare the bad blood in my cheek and eye ' have be suck by pound of red meat . ' I wonder , whether if I stand up and walk to either one of the three great hall lie in an obtuse triangle within view , I should easily be recognize . when I do see myself , I groan verily . with the silence of profound resignation , I hand back to Eveleen the curious fragment of her boudoir , which would have grimace at Helen of Troy . 
 ' you be feel your nose you have   be look at a glass ! ' Kiomi say , with supernatural swiftness of deduction on her return . 
 she add for my comfort that nothing be break , but confess I to be still ' a sight ' ; and thereupon drive knotty language at Eveleen . the girl retort , and though these two would never acknowledge to I that any of their man have be in this neighbourhood recently , the fact be treat as a matter of course in their spiteful altercation , and each saddle the other with the mistake they have commit . eveleen snatch the last word . what she say I do not comprehend , she must have hit hard . Kiomi 's eye lighten , and her lip twitch ; she colour like the roof smoke of the tent fire ; twice she show her tooth , as in a spasm , strike to the heart , unable to speak , breathe in and out of a bitterly disjoin mouth . eveleen run . I guess at the ill - word speak . Kiomi sit eye the wood - ash , a devouring gaze that shoot straight and read but one thing . they who have see wild creature die will have she before they , save the fiery eye . she become an ashen - colour , I take her little hand . unconscious of I , her brown finger clutch at mine , she fling up her nostril , crave air . 
 this be the picture of the woman who could not weep in her misery . 
 ' Kiomi , old friend ! ' I call to she . I could have curse that other friend , the son of mischief ; for she , I could have swear , have be fiercely and wantonly hunt . chastity of nature , intense personal pride , be as proper to she as the free wind be to the heath : they be as visible to dull divination as the milky blue about the iris of her eyeball . she have actually no animal vileness , animal though she might be term , and would have appear if compare with Heriot 's admirable Cissies and gwennie , and other lady of the Graces that run to fall , and spend their pain more in kindle the scent of the huntsman than in effectively fly . 
 there be no consolation for she . 
 the girl Eveleen come in sight , loitering and look , kick her idle heel . 
 Kiomi turn sharp round to I . 
 ' I be go . your father 's here , up at Bulsted . I will see he . he will not   tell . he will come soon . you will be fit to walk in a day . you be sound as a nail . goodbye I shall not   say good - bye twice , ' she answer my attempt to keep she , and pass into the tent , out of which she bring a small bundle tie in a yellow handkerchief , and walk away , without nod or speak . 
 ' what be that you say to Kiomi ? ' I question Eveleen , who be quickly beside I . 
 she reply , accurately or not : ' I tell she our men'd give she as good as she give I , let she wait and see . ' 
 Therewith she pout ; or , to sketch she with precision , ' snoute ' would well convey the vivacity of her ugly flash of feature . it be an error in I to think her heartless . she talk of her aunt Kiomi affectionately , for a gipsy girl , whose modulate tone be all address to the soft public . eveleen speak with the pride of bated breath of the ferocious unforgivingness of their man . perhaps if she have know that I trace the good repute of the tribe for purity to the sweet instinct of the woman , she would have eulogize her sex to amuse I . Gipsy girl , like other people , be fond of show off ; but it would have be a victory of education to have help she to feel the distinction of the feminine sense of shame half as awfully and warmly as she do the inscrutable iron despotism of the male . she hint that the mistake of which I have be the victim would be rectify . 
 ' tell your man I will hunt they down like rat if I hear of it , ' say I. 
 while we be converse my father arrive . Eveleen , not know he , would have have I accept the friendly covering of a mat . 
 ' here be a big one ! he be a clergyman , ' she mutter to herself , and run to he and set up a gipsy whine , front I up to the last step while she advance ; she only yield ground to my outcry . 
 my father bend over I . Kiomi have prepare he for what he see . I quiet his alarm by talk currently and easily . Julia Bulsted have despatch a messenger to inform he of my mysterious disappearance ; but he , as his way be , revel in large conjecture , have half imagine I seize by a gust of passion , and bind for Germany . ' without my luggage ? ' I laugh . 
 ' ay , without your luggage , Richie , ' he answer seriously . his conceit of a well knowledge of I than other possess , have buoy he up . ' for I know , ' he say , ' we two do nothing like the herd of man . I think you be off to she , my boy . now ! ' he look at I , and this look of dismay be a perfect mirror . I be not a presentable object . 
 he stretch his limb on the heather and keep hold of my hand , look and talk watchfully , doctor - like , doubt I to be as sound in body as I assure he I be , despite ache and pain . eveleen hang near . 
 ' these people have be kind to you ? ' he say . 
 ' no , the big brute on the earth , ' say I. 
 ' oh ! you say that , when I spot you out in the dark where you might have lie to be eat , and carry you and wash your bloody face , and watch you , and never sleep , I do not , to mother you and wet your head ! ' cry the girl . 
 my father beckon to she and thank she appreciably in the yellow tongue . 
 ' so these scoundrel of the high road fall upon you and rob you , Richie ? ' 
 I nod . 
 ' you let he think they rob you , and you have your purse to give I a gold guinea out of it ! ' eveleen cry , and find herself in the wrong track , volubly resume : ' that they do not , for they have not   time , whether they mean to , and the night black as a coal , whoever they be . ' 
 the mystery of my not have send word to Bulsted or to Riversley perplex my father . 
 ' comfortable here ! ' he echo I , disconsolately , and glance at the heath , the tent , the black circle of the broth - pot , and the wild girl . 




 CHAPTER XLVII . my FATHER act the charmer again 

 Kiomi 's mother be see in a turn of the gravel - cutting , bear purchase from Durstan village . she take the new circumstance in with a single cast up of her wary eyelid ; and she , and her skill in surgery and art in medicine , I praise to lull her fear , which procure I the denomination of old friend , as well as handsome gentleman : she go so far as to add , in a fit of natural warmth , nice fellow ; and it be the truth , that this term effect wonder in flatter I : it seem to reveal to I how simple it be for Harry Richmond , one whom gipsy could think a nice fellow , to be the lord of Janet 's affection to be her husband . my heart throb ; yet she be within range of a mile and a half , and I do not wish to be take to she . I do wish to smell the piney air about the lake - palace ; but the thought of Ottilia cause I no quick pulsation . 
 my father remain an hour . he could not perceive the drift of my objection to go either to Bulsted or to Riversley , and desire that my misadventure should be unknown at those place . however , he obey I , as I could always trust he to do scrupulously , and tell a tale at Bulsted . in the afternoon he return in a carriage to convey I to the seaside . when I be raise I faint , and see the last of the camp on Durstan much as I have come to it first . Sickness and swimming of the head continue for several day . I be persecute with the sensation of the carriage journey , and an iteration of my father 's that run : ' my son 's inanimate body in my arm , ' or ' clasp the lifeless body of my sole son , Harry Richmond , ' and other variation . I say nothing about it . he tell I aghast that I have spat blood . a battery of eight fist , have it in the end all its own way , leave a deep indentation on its target than a pistol - shot that pass free of the vital chord . my convalescence in Germany be a melody compare with this . I ought to have stop in the tent , accord to the wise old mother 's advice , give sincerely , for prudence counsel she to strike her canvas and be go . there I should have lain , interested in the progress of a bee , the course of a beetle or a cloud , a spider 's business , and the shaking of the gorse and the heather , until good health have grow out of thoughtlessness . the very sight of my father be as a hive of hum trouble . 
 his intense anxiety about I reflect in my mind the endless worry I have concern he . it be the intellect which condemn he when he wear a joyful air , and the sensation when he wax over - solicitous . whether or not the sentence be just , the judge should have sometimes shift place . I be unable to divine why he fevere I so much . must I say it ? he have cease to entertain I . instead of a comic I find he a tragic spectacle ; and his exuberant anticipation , his burst hope that feed their force - bed with the blight and decay of their predecessor , his transient fit of despair after a touch at my pulse , and exclamation of ' oh , Richie , Richie , if only I have my boy up and well ! ' assume that nothing but my tardy recovery stand in the way of our contentment be example of downright unreason such as contemplation through the comic glass would have excuse ; the tragic could not . I know , nevertheless , that to the rest of the world he be a progressive comedy : and the knowledge make he seem more tragic still . he clearly could not learn from misfortune ; he be not to be contain . money I give he freely , hold the money at my disposal his own ; I chafe at his unteachable spirit , surely one of the most tragical thing in life ; and the proof of my love for he be that I think it so , though I should have be kind have he amuse I , as in the old day . 
 conceive to yourself the keeping watch over a fountain choke in its spouting , incessantly labour to spin a jet into the air ; now for a moment glitter and tower in a column , and once more straining to mount . my father appear to I in that and other image . he would have have I believe he shoot to his zenith , victorious at last . I likewise be to reap a victory of the high kind from the attack of the mysterious ruffian ; so much ; he say , he think he could assure I of . he chatter of an intimidate Government , and Dettermain and Newson ; duchess , duke , most friendly ; innumerable invitation to country castle ; and among other thing one which really show he to be capable of conceive idea and work from an initiative . but this , too , though it accomplish a temporary service , he render illusory to I by his unhappy manner of regard it as an instance of his now permanent social authority . he have institute what he call his jury of HONOUR court , compose of the select gentleman of the realm , ostensibly to weigh the cause of dispute between member of their class , and decree the method of settlement : but actually , my father admit , to put a stop to the affair between Edbury and I . 
 ' that be the origin of the notion , Richie . I carry it on . I din some of the good man of our day . I seize the opportunity when our choice " emperor " be roll on wheel to propound my system . I mention the name of Bramham DeWitt , Colonel Hibbert Segrave , Lord Alonzo Carr , Admiral Loftus , the Earl of Luton , the Marquis of Hatchford , Jack Hippony , Monterez Williams , I think you know he ? and little Dick Phillimore , son of a big - wig , a fellow of a capital wit and discretion ; I mention they as present to convince you we be not trifler , dear boy . my argument run , it be absurd to fight ; also it be intolerable to be compel to submit to insult . as the case stand , we be under a summary edict of the citizen , to whom chivalry be unknown . well , well , I deliver a short speech . fight , I say , resemble butting , a performance proper to creature that grow horn instead of brain .. not to allude to a multitude of tell remark ; and the question " be man a fighting animal ? " my answer be that he be not bear with spur on his heel or horn to his head and that those who insist on fighting should be examine by competent anatomist , " ologist " of some sort , to decide whether they have the excrescence , and proclaim they ... touch on these light part of my theme with extreme delicacy . but and here I dwelt on my point : man , if not a fighting animal in his glorious I forget what be a sensitive one , and have the idea of honour . " hear , " from Colonel Segrave , and Sir Weeton Slaterhe be one of the party . in fine , Richie , I find myself waft into a breathing oration . I can not , I confess it humbly , hear your " hear , hear , " without go up and off , inflate like a balloon . " shall the arbitration of the magistracy , indemnification in money award by the Law - court , succeed in satisfy , " but I declare to you , Richie , it be no platform speech . I know your term " the chaincable sentence . " nothing of the kind , I assure you . plain sense , as from gentleman to gentleman . we require , I say , a protection that the polite world of Great Britain do not now afford we against the aggression of the knave , the fool , and the brute . we establish a court . we do hereby no , no , not the " hereby " ; quite simply , Richie pledge ourselves I say some other word not " pledge " to use our utmost authority and influence to exclude from our circle person refuse to make the reparation of an apology for wanton common insult : we renounce intercourse with man decline , when guilty of provoke the sentiment of hostility , to submit to the jurisdiction of our Court . all I want you to see be the notion . we raise the shield against the cowardly bully which the law have raise against the bloody one . " and gentleman , " ' my father resume his oration , forget my sober eye for a minute ' " gentleman , we be the ultimate Court of Appeal for man who cherish their honour , yet abstain from fasten it like a millstone round the neck of their common - sense . " credit I , Richie , the proposition kindle . we cite Lord Edbury to appear before we , and I tell you we extract an ample apology to you from that young nobleman . and let I add , one that I , that we , must impose it upon an old son to accept . he do ! come , come . and you shall see , Richie , society shall never repose an inert mass under my leadership . I cure it ; I shake it and cure it . ' 
 he promenade the room , repeat : ' I do not say I be possess of a panacea , ' and bend to my chin as he pass ; ' I maintain that I can and do fulfil the duty of my station , which be my element , attain in the tooth of considerable difficulty , as no other man could , be he prince or Prime Minister . not one , ' he flourish , step onward . ' and mind you , Richie , this , ' he swing round , conscious as ever of the critic in I , though witless to correct his pomp of style , ' this be not self - glorification . I point you fact . I have a thousand scheme project . I recognize the value of early misfortune . the particular misfortune of prince bear be that they know nothing of the world baby ! I grant you , baby . now , I do . I have it on my thumbnail . I know its want . and just as I succeed in make you a member of our Parliament in assembly , and the husband of an hereditary princess hear I so will I make good my original determination to be in myself the fountain of our social law , and leader . I have never , I believe to speak conscientiously fail in a thing I have once determine on . ' 
 the single wish that I might be a boy again , to find pleasure in his talk , be all that remain to combat the distaste I have for such oppressive delivery of a mind apparently as little capable of be seat as a bladder charge with gas . I thank he for get rid of Edbury , and a touch of remorse prick I , it be true , on his turning abruptly and say : ' you see I in my nakedness , Richie . to you and my valet , the heart , the body ! ' he be too sympathetic not to have a keen apprehension of a state of hostility in one whom he love . if I have incline to melt , however , his next remark would have be enough to harden I : ' I have fight as many battle , and gain as startling victory as Napoleon Buonaparte ; he be an upstart . ' the word give I a jerk . 
 sometimes he would indulge I transparently in a political controversy , confess that my dialectical dexterity go far to make a Radical of he . I have no other amusement , or I should have hold my peace . I try every argument I could think of to prove to he that there be neither honour , nor dignity , nor profit in aim at titular distinction not force upon we by the circumstance of our birth . he keep his position with much sly fencing , approach shrewdness ; and , whatever I might say , I could not deny that a vile old knockknee'd world , tug its forelock to the look of rank and chink of wealth , back he , if he choose to be insensible to radical dignity . 
 ' in my time , ' say he , ' all young gentleman be bear Tories . the doctor no more expect to see a Radical come into the world from a good family than a radish . but I discern you , my dear boy . our reign family must now be active ; they require the discipline I have undergo ; and I also dine at aldermen 's table , and lie a foundation - stone as Jorian say with the facility of a hen - mother : that should not suffice they . ' tis not sufficient for I . I lie my stone , eat my dinner , make my complimentary speech and that be all that be expect of we ; but I be fully aware we should do more . we must lead , or we be lose . ay , and to quote you a Lord Mayor 's barge be a pretty piece of gilt for the festive and luxurious to run up the river Thames in and mark their swan . I be convinced there be something deep in that . but what be I to do ? would you have I frown upon the people ? Richie , it be prudent I maintain it righteous , nay , it be , I affirm positively , sovereign wisdom to cultivate every flower in the british bosom . riposte I have you too many ? say yes , and you pass my guard . you can not . I fence you there . this british loyalty be , in my estimation , absolutely beautiful . we grow to a head in our old England . the people have an eye ! I need no introduction to they . we reciprocate a highly cordial feeling when they line the street and road with respectful salutation , and I acknowledge their demonstrative goodwill . these thing make we a nation . by heaven , Richie , you be , on this occasion , if your dad may tell you so , wrong . I ask pardon for my bluntness ; but I put it to you , could we , not travel as personage in our well - beloved country , count on civility to greet we everywhere ? assuredly not . my position be , that by consent to their honest enthusiasm , we the identical effect you be perpetually cry out for we civilize they , we civilize they . goodness ! a Great Britain without Royalty ! ' 
 he launch on a series of desolate image . in the end , he at least persuade himself that he have an idea in his anxiety to cultivate the primary british sentiment . 
 we move from town to town along the South coast ; but it be vain to hope we might be take for simple people . nor be he altogether to blame , except in allow the national instinct for ' worship and reverence ' to air itself unrebuked . I flee to the island . Temple run down to meet I there , and I hear that Janet have write to he for news of I . he enter our hotel a private person ; when he pass out , hat fly off before he . the modest little fellow go along a double line of attentive observer on the pier , and come back , ask I in astonishment who he be suppose to be . 
 ' I petition for privacy here ! ' exclaim my father . it account for the mystery . 
 Temple know my feeling , and do but glance at I . 
 close upon Temple 's arrival we have a strange couple of visitor . ' mistress dolly Disher and her husband , ' my father introduce they . she call he by one of his christian name inadvertently at time . the husband be a confectioner , a satisfied shade of a man who reserve the exercise of his will for his business , we learn ; she , a bustling , fresh - faced woman of forty - five , with still expressive dark eye , and , I guess , the ideal remainder of a passion in her bosom . the guess be no great hazard . she be soon sit beside I , tell I of the ' year ' she have know my father , and of the most affectionate friend and perfect gentleman he be of the lady who have be in love with he ; ' no wonder ' : and of his sorrow and struggle , and his beautiful voice , and heart that bleed for he ; and of one at least who pray and trust he would be successful at last . 
 Temple and the pallid confectioner spend the day on board a yacht with my father . Mrs. Dolly stay to nurse I and persuade I to swallow medicine . she talk of her youth , when , as a fashionable bootmaker 's daughter , she permit no bill to be send in to Mr. Richmond , alleging , as a sufficient reason for it to her father , that their family come from Richmond in Yorkshire . eventually , the bill be always pay . she have not be able to manage her husband so well ; and the consequence be , that   she breathe low   an execution be out ; ' though I tell he , ' she say tremulously , ' he be sure to be pay in the long run , if only he will wait . but no ; he be you can not think how obstinate in his business . and my girl Augusta wait for Mr. Roy Richmond , the wish of our heart ! to assist at her wedding ; and can we ask it , and have an execution hang over he ? and for all my husband 's a guest here , he be as likely as not to set the officer at work , do what I will , to - morrow or any day . your father invite we , Mr. Harry . I force my husband to come , hop against hope ; for your papa give the order , rely on I , as he believe he might , and my husband undertake they , all through I . there it stop ; he hear report , and he take fright : in go the bill : then it be law , and last oh ! I be ashamed . ' 
 Mr. Disher 's bill be for supply supper to the Balls . he receive my cheque for the amount in full , observe that he have be confident his wife be correct when she say it would be pay , but a tradesman 's business be to hasten the day of payment ; and , for a penance , he himself would pacify the lawyer . 
 on hearing of the settlement of Mr. Disher 's claim , my father ahem'd , speechless , which be a sign of his swallow vexation . he remark that I have , no doubt with the good intention , encroach on his liberty . ' I do not like to have my debt disturb . ' he put it to I , whether a man , carry out a life - long plan , would not be disconcert by the friendly intervention . this payment to Disher he pronounce fatal in policy . ' you have strike a heavy blow to my credit , Richie . good little mistress dolly bring the man down here no select addition to our society and we be do our utmost to endure he , as the lady say , for the very purpose ... but the error stand commit ! for the future , friend Disher will infallibly expect payment within the year . credit for supper be the guarantee of unlimited entertainment . and I be inspire he with absolute confidence for next year 's campaign . money , you be aware , be no long a question to terrify I . I hold proof that I have conclusively frighten Government , and you know it . but this regard the manipulation of the man Disher . he will now dictate to I . a refresher of a few hundred would have be impolitic to this kind of man ; but the entire sum ! and to a creditor in arm ! you reverse the proper situation of gentleman and tradesman . my supperman , in particular , should be teach to understand that he be bind up in my success . something frighten he ; he proceed at law ; and now we have show he that he have frighten we . an execution ? my dear boy , I have dance an execution five year run , and order , consecutively , at the same house . like other matter , an execution depend upon how you treat it . the odd be that we have mortally offend Mistress dolly . ' he apologize for dwell on the subject , with the plea that it be an essential part of his machinery of action , and the usual comparison of ' the sagacious General ' whose forethought omit no minutia . I have to listen . 
 the lady profess to be hurt . the payment , however , put an end to the visit of this couple . politic or not , it be a large sum to disburse , and once more my attention become fix on the probable display of figure in my banker ' book . bond and bill be fall due : the current expense be exhausting . I try to face the evil , and take a line of conduct , staggering , as I do on my foot . have I be well enough , I believe I should have go to my grandfather , to throw myself on his good - nature ; such be the brain 's wise counsel : but I be all nerve and alarm , insomuch that I interdict Temple 's writing to Janet , lest it should bring on I letter from my aunt Dorothy , full of advice that could no long be follow , well - mean caution that might as well be address to the mile - post behind I . moreover , Janet would be fly on the wind to I , and I have a craving for soft arm and the look of her eyebrow , that warn I to keep she off if I intend to act as become a man of good faith . 
 fair weather , sunny green sea - water speckle with yacht shoot and bounding , and send I the sharp sense of life there be in dash - up fountain of silvery salt - spray , would have quicken my blood soon but for this hot - bed of fruitless adventure , tricksy precept , and wisdom turn imp , in which my father have again plant I . to pity he seem a childish affectation . his praise of my good look please I , for on that point he be fit to be a judge , and I be still fancy I have lose they on the heath . troop of the satellite of his grand parade surround he . I see he walk down the pier like one break up a levee . at time he appear to I a command phantasm in the midst of phantasm figure of great lady and their lord , whose name he tell off on his return like a drover count his herd ; but within range of his eye and voice the reality of he grow overpower . it seduce I , and , despite reason , I begin to feel warm under his compliment . he be like wine . gaiety spring under his foot . sit at my window , I thirst to see he when he be out of sight , and have touch of the passion of my boyhood . 
 I listen credulously , too , as in the old day , when he repeat , ' you will find I be a magician , and very soon , Richie , mark I . ' his manner hint that there be a surprise in store . ' you have not be on the brink of the grave for nothing . ' he resemble wine in the other condition attach to its rare quality . oh for the choice of have only a little of he , instead of have he on my heart ! the unfilial wish attack I frequently : he could be , and be , so ravish to stranger and light acquaintance . do by chance a likeness exist between we ? my sick fancy rush to the Belthams for a denial . there do , of some sort , I know ; and the thought partition my dreamy idea , of which the noble , take advantage of my physical weakness , compel I to confess that it be a vain delusion for one such as I to hope for Ottilia . this look at the root of yourself , if you be possess of a nobler half that will do it , be a sound corrective of an excessive ambition . unfortunately it would seem that young man can do it only in sickness . with the use of my leg , and open - air breathing , I become compact , and as hungry and zealous on behalf of my individuality , as proud of it as I have ever be : prouder and hungry . 
 my first day of outing , when , look at every face , I could reflect on the miraculous issue of mine almost clear from its pummelling , and above all , that my nose be safe not stamp with the pugilist 's brand inspire a lyrical ebullition of gratitude . who so intoxicated as the convalescent catch at health ? 
 I meet Charles Etherell on the pier , and hear that my parliamentary seat be consider in peril , together with a deal of gossip about my disappearance . 
 my father , who be grow markedly restless , on the watch for letter and new arrival , start to pay Chippenden a fly visit . he beg I urgently to remain for another few day , while he gather information , say my presence at his chief quarter do he infinite service , and I always think that possible . I should find he be a magician , he repeat , with a sort of hesitate fervour . 
 I have just wave my hand to he as the boat be bear he away from the pier - head , when a feminine voice murmur in my ear , ' be not this our third meeting , Mr. Harry Richmond ? Venice , Elbestadt , and the Isle of Wight ? ' she run on , allow I time to recognize Clara Goodwin . ' what be your last adventure ? you have be ill . very ill ? have it be serious ? ' 
 I make light of it . ' no : a tumble . ' 
 ' you look pale , ' she say quickly . 
 ' that be from grieve at the loss of my beauty , Miss Goodwin . ' 
 ' have you really not be seriously ill ? ' she ask with an astonishing eagerness . 
 I tell her mock - loftily that I do not believe in serious illness come to godlike youth , and ply she in turn with inquiry . 
 ' you have not be lay up in bed ? ' she persist . 
 ' no , on my honour , not in bed . ' 
 ' then , ' say she , ' I would give much to be able to stop that boat . ' 
 she amaze I . ' why ? ' 
 ' because it be go on a bad errand , ' she reply . 
 ' Miss Goodwin , you perplex I . my father have start in that boat . ' 
 ' yes , I see he . ' she glance hastily at the foam in a way to show indifference . ' what I be say concern other ... who have hear you be dangerously ill . I have send for they to hasten across . ' 
 ' my aunt and Miss Ilchester ? ' 
 ' no . ' 
 ' who be they ? Miss Goodwin , I will answer any question . I have   be queerish , that be true . now let I hear who they be , when you arrive , when you expect they . where be they now ? ' 
 ' as to I , ' she respond with what stretch on my ear like an insufferable drawl , ' I come over last night to hire a furnished house or lodging . Papa have an appointment attach to the fortification yonder . we will leave the pier , if you please . you draw too much attention on lady who venture to claim acquaintance with so important a gentleman . ' 
 we walk the whole length of the pier , chat of our former meeting . 
 ' not here , ' she say , as soon as I begin to question . 
 I be lead far on , half expect that the accessory of time and place would have to do with the revelation . 
 the bitter creature draw I at her heel into a linendraper 's shop . there she take a seat , pitch her voice to the key of a lady 's at a dinner - table , when speak to her cavalier of the history or attire of some one present , and say , ' you be sure the illness be not at all feign ? ' 
 she have I as completely at her mercy in this detestable shop as if I have be in a witness - box . 
 ' feign ! ' I exclaim . 
 ' that be no answer . and pray remember where you be . ' 
 ' no , the illness be not feign . ' 
 ' and you have not make the most of it ? ' 
 ' what an extraordinary thing to say ! ' 
 ' that be no answer . and please do not imagine yourself under the necessity of act every sentiment of your heart before these people . ' 
 she favour a shopman with half - a - dozen direction . 
 ' my answer be , then , that I have not make the most of it , ' I say . 
 ' not even by proxy ? ' 
 ' once more I be adrift . ' 
 ' you be certainly energetic . I must address you as a brother , or it will be suppose we be quarrel . Harry , do you like that pattern ? ' 
 ' yes . what be the meaning of proxy ? ' 
 ' with the accent you give it , heaven only know what it mean . I would rather you do not talk here like a Frenchman relate his last love - affair in company . 
 must your voice escape control exactly at the indicatory word ? do you think your father make the most of it ? ' 
 ' of my illness ? oh ! yes ; the utmost . I should undoubtedly think so . that be his way . ' 
 ' why do you permit it ? ' 
 ' I be what they call " wander " half the time . besides , who could keep he in check ? I rarely know what he be do . ' 
 ' you do not   know what he write ? ' 
 ' Wrote ? ' 
 ' that you be die . ' 
 ' of I ? to whom ? ' 
 she scrutinize I , and rise from her chair . ' I must try some other shop . how be it , that if these english people can not make a " berthe " fit to wear , they do not conceive the idea of import such thing from Paris ? I will take your arm , Harry . ' 
 ' you have buy nothing , ' I remark . 
 ' I have as much as I go for , ' she reply , and gravely thank the assistant lean on his thumb across the counter ; after which , drop the graceless play of an enigma , she inquire whether I have forget the Frau von Dittmarsch . 
 I have , utterly ; but not her maiden name of Sibley . 
 ' Miss Goodwin , be she one of those who be come to the island ? ' 
 ' Frau von Dittmarsch ? yes . she take an interest in you . she and I have be in correspondence ever since my visit to Sarkeld . it remind I , you may vary my maiden name with the Christian , if you like . Harry , I believe you be truthful as ever , in spite ' 
 ' do not   be unjust , ' say I. 
 ' I wish I could think I be ! ' she rejoin . ' Frau von Dittmarsch be at Sarkeld , and receive terrible news of you . she call on I , at my father 's residence over the water yonder , yesterday afternoon , desire greatly to know she be as cautious as one with a jewel in her custody how it fare with you , whether you be actually in a die state . I come here to learn ; I have friend here : you be not alone , or I should have call on you . the rumour be that you be very ill ; so I hire a furnished place for Frau von Dittmarsch at once . but when I see you and he together , and the parting between you , I begin to have fear ; I should have countermand the despatch I send by the boat , have it be possible . ' 
 ' it have go ! and tell I the name of the other . ' 
 ' Frau von Dittmarsch have a husband . ' 
 ' not with she now . oh ! cruel ! speak : her name ? ' 
 ' her name , Harry ? ' her title be Countess von Delzenburg . ' 
 ' not princess ? ' 
 ' not in England . ' 
 then Ottilia be here ! 
 my father be indeed a magician ! 




 CHAPTER XLVIII . the PRINCESS ENTRAPPED 

 ' not princess in England , ' could betoken but one thing an incredible act of devotion , so great that it stun my sens , and I think of it , and of all it involve , before the vision of Ottilia crossing sea take possession of I . 
 ' the Princess Ottilia , Miss Goodwin ? ' 
 ' the Countess of Delzenburg , Harry . ' 
 ' to see I ? she have come ! ' 
 ' Harry , you talk like the boy you be when we meet before you know she . yes and yes to everything you have to say , but I think you should spare her name . ' 
 ' she come think I ill ? ' 
 ' die . ' 
 ' I be as strong as ever I be . ' 
 ' I should imagine you be , only rather pale . ' 
 ' have you , tell I , Clara , see she yourself ? be she well ? ' 
 ' pale : not unwell : anxious . ' 
 ' about I ? ' 
 ' it may be about the political affair of the continent ; they be disturb . ' 
 ' she speak of I ? ' 
 ' yes . ' 
 ' she be come by the next boat ? ' 
 ' it be my fear that she be . ' 
 ' why do you fear ? ' 
 ' shall I answer you , Harry ? it be useless now . well , because she have be deceive . that be why . you will soon find it out . ' 
 ' Prince Ernest be at Sarkeld ? ' 
 ' in Paris , I hear . ' 
 ' how will your despatch reach these lady in time for they to come over by the next boat ? ' 
 ' I have send my father 's servant . the General he be promote at last , Harry attend the lady in person , and be now wait for the boat 's arrival over there , to follow my direction . ' 
 ' you will not   leave I ? ' 
 Miss Goodwin have promise to meet the foreign lady on the pier . we quarrel and make it up a dozen time like girl and boy , I call her aunt Clara , as in the old day , and she call I occasionally son Richie : an imitation of my father 's manner of speech to I when we form acquaintance first in Venice . but I be very little aware of what I be say or do . the force of my life be yoke to the heart , and tumble as confusedly as the world under Phaethon charioteer . we walk on the height above the town . I look over the water to the white line of shore and battery where this wonder stand , who be what poet dream of , deep - hearted man hope for , none quite believe in . hardly could I ; and though my relent spinster friend at my elbow keep assure I it be true that she be there , my sceptical sight fix on the stale prominence visible in the same feature which they have wear day after empty day of late . this deed of hers be an act of devotion great as death . I know it from experience consonant to Ottilia 's character ; but could a princess , hereditary , and bind in the league of govern prince , dare so to brave her condition ? Complex of mind , simple in character , the uncontrollable nobility of her spirit be no soon recognize by I than I be shock throughout by a sudden light , contrast I appallingly with this supreme of woman , who sweep the earth aside for truth . I have never before receive a distinct intimation of my littleness of nature , and my first impulse be to fly from thought , and then , as if to prove myself justly accuse , I catch myself regret no , not regretting , gaze , as it be , on a picture of regret that Ottilia be not a romantic little lady of semi - celestial rank , exquisitely rash , wilful , desperately enamoured , bear as many fly hue and peep of fancy as a love - ballad , and not more roughly brush the root - emotion . 
 if she have but be such an one , what sprightly colour , delicious sadness , magical transformation , tender intermixture of earth and heaven ; what tear and sunbeam , divinest pathos : what descent from radiance to consolatory twilight , would have surround I for poetry and pride to dwell on ! what captivate melody in the minor key would have be mine , though I lose she the legacy of it all for ever ! say a petulant princess , a star of beauty , mad for I , and the whisper of our passion and sorrow traverse the flushed world ! be she come ? not she , but a touchstone , a relentless mirror , a pierce eye , a mind severe as the Goddess of the God 's head : a princess indeed , but essentially a princess above woman : a remorseless intellect , an actual soul visible in the flesh . she be truth . be I true ? not so very false , yet how far from truth ! the stain on I   a modern man write his history be fugitive and crepuscular in allude to they , as a woman kneel at the ear - guichet   burn like the blood - spot on the criminal compel to touch his victim by savage ordinance , which know the savage and how to search he . and these be fault of weakness rather than the sin of strength . I might as fairly hope for absolution of they from Ottilia as from offended law of my natural being , gentle though she be , and charitable . 
 be I not guilty of let she come on to I hoodwink at this moment ? I have a faint memory of Miss Goodwin 's say that she have be deceive , and I suggest a plan of hold aloof until she have warn the princess of my perfect recovery , to leave it at her option to see I . 
 ' yes , ' Miss Goodwin assent : ' if you like , Harry . ' 
 her compassion for I only tentatively encourage the idea . ' it would , perhaps , be right . you be the judge . if you can do it . you be act bravely . ' she must have laugh at I in her heart . 
 the hour wear on . my curse of introspection leave I , and descend through the town to the pier , amid the breezy blue skirt and bonnet - string , we watch the packet - boat approach . there be in advance one of the famous swift island wherry . something go wrong with it , for it be overtaken , and the steamer come in first . I jump on board , much bawl at . out of a crowd of unknown visage , Janet appear : my aunt Dorothy be near she . the pair begin chatter of my paleness , and wickedness in keep my illness unknown to they . they have see Temple on an excursion to London ; he have betray I , as he would have betray an archangel to Janet . 
 ' will you not look at we , Harry ? ' they both say . 
 the passenger be quit the boat , stranger every one . 
 ' Harry , have we really offend you in come ? ' say Janet . 
 my aunt Dorothy take the blame on herself . 
 I scarcely notice they , beyond lead they on to the pier - step and leave they under charge of Miss Goodwin , who have , in matter of luggage and porterage , the practical mind and aplomb of an Englishwoman that have pass much of her time on the continent . I fancy myself vilely dupe by this lady . the boat be empty of its passenger ; a grumble pier - man , wound in his dignity , notify to I that there be fine for disregard of the Company 's rule and regulation . his tone alter ; he touch his hat : ' do not   know who you be , my lord . ' Janet overhear he , and her face be humorous . 
 ' we may break the rule , you see , ' I say to she . 
 ' we see he land on the other side of the water , ' she reply ; so spontaneously do the circumstance turn her thought on my father . 
 ' do you speak to he ? ' 
 ' no . ' 
 ' you avoid he ? ' 
 ' Aunty and I think it well . he land ... there be a crowd . ' 
 Miss Goodwin interpose : ' you go to Harry 's hotel ? ' 
 ' Grandada be come down to - morrow or next day , ' Janet prompt my aunt Dorothy . 
 ' if we could seek for a furnished house ; Uberly would watch the luggage , ' Dorothy murmur in distress . 
 ' furnish house , even room at hotel , be doubtful in the height of the season , ' Miss Goodwin remark . ' last night I engage the only decent set of room I could get , for friend of Harry 's who be come . ' 
 ' no wonder he be disappoint at see we he be expect they ! ' say Janet , smile a little . 
 ' they be sure to come , ' say Miss Goodwin . 
 near we a couple of yachtsman be converse . 
 ' oh , he will be back in a day or two , ' one say . ' when you ' ve   once taste that old boy , you can not   do without he . I remember when I be a youngster it be in Lady Betty Bolton 's day ; she marry old Edbury , you know , first wife the Magnificent be then in his prime . he spend his money in a week : so he hire an eighty - ton schooner ; he lay violent hand on a Jew , bag he , lug he on board , and sail away . ' 
 ' what the deuce do he want with a Jew ? ' cry the other . 
 ' oh , the Jew supply cheque for a three month ' cruise in the Mediterranean , and come home , I hear , very good friend with his pirate . that be only one of dozen . ' 
 the unconscious slaughterer laugh . 
 ' on another occasion ' I hear it say by the first speaker , as they swing round to parade the pier , and pass on narrate . 
 ' not an hotel , if it be possible to avoid it , ' my aunt Dorothy , with heighten colour , urge Miss Goodwin . they talk together . 
 ' Grandada be come to you , Harry , ' Janet say . ' he have business in London , or he would have be here now . our horse and carriage follow we : everything you would like . he do love you ! he be very anxious . I be afraid his health be bad than he think . Temple do not say your father be here , but grandada must have suspect it when he consent to our come , and say he would follow we . so that look well perhaps . he have be much quieter since your money be pay back to you . if they should meet ... no , I hope they will not : grandada hat noise . and , Harry , let I tell you : it may be nothing : if he question you , do not take fire ; just answer plainly : I be sure you understand . one in a temper at a time I be sure be enough : you have only to be patient with he . he have be go to London , to the City , see lawyer , banker , broker , and come back muttering . ah ! dear old man . and when he ought to have peace ! Harry , the poor will regret he in a thousand place . I write a great deal for he now , and I know how they will . what be you look at ? ' 
 I be look at a man of huge stature , of the stiff build , whose shoulder show I their full breadth while he stand display frontward the open of his hand in a salute . 
 ' Schwartz ! ' I call . Janet start , imagine some fierce interjection . the giant do not stir . 
 but other have hear . a lady step forward . ' dear Mr. Harry Richmond ! then you be well ? we have most alarming news of you . ' 
 I bow to the Frau von Dittmarsch , anciently Miss Sibley . 
 ' the princess ? ' 
 ' she be here . ' 
 Frau von Dittmarsch clasp Miss Goodwin 's hand . I be touch Ottilia 's . a veil partly swathe her face . she tremble : the breeze rob I of her voice . 
 our walk down the pier be almost in silence . Miss Goodwin assume the guardianship of the foreign lady . I have to break from they and provide for my aunt Dorothy and Janet . 
 ' they go over in a little boat , they be so impatient . who be she ? ' Dorothy Beltham ask . 
 ' the Princess Ottilia , ' say Janet . 
 ' be you certain ? be it really , Harry ? ' 
 I confirm it , and my aunt say , ' I should have guess it could be no other ; she have a foreign grace . ' 
 ' General Goodwin be with they when the boat come in from the island , ' say Janet . ' he walk up to Harry 's father , and you notice , aunty , that the lady stand away , as if they wish to be unobserve , as we do , and pull down their veil . they would not wait for our boat . we pass they cross . People joke about the big servant over - weigh the wherry . ' 
 Dorothy Beltham think the water too rough for little boat . 
 ' she know what a sea be , ' I say . 
 Janet gaze steadily after the retreat figure , and then commend I to the search for room . the end of it be that I abandon my father 's suite to they . an accommodate linen - draper possess of a sea - view , and room which hurl the tenant to the window in desire for it , give I harbourage . 
 till dusk I scour the town to find Miss Goodwin , without whom there be no clue to the habitation I be seek , and I must have pass she blindly again and again . my aunt Dorothy and Janet thank I for my consideration in sit down to dine with they ; they excuse my haste to retire . I hear no reproach except on account of my not send they word of my illness . Janet be not warm . she change in colour and voice when I relate what I have hear from Miss Goodwin , namely , that ' some one ' have inform the princess I be in a die state . I be oblige to offer up my father as a shield for Ottilia , lest false idea should tarnish the image of she in their mind . Janet do not speak of he . the thought stand in her eye ; and there lie the evil of a sore subject among person of one household : they have not to speak to exhibit their mind . 
 after a night of suspense I fall upon old Schwartz and Aennchen out in the early dawn , accord to their german habit , to have a gaze at sea , and strange country and people . Aennchen be all wonder at the solitary place , Schwartz at the big ship . but when they try to direct I to the habitation of their mistress , it be discover by they that they have lose their bearing . Aennchen tell I the margravine have be summon to Rippau just before they leave Sarkeld . her mistress have inform Baroness Turckems of her intention to visit England . Prince Ernest be travel in France . 
 the hour which bring I to Ottilia be noon . the arrangement of the lady could only grant I thirty minute , for Janet be to drive the princess out into the country to view the island . she and my aunt Dorothy have be already introduce . Miss Goodwin , after present they , insist upon ceremoniously accompany I to the house . quite take the vulgar view of a proceeding such as the princess have be guilty of , and perhaps fear summary audacity and interestedness in the son of a father like mine , she venture on lecture I , as though it lie with I to restrain the fair romantic head , forbear from call up my special advantage , advise , and stand to the wisdom of this world , and be the man of honour . the princess have say : ' not see he when I have come to he ? ' I reassure my undiscerne friend partly , not wholly . 
 ' would it be commonly sensible or civil , to refuse to see I , have come ? ' 
 Miss Goodwin doubt . 
 I could indicate forcibly , because I feel , the clear - judge brain and temper self - command whereby Ottilia have gain her decision . 
 Miss Goodwin nod and give I the still - bear affirmative of politeness . her english mind express itself willing to have exonerate the rash great lady for visit a die lover , but he be not the same person now that he be on his foot , consequently her expedition wear a different aspect : my not die condemn she . she entreat I to keep the fact of the princess 's arrival unknown to my father , on which point we be one . intensely enthusiastic for the man of her race , she would have I , above all thing , by a form of adjuration design to be a masterpiece of persuasive rhetoric , ' prove myself an Englishman . ' I be to show that ' the honour , interest , reputation and position of any lady   demente or not , ' she add   ' be as precious to I as to the owner ' : that ' no woman be ever in peril of a shadow of loss in the hand of an english gentleman , ' and so forth , rather surprisingly to I , remember her off - hand manner of the foregoing day . but the sense of responsibility throw upon her idea of our superior national dignity have awaken her fervider naturalness make she a different person , as we say when accounting , in our fashion , for what a little add heat may do . 
 the half hour allot to I flee . I go from the room and the house , feel that I have see and hear she who be barely of the world of humankind for I , so strongly do imagination fly with she . I kiss her finger , I gaze in her eye , I hear the beloved voice . all pass too swift for happiness . recollection set I throb , but recollection bring longing . she say , ' now I have come I must see you , Harry . ' do it signify that to see I be a piece of kindness at war with her judgement ? she rejoice at my perfect recovery , though it rob she of the plea in extenuation of this step she have take . she praise I for abstain to write to she , when I be stammer a set of hastily - impress reason to excuse myself for the omission . she praise my step into Parliament . it do not seem to involve a near approach to she . she say , ' you have not waste your time in England . ' it be for my solitary interest that she care , then . 
 I brood desperately . I could conceive an overlook height that make her utterance simple and consecutive : I could not reach it . topic which to I be palpitate , have no terror for she . she say , ' I have offend my father ; I have write to he ; he will take I away . ' in speaking of the letter which have cause she to offend , she do not blame the writer . I be suffer to run my eye over it , and be ashamed . it read to I too palpably as an outcry to delude and draw her hither : pathos and pathos : the father hold his die son in his arm , his sole son , Harry Richmond ; the son set upon by enemy in the night : the lover never dare to beg for a sight of his beloved ere he pass away : not an ill - word letter ; read uncritically , it may have be touch : it must have be , though it be the reverse for I . I frown , break down in regret , under sharp humiliation . 
 she say , ' you know nothing of it . a little transgression be the real offender . when we be once out of the way trace for we , we be in danger of offend at every step ; we be as lawless as the outcast . ' that mean , ' my turn aside to you originally be the blameable thing . ' it might mean , ' my love of you set my idea of duty at variance with my father 's . ' 
 she smile ; nothing be utter in a tone of despondency . her high courage and breeding give she even in this pitfall the smoothness which most woman keep for society . why she have not send I any message or tiding of herself to Riversley be not a matter that she could imagine to perplex I : she could not imagine my lose faith in she . the least we could do , I construe it , the religious bond between we be a faith in one another that should sanctify to our soul the external injury it cause we to commit . but she talk in no such strain . her delight in tread english ground be her happy theme . she say , ' it be as young as when we meet in the forest ' ; namely , the feeling revive for England . how far off we be from the green Devonshire coast , be one of her question , suggestive of our old yacht - voyage lie among her dream . except an extreme and terrorizing paleness , there be little to fever I with the thought that she suffer mortally . of reproach , not a word ; nor of regret . at the first touch of hand , when we stand together , alone , she say , ' would hear of your recovery have give I peace ? ' my privilege be the touch of hand , the touch of her finger to my lip , a painless hearing and seeing , and passionate recollection . she say , ' impatience be not for we , Harry ' : I be not to see she again before the evening . these be the last word she say , and seem the light until my hot brain make a harvest of they transcend thrice - tell vow of love . do they not mean , ' we two wait ' : therefore , ' the year be bondman to our stedfastness . ' could sweet have be say ? they might mean nothing ! 
 she be veil when Janet drive she out ; Janet sit upright in her masterly way , smooth her pet pony with the curl of her whip , chat and smile ; the princess slightly lean back . I stride up to the country road , proud of our land 's beauty under a complacent sky . by happy chance , which in a generous mood I ascribe to Janet 's good nature , I come across they at a seven mile ' distance . they be talk spiritedly : what be wonderful , they give not much heed to I : they seem on edge for one another 's conversation : each face be turn to the other 's , and after nod an adieu , they resume the animate discourse . I have be rather in alarm lest Ottilia should think little of Janet . they pass out of sight without recur to a thought of I behind they . 
 in the evening I be one among a group of lady . I have the opportunity of hear the run interchange between Ottilia and Janet , which appear to be upon equal term ; indeed , Janet lead . the subject be not very deep . plain wit , candour , and an unpretende tongue , it seem , could make common subject attractive , as fair weather do our english wood and field . the princess be attract by something in Janet . I myself feel the sway of something , while observe Ottilia 's rapt pleasure in her talk and her laughter , with those funny familiar frown and current dimple twisting and melt away like a play of shadow on the eddy of the brook . 
 ' I ' m glad to be with she , ' Janet say of Ottilia . 
 it be just in that manner she speak in Ottilia 's presence . why it should sound elsewhere unsatisfactorily blunt , and there possess a finished charm , I could not understand . 
 I mention to Janet that I fear my father would be return . 
 she contain herself with a bridle ' oh ! ' 
 we be of one mind as to the necessity for keep he absent , if possible . 
 ' Harry , you will pardon I ; I can not   talk of he , ' say she . 
 I propose half - earnestly to foil his return by go to London at once . 
 ' that be manly ; that be nice of you , ' Janet say . 
 this be on our walk from the house at night . my aunt Dorothy listen , press my arm . the next morning Janet urge I to go at once . ' keep he away , bring down grandada , Harry . she can not quit the island , because she have give Prince Ernest immediate rendezvous here . you must not delay to go . yes , the Countess of Delzenburg shall have your excuse . and no , I promise you I will run nobody down . besides , if I do , aunty will be at hand to plead for the defence , and she can ! she have a way that bind one to accept everything she say , and Temple ought to study with she for a year or two before he wear his gown . bring he back with you and grandada . he be esteem here at his true worth . I love he for make she in love with english boy . I leave the man for those who know they , but english boy be unrivalle , I declare . Honesty , bravery , modesty , and nice look ! they be so nice in their style and their way of talk . I tell she , our man may be shy and sneering , awkward , I daresay ; but our boy beat the world . do bring down Temple . I should so like she to see a cricket - match between two good eleven of our boy , Harry , while she be in England ! we could have arrange for one at Riversley . ' 
 I go , and I repress the idea , on my way , that Janet have manoeuvre by send I off to get rid of I , but I feel myself a live testimony to her heartlessness : for no girl of any heart , act the part of friend , would have allow I to go without a leave - taking of she I love few would have be so cruel as to declare it a duty to go at all , especially when the chance be that I might return to find the princess waft away . Ottilia 's condescension have do she no good . ' turn to the right , that be your path ; on . ' she seem to speak in this style , much as she make her touch of the rein understand by her pony . ' I will take every care of the princess , ' she say . her conceit be unbounded . I revel in contemptuous laughter at her assumption of the post of leader with Ottilia . however , it be as well that I should go : there be no trust my father . 




 CHAPTER XLIX . which foreshadow a GENERAL gathering 

 at our Riversley station I observe the squire , in company with Captain Bulsted , jump into a neighbouring carriage . I join they , and be call upon to answer various inquiry . the squire give I one of his short tight grasp of the hand , in which there be warmth and shyness , our english mixture . the captain whisper in my ear : ' he ought not   to be alone . ' 
 ' how be the great - grandmother of the tribe ? ' say I. 
 Captain Bulsted nod , as if he understand , but be at sea until I mention the bottle of rum and the remarkable length of that old lady 's measurement . 
 ' ay , to be sure ! a grand old soul , ' he say . ' you know that scum of old , Harry . ' 
 I laugh , and so do he , at which I laugh the loud . 
 ' he laugh , I suppose , because his party be get a majority in the House , ' say the squire . 
 ' we give you a handsome surplus this year , sir . ' 
 ' sweat out of the country 's skin and bone , ay ! ' 
 ' you be compliment by the Chancellor of the Exchequer ! ' 
 ' yes , that fellow 's compliment be like a cabman 's , and cry fool : he never thank you but when he be overpay . ' 
 Captain Bulsted applaud the sarcasm . 
 ' why do you keep out of knowledge all this time , Hal ? ' my grandfather ask . 
 I refer he to the captain . 
 ' hang it , ' cry Captain Bulsted , ' do you think I would have be do duty for you if I have know where to lay hold of you . ' 
 ' well , if you do not   shake hand with I , you touch my toe , ' say I , and thank he with all my heart for his kindness to an old woman on the point of the grave . I have some fun to flavour melancholy with . 
 my grandfather resume his complaint : ' you might have go clean off , and we none the wiser . ' 
 ' be we quite sure that his head 's clean on ? ' say the mystified captain . 
 ' of course we should run to he , wherever he be , if he be down on his back , ' the squire mutter . 
 ' ay , ay , sir ; of course , ' quoth Captain William , frown to I to reciprocate this relent mood . ' but , Harry , where do you turn off that night ? we sit up expect you . my poor Julia be in a terrible fright , my lad . eh ? speak up . ' 
 I raise the little finger . 
 ' oh , oh , ' go he , happily reassure ; but , reflect , add : ' a bout of it ? ' 
 I drop he a penitent nod . 
 ' that be bad , though , ' say he . 
 ' then why do you tip I a bottle of rum , Captain William ? ' 
 ' by George , Harry , you have   have a crack o ' the sconce , ' he exclaim , more sagaciously than he be aware of . 
 my grandfather want to keep I by his side in London until we two should start for the island next day ; but his business be in the city , mine toward the West . we appoint to meet two hour after reach the terminus . 
 he turn to I while give direction to his man . 
 ' you ' ve   get he down there , I suppose ? ' 
 ' my father 's in town , sir . he shall keep away , ' I say . 
 ' Humph ! I may not   object to see he . ' 
 this set I think . 
 Captain bulste previously ask I in a very earnest manner whether I be really all right and sound favour I with a hint : 
 ' the squire have plunge into speculation of his own , or else he be peep at somebody else 's . no danger of the dad be mix up with company ? let us hope not . Julia pledge her word to Janet that I would look after the old squire . I suppose I can go home this evening ? my girl hat to be alone . ' 
 ' by all mean , ' say I ; and the captain propose to leave the squire at his hotel , in the event of my fail to join he in the city . 
 ' but do not   fail , if you can help it , ' he urge I ; ' for thing somehow , my dear Harry , appear to I to look like the compass when the needle give sign of atmospheric disturbance . my only reason for say so be common observation . you can judge for yourself that he be glad to have you with he . ' 
 I tell the captain I be equally glad ; for , in fact , my grandfather 's quietness and apparently friendly disposition tempt I to petition for a dower for the princess at once , so that I might be in the position to offer Prince Ernest on his arrival a distinct alternative ; suppose it be still but a supposition Ottilia should empower I . incessant dialogue of perpetually shift tendency pass between Ottilia and I in my brain now dark , now mildly fair , now very wild , on one side at least . never , except by downright force of will , could I draw from the phantom of her one purely irrational outcry , so deeply - rooted be the knowledge of her nature and mind ; and when I do force it , I be no gainer : a puppet stand in her place the vision of Ottilia melt out in thread of vapour . 
 ' and yet she have come to I ; she have brave everything to come . ' I might say that , to liken she to the woman who break rule and read duty by their own light , but I could not cheat my knowledge of she . Mrs. Waddy meet I in the hall of my father 's house , as usual , press , I regret to see , one hand to her side . ' her heart , ' she say , ' be easily set pitty - pat now . ' she have be , by her master 's order , examine by two of the chief physician of the kingdom , ' baronet both . ' they advise total rest . as far as I could apprehend , their baronetcy and doing in high region have be of more comfort than their prescription . 
 ' what I be I must be , ' she say , meekly ; ' and I can not quit his service till he be abroad again , or I drop . he have promise I a monument . I do not   want it ; but it show his kindness . ' 
 a letter from Heriot inform I that the affair between Edbury and I be settle : he could not comprehend how . 
 ' what be this new Jury of Honour ? who be the juryman ? ' he ask , and affected wit . 
 I thank he for a thrashing in a curt reply . 
 my father have leave the house early in the morning . Mrs. Waddy believe that he mean to dine that evening at the season 's farewell dinner of the Trump - Trick Club : ' leastway , Tollingby have order to lay out his gentlemen' - dinner ' evening - suit . yesterday afternoon he fly down to Chippenden , and be home late . to - day he be in the City , or one of the square . Lady Edbury 's ah ! detain in town with the jaundice or toothache . he say he be send to France for a dentist : or be it Germany , for some lady 's eye ? I be sure I do not   know . well or ill , so long as you be anything to he , he will abound . pocket and purse ! you know he by this time , Mr. Harry . oh , my heart ! ' 
 a loud knock at the door have bring on the poor creature 's palpitation . 
 this visitor be no other than Prince Ernest . the name on his card be Graf von Delzenburg , and it set my heart leap to as swift a measure as Mrs. Waddy 's . 
 hear that I be in the house , he desire to see I . 
 we meet , with a formal bow . 
 ' I congratulate you right heartily upon be out of the list of the nekron , ' he say , civilly . ' I be on my way to one of your watering - place , whither my family should have precede I . do you publish the name and address of visitor daily , as it be the custom with we ? ' 
 I relieve his apprehension on that head : ' here and there , rarely ; and only at the hotel , I believe . ' the excuse be furnish for offer the princess 's address . 
 ' possibly , in a year or two , we may have the pleasure of welcome you at Sarkeld , ' say the prince , extend his hand . ' then , you have see the Countess of Delzenburg ? ' 
 ' on the day of her arrival , your Highness . lady of my family be stay on the island . ' 
 ' ah ? ' 
 he pause , and invite I to bow to he . we bow thus in the room , in the hall , and at the street - door . 
 for what purpose could he have call on my father ? to hear the bad at once ? that seem likely , suppose he to have lose his peculiar confidence in the princess , of which the courtly pace he have put I through preclude I from judge . 
 but I guess acutely that it be not his intention to permit of my meeting Ottilia a second time . the blow be hard : I feel it as if it have be strike already , and think I have gain resignation , until , like a man reprieve on his road to execution , the narrow circle of my heart open out to the breadth of the world in a minute . return from the city , I hurry to my father 's house , late in the afternoon , and hear that he have start to overtake the prince , leave word that the prince be to be find at his address in the island . no doubt could exist regard the course I be bind to take . I drive to my grandfather , state my case to he , and by sheer vehemence take the wind out of his sail ; so that when I say , ' I be the only one alive who can control my father , ' he answer mildly , ' seem t ' other way , ' and choose a small snort for the indulgence of his private opinion . 
 ' what ! this princess come over alone , and be down drive out with my girl under an alias ? ' he say , show sour aversion at the prospect of a collision with the foreign specie , as expressive as the ridge of a cat 's back . 
 Temple come to dine with we , so I do not leave he quite to himself , and Temple promise to accompany he down to the island . 
 ' oh , go , if you like , ' the fretted old man dismiss I : 
 ' I have   get enough to think over . hold he fast to stand up to I within forty - eight hour , present time ; you know who I mean ; I have   get a question or two for he . how he treat his foreign prince and princess do not   concern I . I would say , like the Prevention - Cruelty - Animal 's man to the keeper of the menagerie , " lecture them , wound their dignity , hurt their feeling , only do not   wop them . " I do not   wish any harm to they , but what the deuce they do here nose after my grandson ! ... there , go ; we shall be have it out ha ' do with to - morrow or next day . I have   run the badger to earth , else I be not fit to follow a scent . ' 
 he grumble at have to consume other than his Riversley bread , butter , beef , and ale for probably another fortnight . one of the boast of Riversley be , that while the rest of the world eat and drank poison , the Grange live on its own solid substance , defy malefactory Radical trickster . 
 Temple be leave to hear the rest . he have the sweetest of modest wish for a re - introduction to Ottilia . 




 CHAPTER L. we be all in MY FATHER 'S NET 

 Journeying down by the mail - train in the face of a great sunken sunset break with cloud , I chance to ask myself what it be that I seriously desire to have . my purpose to curb my father be sincere and good ; but concern my heart 's desire , whitherward do they point ? I think of Janet she make I gasp for air ; of Ottilia , and she make I long for earth . sharp , as I write it , the distinction smite I . I might have be divide by an electrical shot into two half , with such an equal force be I draw this way and that , point nowhither . to strangle the thought of either one of they be like the pang of death ; yet it do not strike I that I love the two : they be apart in my mind , actually as if I have be divide . I pass the Riversley station under sombre sunset fire , sadden by the fancy that my old home and vivacious Janet be ash , past hope . I come on the smell of salt air , and have that other spirit of woman around I , of whom the control seadeep be an image , who speak to my soul like starlight . much wise counsel , and impatience of the wisdom , go on within I . I walk like a man with a yawning wound , and have to whip the sense of passion for a drug . toward which one it strove I know not ; it be blind and stormy as the night . 
 not a boatman would take I across . the light of the island lie like a crown on the water . I pace the rampart , eye they , breathe the keen salt of thunder wave , until they be rob of their magic by the coloured Fast . 
 it be , I have learn , out of the conflict of sensation such as I then undergo that a young man 's brain and morality , suppose he not to lean overmuch to sickly sentiment , become gradually enrich and strengthen , and himself shape for capable manhood . I be partly conscious of a well condition in the morning ; and a sober morning it be to I after my long sentinel 's step to and fro . I find myself possess of one key whether the right one or not wherewith to read the princess , which be never possible to I when I be under stress of passion , or of hope or despair ; my perplexity over what she say , how she look , cease to trouble I . I read she by this strange light : that she be a woman who could only love intelligently love , that is , in the sense of give herself . she have the power of passion , and it could be stir ; but he who kindle it wreck his chance if he could not stand clear in her intellect 's unsparing gaze . twice already she must have feel herself disillusion by I . this third time , possibly , she blame her own fatally credulous tenderness , not I ; but it be her third awakening , and could affection and warmth of heart combat it ? her child 's enthusiasm for my country have prepare she for the impression which the waxen mind of the dreamy invalid receive deeply ; and so , aid by the emotional blood of youth , she give I place in her imagination , probe I still curiously , as I remember , at a season when her sedate mind be attain to joint deliberation with the impulsive overgenerous heart . 
 then ensue for she the successive shock of discernment . she know the to have some of the vice , many folly , all the intemperateness of man who carve a way for themselves in the common road , if barely they do that . and resemble common man   man , in a judgement elective as her , common , however able , I be not assuredly to be separate by she from my association ; from the thought of my father , for example . her look at he in the lake - palace library , and her manner in unfold and fold his recent letter to she , and in one or two necessitate allusion , embrace a kind of grave , pitiful humour , beyond smile or any outward expression , as if the acknowledgement that it be so quite obliterate the wonder that it should be so that one such as he could exercise influence upon her destiny . or she may have make she reckon generally , not personally , upon our human destiny : it be the more likely , if , as I divine , the calm oval of her lift eyelid contemplate he in the fulness of the recognition that this world , of which we hope unuttered thing , can be shift and sway by an ignis - fatuus . the father of one now see through , could hardly fail of be transfix himself . it be horrible to think of . I would rather have add a vice to my fault than that she should have penetrate he . 
 near the island , I be remind of the early morning when I land on the flemish flat . I do not expect a similar surprise , but before my rower have pull in , the tall beaconhead of old Schwartz notify that his mistress might be abroad . Janet walk with she . I run up the step to salute they , and have Ottilia 's hand in mine . 
 ' Prince Ernest have arrive ? ' 
 ' my father come yesterday evening . ' 
 ' do you leave to - day ? ' 
 ' I can not tell ; he will decide . ' 
 it seem a good oman , until I scan Janet 's sombre face . 
 ' you will not see we out for the rest of the day , Harry , ' say she . 
 ' that be your arrangement ? ' 
 ' it be . ' 
 ' your own ? ' 
 ' mine , if you like . ' 
 there be something hard in her way of speak , as though she blame I , and the princess be under her protection against I . she vouchsafe no friendly significance of look and tone . 
 in spite of my readiness to criticize she   which in our language mean condemn   for always assume leadership with whomsoever she might be , I be impress by the air of high - breed friendliness exist between she and the princess . their interchange be pleasant to hear . Ottilia have catch the spirit of her frank manner of speech ; and she , though in a less degree , the princess 's fine ease and sweetness . they converse , apparently , like equal mind . on material point , Janet unhesitatingly lead . it be she who bring the walk to a close . 
 ' now , Harry , you have well go and have a little sleep . I should like to speak to you early . ' 
 Ottilia immediately put her hand out to I . 
 I beg permission to see she to her door . 
 Janet reply for she , indicate old Schwartz : ' we have a protector , you see , six foot and a half . ' 
 an hour later , Schwartz be follow she to the step of her hotel . she see I , and wait . for a wonder , she display reluctance in disburden herself of what she have to say . ' Harry , you know that he have come ? he and Prince Ernest come together . get he to leave the island at once : he can return to - morrow . Grandada write of wish to see he . get he away to - day . ' 
 ' be the prince go to stay here ? ' I ask . 
 ' no . I daresay I be only guess ; I hope so . he have threaten the prince . ' 
 ' what with ? ' 
 ' oh ! Harry , can not   you understand ? I be no reader of etiquette , but even I can see that the story of a young princess travel over to England alone to visit ... and you ... , and her father fetch she away ! the prince be almost at his mercy , unless you make the man behave like a gentleman . this be exactly the thing Miss Goodwin fear ! ' 
 ' but who be to hear of the story ? ' say I. 
 Janet give an impatient sigh . 
 ' do you mean that my father have threaten to publish it , Janet ? ' 
 ' I will not   say he have . he have make the prince afraid to move : that I think be true . ' 
 ' do the princess herself mention it to you ? ' 
 ' she understand her situation , I be sure . ' 
 ' do she speak of " the man , " as you call he ? ' 
 ' yes : not as I do . you must try by - and - by to forgive I . whether he set a trap or not , he have decoy she do not   frown at word and it remain for you to act as I do not   doubt you will ; but lose no time . determine . oh ! if I be a man ! ' 
 ' you would muzzle we ? ' 
 ' Muzzle , or anything you please ; I would make any one relate to I behave honourably . I would give he the alternative ... ' 
 ' you foolish girl ! suppose he take it ? ' 
 ' I would make he feel my will . he should not take it . keep to the circumstance , Harry . if you have no control over he I should think I be not fit to live , in such a position ! no control over he at a moment like this ? and the princess in danger of have her reputation hurt ! surely , Harry ! but why should I speak to you as if you be undecided ! ' 
 ' where be he ? ' 
 ' at the house where you sleep . he surrender his room here very kindly . ' 
 ' aunty have see he ? ' 
 Janet blush : I think I know why . it be for subtler reason than I should have credit she with conceiving . 
 ' she send for he , at my request , late last night . she believe her influence would be decisive . so do I. she could not even make the man perceive that he be act to use her poor dear old - fashioned word reprehensibly in frighten the prince to further your interest . from what I gather he go off in a song about they . she say he talk so well ! and aunty Dorothy , too ! I should nearly as soon have expect grandada to come in for his turn of the delusion . how I wish he be here ! uberly go by the first boat to bring he down . I feel with Miss Goodwin that it will be a disgrace for all of we the country 's disgrace . as for our family ! ... Harry , and your name ! good - bye . do your good . ' 
 I be in the mood to ask , ' on behalf of the country ? ' she have , however , a glow and a ring articulation in her excitement that forbid trifling ; a minute 's reflection set I weigh my power of will against my father 's . I nod to she . 
 ' come to we when you be at liberty , ' she call . 
 I have say that I weigh my power of will against my father 's . contemplation of the state of the scale do not send I stride to meet he . let it be remember I have it strongly in memory that he habitually delude himself under the supposition that the turn of all event have an aspect of good fortune have be plan by he of old , and be offer to he as the legitimately - win fruit of a politic life . while other deem he mad , or merely reckless , wild , a creature live for the day , he enjoy the conceit of be a profound schemer , in which he be fortify by a really extraordinary adroitness to take advantage of occurrence : and because he be prompt in an emergency , and quick to profit of a crisis , he be delude to imagine that he have create it . such a man would be with difficulty bring to surrender his prize . 
 again , there be his love for I . ' pater est , Pamphile ; difficile est . ' how be this vast conceit of a not unreal paternal love to be encounter ? the sense of honour and of decency might appeal to he personally ; would either of they get a hearing if he fancy they to be stand in opposition to my dearest interest ? I , unhappily , as the case would be sure to present itself to he , appear the live example of his eminently politic career . after establish I the heir of one of the wealthy of english commoner , would he be likely to forego any desperate chance of ennoble I by the brilliant marriage ? his dreadful devotion to I extinguish the hope that he would , unless I should happen to be particularly masterful in deal with he . I hear his nimble and overwhelming volubility like a flood advance . that could be withstood , and his argument and persuasion . but by what step could I restrain the man himself ? I say ' the man , ' as Janet do . he figure in my apprehensive imagination as an engine more than as an individual . Lassitude oppress I . I feel that I require every access of strength possible , physical besides moral , in anticipation of our encounter , and take a swim in sea - water , which displace my drowsy fit , and some alarming intimation of cowardice menace a paralysis of the will : I have not altogether recover from my gipsy drubbing . and now I want to have the contest over instantly . it seem presumable that my father have sleep at my lodging . there , however , the report of he be , that he have inspect the room , highly complimented the owner of they , and vanish . 
 return to the pier , I learn that he have set sail in his hire yacht for the sister town on the Solent , at an early hour : for what purpose ? I know of it too late to intercept it . one of the squire 's horse trot I over ; I come upon Colonel Hibbert Segrave near the Club - house , and hear that my father be off again : 
 ' but your german prince and papa - in - law shall be free of the Club for the next fortnight , ' say he , and cordially ask to have the date of the marriage . my face astonish he . he excuse himself for speak of this happy event so abruptly . a sting of downright anger drive I back at a rapid canter . it flash on I that this Prince Ernest , whose suave fashion of depress I , and philosophical skill in manage his daughter , have induce I to regard he as a pattern of astuteness , be really both credulous and feeble , or else supremely unsuspecting : and I be confirm in the latter idea on hear that he have sail to visit the opposite harbour and dock on board my father 's yacht . Janet share my secret opinion . 
 ' the prince be a gentleman , ' she say . 
 her wrath and disgust be unspeakable . my aunt Dorothy blame she for overdue severity . ' the prince , I suppose , go of his own free will where he please . ' 
 Janet burst out , ' oh ! can not   you see through it , aunty ? the prince go about without at all know that the person who take he Harry see it be make he compromise himself : and by - and - by the prince will discover that he have no will of his own , whatever he may wish to resolve upon do . ' 
 ' be he quite against Harry ? ' ask my aunt Dorothy . 
 ' dear aunty , he be a prince , and a proud man . he will never in his lifetime consent to ... to what you mean , without be hound into it . I have not   the slight idea whether anything will force he . I know that the princess would have too much pride to submit , even to save her name . but it be her name that be in danger . think of the scandal to a sovereign princess ! I know the signification of that now ; I use to laugh at Harry 's ' sovereign princess . " she be one , and thorough ! there be no one like she . do not   you understand , aunty , that the intrigue , plot I do not   choose to be nice upon term may be perfectly successful , and do good to nobody . the prince may be trick ; the princess , I be sure , will not . ' 
 Janet 's affectation of an intimate and peculiar knowledge of the princess be a show of her character that I be accustom to : still , it be evident they have converse much , and perhaps intimately . I lead she to tell I that the princess have express no view upon my father . ' he do not come within her scope , Harry . ' ' Scope ' be one of Janet 's new word , wherewith she would now and then fall to season a serviceable but savourless outworn vocabulary of the common table . in spite of that and other offence , render prominent to I by the lifting of her lip and her frown when she have to speak of my father , I be on her side , not on his . her estimation of the princess be soundly base . she discern exactly the nature of Ottilia 's entanglement , and her peril . 
 she and my aunt Dorothy pass the afternoon with Ottilia , while I cross the head of the street , look down at the one house , where the princess be virtually imprison , either by her father 's express injunction or her own discretion . and it be as well that she should not be out . the yachting season have bring many London man to the island . I meet several who have not forget the newspaper - paragraph assertion and contradiction . Lord Alton , Admiral Loftus , and other be on the pier and in the outfitter ' shop , eager for gossip , as the languid stretch of indolence incline man to be . the Admiral ask I for the whereabout of Prince Ernest 's territory . he too say that the prince would be free of the Club during his residence , add : 
 ' where be he ? ' not a question demand an answer . the man might have let the princess go by , but there would have be question urgently demand answer have she be see by their woman . 
 late in the evening my father 's yacht be sight from the pier . just as he reach his mooring , and his boat be haul round , the last steamer come in . sharp - eyed Janet see the squire on board among a crowd , and Temple next to he , support his arm . 
 ' has grandada be ill ? ' she exclaim . 
 my chief concern be to see my father 's head rise in the midst of the crowd , uncover repeatedly . Prince Ernest and General Goodwin be behind he , step off the low pier - platform . the General do not look pleased . my grandfather , with Janet hold his arm , in the place of Temple , stand wait to see that his man have do his duty by the luggage . 
 my father , advance , perceive I , and almost take the squire into his affectionate salutation , say : 
 ' nothing could be more opportune than your arrival , Mr. Beltham . ' 
 the squire rejoin : ' I want to see you , Mr. Richmond ; and not in public . ' 
 ' I grant the private interview , sir , at your convenience . ' 
 Janet go up to General Goodwin . my father talk to I , and lose a moment in shake Temple 's hand and say kind thing . 
 ' name any hour you please , Mr. Beltham , ' he resume ; ' meantime , I shall be glad to effect the introduction between Harry 's grandfather and his Highness Prince Ernest of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld . ' 
 he turn . General Goodwin be hurry the prince up the step , the squire at the same time retreat hastily . I witness the spectacle of both party to the project introduction swing round to make their escape . my father glance to right and left . he cover in the airy fashion what would have be confusion to another by carry on a jocose remark that he have leave half speak to Temple , and involve Janet in it , and soon through sheer amiable volubility and his take manner the squire himself for a minute or so . 
 ' Harry , I have to tell you she be not unhappy , ' Janet whisper rapidly . ' she be read of one of our great man alive now . she be glad to be on our ground . ' Janet name a famous admiral , kindling as a fiery beacon to our blood . she would have say more : she look the remainder ; but she could have say nothing well fit to spur I to the work she want do . Mournfulness drop on I like a cloud in thinking of the bright little princess of my boyhood , and the Ottilia of to - day , faithful to her early passion for our sea - hero and my country , though it have grievously entrap she . and into what hand ! not into hand which could cast one ray of honour on a devoted head . the contrast between the sane service give man she admire , and the hopping skip social meteor , weaver of webs , thrower of net , who offer she his history for a nuptial acquisition , be ghastly , most discomforting . he seem to have entangle we all . 
 he say that he have . he treat I now confessedly as a cipher . the prince , the princess , my grandfather , and I he have gather we together , he say . I hear from he that the prince , assist by he in the part of an adviser , see no way of cut the knot but by a marriage . all be at hand for a settlement of the term : Providence and destiny be drag in . 
 ' let us have no theatrical talk , ' I interpose . 
 ' certainly , Richie ; the plain English , ' he assent . 
 this be on the pier , while he bow and greet pass figure . I dare not unlink my arm , for fear of further mischief . I get he to my room , and insist on his dining there . 
 ' Dry bread will do , ' he say . 
 my anticipation of the nature of our wrestle be correct . but I have not expect he to venture on the assertion that the prince be for the marriage . he meet I at every turn with this downright iteration . ' the prince consent : he know his only chance be to yield . I have he fast . ' 
 ' how ? ' I inquire . 
 ' how , Richie ? where be your perspicuity ? I have he here . I loosen a thousand tongue on he . I ' 
 ' no , not on he ; on the princess , you mean . ' 
 ' on he . the princess be the willing party ; she and you be one . on he , I say . ' tis but a threat : I hold it in terrorem . and by heaven , son Richie , it assure I I have not live and fight for nothing . " now be the day and now be the hour . " on your first birthday , my boy , I swear to marry you to one of the high lady upon earth : she be , as it turn out , then unborn . no matter : I keep my oath . abandon it ? pooh ! you be forgive I silly . pardon I for remark it , you have not that dash courage never mind . the point be , I have my prince in his trap . we be perfectly polite , but I have he , and he acknowledge it ; he shrug : love have beat he . very well . and observe : I permit no squire - of - low - degree insinuation ; none of that . the lady all earthly blessing on she ! do not stoop to Harry Richmond . I have the announcement in the newspaper . I maintain it the fruit of a life of long and earnest endeavour , legitimately win , by heaven it be ! and with the constituted authority of my native land against I . your grandad propose formally for the princess to - morrow morning . ' 
 he madden I . merely to keep he silent I burst out in a flux of reproach as torrent - like as his own could be ; and all the time I be wonder whether it be true that a man who talk as he do , in his strain of florid flimsy , have actually do a practical thing . 
 the effect of my vehemence be to brace he and make he sedately emphatic . he declare himself to have gain entire possession of the prince 's mind . he repeat his positive intention to employ his power for my benefit . never do power of earth or of hell seem dark to I than he at that moment , when solemnly declaim that he be prepared to forfeit my respect and love , die soon than ' yield his prince . ' he wear a new aspect , speak briefly and pointedly , use the phrase of a determined man , and in voice and gesture signify that he have we all in a grasp of iron . the charge of his have plot to bring it about he accept with exultation . 
 ' I admit , ' he say , ' I do not arrange to have Germany present for a witness besides England , but since he be here , I take advantage of the fact , and to - morrow you will see young Eckart down . ' 
 I cry out , as much enrage at my feebleness to resist he , as in disgust of his unscrupulous trick . 
 ' ay , you have not know I , Richie , ' say he . ' I pilot you into harbour , and all you can do be just the creaking of the vessel to I . you be in my hand . I pilot you . I have you the husband of the princess within the month . no other course be open to she . and I have the assurance that she lose nothing by it . she be your , my son . ' 
 ' she will not be . you have wreck my last chance . you cover I with dishonour . ' 
 ' you be a youngster , Richie . ' tis the wish of her heart . probably while you and I be talk it over , the prince be confess that he have no escape . he have not a loophole ! she come to you ; you take she . I be far from withhold my admiration of her behaviour ; but there it be she come . not consent ? she be a ruined woman if she refuse ! ' 
 ' through you , through you ! through my father ! ' 
 ' have you both go mad ? ' 
 ' try to see this , ' I implore he . ' she will not be subject by any threat . the very whisper of one will make her turn from I ... ' 
 he interrupt . ' totally the contrary . the prince acknowledge that you be master of her affection . ' 
 ' consistently with her sense of honour and respect for we . ' 
 ' tell I of her reputation , Richie . ' 
 ' you pretend that you can damage it ! ' 
 ' pretend ? I pretend in the tooth of all concerned to establish her happiness and your , and nothing human shall stop I . I have you grateful to I before your old dad lay his head on his last pillow . and that remind I : I surrender my town house and furniture to you . Waddy have receive the word . by the way , should you hear of a good doctor for heart - disease , tell I : I have my fear for the poor soul . ' 
 he stand up , say , ' Richie , I be not like Jorian , to whom a lodge - house dinner be no dinner , and an irreparable loss , but I must have air . I go forth on a stroll . ' 
 it be impossible for I to allow it . I stop he . 
 we be in the midst of a debate as to his right of personal freedom , upon the singularity of which he comment with sundry ejaculation , when Temple arrive and General Goodwin send up his card . Temple and I leave the general closet with my father , and stand at the street - door . he have see the princess , have at her request be take to present his respect to she by Janet . how she look , what she say , he be dull in describing ; he think she lively , though she be pale . she have mention my name , ' kindly , ' he observe . and he know , or suspect , the General to be an emissary from the prince . but he could not understand the exact nature of the complication , and plague I with a mixture of blunt inquiry and the delicate reserve proper to he so much that I have to look elsewhere for counsel and sympathy . Janet have tell he everything ; still he be plunge in wonder , tempt I to think the lawyer 's mind of necessity bourgeois , for the value of a sentiment seem to have no weight in his estimation of the case . nor do he appear disinclined to excuse my father . some of his remark partly sway I , in spite of my seeing that they be base on the supposition of an ' all for love ' adventure of a mad princess . they whisper a little hope , when I be adore she passionately for be the reverse of whatever might have give hope a breath . 
 General Goodwin , follow by my father , come down and lead I aside after I have warn Temple not to let my father elude he . the General be greatly ruffle . ' Clara tell I she can rely on you , ' he say . ' I be at the end of my argument with that man , short of send he to the lock - up . you will pardon I , Mr. Harry ; I foresaw the scrape in store for you , and advise you . ' 
 ' you do , general , ' I confess . ' will you tell I what it be Prince Ernest be in dread of ? ' 
 ' a pitiable scandal , sir ; and if he take my recommendation , he would find instant mean of punish the man who dare to threaten he . you know it . ' 
 I explain that I be aware of the threat , not of the degree of the prince 's susceptibility ; and ask he if he have see the princess . 
 ' I have have the honour , ' he reply , stiffly . ' you gain nothing with she by this infamous proceeding . ' 
 I swallow my anger , and say , ' do you accuse I , General ? ' 
 ' I do not accuse you , ' he return , unbendingly . ' you choose your path some ten or twelve year ago , and you must take the consequence . I foresaw it ; but this I will say , I do not credit the man with his infernal cleverness . if I speak to you at all , I must speak my mind . I think he a mere buffoon and spendthrift , fly his bar - sinister story for the sake of distinction . he have scheme up to this point successfully : he have the prince in his toil . I would cut through they , as I have inform Prince Ernest . I daresay different position lead to different reasoning ; the fellow appear to have a fascination over he . your father , Mr. Harry , be guilty now he be guilty , I reiterate , now of a piece of iniquity that make I ashamed to own he for a countryman . ' 
 the General shake himself erect . ' be you unable to keep he in ? ' he ask . 
 my nerve be prick and sting with the insult I have to listen to , and conscience 's justification of they . 
 he repeat the question . 
 ' I will do what I can , ' I say , unsatisfactorily to myself and to he , for he transpose our situation , tell I the thing he would say and do in my place ; thing not dissimilar to those I have already say and do , only more toweringly enunciate ; and for that reason they strike I as all the more hopelessly ineffectual , and make I despair . 
 my dumbness excite his ire . ' come , ' say he ; ' the lady be a spoilt child . she behave foolishly ; but from your point of view you should feel bound to protect she on that very account . do your duty , young gentleman . he be , I believe , fond of you , and if so , you have he by a chain . I tell you frankly , I hold you responsible . ' 
 his way of speak of the princess open an idea of the world 's , in the event of her name fall into its clutch . 
 I say again , ' I will do what I can , ' and sing out for Temple . 
 he be alone . my father have slip from he to leave a card at the squire 's hotel . General Goodwin touch Temple on the shoulder kindly , in mark contrast to his treatment of I , and wish we good - night . nothing have be hear of my father by Janet , but while I be sit with she , at a late hour , his card be bring up , and a pencil entreaty for an interview the next morning . 
 ' that will suit grandada , ' Janet say . ' he commission I before go to bed to write the same for he . ' 
 she relate that the prince be in a state of undisguise distraction . from what I could comprehend it appear incredible he regard his daughter 's marriage as the solution of the difficulty , the sole way out of the mesh . 
 ' be not that her wish ? ' say Temple ; perhaps with a wish of his own . 
 ' oh , if you think a lady like the Princess Ottilia be lead by her wish , ' say Janet . her radiant perception of an ideal in her sex   the first she ever have   make she utterly contemptuous toward the less enlighten . 
 we appoint the next morning at half - past eleven for my father 's visit . 
 ' not a minute later , ' Janet say in my ear , urgently . ' do not   do not   let he move out of your sight , Harry ! the princess be convince you be not to blame . ' 
 I ask she whether she have any knowledge of the squire 's design . 
 ' I have not , on my honour , ' she answer . ' but I hope ... it be so miserable to think of this disgraceful thing ! she be too firm to give way . she do not blame you . I be sure I do not ; only , Harry , one always feel that if one be in another 's place , in a case like this , I could and would command he . I would have he obey I . one be not bear to accept disgrace even from a father . I should say , " you shall not stir , if you mean to act dishonourably . " one be justify , I be sure , in break a tie of relationship that involve you in dishonour . Grandada have not speak a word to I on the subject . I catch at straw . this thing burn I ! oh , good - night , Harry . I can not   sleep . ' 
 ' good - night , ' she call softly to Temple on the stair below . I hear the poor fellow murmur good - night to himself in the street , and think he happy than I. he sleep at a room close to the hotel . 
 a note from Clara Goodwin adjure I , by her memory of the sweet , brave , gracious fellow she love in other day , to be worthy of what I have be . the General have unnerve her reliance on I . 
 I sit up for my father until long past midnight . when he come his appearance remind I of the time of his altercation with Baroness Turckems under the light of the blaze curtain : he have sup and drunk deeply , and he very soon proclaim that I should find he invincible , which , as far as insensibility to the strong appeal to he go , he be . 
 ' deny you love she , deny she love you , deny you be one I knot you fast ! ' 
 he have again see Prince Ernest ; so he say , declare that the Prince positively desire the marriage ; would have it . ' and I , ' he dramatize their relative situation , ' consent . ' 
 after my experience of that night , I forgive man who be unmove by display of humour . commonly we think it should be irresistible . his description of the thin - skinned sensitive prince strive to run and dodge for shelter from he , like a fever - patient pursue by a north - easter , accompany by dozen of quaint simile full of his mental laughter , make my loathing all the more acute . but I have not be an equal match for he previous to his take wine ; it be waste of breath and heart to contend with he . I fold my arm tight , sit rigidly silent , and he drop on the sofa luxuriously . 
 ' Bed , Richie ! ' he wave to I . ' you drink no wine , you can not stand dissipation as I do . Bed , my dear boy ! I be a God , sir , inaccessible to mortal ailment ! seriously , dear boy , I have never know an illness in my life . I have kill my hundred of poor devil who be for imitate I . this I boast I boast constitution . and I fear , Richie , you have none of my superhuman strength . add to that , I know I be watch over . I ask I have : I scheme the trick be in my hand ! it may be the doing of my mother in heaven ; there be the fact for you to reflect on . " stand not in my way , nor follow I too far , " would serve I for a motto admirably , and you can put it in Latin , Richie . Bed ! you shall turn your scholarship to account as I do my genius in your interest . on my soul , that motto in Latin will requite I . now to bed . ' 
 ' no , ' say I. ' you have get away from I once . I shall keep you in sight and hearing , if I have to lie at your door for it . you will go with I to London to - morrow . I shall treat you as a man I have to guard , and I shall not let you loose before I be quite sure of you . ' 
 ' loose ! ' he exclaim , throw up an arm and a leg . 
 ' I mean , sir , that you shall be in my presence wherever you be , and I will take care you do not   go far and wide . it be useless to pretend astonishment . I do not   argue and I do not   beseech any far : I just sit on guard , as I would over a powder - cask . ' 
 my father raise himself on an elbow . ' the explosion , ' he say , examine his watch , ' occur at about five minute to eleven we be advance into the morning last night . I receive on your behalf the congratulation of friend Loftus , Alton , Segrave , and the rest , at that hour . so , my dear Richie , you be sit on guard over the empty magazine . ' 
 I listen with a throb forehead , and control the choking in my throat , to ask he whether he have touch the newspaper . 
 ' ay , dear lad , I have spring my mine in they , ' he reply . 
 ' you have send word ? ' 
 ' I have despatch a paragraph to the effect , that the prince and princess have arrive to ratify the nuptial preliminary . ' 
 ' you expect it to appear this day ? ' 
 ' or else my name and influence be curiously at variance with the confidence I repose in they , Richie . ' 
 ' then I leave you to yourself , ' I say . ' Prince Ernest know he have to expect this statement in the paper ? ' 
 ' we trump he with that identical court - card , Richie . ' 
 ' very well . to - morrow , after we have be to my grandfather , you and I part company for good , sir . it cost I too much . ' 
 ' dear old Richie , ' he laugh , gently . ' and now to bye - bye ! my blessing on you now and always . ' 
 he shut his eye . 




 CHAPTER LI . an ENCOUNTER show MY FATHER 's genius in a strong light 

 the morning be sultry with the first rise of the sun . I know that Ottilia and Janet would be out . for myself , I dare not leave the house . I sit in my room , harry by the most penetrate snore which can ever have afflict wakeful ear . it proclaim so deep - seat a peacefulness in the bosom of the disturber , and be so arrogant , so ludicrous , and inaccessible to remonstrance , that it sound like a renewal of our midnight altercation on the sleeper 's part . prolong now and then beyond all bound , it end in the crash blare whereof utter wakefulness can not imagine honest sleep to be capable , but a playful melody twirl back to the regular note . he be fast asleep on the sitting - room sofa , while I walk fret and panting . to this twinship I seem condemn . in my heart nevertheless there be a reserve of wonderment at his apparent astuteness and resolution , and my old love for he whisper disbelief in his have disgrace I . perhaps it be wilful self - deception . it help I to meet he with a well face . 
 we both avoid the subject of our difference for some time : he would evidently have do so altogether , and use his good and sweetest manner to divert I : but when I strike on it , ask he if he have indeed tell I the truth last night , his feature cloud as though with an effort of patience . to my consternation , he suddenly break away , with his arm up , puffing and stammering , stamp his foot . he would have a truce he insist on a truce , I understand he to exclaim , and that I be like a woman , who would and would not , and want a master . he rave of the gallant down - rightedness of the young blood of his day , and how splendidly this one and that have compass their end by win great lady , lawfully , or otherwise . for several minute he be in a state of frenzy , appeal to his pattern youth of a bygone generation , as to moral principle stutter , and of a dark red hue from the neck to the temple . I refrain from a scuffle of tongue . nor do he excuse himself after he have cool . his hand touch instinctively for his pulse , and , with a glance at the ceiling , he exclaim , ' Good Lord ! ' and bring I to his side . ' these wigwam house check my circulation , ' say he . ' let we go out - let we breakfast on board . ' 
 the open air restore he , and he tell I that he have be merely oppress by the architect of the inferior class , whose ceiling sit on his head . my nerve , he remark to I , be very exciteable . ' you should take your wine , Richie , you require it . your dear mother have a low - toned nervous system . ' I be silent , and follow he , at once a captive and a keeper . 
 this day of slacken sail and a bright sleep water keep the yachtsman on land ; there be a crowd to meet the morning boat . foremost among those who step out of it be the yellow - haired Eckart , little suspect what the sight of he signal to I . I could scarcely greet he at all , for in he I perceive that my father have fully commit himself to his plot , and leave I nothing to hope . Eckart say something of Prince Hermann . as we be walk off the pier , I see Janet converse with Prince Ernest , and the next minute Hermann himself be one of the group . I turn to Eckart for an explanation . 
 ' do not   I tell you he call at your house in London and travel down with I this morning ! ' say Eckart . 
 my father look in the direction of the prince , but his face be for the moment no index . they bow to Janet , and begin talk hurriedly in the triangle of road between her hotel , the pier , and the way to the villa : pass on , and come to a full halt , like man who be not reserve their mind . my father stept out toward they . he be meet by Prince Ernest . Hermann turn his back . 
 it be the hour of the appointment , I deliver Eckart over to Temple 's safe - keeping , and go up to Janet . ' do not   be late , Harry , ' she say . 
 I ask she if she know the object of the meeting appoint by my grandfather . 
 she answer impatiently , ' do get he away from the prince . ' and then : ' I ought to tell you the princess be well , and so on pardon I just now : Grandada be keep wait , and I do not   like it . ' 
 her actual dislike be to see Prince Ernest in dialogue with my father , it seem to I ; and the manner of both , which be , one would have say , intimate , anything but the manner of adversary . Prince Ernest appear to affect a pleasant humour ; he twice , after shake my father 's hand , step back to he , as if to renew some impression . their attitude declare they to be on the good of term . Janet withdraw her attentive eye from observe they , and throw a world of meaning into her abstract gaze at I . my father 's advance put she to flight . 
 yet she give he the welcome of a high - breed young woman when he enter the drawing - room of my grandfather 's hotel - suite . she be alone , and she oblige herself to accept conversation graciously . he recommend she to try the German Baths for the squire 's gout , and evidently amuse she with his specific probation for english person design to travel in company , that they should previously live together in a house with a collection of undisciplined chambermaid , a musical footman , and a mad cook : to learn to accommodate their temper . ' I would add a touch of earthquake , Miss Ilchester , just to make sure that all the party know one another 's edge before start . ' this be too far a shot of nonsense for Janet , whose native disposition be to refer to lunacy or stupidity , or trickery , whatsoever be novel to her understanding . ' I , for my part , ' say he , ' stipulate to have for comrade no man who fancy himself a bear and stamp chieftain , no inveterate student of map , and no dog with a turn for feel himself pull by the collar . and that remind I you be amateur of dog . have you a pomeranian boar - hound ? ' 
 ' no , ' say Janet ; ' I have never even see one ' 
 ' that high . ' my father raise his hand flat . 
 ' big than our Newfoundlands ! ' 
 ' without exaggeration , big as a pony . you will permit I to send you one , warrant to have pass his distemper , which can rarely be do for our human specie , though here and there I venture to guarantee my man as well as my dog . ' 
 Janet interpose her thank , decline to take the dog , but he dwell on the dog 's charm , his youth , stature , appearance , fitness , and grandeur , earnestly . I have to relieve her apprehension by question where the dog be . 
 ' in Germany , ' he say . 
 it be not improbable , nor less so that the dog be in Pomerania likewise . 
 the entry of my aunt Dorothy , follow by my grandfather , be silent . 
 ' be seat , ' the old man address we in a body , to cut short particular salutation . 
 my father overshadow he with droop shoulder . 
 Janet wish to know whether she be to remain . 
 ' I like you by I always , ' he answer , bluff and sharp . 
 ' we have some shopping to do , ' my aunt Dorothy murmur , show she be there against her will . 
 ' do you shop out of London ? ' say my father ; and for some time he succeed in make we sit for the delusive picture of a comfortable family meeting . 
 my grandfather sit quite still , Janet next to he . ' when you have   finish , Mr. Richmond , ' he remark . 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I be tell Miss Beltham that I join in the abuse of London exactly because I love it . a paradox ! she say . but we seem to be effect a kind of insurance on the life of the thing we love well by cry they down violently . you have observe it ? denounce they they endure for ever ! so I join any soul on earth in decry our dear London . the naughty old City can bear it . ' 
 there be a clearing of throat . my aunt Dorothy 's foot tap the floor . 
 ' but I presume you have do I the honour to invite I to this conference on a point of business , Mr. Beltham ? ' say my father , admonish by the hint . 
 ' I have , sir , ' the squire reply . 
 ' and I also have a point . and , in fact , it be urgent , and with your permission , Mr. Beltham , I will lead the way . ' 
 ' no , sir , if you please . 
 I be a short speaker , and go to it at once , and I will not   detain you a second after you have   answer I . ' 
 my father nod to this , with the conciliatory comment that it be business - like . 
 the old man draw out his pocket - book . 
 ' you pay a debt , ' he say deliberately , ' amount to twenty - one thousand pound to my grandson 's account . ' 
 ' oh ! a debt ! I do , sir . between father and boy , dad and lad ; debt ! ... but use your own term , I pray you . ' 
 ' I do not   ask you where that money be now . I ask you to tell I where you get it from . ' 
 ' you speak bluntly , my dear sir . ' 
 ' you will not   answer , then ? ' 
 ' you ask the question as a family matter ? I reply with alacrity , to the good of my ability : and with my hand on my heart , Mr. Beltham , let I assure you , I very heartily desire the information to be furnish to I . or rather why should I conceal it ? the source be irregular , but a child could toddle its way to they you take my indication . say that I obtain it from my friend . my friend , Mr. Beltham , be of the kind require squeeze . government , as my chum and good comrade , Jorian DeWitt , be fond of say , be a sponge a thing that when you dive deep enough to catch it give liberal supply , but will assuredly otherwise reverse the process by act the part of an absorbent . I get what I get by force of arm , or I might have perish long since . ' 
 ' then you do not   know where you get it from , sir ? ' 
 ' Technically , you be correct , sir . ' 
 ' a bird do not   bring it , and you do not   find it in the belly of a fish . ' 
 ' neither of these prodigy . they have occur in book I be bind to believe ; they do not happen to I . ' 
 ' you swear to I you do not   know the man , woman , or committee , who give you that sum ? ' 
 ' I do not know , Mr. Beltham . in an extraordinary history , extraordinary circumstance ! I have experience so many that I be surprised at nothing . ' 
 ' you suppose you get it from some fool ? ' 
 ' oh ! if you choose to indict Government collectively ? ' 
 ' you pretend you get it from Government ? ' 
 ' I be term a Pretender by some , Mr. Beltham . the fact be these : I promise to refund the money , and I fulfil the promise . there you have the only answer I can make to you . now to my own affair . I come to request you to demand the hand of the Princess of Eppenwelzen - Sarkeld on behalf of my son Harry , your grandson ; and I possess the assurance of the prince , her father , that it will be grant . doubtless you , sir , be of as old a blood as the prince himself . you will acknowledge that the honour bring to the family by an hereditary princess be considerable : it be something . I be prepared to accompany you to his Highness , or not , as you please . it be but a question of dotation , and a selection from one or two monosyllable . ' 
 Janet shake her dress . 
 the squire reply : ' we will take that up presently . I have not   quite do . will you tell I what agent pay you the sum of money ? ' 
 ' the usual agent a solicitor , Mr. Beltham ; a gentleman whose business lie amongst the aristocracy ; he be defunct ; and a very worthy old gentleman he be , with a remarkable store of anecdote of his patron , very discreetly tell : for you never hear a name from he . ' 
 ' you take he for an agent of Government , do you ? why ? ' 
 ' to condense a long story , sir , the kernel of the matter be , that almost from the hour I begin to stir for the purpose of claim my right which be transparent enough this old gentleman certainly from no sinister motive , I may presume commence the payment of an annuity ; not sufficient for my necessity , possibly , but warrant of an agreeable sort for encourage my expectation ; although oddly , this excellent old Mr. Bannerbridge invariably serve up the dish in a sauce that do not agree with it , by advise I of the wish of the donator that I should abandon my case . I consequently , in common with my friend , perform a little early lesson in arithmetic , and we come to the one conclusion open to reflective mind namely , that I be fear . ' 
 my aunt Dorothy look up for the first time . 
 ' Janet and I have some purchase to make , ' she say . 
 the squire signify sharply that she must remain where she be . 
 ' I think aunty want fresh air ; she have a headache last night , ' say Janet . 
 I suggest that , as my presence do not seem to be require , I could take she on my arm for a walk to the pier - head . 
 her face be burn ; she would gladly have go out , but the squire refuse to permit it , and she nod over her crossed hand , say that she be in no hurry . 
 ' ha ! I be , ' quoth he . 
 ' dear Miss Beltham ! ' my father ejaculate solicitously . ' here , sir , oblige I by attend to I , ' cry the squire , fume and blink . ' I send for you on a piece of business . you get this money through a gentleman , a solicitor , name Bannerbridge , do you ? ' 
 ' his name be Bannerbridge , Mr. Beltham . ' 
 ' Dorothy , you know a Mr. Bannerbridge ? ' 
 she falter : ' I know he .... Harry be lose in the street of London when he be a little fellow , and the Mr. Bannerbridge I know find he and take he to his house , and be very kind to he . ' 
 ' what be his christian name ? ' 
 I give they : ' Charles Adolphus . ' 
 ' the identical person ! ' exclaim my father . 
 ' oh ! you admit it , ' say the squire . ' ever see he since the time Harry be lose , Dorothy ? ' 
 ' yes , ' she answer . ' I have hear he be dead : 
 ' do you see he shortly before his death ? ' 
 ' I happen to see he a short time before ! 
 ' he be your man of business , be he ? ' 
 ' for such little business as I have to do . ' 
 ' you be sure you could trust he , eh ? ' 
 ' yes . ' 
 my aunt Dorothy breathe deeply . 
 ' by God , ma'am , you be a truthful woman ! ' 
 the old man give she a glare of admiration . 
 it be now my turn to undergo examination , and summon by his apostrophe to meet his eye , I could appreciate the hardness of the head I have to deal with . 
 ' Harry , I beg your pardon beforehand ; I want to get at fact ; I must ask you what you know about where the money come from ? ' 
 I speak of my attempt to discover the whence and wherefore of it . 
 ' Government ? eh ? ' he sneer . 
 ' I really can not   judge whether it come from that quarter , ' say I. 
 ' what do you think ? think it likely ? ' 
 I think it unlikely , and yet likeli than that it should have come from an individual . 
 ' then you do not   suspect any particular person of have send it in the nick of time , Harry Richmond ? ' 
 I reply : ' no , sir ; unless you force I to suspect you . ' 
 he jump in his chair , astounded and wrathful , confound I for insinuate that he be a Bedlamite , and demand the impudent reason of my suspect he to have be guilty of the infernal folly . 
 I have but the reason to instance that he be rich and kind at heart . 
 ' Rich ! kind ! ' he bellow . ' just excuse I I must ask for the purpose of my inquiry ; there , tell I , how much do you believe you ' ve   get of that money remain ? none o ' that Peterborough style of count in the back of your pate . say ! ' 
 there be a dreadful silence . 
 my father lean persuasively forward . 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I crave permission to take up the word . allow I to remind you of the prize Harry have win . the prince await you to bestow on he the hand of his daughter ' 
 ' out with it , Harry , ' shout the squire . 
 ' not to mention Harry 's seat in Parliament , ' my father resume , ' he have a princess to wife , indubitably one of the most enviable position in the country ! it be unnecessary to count on future honour ; they may be allude to . in truth , sir , we make he the first man in the country . not necessarily Premier : you take my meaning : he possess the combination of social influence and stand with political achievement , and rank and rich in addition ' 
 ' I ' m speak to my grandson , sir , ' the squire rejoin , shake himself like a man rain on . ' I ' m wait for a plain answer , and no lie . you have   already confess as much as that the money you tell I on your honour you put out to interest ; psh ! for my grandson be smoke . now let us hear he . ' 
 my father call out : ' I claim a hearing ! the money you speak of be put out to the very high interest . you have your grandson in Parliament , largely acquainted with the principal member of society , husband of an hereditary princess ! you have only at this moment to propose for her hand . I guarantee it to you . with that money I have win he everything . not that I would intimate to you that princess be purchaseable . the point be , I know how to employ it . ' 
 ' in two month ' time , the money in the Funds in the boy 's name you tell I that . ' 
 ' you have it in the fund in Harry Richmond 's name , sir . ' 
 ' well , sir , I be ask he whether it be in the fund now . ' 
 ' oh ! Mr. Beltham . ' 
 ' what answer be that ? ' 
 the squire be really confuse by my father 's interruption , and lose sight of I . 
 ' I ask where it come from : I ask whether it be squander ? ' he continue . 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I reply that you have only to ask for it to have it ; do so immediately . ' 
 ' what be he say ? ' cry the baffle old man . 
 ' I give you a thousand time the equivalent of the money , Mr. Beltham . ' 
 ' be the money there ? ' 
 ' the lady be here . ' 
 ' I say money , sir . ' 
 ' a priceless honour and treasure , I say emphatically . ' my grandfather 's brow and mouth be gather for storm . Janet touch his knee . 
 ' where the devil your understanding truckle , if you have any , I do not   know , ' he mutter . ' what the deuce lady get to do with money ! ' 
 ' oh ! ' my father laugh lightly , ' customarily the alliance be , they say , as close as matrimony . pardon I . to speak with become seriousness , Mr. Beltham , it be duly imperative that our son should be know in society , should be , you will apprehend I , advance in station , which I have to do through the ordinary political channel . there could not but be a considerable expenditure for such a purpose . ' 
 ' in Balls , and dinner ! ' 
 ' in everything that build a young gentleman 's repute . ' 
 ' you swear to I you give your Balls and dinner , and the lot , for Harry Richmond 's sake ? ' 
 ' on my veracity , I do , sir ! ' 
 ' please do not   talk like a mountebank . I do not   want any of your roundabout word for truth ; we be not write a Bible essay . I try my good to be civil . ' 
 my father beam on he . 
 ' I guarantee you succeed , sir . nothing on earth can a man be so absolutely sure of as to succeed in civility , if he honestly try at it . Jorian DeWitt , by the way , you may not know he an esteemed old friend of mine , say that is , he say once to a tolerably impudent fellow whom he have disconcert with a capital retort , " you may try to be a gentleman , and blunder at it , but if you will only try to be his humble servant , we be certain to establish a common footing . " Jorian , let I tell you , be a wit worthy of our glorious old day . ' 
 my grandfather ease his heart with a plunge breath . 
 ' well , sir , I do not   ask you here for your opinion or your friend 's , and I do not   care for modern wit . ' 
 ' nor I , Mr. Beltham , nor I ! it have the reek of stable straw . we be of one mind on that subject . the thing slouch , it sprawl . it to quote Jorian once more be like a dirty , idle , little stupid boy who can not learn his lesson and play the fool with the alphabet . you smile , Miss Ilchester : you would appreciate Jorian . modern wit be emphatically degenerate . it have no scintillation , neither thrust nor parry . I compare it to box , as oppose to the more beautiful science of fencing . ' 
 ' well , sir , I do not   want to hear your comparison , ' growl the squire , much oppress . ' stop a minute ... ' 
 ' half a minute to I , sir , ' say my father , with a glowing reminiscence of Jorian DeWitt , which be almost too much for the combustible old man , even under Janet 's admonition . 
 my aunt Dorothy move her head slightly toward my father , look on the floor , and he at once draw in . 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I attend to you submissively . ' 
 ' you do ? then tell I what bring this princess to England ? ' 
 ' the conviction that Harry have accomplish his oath to mount to an eminence in his country , and have make the step she be about to take less , I will say , precipitous : though I personally decline to admit a pointed inferiority . ' 
 ' you write she a letter . ' 
 ' that , contain the news of the attack on he and his desperate illness , be the finish touch to the noble lady 's passion . ' 
 ' Attack ? I know nothing about an attack . you write she a letter and write she a lie . you say he be die . ' 
 ' I have the boy inanimate on my breast when I despatch the epistle . ' 
 ' you say he have only a few day to live . ' 
 ' so in my affliction I fear . ' 
 ' will you swear you do not   write that letter with the intention of draw she over here to have she in your power , so that you might threaten you would blow on her reputation if she or her father hold out against you and all do not   go as you fish for it ? ' 
 my father raise his head proudly . 
 ' I divide your query into two part . I write , sir , to bring she to his side . I do not write with any intention to threaten . ' 
 ' you have   do it , though . ' 
 ' I have do this , ' say my father , toweringly : ' I have use the power place in my hand by Providence to overcome the hesitation of a gentleman whose illustrious rank predispose he to sacrifice his daughter 's happiness to his pride of birth and station . can any one confute I when I assert that the princess love Harry Richmond ? ' 
 I walk abruptly to one of the window , hear a pitiable wrangling on the theme . my grandfather vow she have grow wiser , my father protest that she be willing and anxious ; Janet be appeal to . in a strangely - sound underbreath , she say , ' the princess do not wish it . ' 
 ' you hear that , Mr. Richmond ? ' cry the squire . 
 he return : ' can Miss Ilchester say that the Princess Ottilia do not passionately love my son Harry Richmond ? the circumstance warrant I in beseech a direct answer . ' 
 she utter : ' no . ' 
 I look at she ; she at I . 
 ' you can conduct a case , Richmond , ' the squire remark . 
 my father rise to his foot . ' I can conduct my son to happiness and greatness , my dear sir ; but to some extent I require your grandfatherly assistance ; and I urge you now to present your respect to the prince and princess , and judge yourself of his Highness 's disposition for the match . I assure you in advance that he welcome the proposal . ' 
 ' I do not believe it , ' say Janet , rise . 
 my aunt Dorothy follow her example , say : ' in justice to Harry the proposal should be make . at least it will settle this dispute . ' 
 Janet star at she , and the squire throw his head back with an amazed interjection . 
 ' what ! you be for it now ? why , at breakfast you be all t ' other way ! you do not   want this meeting because you pooh - poohe the match . ' 
 ' I do think you should go , ' she answer . ' you have give Harry your promise , and if he empower you , it be right to make the proposal , and immediately , I think . ' 
 she speak feverishly , with an unsweet expression of face , that seem to I to indicate vexedness at the squire 's treatment of my father . 
 ' Harry , ' she ask I in a very earnest fashion , ' be it your desire ? tell your grandfather that it be , and that you want to know your fate . why should there be any dispute on a fact that can be ascertain by cross a street ? surely it be trifle . ' 
 Janet stoop to whisper in the squire 's ear . 
 he catch the shock of unexpected intelligence apparently ; face about , gaze up , and cry : ' you too ! but I have not   do here . I ' ve   get to cross - examine ... pretend , do you mean ? pretend I be ready to go ? I can release this prince just as well here as there . ' 
 Janet laugh faintly . 
 ' I should advise your going , grandada . ' 
 ' you a weathercock woman ! ' he reproach she , quite mystified , and fall to rub his head . ' suppose I go to be snub ? ' 
 ' the prince be a gentleman , grandada . come with I . we will go alone . you can relieve the prince , and protect he . ' 
 my father nod : ' I approve . ' 
 ' and grandada but it will not so much matter if we be alone , though , ' Janet say . 
 ' speak out . ' 
 ' see the princess as well ; she must be present . ' 
 ' I leave it to you , ' he say , crestfallen . 
 Janet press my aunt Dorothy 's hand . 
 ' aunty , you be right , you be always right . this state of suspense be bad all round , and it be infinitely bad for the prince and princess . ' 
 my aunt Dorothy accept the eulogy with a singular trembling wrinkle of the forehead . 
 she evidently understand that Janet have see her wish to get release . 
 for my part , I share my grandfather 's stupefaction at their unaccountable change . it appear almost as if my father have win they over to baffle he . the old man try to insist on their sit down again , but Janet perseveringly smile and smile until he stand up . she speak to he softly . he be one black frown ; displease with she ; obedient , however . 
 too soon after , I have the key to the enigmatical scene . at the moment I be contemptuous of riddle , and hear with idle ear janet 's prompting to he and his reply . ' it would be so much well to settle it here , ' he say . she urge that it could not be settle here without the whole burden and responsibility fall upon he . 
 ' exactly , ' interpose my father , triumphing . 
 Dorothy Beltham come to my side , and say , as if speak to herself , while she gaze out of window , ' if a refusal , it should come from the prince . ' she drop her voice : ' the money have not be spend ? have it ? have any part of it be spend ? be you sure you have more than three part of it ? ' 
 now , that she should be possess by the spirit of parsimony on my behalf at such a time as this , be to my conception insanely comical , and her manner of express it be too much for I . I keep my laughter under to hear she continue : ' what number be flock on the pier ! and there be no music yet . tell I , Harry , that the money be all safe ; nearly all ; it be important to know ; you promise economy . ' 
 ' music do you speak of , Miss Beltham ? ' my father bow to her gallantly . ' I chance to overhear you . my private band perform to the public at midday . ' 
 she be oblige to smile to excuse his interruption . 
 ' what be that ? whose band ? ' say the squire , burst out of Janet 's hand . ' a private band ? ' 
 Janet have a difficulty in resume her command of he . the mention of the private band make he very restive . 
 ' I ' m not act on my own judgement at all in go to these foreign people , ' he say to Janet . ' why go ? I can have it out here and an end to it , without bother they and their interpreter . ' 
 he sing out to I : ' Harry , do you want I to go through this form for you ? mn'd unpleasant ! ' 
 my aunt Dorothy whisper in my ear : ' yes ! yes ! ' 
 ' I feel tricked ! ' he mutter , and do not wait for I to reply before he be again question my aunt Dorothy concern Mr. Bannerbridge , and my father as to ' that sum of money . ' but his method of interrogation be confused and pointless . the drift of it be totally obscure . 
 ' I be off my head to - day , ' he say to Janet , with a sideshot of his eye at my father . 
 ' you waste time and trouble , grandada , ' say she . 
 he vow that he be be bewilder , bother by we all ; and I think I have never see he so far below his level of energy ; but I have not see he condescend to put himself upon a moderately fair footing with my father . the truth be , that Janet have rigorously school he to bridle his temper , and he be no match for the voluble easy man without the free play of his tongue . 
 ' this prince ! ' he keep ejaculate . 
 ' will not   you understand , grandada , that you relieve he , and make thing clear by go ? ' Janet say . 
 he beg she fretfully not to be impatient , and hint that she and he might be act the part of dupe , and be for pursue his inauspicious cross - examination in spite of his blundering , and the ' where be I now ? ' which pull he up . my father , either talk to my aunt Dorothy , to Janet , or to I , on ephemeral topic , scarcely notice he , except when he be question , and look secure of success in the high degree consistent with perfect calmness . 
 ' so you say you tell I to go , do you ? ' the squire call to I . ' be good enough to stay here and wait . I do not   see that anything be gain by my going : it be damned hard on I , have to go to a man whose language I do not   know , and he do not   know mine , on a business we be all of we in a muddle about . I will do it if it be right . you be sure ? ' 
 he glance at Janet . she nod . 
 I be look for this quaint and , to I , incomprehensible interlude to commence with the departure of the squire and Janet , when a card be hand in by one of the hotel - waiter . 
 ' another prince ! ' cry the squire . ' these Germans seem to grow prince like potato dozen to a root ! who be the card for ? ask he to walk up . show he into a quiet room . do he speak English ? ' 
 ' do Prince Hermann of I can not   pronounce the name of the place speak English , Harry ? ' Janet ask I . 
 ' as well as you or I , ' say I , lose my inattention all at once with a mad leap of the heart . 
 Hermann 's presence give light , fire , and colour to the scene in which my destiny have be waver from hand to hand without much more than amusedly interesting I , for I be sure that I have lose Ottilia ; I know that too well , and bad could not happen . I have besides lose other thing that use to sustain I , and be reckless , I be contemptuous , and listen to the talk about money with sublime indifference to the subject : with an attitude , too , I daresay . but Hermann 's name revive my torment . why have he come ? to persuade the squire to control my father ? nothing but that would suffer itself to be suggest , though conjecture lie in shadow underneath press ominously on my mind . 
 my father have no doubt . 
 ' a word to you , Mr. Beltham , before you go to Prince Hermann . he be an emissary , we treat he with courtesy , and if he come to diplomatize we , of course , give a patient hearing . I have only to observe in the most emphatic manner possible that I do not retract one step . I will have this marriage : I have speak ! it rest with Prince Ernest . ' 
 the squire throw a hasty glare of his eye back as he be hobble on Janet 's arm . she stop short , and reply for he . 
 ' Mr. Beltham will speak for himself , in his own name . we be not concerned in any unworthy treatment of Prince Ernest . we protest against it . ' 
 ' dear young lady ! ' say my father , graciously . ' I meet you frankly . now tell I . I know you a gallant horsewoman : if you have lasso the noble horse of the desert would you let he run loose because of his remonstrating ? side with I , I entreat you ! my son be my first thought . the pride of prince and wild horse you will find wonderfully similar , especially in the way they take their taming when once they feel they be positively catch . we show he we have he fast he fall into our pace on the spot ! for Harry 's sake for the princess 's , I beg you exert your universally deservedly acknowledge influence . even now and you frown on I ! I can not find it in my heart to wish you the sweet and admirable woman of the world you be destine to be , though you would comprehend I and applaud I , for I could not no , not to win your favourable opinion ! consent that you should be rob of a single ray of your fresh maidenly youth . if you must misjudge I , I submit . it be the price I pay for see you young and lovely . Prince Ernest be , credit I , not unworthily treat by I , if life be a battle , and the prize of it to the General 's head . I implore you ' he lure she with the dimple of a lurk smile ' do not seriously blame your afflict senior , if we be to differ . I be vastly your elder : you instil the doubt whether I be by as much the wiser of the two ; but the father of Harry Richmond claim to know well what will ensure his boy 's felicity . be he rash ? pronounce I guilty of an excessive anxiety for my son 's welfare ; say that I be too old to read the world with the accuracy of a youthful intelligence : call I indiscreet : stigmatize I unlucky ; the severe sentence a judge ' he bow to her deferentially ' can utter ; only do not cast a gaze of rebuke on I because my labour be for my son my utmost devotion . and we know , Miss Ilchester , that the princess honour he with her love . I protest in all candour , I treat love as love ; not as a weight in the scale ; it be the heavenly power which dispense with weighing ! its ascendancy ... ' 
 the squire could endure no more , and happily so , for my father be lose his remarkably moderated tone , and threaten polysyllable . he have follow Janet , step for step , at a measured distance , droop toward she with his winning air , while the old man pull at her arm to get she out of hearing of the obnoxious flatterer . she keep she long head in profile , try creditably not to appear discourteous to one who address she by show an open ear , until the final bolt make by the frenzied old man drag she through the doorway . his neck be shorten behind his collar as though he shrug from the blast of a bad wind . I believe that , on the whole , Janet be pleased . I will wager that , leave to herself , she would have be draw into an answer , if not an argument . nothing would have make her resolution swerve , I admit . 
 they have not be out of the room three second when my aunt Dorothy be call to join they . she have find time to say that she hop the money be intact . 




 CHAPTER LII . strange revelation , and MY GRANDFATHER have his last outburst 

 my father and I stand at different window , observe the unconcerned people below . 
 ' do you scheme to bring Prince Hermann over here as well ? ' I ask he . 
 he reply laugh : ' I really be not the wonderful wizard you think I , Richie . I leave Prince Ernest 's address as mine with Waddy in case the Frau Feld - Marschall should take it into her head to come . far than that you must question Providence , which I humbly thank for its unfailing support , down to unexpected trifle . only this to you and to all of they : nothing bend I . I will not be rob of the fruit of a lifetime . ' 
 ' suppose I refuse ? ' 
 ' you refuse , Richie , to restore the princess her character and the prince his serenity of mind at their urgent supplication ? I be utterly unable to suppose it . you be marry in the paper this morning . I grieve to say that the position of Prince Hermann be supremely ridiculous . I be bind to add he be a bold boy . it require courage in one of the pretender to the hand of the princess to undertake the office of intercessor , for he must know the man must know in his heart that he be do she no kindness . he do not appeal to I , you see . I have show that my arrangement be unalterable . what he will make of your grandad ! ... why on earth he should have be send to of all man in the world your grandad , Richie ! ' 
 I be invite to sympathetic smile of shrewd amusement . 
 he catch sight of friend , and throw up the window , salute they . 
 the squire return with my aunt Dorothy and Janet to behold the detest man communicate with the outer world from his own room . he shout unceremoniously , ' shut that window ! ' and it be easy to see that he have come back heavily armed for the offensive . ' here , Mr. Richmond , I do not   want all man to know you be in my apartment . ' 
 ' I forget , sir , temporarily , ' say my father , ' I have vacate the room for your convenience be assure . ' 
 an explanation on the subject of the room ensue between the old man and the lady ; it do not improve his temper . 
 his sense of breeding , nevertheless , force he to remark , ' I can not   thank you , sir , for put I under an obligation I should never have incur myself . ' 
 ' oh , I be happy to be of use to the lady , Mr. Beltham , and require no small coin of exchange , ' my father respond with the flourish of a pacify hand . ' I have just hear from a posse of friend that the marriage be signal in this morning 's paper numberless congratulation , I need not observe . ' 
 ' no , do not , ' say the squire . ' Nobody'll understand they here , and I need not   ask you to sit down , because I do not   want you to stop . I will soon have do now ; the game 's play . here , Harry , quick ; have all that money be spend no offence to you , but as a matter of business ? ' 
 ' not all , sir , ' I be able to say . 
 ' half ? ' 
 ' yes , I think so . ' 
 ' three part ? ' 
 ' it may be . ' 
 ' and liability besides ? ' 
 ' there be some . ' 
 ' you be not a liar . that will do for you . ' 
 he turn to my aunt : her eye have shut . 
 ' Dorothy , you have   sell out twenty - five thousand pound ' worth of stock . you be a truthful woman , as I say , and so I will not   treat you like a witness in a box . you give it to Harry to help he out of his scrape . why , short of star lunacy , do you pass it through the hand of this man ? he sweat his thousand out of it at the start . why do you make a secret of it to make the man think his nonsense ? Ma'am , behave like a lady and my daughter , ' he cry , front she , for the sudden and blunt attack have slacken her nerve ; she move as though to escape , and be bewilder . I stand overwhelmed . no wonder she have attempt to break up the scene . 
 ' tell I your object , Dorothy Beltham , in pass the money through the hand of this man ? be you for help he to be a man of his word ? help the boy that I understand . however , you be mistress of your money ! I have   no right to complain , if you will go spend a fortune to whitewash the blackamoor ! well , it be your own , you will say . so it be : so be your character ! ' 
 the egregious mildness of these interjection could not long be preserve . 
 ' you deceive I , ma'am . you would not   build school - house , you could not   subscribe to Charities , you act parsimony , to pamper a scamp and his young scholar ! you go to London you do it in cool blood ; you go to your stockbroker , and from the stockbroker to the Bank , and you sell out stock to fle away this big sum . I go to the Bank on business , and the book be turn over for my name , and there at " Beltham " I see quite by chance the cross of the pen , and I see your folly , ma'am ; I see it all in a shot . I go to the Bank on my own business , mind that . ha ! you know I by this time ; I loathe spying ; the thing jump out of the book ; I could not   help see . now I do not   reckon how many positive fool go to make one superlative humbug ; you be one of the lot , and I have   learn it . ' 
 my father airily beg leave to say : ' as to positive and superlative , Mr. Beltham , the three degree of comparison be no long of service except to the trader . I do not consider they to exist for lady . your positive be always particularly open to dispute , and I venture to assert I cap you your superlative ten time over . ' 
 he talk the stuff for a diversion , present in the midst of we an incongruous image of smile that fill I with I know not what feeling of angry alienation , until I be somewhat appease by the idea that he have not apprehend the nature of the word just speak . 
 it seem incredible , yet it be true ; it be prove to be so to I by his prick his ear and his attentive look at the mention of the word prepossess he in relation to the money : government . 
 the squire say something of Government to my aunt Dorothy , with sarcastical emphasis . 
 as the observation be unnecessary , and be wantonly throw in by he , she seize on it to escape from her compromise silence : ' I know nothing of Government or its way . ' 
 she murmur far , and look at Janet , who come to her aid , say : ' Grandada , we have   have enough talk of money , money ! all be do that you want do . stock , share , bank we have   go through they all . please , finish ! please , do . you have only to state what you have hear from Prince Hermann . ' 
 Janet gaze in the direction of my father , carefully avoid my eye , but evidently anxious to shield my persecute aunty . 
 ' speak of stock and share , Miss Ilchester , ' say my father , ' I myself would as soon think of walk into a field of scythe - blade in full activity as of dabble in they . one of the few instance I remember of our Jorian stoop to a pun , be upon the contango : ingenious truly , but objectionable , because a pun . I shall not be guilty of repeat it . " the stockmarket be the national snapdragon bowl , " he say , and be very amusing upon the Jews ; whether quite fairly , Mr. Beltham know well than I , on my honour . ' 
 he appeal lightly to the squire , for thus he dance on the crater 's brink , and have for answer , 
 ' you be a cool scoundrel , Richmond . ' 
 ' I choose to respect you , rather in spite of yourself , I fear , sir , ' say my father , brace up . 
 ' do you hear my conversation with my daughter ? ' 
 ' I hear , if I may say so , the lion take his share of it . ' 
 ' all roar to you , be it ? ' 
 ' Mr. Beltham , we have our little peculiarity ; I be accustomed to think of a steam - vent when I hear you indulge in a sentence of unusual length , and I hope it be for our good , as I thoroughly believe it be for your , that you should deliver yourself freely . ' 
 ' so you tell I ; like a stage lacquey ! ' mutter the old man , with surprising art in caricature a weakness in my father 's bearing , of which I be cruelly conscious , though his enunciation be flow . he lose his naturalness through force for ease in the tooth of insult . 
 ' Grandada , aunty and I will leave you , ' say Janet , wax importunate . 
 ' when I have   do , ' say he , face his victim savagely . ' the fellow pretend he do not   understand . she be here to corroborate . Richmond , there , my daughter , Dorothy Beltham , there be the last of your fool and dupe . she be a truthful woman , I will own , and she will contradict I if what I say be not the fact . that twenty - five thousand from " government " come out of her estate . ' 
 ' out of ' 
 ' out of be damned , sir ! she be the person who pay it . ' 
 ' if the " damn " have set up , you may as well let the lady go , ' say I. 
 he snap at I like a rabid dog in career . 
 ' she be the person one of your petticoat " Government " who pay do you hear I , Richmond ? the money to help you to keep your word : to help you to give your Balls and dinner too . she I will not   say she tell you , and you know it she pay it . she send it through her Mr. Bannerbridge . do you understand now ? you have it from she . my God ! look at the fellow ! ' 
 a dreadful gape of stupefaction have usurp the smile on my father 's countenance ; his eye roll over , he try to articulate , and be indeed a spectacle for an enemy . his convulse frame rock the syllable , as with a groan , unpleasant to hear , he call on my aunt Dorothy by successive stammer apostrophe to explain , spread his hand wide . he call out her christian name . her face be bloodless . 
 ' address my daughter respectfully , sir , will you ! I will not   have your infernal familiarity ! ' roar the squire . 
 ' he be my brother - in - law , ' say Dorothy , repose on the courage of her blood , now that the bad have be speak . ' forgive I , Mr. Richmond , for have secretly induce you to accept the loan from I . ' 
 ' loan ! ' interject the squire . ' they fall upon it like a pair of kite . you will find the last ghost of a bone of your loan in a bill , and well pick . they have   be do their bill : I have   hear that . ' 
 my father touch the point of his finger on his forehead , strain to think , too theatrically , but in hard earnest , I believe . he seem to be rise on tiptoe . 
 ' oh , madam ! dear lady ! my friend ! Dorothy , my sister ! well a thousand time that I have marry , though I shrink from a heartless union ! this money ? it be not ' 
 the old man break in : ' be you go to be a damned low vulgar comedian and tale of a trumpet up to the end , you Richmond ? do not   think you will gain anything by stand there as if you be jump your trunk from a shark . come , sir , you be in a gentleman 's room ; do not   pitch your voice like a young jackanape blow into a horn . your gasp and your spasm , and howl of a yawn brute ! keep your menagerie performance for your pantomime audience . what be you mean ? do you pretend you be astonish ? she be not the first fool of a woman whose money you have   devour , with your " Madam , " and " my dear " and mouth and elbow your comedy trick ; your gabble of " government " protection , and scandalous advertisement of the by - blow of a star - coat rapscallion . if you have   a recollection of the man in you , show your back , and be off , say you have   fight against odd I do not   doubt you have , count the constable and own you be a villain : plead guilty , and be off and be silent , and do no more harm . be it " Government " still ? ' 
 my aunt Dorothy have come round to I . she clutch my arm to restrain I from speak , whispering : 
 ' Harry , you can not   save he . think of your own head . ' she make I irresolute , and I be too late to check my father from fall into the trap . 
 ' oh ! Mr. Beltham , ' he say , ' you be hard , sir . I put it to you : have you be in receipt of a secret subsidy from Government for a long course of year ' 
 ' how long ? ' the squire interrupt . 
 prompt though he would have be to dismiss the hateful person , he be not , one could see , displeased to use the whip upon so exciteable and responsive a frame . he seem to I to be basely guilty of lead his victim on to expose himself far . 
 ' there be no necessity for " how long , " ' I say . 
 the old man keep the question on his face . 
 my father reflect . 
 ' I have to hit my memory , I be shatter , sir . I say , you would be justify , amply justify ' 
 ' how long ? ' be reiterate . 
 ' I can at least date it from the period of my marriage . ' 
 ' from the date when your scoundrelism first touch my family , that be to say ! so " government " agree to give you a stipend to support your wife ! ' 
 ' Mr. Beltham , I breathe with difficulty . it be at that period , on the death of a nobleman interested in restrain I I be his debtor for kindness ... my head be whirl ! I say , at that period , upon the recommendation of friend of high standing , I begin to agitate for the restitution of my right . from infancy ' 
 ' to the deuce , your infancy ! I know too much about your age . just hark , you Richmond ! none of your " I be a child " to provoke compassion from woman . I mean to knock you down and make you incapable of hurt these poor foreign people you trap . they defy you , and I will do my good to draw your tooth . now for the annuity . you want one to believe ' you think you frighten " Government , " eh ? ' 
 ' annual proof be afford I , sir . ' 
 ' oh ! annual ! through Mr. Charles Adolphus Bannerbridge , deceased ! ' 
 Janet step up to my aunt Dorothy to persuade she to leave the room , but she decline , and hang by I , to keep I out of danger , as she hop , and she prompt I with a guard nervous squeeze of her hand on my arm to answer temperately when I be question : 
 ' Harry , do you suspect Government pay that annuity ? ' 
 ' not now , certainly . ' 
 ' tell the man who ' tis you suspect . ' 
 my aunt Dorothy say : ' Harry be not bind to mention his suspicion . ' 
 ' tell he yourself , then . ' 
 ' do it matter ? ' 
 ' yes , it matter . I will break every plank he walk on , and strip he stark till he flop down shiver into his slough a convict common swindler , with his dinner and Balls and his private band ! Richmond , you kill one of my daughter ; t ' other feed you , through her agent , this Mr. Charles Adolphus Bannerbridge , from about the date of your snare my poor girl and carry she off behind your postillion your trotting undertaker ! and the hour of her life reckon in milestone . she be here to contradict I , if she can . Dorothy Beltham be your " government " that pay the annuity . ' 
 I take Dorothy Beltham into my arm . she be tremble excessively , yet find time to say , ' bear up , dearest ; keep still . ' all I think and feel foundered in tear . 
 for a while I hear little distinctly of the tremendous tirade which the vindictive old man , render thrice venomous by the immobility of the petrified large figure oppose to he , pour forth . my poor father do not speak because he could not ; his arm drop ; and such be the torrent of attack , with its free play of thunder and lightning in the form of oath , epithet , short and sharp comparison , bitter home thrust and most vehement imprecatory denunciation , that our protest voice quail . Janet pluck at my aunt Dorothy 's dress to bear she away . 
 ' I can not   leave my father , ' I say . 
 ' nor I you , dear , ' say the tender woman ; and so we remain to be scourge by this tongue of incarnate rage . 
 ' you pensioner of a silly country spinster ! ' sound like a return to mildness . my father 's chest heave up . 
 I take advantage of the lull to make myself hear : I do but heap fuel on fire , though the old man 's splenetic impetus have partly abate . 
 ' you Richmond ! do you hear he ? he swear he be your son , and ask to be tie to the stake beside you . disown he , and I will pay you money and thank you . I will thank my God for anything short of your foul blood in the family . you marry the boy 's mother to craze and kill she , and guttle her property . you wait for the boy to come of age to swallow what be settle on he . you wait for I to lie in my coffin to pounce on the strongbox you think I the fool to toss to a young donkey ready to ruin all his belonging for you ! for nine - and - twenty year you have   suck the vein of my family , and strike through my house like a rotting - disease . nine - and - twenty year ago you give a singing - lesson in my house : the p have be in it ever since ! you breed vermin in the brain to think of you ! your wife , your son , your dupe , every soul that touch you , mildew from a blight ! you be bear of ropery , and you go at it straight , like a webfoot to water . what be your boast ? your mother 's disgrace ! you shame your mother . your whole life be a ballad o ' bastardy . you cry up the woman 's infamy to hook at a father . you swell and strut on her picking . you be a cock force from the smoke of the dunghill ! you shame your mother , damned adventurer ! you train your boy for a swindler after your own pattern ; you twirl he in your curst harlequinade to a damnation as sure as your own . the day you cross my threshold the devil dance on their flooring . I have   never see the sun shine fair on I after it . with your guitar under the window , of moonlight night ! your spanish fopperie and trickery ! your french phrase and toeing ! I be touch by a leper . you set your trap for both my girl : you catch the brown one first , do you , and fling her second for t ' other , and drive a tandem of them to live the spangled hog you be ; and down go the mother of the boy to the place she like well , and my other girl here the one you cheat for her salvation you try to cajole she from home and I , to send she the same way down . she stick to decency . good Lord ! you threaten to hang yourself , guitar and all . but her purse serve your turn . for why ? you be a leech . I speak before lady or I would rip your town - life to shred . your cause ! your romantic history ! your fine figure ! every inch of you be notch with villany ! you fasten on every moneyed woman that come in your way . you have   outdo Herod in murder the innocent , for he do not   feed on them , and they have   make you fat . one thing I will say of you : you look the beastly thing you set yourself up for . the kind blow to you be to call you impostor . ' 
 he pause , but his inordinate passion of speech be unsate : his white lip hang loose for another eruption . 
 I break from my aunt Dorothy to cross over to my father , say on the way : ' we ' ve   hear enough , sir . you forget the cardinal point of invective , which be , not to create sympathy for the person you assail . ' 
 ' oh ! you come in with your infernal fine language , do you ! ' the old man thunder at I . ' I will just tell you at once , young fellow ' 
 my aunt Dorothy supplicate his attention . ' one error I must correct . ' her voice issue from a contract throat , and be painfully thin and straining , as though the will to speak do violence to her weak nature . ' my sister love Mr. Richmond . it be to save her life , because I believe she love he much and would have die , that Mr. Richmond in pity offer she his hand , at my wish ' : she bend her head : ' at my cost . it be do for I . I wish it ; he obey I . no blame ' her dear mouth falter . ' I be to be accuse , if anybody . ' 
 she add more firmly : ' my money would have be his . I hop to spare his feeling , I beg his forgiveness now , by devote some of it , unknown to he , to assist he . that be chiefly to please myself , I see , and I be punish . ' 
 ' well , ma'am , ' say the squire , calm at white heat ; ' a fool 's confession ought to be hear out to the end . what about the twenty - five thousand ? ' 
 ' I hop to help my Harry . ' 
 ' why do not   you do it openly ? ' 
 she breathe audible long breath before she could summon courage to say : ' his father be go to make an irreparable sacrifice . I fear that if he know this money come from I he would reject it , and persist . ' 
 have she dislike the idea of my father 's marrying ? 
 the old man pounce on the word sacrifice . ' what sacrifice , ma'am ? what be the sacrifice ? ' 
 I perceive that she could not without anguish , and perhaps peril of a further exposure , bring herself to speak , and explain : ' it relate to my have try to persuade my father to marry a very wealthy lady , so that he might produce the money on the day appoint . rail at I , sir , as much as you like . if you can not   understand the circumstance without a chapter of statement , I be sorry for you . a great deal be due to you , I know ; but I can not   pay a jot of it while you go on rat my father like a madman . ' 
 ' Harry ! ' either my aunt or Janet breathe a warning . 
 I reply that I be past mince phrase . the folly of give the tongue an airing be upon I : I be in fact invite to continue , and animate to do it thoroughly , by the old man 's expression of face , which be that of one who say , ' I give you rope , ' and I deal he a liberal amount of stock irony not worth repeat ; thing that any cultivate man in anger can drill and ste the Boeotian with , under the delusion that he have not lose a particle of his self - command because of his coolness . I speak very deliberately , and therefore suppose that the word of composure be those of prudent sense . the error be manif . the woman see it . one who have indulge his soul in invective will not , if he have power in his hand , be rob of his climax with impunity by a cool response that seem to trifle , and scourge . 
 I wound up by thank my father for his devotion to I : I deem it , I say , excessive and mistaken in the recent instance , but it be for I . 
 upon this he awake from his dreamy - looking stupefaction . 
 ' Richie do I justice . he be my dear boy . he love I : I love he . none can cheat we of that . he love his wreck of a father . you have strike I to your foot , Mr. Beltham . ' 
 ' I do not   want to see you there , sir ; I want to see you go , and not stand rap your breast - bone , sound like a burst drum , as you be , ' retort the unappeasable old man . 
 I beg he in exasperation to keep his simile to himself . 
 Janet and my aunt Dorothy raise their voice . 
 my father say : ' I be break . ' 
 he put out a swimming hand that tremble when it rest , like that of an aged man grasp a staff . I fear for a moment he be act , he speak so like himself , miserable though he appear : but it be his well - know native old style in a state of decrepitude . 
 ' I be break , ' he repeat . ' I be like the ancient figure of mortality enter the mouth of the tomb on a sepulchral monument , somewhere , by a celebrated sculptor : I have see it : I forget the city . I shall presently forget name of man . it be not your abuse , Mr. Beltham . I should have bow my head to it till the storm pass . your fact ... oh ! Miss Beltham , this last privilege to call you dearest of human being ! my benefactress ! my blessing ! do not scorn I , madam . ' 
 ' I never do ; I never will ; I pity you , ' she cry , sob . 
 the squire stamp his foot . 
 ' Madam , ' my father bow gently . ' I be under heaven 's special protection I think so . I feel I have be rob I have not deserve it ! oh ! madam , no : it be your generosity that I do not deserve . one of the angel of heaven persuade I to trust in it . I do not know .... Adieu , madam . may I be worthy to meet you ! ay , Mr. Beltham , your fact have commit the death - wound . you have take the staff out of my hand : you have extinguish the light . I have exist ay , a pensioner , unknowingly , on this dear lady 's charity ; to she I say no more . to you , sir , by all that be most sacred to a man - by the ash of my mother ! by the prospect of my boy ! I swear the annuity be in my belief a tangible token that my claim to consideration be in the high source acknowledge to be just . I can not speak ! one word to you , Mr. Beltham : put I aside , I be nothing : Harry Richmond ! his fortune be not lose ; he have a future ! I entreat you he be your grandson give he your support ; go this instant to the prince no ! you will not deny your countenance to Harry Richmond : let he abjure my name ; let I be nameless in his house . and I promise you I shall be unheard of both in Christendom and Heathendom : I have no heart except for my boy 's nuptial with the princess : this one thing , to see he the husband of the fair and noble lady upon earth , with all the life remain in I I pray for ! I have win it for he . I have a moderate ability , immense devotion . I declare to you , sir , I have live , actually subsist , on this hope ! and I have direct my effort incessantly , sleeplessly , to fortify it . I die to do it ! I implore you , sir , go to the prince . if I '   he say this touchingly   ' if I be any far in anybody 's way , it be only as a fallen tree . ' but his inveterate fancifulness lead he to add : ' and that may bridge a cataract . ' 
 my grandfather have be clear his throat two or three time . 
 ' I ' m ready to finish and get rid of you , Richmond . ' 
 my father bow . 
 ' I be gone , sir . I feel I be all but tongue - tie . think that it be Harry who petition you to ensure his happiness . to - day I guarantee - it . ' 
 the old man turn an inquire eyebrow upon I . Janet lay her hand on he . he dismiss the feline instinct to prolong our torture , and deliver himself briskly . 
 ' Richmond , your last little bit of villany 's break in the egg . I separate the boy from you : he be not your accomplice there , I be glad to know . you witch the lady over to pounce on she like a fowler , you threaten her father with a scandal , if he think proper to force the trap ; swear you would toss she to be pluck by the gossip , eh ? she be free of you ! you get your English and your Germans here to point their bill , and stretch their neck , and hiss , if this gentleman and your newspaper ! if he do not   give up to you like a funky traveller to a highwayman . I remember a tale of a clumsy turpin , who shoot himself when he be draw the pistol out of his holster to frighten the money - bag out of a market farmer . you have   do about the same , you Richmond ; and , of all the damned poor speech I ever hear from a convict felon , yours be the bad a sheared sheep'd ha ' do it more respectably , grant the beast a tongue ! the lady be free of you , I tell you . Harry have to thank you for that kindness . she what be it , Janet ? never mind , I have   get the story she do not   want to marry ; but this prince , who call on I just now , happen to be her father 's nominee , and he hear of your scoundrelism , and he behave like a man and a gentleman , and offer himself , none too early nor too late , as it turn out ; and the princess , like a good girl , have make amend to her father by accept he . I have   the word of this Prince Hermann for it . now you can look upon a game of stale - mate . if I have go to the prince , it would not   have be to back your play ; but , if you have not   be guilty of the trick of a blackguard past pray for , this princess would never have be oblige to marry a man to protect her father and herself . they send he here to stop any misunderstanding . he speak good English , so that be certain . your lie will be contradict , every one of them , seriatim , in to - morrow 's newspaper , set the real man in place of the wrong one ; and you will draw no profit from they in your fashionable world , where you ' ve   be grin lately , like a blackamoor 's head on a conjuror 's plate the devil alone able to account for the body and joining . now you can be off . ' 
 I go up to my father . his plight be more desperate than mine , for I have resemble the condemn before the firing - party , to whom the expect bullet bring a merely physical shock . he , poor man , hear his sentence , which be the heart 's pang of death ; and how fondly and rootedly he have clung to the idea of my marriage with the princess be show in his extinction after this blow . 
 my grandfather choose the moment as a fitting one to ask I for the last time to take my side . 
 I reply , without offence in the tone of my voice , that I think my father need not lose I into the bargain , after what he have suffer that day . 
 he just as quietly rejoin with a recommendation to I to divorce myself for good and all from a scoundrel . 
 I take my father 's arm : he be not in a state to move away unsupported . 
 my aunt Dorothy stand weep ; Janet be at the window , no friend to either of we . 
 I say to she , ' you have your wish . ' 
 she shake her head , but do not look back . 
 my grandfather watch I , step by step , until I have reach the door . 
 ' you be go , be you ? ' he say . ' then I whistle you off my finger ! ' 
 an attempt to speak be make by my father in the doorway . he bow wide of the company , like a blind man . I lead he out . 
 dimness of sight spar I from see certain figure , which be at the toll - bar of the pier , on the way to quit our shore . what I hear be not of a character to give I faith in the sanity of the companion I have choose . he murmur it at first to himself : 
 ' Waddy shall have her monument ! ' 
 my patience be not proof against the repetition of it aloud to I . have I be gentler I might have know that his nature be compel to look forward to something , and he discern nothing in the future , save the task of raise a memorial to a faithful servant . 




 CHAPTER LIII . the HEIRESS prove that SHE INHERITS the FEUD and I go drift 

 my grandfather live eight month after a scene that have afford he high gratification at the heavy cost a plain man can pay for his pleasure : it kill he . 
 my father 's supple nature help he to survive it in apparently unimpeded health , so that the world might well suppose he unconquerable , as he mean that it should . but I , who be with he , know , though he never talk of his wound , they have be drive into his heart . he collapse in speech , and become what he use to call ' one of the ordinary nodding man , ' forsake of his swamp initiative . I merely observe he ; I do not invite his confidence , be myself in no mood to give sympathy or to receive it . I be about as tender in my care of he as a military escort bind to deliver up a captive alive . 
 I leave he at Bulsted on my way to London to face the creditor . Adversity have not lower the admiration of the captain and his wife for the magnificent host of those select and lofty entertainment which I be lead by my errand to examine in the skeleton , and with a wonder as big as theirs , but of another complexion : they hang about he , and peruse and pet he quaintly ; it be grotesque ; they think he deeply injure : by what , by whom , they could not say ; but Julia be disappoint in I for refrain to come out with a sally on his behalf . he have quite intoxicate their imagination . Julia tell I of the thing he do not do as marvellingly as of the thing he do or have do ; the charm , it seem , be to find herself familiar with he to the extent of all but nurse he and make he belong to she . pilgrim come upon the source of the mysteriously - abound river , hardly revere it the less because they love it more when they behold the babbling channel it issue from ; and the sense of possession be the secret , I suppose . Julia could inform I rapturously that her charge have sleep eighteen hour at a spell . his remark upon the proposal to fetch a doctor , feeble in themselves , be delicious to she , because they recall his old humour to show his great spirit , and from she and from Captain William in turn I be condemn to hear how he have say this and that of the doctor , which in my opinion might have be more concise . ' really , deuce good indeed ! ' Captain William would exclaim . ' do not   you see it , Harry , my boy ? he deny the doctor have a right to cast he out of the world on account of his have be the official to introduce he , and he will only consent to be visit when he happen to be as incapable of resist as upon their very first encounter . ' 
 the doctor and death and marriage , I venture to remind the captain , have be riddle in this fashion by the whole army of humourist and their echo . 
 he and Julia fancy I cold to my father 's merit . fond as they be of the squire , they declare war against he in private , they criticize Janet , they think my aunt Dorothy slightly wrong in make a secret of her good deed : my father be the victim . their unabated warmth console I in the bitter of season . he find a home with they at a time when there would have be a battle at every step . the world soon know that my grandfather have cast I off , and with this foundation destroy , the entire fabric of the Grand Parade fall to the ground at once . the crash be heavy . Jorian DeWitt say truly that what a man hat in adversity be to see ' face ' ; mean that the humanity have go out of they in their curious observation of you under misfortune . you see neither friend nor enemy . you be too sensitive for friend , and be blunt against enemy . you see but the mask of face : my father be shelter from that . Julia consult his wish in everything ; she set trap to catch his whim , and treat they as bird of paradise ; she could submit to have the topple crumpled figure of a man , Bagenhope , his pensioner and singular comforter , in her house . the little creature be fetch out of his haunt in London purposely to soothe my father with performance on his ancient clarionet , a most querulous plaintive instrument in his discoursing , almost the length of himself ; and she endure the nightly sound of it in the guest 's blue bedroom , heroically patient , a model to I . Bagenhope drink dram : she allowance he . he have know my father 's mother , and could talk of she in his cup : his playing , and his aged tune , my father say , be a certification to he that he be at the bottom of the ladder . why that should afford he peculiar comfort , none of we could comprehend . ' he be the humble lover of my mother , Richie , ' I hear with some confusion , and that he adore her memory . the statement be part of an entreaty to I to provide liberally for Bagenhope 's pension before we quit England . ' I be not seriously anxious for much else , ' say my father . yet be he fully conscious of the defeat he have sustain and the catastrophe he have bring down upon I : his touch of my hand tell I that , and his desire for darkness and sleep . he have nothing to look to , nothing to see twinkle its radiance for he in the dim distance now ; no propitiate Government , no special providence . but he never once put on a sorrowful air to press for pathos , and I thank he . he be a man endow to excite it in the most effective manner , to a degree fearful enough to win English sympathy despite his un - english fault . he could have draw tear in flood , infinite pathetic commiseration , from our grangousi public , whose taste be to have it as it may be have to the mixture of one - third of nature in two - third of artifice . I believe he be expect to go about with this beggar 's petition for compassion , and it be a disappointment to the generous , for which they punish he , that he should have abstain . and moreover his simple quietude be really touch to true - hearted people . the element of pathos do not permit of their be dispense from a stout smoking bowl . I have to record no pathetic field - day . my father be never insincere in emotion . 
 I spar his friend , chum , associate , excellent man of a kind , the trial of their attachment by shun they . his servant I dismiss personally , from M. Alphonse down to the coachman Jeremy , whose speech to I be , that he should be happy to serve my father again , or I , if he should happen to be out of a situation when either of we want he , which at least show his preference for employment : on the other hand , Alphonse , embrace the grand extreme of his stereotyped national oratory , where ' si jamai , ' like the herald Mercury new - mount , take its august flight to set in the splendour of ' ausqu'n LA MORT , ' declare all other service than my father 's repugnant , and vow himself to a hermitage , remote from condiment . they both mean well , and do but speak the diverse language of their blood . Mrs. Waddy withdraw a respite heart to Dipwell ; it be , accord to her experience , the third time that my father have relinquish house and furniture to go into eclipse on the continent after blaze over London . she strongly recommend the continent for a place of restoration , cite his likeness to that animal the chameleon , in the readiness with which he forget himself among they that know nothing of he . we quit Bulsted previous to the return of the family to Riversley . my grandfather lie at the island hotel a month , and be bring home desperately ill . Lady Edbury happen to cross the channel with we . she behave badly , I think ; foolishly , my father say . she do as much as obliqueness of vision and sharpness of feature could help she to do to cut he in the presence of her party : and he would not take nay . it seem in very bad taste on his part ; he explain to I off - handedly that he insist upon the exchange of a word or two for the single purpose of protect she from calumny . by and by it grow more explicable to I how witless she have be to give gossip a handle in the effort to escape it . she send for he in Paris , but he do not pay the visit . 
 my grandfather and I never see one another again . he have news of I from various quarter , and I of he from one ; I be lead a life in marked contrast from the homely Riversley circle of day : and this likewise be set in the count of charge against my father . our Continental pilgrimage end in a course of riotousness that he do not participate in , and be entirely innocent of , but be hold accountable for , because he have be judge a sinner . 
 ' I be order to say , ' Janet write , scrupulously obey the order , ' that if you will leave Paris and come home , and not delay in do it , your grandfather will receive you on the same footing as heretofore . ' 
 as heretofore ! in a letter from a young woman suppose to nourish a softness ! 
 I could not leave my father in Paris , alone ; I dare not bring he to London . in wrath at what I remember , I reply that I be willing to return to Riversley if my father should find a welcome as well . 
 Janet send a few dry line to summon I over in April , a pleasant month on heath - land when the Southwest sweep they . the squire be dead . I drop my father at Bulsted . I could have swear to the term of the will ; Mr. Burgin have little to teach I . Janet be the heiress ; three thousand pound per annum fall to the lot of Harry Lepel Richmond , to be pay out of the estate , and pass in reversion to his child , or to Janet 's should the aforesaid Harry die childless . 
 I be hard hit , and chagrin , but I be not at all angry , for I know what the Will mean . my aunt Dorothy supply the interlining eagerly to mollify the seem cruelty . ' you have only to ask to have it all , Harry . ' the sturdy squire have do his utmost to forward his cherished wish after death . my aunt receive five - and - twenty thousand pound , the sum she have throw away . ' I promise that no money of mine should go where the other go , ' she say . 
 the surprise in store for I be to find how much this rough - word old man have be like by his tenantry , his agent and servant . I speak of it to Janet . ' they love he , ' she say . ' no one who ever meet he fairly could help love he . ' they follow he to his grave in a body . from what I chance to hear among they , their squire be the man of their heart : in short , an Englishman of the kind which be perpetually perish out of the land . Janet expect I to be enthusiastic likewise , or remorseful . she expect sympathy ; she read I the long list of his charity . I be remind of Julia Bulsted comment on my father , with she this he do and that . ' he have plenty , ' I say , and Janet shut her lip . her coldness be irritate . 
 what ground of accusation have she against I ? our situation have become so delicate that a cold breath sunder we as far as the Poles . I be at liberty to suspect that now she be the heiress , her mind be simply obedient to her grandada 's wish ; but , as I tell my aunt Dorothy , I would not do she that injustice . 
 ' no , ' say Dorothy ; ' it be the money that make her position so difficult , unless you break the ice . ' 
 I urge that have steadily refuse she before , I could hardly advance without some invitation now . 
 ' what invitation ? ' say my aunt . 
 ' not a corpse - like consent , ' say I. 
 ' Harry , ' she twit I , ' you have not forgive she . ' that be true . 
 Sir Roderick and Lady Ilchester do not conceal their elation at their daughter 's vast inheritance , though the lady appeal to my feeling in state that her son Charles be not mention in the will . Sir Roderick talk of the squire with personal pride : ' now , as to his management of those unwieldy man , his miner they send he up the item of their complaint . he take they one by one , yield here , discuss there , and hold to his point . so the man give way ; he send they a month 's pay to reward they for their good sense . he have the art of mould the man who serve he in his own likeness . his capacity for business be extraordinary ; you never expect it of a country gentleman . he more than quadruple his inheritance much more ! ' I state it to the worthy Baronet 's honour , that although it would have be immensely to his satisfaction to see his daughter attract the suitor proper to an heiress of such magnitude , he do not attempt to impose restriction upon my interview with Janet : Riversley be mention as my home . I try to feel at home ; the heir of the place seem foreign , and so do Janet . I attribute it partly to her deep mourning dress that rob she in so sedate a womanliness , partly , in spite of myself , to her wealth . 
 ' speak to she kindly of your grandfather , ' say my aunt Dorothy . to do so , however , as she desire it , would be to be guilty of a form of hypocrisy , and I belie my well sentiment by keep silent . thus , have ruin myself through anger , I allow silly sensitiveness to prevent the repair . 
 it become know that my father be at Bulsted . 
 I see trouble one morning on Janet 's forehead . 
 we have a conversation that come near to tenderness ; at last she say : ' will you be able to forgive I if I have ever the misfortune to offend you ? ' 
 ' you will not   offend I , ' say I. 
 she hop not . 
 I rally she : ' tut , tut , you talk like any twelve - year - old , Janet . ' 
 ' I offend you then ! ' 
 ' every day ! it be all that I care much to remember . ' 
 she look pleased , but I be so situated that I require passion and abandonment in return for a confession damage to my pride . besides , the school I have be graduate in of late unfit I for a young English gentlewoman 's shade and intervolve descent of emotion . a glance up and a dimple in the cheek , be pretty homely thing enough , not the blaze I want to unlock I , and absolutely think I have deserve . 
 Sir Roderick call she to the library on business , which he be in the habit of do ten time a day , as well as of discuss matter of business at table , ostentatiously consult his daughter , with a solemn countenance and a transparently reel heart of parental exultation . ' Janet be supreme , ' he would say : ' my advice be simple advice ; I be her chief agent , that be all . ' her chief agent , as director of three company and chairman of one , be perhaps competent to advise she , he remark . her judgement upon ordinary matter he agree with my grandfather in think consummate . 
 Janet go to he , and shortly after drive he to the station for London . my aunt Dorothy have warn I that she be prepare some deed in my favour , and as I fancy her father to have go to London for that purpose , and suppose she would now venture to touch on it , I walk away from the East gate of the park as soon as I hear the trot of her pony , and be lead by an evil fate   the stuff the fate be compose of in my instance I have not keep secret   to walk Westward . Thither my evil fate propel I , where accident be ready to espouse it and breed I mortification innumerable . my father chance to have hear the particular of Squire Beltham 's will that morning : I believe Captain William 's coachman brush the subject despondently in my interest ; it do not reach he through Julia . 
 he stand outside the western gate , and as I approach , I could perceive a labour of excitement on his frame . he pull violently at the bar of the obstruction . 
 ' Richie , I be interdict house and ground ! ' he call , and wave his hand toward the lodge : ' they decline to open to I . ' 
 ' be you deny admission ? ' I ask he . 
 ' your name , if you please , sir ? Mr. Richmond Roy . we be sorry we have order not to admit you . and they decline ; they would not admit I to see my son . ' 
 ' those must be the squire 's old order , ' I say , and shout to the lodge - keeper . 
 my father , with the forethoughtfulness which never forsook he , stop I . 
 ' no , Richie , no ; the good woman shall not have the responsibility of let I in against order ; she may be risk her place , poor soul ! help I , dear lad . ' 
 he climb the bar to the spike , tottering , and communicate a convulsion to I as I assist he in the leap down : no common feat for one of his age and weight . 
 he lean on I , quake . 
 ' impossible ! Richie , impossible ! ' he cry , and review a series of interjection . 
 it be some time before I discover that they relate to the will . he be frenzied , and rave , turn suddenly from red to pale under what I fear be redoubtable symptom , physical or mental . he come for sight of the will ; he would contest it , overthrow it . Harry ruin ? he would see Miss Beltham and fathom the plot ; angel , he call she , and be absurdly exclamatory , but in dire earnest . he must have have the appearance of a drunken man to person observe he from the Grange window . 
 my father be refuse admission at the hall - door . 
 the butler , the brute Sillabin , withstand I impassively . 
 whose order have he ? 
 Miss Ilchester 's . 
 ' they be afraid of I ! ' my father thunder . 
 I send a message to Janet . 
 she be not long in come , follow by a footman who hand a twist of note - paper from my aunt Dorothy to my father . he open it and make believe to read it , mutter all the while of the will . 
 Janet dismiss the man - servant . she be quite colourless . 
 ' we have be stop in the doorway , ' I say . 
 she answer : ' I wish it could have be prevent . ' 
 ' you take it on yourself , then ? ' 
 she be inaudible . 
 ' my dear Janet , you call Riversley my home , do not   you ? ' 
 ' it be your . ' 
 ' do you intend to keep up this hateful feud now my grandfather be dead ? ' 
 ' no , Harry , not i. ' 
 ' do you give order to stop my father from enter the house and ground ? ' 
 ' I do . ' 
 ' you will not   have he here ? ' 
 ' Dear Harry , I hop he would not come just yet . ' 
 ' but you give the order ? ' 
 ' yes . ' 
 ' you be rather incomprehensible , my dear Janet . ' 
 ' I wish you could understand I , Harry . ' 
 ' you arm your servant against he ! ' 
 ' in a few day ' she falter . 
 ' you insult he and I now , ' say I , enrage at the half indication of her relenting , which spoil her look of modestly resolute beauty , and seem to show that she mean to succumb without let I break she . ' you be mistress of the place . ' 
 ' I be . I wish I be not . ' 
 ' you be mistress of Riversley , and you refuse to let my father come in ! ' 
 ' while I be the mistress , yes . ' 
 ' anywhere but here , Harry ! if he will see I or aunty , if he will kindly appoint any other place , we will meet he , we shall be glad . ' 
 ' I request you to let he enter the house . do you consent or not ? ' 
 ' he be refuse once at these door . do you refuse he a second time ? ' 
 ' I do . ' 
 ' you mean that ? ' 
 ' I be oblige to . ' 
 ' you will not   yield a step to I ? ' 
 ' I can not . ' 
 the spirit of an armed champion be behind those mild feature , soft almost to supplication to I , that I might know she to be under a constraint . the nether lip drop in breathing , the eye waver : such be her appearance in open war with I , but her will be firm . 
 of course I be not so dense as to be unable to perceive her ground for refuse . 
 she would not throw the burden on her grandada , even to propitiate I the man she still love . 
 but that she should have a reason , and think it good , in spite of I , and cle to it , defy I , and that she should do hurt to a sentient human creature , who be my father , for the sake of blindly obey to the letter the injunction of the dead , be intolerable offence to I and common humanity . I , for my own part , would have forgive she , as I congratulate myself upon reflect . it be on her account to open her mind , to enlighten she concern right and wrong determination , to bring her feeling to bear upon a crude judgement that I condescend to argue the case . smart with admiration , both of the depth and shallow of her character , and of her fine figure , I begin : she be to consider how young she be to pretend to decide on the balance of duty , how little of the world she have see ; an oath swear at the bedside of the dead be a solemn thing , but be it christian to keep it to do an unnecessary cruelty to the living ? if she have not study philosophy , she might at least discern the difference between just resolve and insane between those the soul sanction , and those hateful to nature ; to bind oneself to carry on another person 's vindictiveness be voluntarily to adopt slavery ; this be flatly - avow insanity , and so forth , with an emphatic display of patience . 
 the truth of my word could not be controvert . unhappily I confound right speak with right acting , and conceive , because I speak so justly , that I be specially approve in press she to yield . 
 she break the first pause to say , ' it be useless , Harry . I do what I think I be bind to do . ' 
 ' then I have speak to no purpose ! ' 
 ' if you will only be kind , and wait two or three day ? ' 
 ' be sensible ! ' 
 ' I be , as much as I can be . ' 
 ' hard as a flint you always be ! the most grateful woman alive , I admit . I know not another , I assure you , Janet , who , in return for million of money , would do such a piece of wanton cruelty . what ! you think he be not punish enough when he be berate and tear to shred in your presence ? they would be cruel , perhaps we will suppose it of your sex but not so fond of their conscience as to stamp a life out to keep an oath . I forget the term of the will . be you enjoin in it to force he away ? ' 
 my father have station himself in the background . Mention of the Will catch his ear , and he commence shake my aunt Dorothy 's note , blink and mutter at a great rate , and press his temple . 
 ' I do not read a word of this , ' he say , ' upon my honour , not a word ; and I know it be her handwriting . that will ! only , for the love of heaven , madam , ' he bow vaguely to Janet ' not a syllable of this to the princess , or we be destroy . I have a great bell in my head , or I would say more . hearing be out of the question . ' 
 Janet gaze piteously from he to I . 
 to kill the deer and be sorry for the suffering wretch be common . 
 I beg my father to walk along the carriage - drive . he require that the direction should be point out accurately , and promptly obey I , say : ' I back you , remember . I should certainly be asleep now but for this extraordinary bell . ' after go some step , he turn to shout ' gong , ' and touch his ear . he walk loosely , utterly unlike the walk habitual to he even recently in Paris . 
 ' has he be ill ? ' Janet ask . 
 ' he will not   see the doctor ; the symptom threaten apoplexy or paralysis , I ' m tell . let we finish . you be aware that you be to inherit Riversley ? ' 
 ' yes , Riversley , Harry ; I know that ; I know nothing else . ' 
 ' the old place be leave to you that you might bar my father out ? ' 
 ' I give my word . ' 
 ' you pledge it swear ? ' 
 ' no . ' 
 ' well , you have   do your bad , my dear . if the axe be to fall on your neck for it , you would still refuse , would you not ? ' 
 Janet answer softly : ' I believe so . ' 
 ' then , good - bye , ' say I. 
 that feminine softness and its burden of unalterable firmness pull I two way , anger I all the more that I should feel myself susceptible to a charm which come of spiritual rawness rather than sweetness ; for she need not to have make the answer in such a manner ; there be pride in it ; she like the soft sound of her voice while declare herself invincible : I could see she picture herself meek but fix . 
 ' will you go , Harry ? will you not take Riversley ? ' she say . 
 I laugh . 
 ' to spare you the repetition of the dilemma ? ' 
 ' no , Harry ; but this might be do . ' 
 ' but my full thank to you for your generosity : really ! I speak in earnest : it would be decidedly against your grandada 's wish , see that he leave the Grange to you , and not to I . ' 
 ' Grandada 's wish ! I can not carry out all his wish , ' she sigh . 
 ' be you anxious to ? ' 
 we be on the delicate ground , as her crimson face reveal to I that she know as well as I. 
 I , however , have little delicacy in lead she on it . she might well feel that she deserve some wooing . 
 I fancy she be go to be overcome , go to tremble and show herself ready to fall on my bosom , and I be uncertain of the amount of magnanimity in store there . 
 she reply calmly , ' not immediately . ' 
 ' you be not immediately anxious to fulfil his wish ? ' 
 ' Harry , I find it hard to do those that be thrust on I . ' 
 ' but , as a matter of serious obligation , you would hold yourself bind by and by to perform they all ? ' 
 ' I can not speak any far of my willingness , Harry . ' 
 ' the sense of duty be evidently always sufficient to make you act upon the negative to deny , at least ? ' 
 ' yes , I daresay , ' say Janet . 
 we shake hand like a pair of commercial man . 
 I lead my father to Bulsted . he be too feverish to remain there . in the evening , after have have a fruitless conversation with my aunt Dorothy upon the event of the day , I take he to London that he might visit his lawyer , who kindly consent to treat he like doctor , when I have arrange to make over to they three part of my annuity , and talk of his case encouragingly ; the effect of which should not have astonish I . he close a fit of reverie resemble his drowsiness , by exclaim : ' Richie will be indebted to his dad for his place in the world after all ! ' temporarily , he admit , we must be fugitive from creditor , and as to that eccentric tribe , at once so human and so inhuman , he impart many curious characteristic gain of his experience . Jorian DeWitt have indeed compare they to the female ivy that would ultimately kill its tree , but inasmuch as they be parasite , they love their debtor ; he be life and support to they , and there be this remarkable fact about they : by slip out of their clutch at critical moment when they would infallibly be pull you down , you be enable to return to they fresh , and they become inspire with another lease of lively faith in your future : et caetera . I know the language . it be a flash of himself , and a bad one , but I be not the person whom he mean to deceive with it . he be soon give I other than verbal proof out of England that he be not thoroughly beat . we have no home in England . at an hotel in Vienna , upon the close of the aristocratic season there , he renew an acquaintance with a russian lady , Countess Kornikoff , and he and I part . she dislike the Margravine of Rippau , who be in Vienna , and do not recognize we . I hear that it be the Margravine who have despatch Prince Hermann to England as soon as she discover Ottilia 's flight thither . she commission he to go straightway to Roy in London , and my father 's have infatuatedly leave his own address for Prince Ernest 's in the island , bring Hermann down : he only meet Eckart in the morning train . I mention it to show the strange working of event . 
 Janet send I a letter by the hand of Temple in August . it be moderately well write for so blunt a writer , and might have touch I but for other news come simultaneously that shake the earth under my foot . 
 she beg my forgiveness for her hardness , add characteristically that she could never have act in any other manner . the delusion , that what she be she must always be , because it be her nature , have master her understanding , or rather it be one of the door of her understanding not yet open : she have to respect her grandada 's wish . she make it likewise appear that she be ready for further sacrifice to carry out the same . 
 ' at least you will accept a division of the property , Harry . it should be yours . it be an excess , and I feel it a snare to I . I be a selfish child : I may not become an estimable woman . you have not pardon my behaviour at the island last year , and I can not think I be wrong : perhaps I might learn : I want your friendship and counsel . aunty will live with I : she say that you would complete we . at any rate I transfer Riversley to you . send I your consent . papa will have it before the transfer be sign . ' 
 the letter end with an adieu , a petition for an answer , and ' yours affectionately . ' 
 on the day of its date , a viennese newspaper lie on the Salzburg Hotel table chronicle Ottilia 's marriage with Prince Hermann . 
 I turn on Temple to walk he off his leg if I could . 
 carry your fever to the Alps , you of mind disease not to sit down in sight of they ruminate , for bodily ease and comfort will trick the soul and set you measure our lean humanity against yonder sublime and infinite ; but mount , rack the limb , wrestle it out among the peak ; taste danger , sweat , earn rest : learn to discover ungrudgingly that haggard fatigue be the fair vision you have run to earth , and that rest be your uttermost reward . would you know what it be to hope again , and have all your hope at hand ? hang upon the crag at a gradient : that make your next step a debate between the thing you be and the thing you may become . there the merry little hope grow for the climber like flower and food , immediate , prompt to prove their us , sufficient : if just within the grasp , as mortal hope should be . how the old lax life close in about you there ! you be the man of your faculty , nothing more . why should a man pretend to more ? we ask it wonderingly when we be healthy . poetic rhapsodist in the vale below may tell you of the joy and grandeur of the upper region , they can not pluck you the medical herb . he get that for himself who wander the marshy ledge at nightfall to behold the distant Sennhiittchen twinkle , who leap the green - eyed crevasse , and in the solitude of an emerald alp stretch a salt hand to the mountain kine . 




 CHAPTER LIV . MY RETURN to ENGLAND 

 I pass from the Alps to the desert , and fall in love with the East , until it begin to consume I . history , like the air we breathe , must be in motion to keep we uncorrupt : otherwise its ancient home be infectious . my passion for the sun and his baked people last awhile , the drudgery of the habit of voluntary exile some time long , and then , quite unawares , I be seize with a thirst for England , so violent that I abandon a correspondence of several month , lie for I both at Damascus and Cairo , to catch the boat for Europe . a dream of a rainy morning , in the midst of the glow furnace , may have be the origin of the wild craving I have for my native land and Janet . the moist air of fly shower and drench spring bud surround she ; I see she plainly lift a rose 's head ; be it possible I have ever refuse to be her yokefellow ? could so noble a figure of a fair young woman have be offer and repudiate again and again by a man in his sens ? I spurn the intolerable idiot , to stop reflection . perhaps she do likewise now . there be nothing to alarm I save my own eagerness . 
 the news of my father be perplexing , lead I to suppose he re - establish in London , await the come on of his case . whence the money ? 
 Money and my father , I know , meet as they divide , fortuitously ; in illustration of which , I well remember , while pass in view of the Key of the Adige along the Lombard plain , a circumstance during my Alpine tour with Temple , of more importance to he than to I , when my emulous friend , who would never be beat , sprain his ankle severely on the crag of a waterfall , not far from Innsbruck , and be invite into a house by a young English lady , daughter of a retired Colonel of Engineers of our army . the colonel be an exile from his country for no grave crime : but , as he tell we , as much an exile as if he have commit a capital offence in be the father of nine healthy girl . he have be , against his judgement , he aver , persuade to fix on his tyrolese spot of ground by the two elder one . five be now married to foreigner ; thus they repay he , by scatter good english blood on the race of Counts and Freiherrs ! ' I could understand the decree of Providence before I be a parent , ' say this dear old Colonel Heddon . ' I be look up at the rainbow when I hear your step , ask myself whether it be see in England at that instant , and why on earth I should be out of England ! ' he live abroad to be able to dower his girl . his son - in - law be gentleman ; so far he be condemn to be satisfied , but suppose all his girl marry foreigner ? his primitive frankness charm we , and it strike I that my susceptible Temple would have like to be in a position to reassure he with regard to the Lucy of the four . we be oblige to confess that she be catch a foreign accent . the old colonel groan . he beg we to forgive he for not treat we as stranger ; his heart leap out to young english gentleman . 
 my name , he say , remind he of a great character at home , in the old day : a certain Roy - Richmond , son of an actress and somebody , so the story go : and there be an old Lord Edbury who know more about it than most . ' now Roy be an adventurer , but he have a soul of true chivalry , by gad , he have ! plenty of foreign whiffmajig be to be find , but you will not   come upon a fellow like that . where he get his money from none know : all I can say be , I do not   believe he ever do a dirty action for it . and one matter I will tell you of : pardon I a moment , Mr. Richmond , I have not   talk English for half a century , or , at least , a quarter . Old Lord Edbury put he down in his will for some thousand , and he risk it to save a lady , who hat he for his pain . Lady Edbury be of the Bolton blood , none of the tamest ; they breed good cavalry man . she run away from her husband once . the old lord take she back . " it be at your peril , mind ! " say she . well , Roy hear by - and - by of afresh affair . he mount horse ; he be in the saddle , I have   be assure , a night and a day , and post himself between my lady 's park - gate , and the house , at dusk . the rumour run that he know of the marquis playing spy on his wife . however , such be the fact ; she be go off again , and the marquis do play the mean part . she walk down the parkroad , and , see the cloak figure of a man , she imagine he to be her Lothario , and very naturally , you will own , fall into his arm . the gentleman in question be an acquaintance of mine ; and the less you follow our example the well for you . it be a damnable period in moral ! he tell I that he see the scene from the gate , where he have his carriage - and - four ready . the old lord burst out of an ambush on his wife and her suppose paramour ; the lady be imprison in her rescuer 's arm , and my friend retire on tiptoe , which be , I incline to think , the good thing he could do . our moral be abominable . Lady Edbury would never see Roy - Richmond after that , nor the old lord neither . he double the sum he have intend to leave he , though . I hear that he marry a second young wife . Roy , I believe , end by marry a great heiress , and reform . he be an eloquent fellow , and stand like a general in full uniform , cocked hat and feather ; most amusing fellow at table ; beat a Frenchman for anecdote . ' 
 I spar Colonel Heddon the revelation of my relationship to his hero , thank his garrulity for interrupt I . 
 how I pity he when I drive past the gate of the main route to Innsbruck ! for I be bind homeward : I should soon see England , green cloudy England , the white cliff , the meadow , the heath ! and I thank the colonel again in my heart for have do something to reconcile I to the idea of that strange father of mine . 
 a banner - like stream of morning - colour smoke roll North - eastward as I enter London , and I drive to Temple 's chamber . he be in Court , engage in a case as junior to his father . Temple have become that radiant human creature , a work man , then ? I walk slowly to the Court , and see he there , hardly recognise he in his wig . all that he have to do be to prompt his father in a case of collision at sea ; the barque Priscilla have run foul of a merchant brig , near the mouth of the Thames , and though I do not expect it on hear the vessel 's name , it prove to be no other than the barque Priscilla of Captain Jasper Welsh . soon after I have shake Temple 's hand , I be go through the same ceremony with the captain himself , not at all change in appearance , who bless his heart for see I , cry out that a beard and mustachio make a foreign face of a young Englishman , and be full of the ' providential ' circumstance of his have confide his case to Temple and his father . 
 ' ay , ay , Captain Welsh , ' say Temple , ' we have pull you through , only another time mind you keep an eye on that look - out man of your . some of your man , I suspect , see double with an easy conscience . a close net make slippery eel . ' 
 ' have you anything to say against my man ? ' the captain inquire . 
 Temple reply that he would talk to he about it presently , and laugh as he draw I away . 
 ' his man will get he into a deuce of a scrape some day , Richie . I shall put he on his guard . have you have all my letter ? you look make of iron . I be begin capitally , not afraid of the Court a bit , and I hope I be not pert . I wish your father have take it well ! ' 
 ' take what ? ' say I. 
 ' have not   you hear from he ? ' 
 ' two or three time : a mass of interjection . ' 
 ' you know he bring his case forward at last ? of course it go as we all know it would . ' 
 ' where be he ? have you see Janet lately ? ' 
 ' he be at Miss Ilchester 's house in London . ' 
 ' write the address on a card . ' 
 Temple write it rather hesitatingly , I think . 
 we talk of see one another in the evening , and I spring off to Janet 's residence , forget to grasp my old friend 's hand at part . I be madly anxious to thank she for the unexpected tenderness to my father . and now nothing stand between we ! 
 my aunt Dorothy be the first to welcome I . ' he must be prepare for the sight of you , Harry . the doctor say that a shock may destroy he . Janet treat he so wonderfully . ' 
 I press she on my heart and cheer she , praise Janet . she weep . 
 ' be there anything new the matter ? ' I say . 
 ' it be not new to we , Harry . I be sure you be brave ? ' 
 ' Brave ! what be I ask to bear ? ' 
 ' much , if you love she , Harry ! ' 
 ' speak . ' 
 ' it be well you should hear it from I , Harry . I write you word of it . we all imagine it would not be disagreeable to you . who could foresee this change in you ? she least of all ! ' 
 ' she be in love with some one ? ' 
 ' I do not say in love . ' 
 ' tell I the bad . ' 
 ' she be engage to be marry . ' 
 Janet come into the room another Janet for I . she have engage herself to marry the Marquis of Edbury . at the moment when she enslave I with gratitude and admiration she be lose to I . I know she too well to see a chance of she break her pledge word . 
 my old grandfather say of Janet , ' she be a compassionate thing . ' I feel now the tear under his speech , and how late I be in get wisdom . compassion for Edbury in Janet 's bosom be the matchmaker 's chief engine of assault , my aunt Dorothy tell I . Lady Ilchester have be for this suitor , Sir Roderick for the other , up to the verge of a quarrel between the most united of wedding couple . Janet be persecute . she hear that Edbury 's life be run to waste ; she like he for his cricketing and hunting , his frankness , seem manliness , and general native english enthusiasm . I permit myself to comprehend the case as far as I could allow myself to excuse she . 
 Dorothy Beltham tell I something of Janet that strike I to the dust . 
 ' it be this , dear Harry ; bear to hear it ! Janet and I and his good true woman of a housekeeper , whose name be Waddy , we be , I believe , the only person that know it . he have a large company to dine at a City tavern , she tell we , on the night after the decision when the verdict go against he . the following morning I receive a note from this good Mrs. Waddy address to Sir Roderick 's London house , where I be stay with Janet ; it say that he be ill ; and Janet put on her bonnet at once to go to he . ' 
 ' the lady do not   fear contagion any long ? ' 
 ' she go , walk fast . he be live in lodging , and the people of the house insist on remove he , Mrs. Waddy tell we . she be cower in the parlour . I have not the courage to go upstairs . Janet go by herself . ' 
 my heart rise on a huge swell . 
 ' she be alone with he , Harry . we could hear they . ' 
 Dorothy Beltham look imploringly on I to waken my whole comprehension . 
 ' she subdue he . when I see he he be white as death , but quiet , not dangerous at all . ' 
 ' do you mean she find he rave ? ' I cry out on our maker 's name , in grief and horror . 
 ' yes , dear Harry , it be so . ' 
 ' she step between he and an asylum ? ' 
 ' she quit Sir Roderick 's house to lodge your father safe in one that she hire , and have he under her own care . she watch he day and night for three week , and govern he , assist only at interval by the poor frightened woman , Mrs. Waddy , and just as frighten I . and I be still subject to the poor woman 's way of press her hand to her heart at a noise . it be over now . Harry , Janet wish that you should never hear of it . she dread any excitement for he . I think she be right in fancy her own influence the good : he be use to it . you know how gentle she be though she be so firm . ' 
 ' oh ! do not   torture I , ma'am , for God 's sake , ' I call aloud . 




 CHAPTER LV . I meet MY first PLAYFELLOW and take my punishment 

 there come to I a little note on foreign paper , unaddresse , an enclosure forward by Janet , and contain merely one scrap from the playful xenien of Ottilia 's favourite brotherly poet , of untranslatable flavour : 
  who shun true friend fly fortune in the concrete : 
  would he see what he aim at ? let he ask his heel . 
 it fill I with a breath of old german peace . 
 from this I learn that Ottilia and Janet correspond . upon what topic ? to what degree of intimacy ? 
 Janet now confess to I that their intimacy have never know reserve . the princess have divine her attachment for Harry Richmond when their acquaintance be commence in the island , and know at the present moment that I have travel round to the recognition of Janet 's worth . 
 thus encourage by the princess 's changeless friendship , I write to she , leave little to be guess of my state of mind , withhold nothing of the circumstance surround I . imagination deal I all my sharp misery , and now that Ottilia resume her place there , I become infinitely peacefull , and strong to subdue my hungry nature . it cause I no pang , strangely though it read in my sight when write , to send warm greeting and respect to the prince her husband . 
 be it any waste of time to write of love ? the trial of life be in it , but in a narrow ring and a fierier . you may learn to know yourself through love , as you do after year of life , whether you be fit to lift they that be about you , or whether you be but a cheat , and a load on the back of your fellow . the impure perishe , the inefficient languishe , the moderate come to its autumn of decay these be of the kind which aim at satisfaction to die of it soon or late . the love that survive have strangle craving ; it live because it live to nourish and succour like the heaven . 
 but to strangle craving be indeed to go through a death before you reach your immortality . 
 but again , to write of a love pervert by all the element contribute to foolishness , and foredoom to chastisement , would be a graceless business . Janet and I go through our trial , she , you may believe , the braver under the most to bear . 
 I be take by Temple down to the ship smell East of London , for the double purpose of try to convince Captain Welsh of the extravagance of a piece of chivalry he be about to commit , and of see a lady with a history , who have recently come under his guardianship . Temple think I should know she , but he make a mystery of it until the moment of our introduction arrive , not be certain of her identity , and not wish to have I disappoint . it appear that Captain Welsh question his man closely after he have win his case , and he arrive at the conclusion that two or three of they have be guilty of false swearing in his interest . he do not dismiss they , for , as he say , it be twice a bad thing to turn sinner loose : it be to shove they out of the direct road of amendment , and it be a wrong to the population . he insist , however , on pay the legal cost and an indemnity for the collision at sea ; and Temple be in great distress about it , he have originally suggest the suspicion of his man to Captain Welsh . ' I want to put he on his guard against those rascal , ' Temple say , ' and I suppose , ' he sigh , ' I want the old captain to think I enormously clever all round . ' he shake himself , and assume a bearish aspect , significant of disgust and recklessness . ' the captain will be ruin , Richie ; and he be not young , you know , to go on sail his barque Priscilla for ever . if he pay , why , I ought to pay , and then you ought to pay , for I should not   have show off before he alone , and then the wind that fetch you ought to pay . toss common sense overboard , there be no end to your fine - drawing ; that be why it be always safest to swear by the Judge . ' 
 we roll down to the mast among the chimney on the top of an omnibus . the driver be eloquent on cricket - match . now , cricket , he say , be fine manly sport ; it might kill a man , but it never mean mischief : foreigner themselves have a bit of an idea that it be the good game in the world , though it be a nice joke to see a foreigner play at it ! none of they could stand to be bowl at . had not   stomachs for it ; they would have to train for soldier first . on one occasion he have see a Frenchman look on at a match . ' ball be hit a shooter twixt the slip : off start Frenchman , catch it , heave it up , like his head , half - way to wicket , and all the field set to bawl at he , and send he , we know where . he trip off : " you no comprong politeness in dis country . " ha ! ha ! ' 
 to prove the aforesaid Frenchman wrong , we nod to the driver 's laughter at his exquisite imitation . 
 he inform we that he have back the Surrey Eleven last year , owe to the report of a gentleman - bowler , who have do thing in the way of tumble wicket to tickle the ear of cricketer . gentleman - batter be common : gentleman - bowler be quite another dish . Saddlebank be the gentleman 's name . 
 ' Old Nandrew Saddle ? ' Temple call to I , and we smile at the supposition of Saddlebank 's fame , neither of we , from what we have know of his bowling , doubt that he deserve it . 
 ' acquaint with he , gentleman ? ' the driver inquire , touch his hat . ' well , and I ask why do not   more gentleman take to cricket ? ' stead of horse all round the year ! now , there be my notion of happiness , ' say the man condemn to inactivity , in the perpetual act of motion ; ' cricket in cricket season ! it comprise count : lot o ' run ; and that be good : just enough o ' take it easy ; that be good : a appetite for your dinner , and your ale or your Port , as may be the case ; good , number three . add on a tired pipe after dark , and a sound sleep to follow , and you say good morning to the doctor and the parson ; for you be in health body and soul , and ne'er a parson will make a well Christian of ye , that I will swear . ' 
 as if anxious not to pervert we , he conclude : ' that be what I think , gentleman . ' 
 Temple and I talk of the ancient rapture of a first of May cricketing - day on a sunny green meadow , with an ocean of a day before we , and well - brace spirit for the match . I have the vision of a matronly , but not much altered Janet , mount on horseback , to witness the performance of some favourite Eleven of youngster with her connoisseur 's eye ; and then the model of an english lady , wife , and mother , wave adieu to the field and canter home to entertain her husband 's guest . her husband ! 
 Temple be aware of my grief , but see no remedy . I know that in his heart he think I justly punish , though he love I . 
 we have a long sitting with Captain Welsh , whom I find immoveable , as I expect I should . his man , he say , have confess their sin similarly to the crab in a hole , with one claw out , as the way of sinner be . he blame himself mainly . ' where you have accident , Mr. Richmond , you have fault ; and where you have fault aboard a ship you may trace a line to the captain . I should have treat my ship 's crew like my conscience , and go through they nightly . as it be , sir , here come round one of your accident to tell I I have live blind by conceit . that be my affliction , my young friend . the payment of the money be no more so than to restore money hold in trust . ' 
 Temple and I argue the case with he , as of old on our voyage , on board the barque Priscilla , quite unavailingly . 
 ' be a verdict build on lie one that my Maker approve of ? ' say he . ' if I keep possession of that money , my young friend , will it clothe I ? ay , with sting ! will it feed I ? ay , with poison . and they that should be have it shiver and want ! ' 
 he be emphatic , as he would not have be , save to read we an example , owe to our contention with he . ' the money be Satan in my very hand ! ' when he have dismiss the subject he never return to it . 
 his topic of extreme happiness , to which Temple lead he , be the rescue of a beautiful sinner from a life of shame . it appear that Captain Welsh have the habit between his voyage of make one holiday expedition to the spot of all creation he think the fairest , Richmond Hill , overlook the Thames ; and there , one evening , he espy a lady in grief , and speak to she , and give her consolation . More , he give she a blameless home . the lady 's name be Mabel Bolton . she be in distress of spirit rather than of circumstance , for temptation be thick about one so beautiful , to supply the vanity and luxury of the father of sin . he describe she . 
 she be my first playfellow , the miller 's daughter of Dipwell , Mabel Sweetwinter , take from her home by Lord Edbury during my german university career , and now put away by he upon command of his family on the eve of his marriage . 
 she herself relate her history to I , after tell I that she have see I once at the step of Edbury 's Club . our meeting be no great surprise to either of we . she have hear my name as that of an expect visitor ; she have see Temple , moreover , and he have prompt I with her christian name and the praise of her really glorious hair , to anticipate the person who be usher into the little cabin - like parlour by Captain Welsh 's good old mother . 
 of Edbury she could not speak for grief , believe that he love she still and be act under compulsion . her long and faithful attachment to the scapegrace seem to preserve she from the particular regret Captain Welsh suppose to occupy her sinner 's mind ; so that , after some minute of the hesitation and strangeness due to our common recollection , she talk of he simply and well as befit her situation , a worldling might say . but she do not conceal her relief in escape to this quaint little refuge   she throw a kindly - comical look , not overtone , at the miniature ship on the mantelpiece , and the picture of Joseph lead Mary with her babe on the ass   from the temptation I could imagine a face like hers would expose she to . the face be splendid , the figure already overblown . I breathe some thank to my father while she and I converse apart . the miller be dead , her brother in America . she have no other safe home than the one Captain Welsh have open to she . when I ask she   I have no excuse for it   whether she would consent to go to Edbury again , she redden and burst into tear . I curse my brutality . ' let she cry , ' say Captain Welsh on part with we at his street door . ' tear be the way of woman and their comfort . ' 
 to our astonishment he tell we he intend to take she for a voyage in the Priscilla . ' why ? ' we ask . 
 ' I take she , ' he say , ' because not to do thing wholly be bad than not to do thing at all , for it be waste of time and cause for a chorus below , down in hell , my young friend . the woman be beautiful as Solomon 's bride . she be weak as water . and the man be wicked . he have write to she a letter . he would have she reserve for himself , a wed man : such he be , or be soon to be . I be search , and she be not deceitful ; and I be a poor man again and must go the voyage . I wrestle with she , and by grace I conquer she to come with I of a free will , and be out of his snare . aboard I do not fear he , and she shall know the mercy of the Lord on high sea . ' 
 we grimace a little on her behalf , but have nothing to reply . 
 see Janet after Mabel be strange . in the latter one could perceive the palpably suitable mate for Edbury . 
 I feel that my darling be insult no amend for it I have to keep silent and mark the remorseless preparation go forward . not so Heriot . he have come over from the camp in Ireland on leave at this juncture . his talk of woman still suggest the hawk with the downy feather of the last little pluck bird stick to his beak ; but his appreciation of Janet and some kindness for I make he a vehement opponent of her resolve . he take licence of his friendship to lay every incident before she , to complete his persuasion . she resist his attack , as I know she would , obstinately , and reply to his entreaty with counter - supplication that he should urge I to accept old Riversley . the conflict go on between those two daily , and I hear of they from Heriot at night . he refuse to comprehend her determination under the head of anything save madness . varied by reproach of I for my former inveterate blindness , he rave upon Janet 's madness incessantly , swear that he would not be beat . I tell he his effort be useless , but think they friendly , and so they be , only Janet 's resistance have fire his vanity , and he stalk up and down my room talk a mixture of egregious coxcombry and hearty good sense that might have show one the cause he mean to win have become personal to he . Temple , who be sometimes in consultation with he , and be always amuse by his quasi - fanfaronade , assure I that Herriot be actually scheme . the next we hear of he be , that he have be see at a whitebait hotel down the river drunk with Edbury . Janet also hear of that , and decline to see Heriot again . 
 our last day march frightfully fast . Janet have learn that any the most distant allusion to her marriage day be an anguish to the man who be not to marry she , so it be through my aunt Dorothy that I become aware of Julia Bulsted 's kindness in offer to take charge of my father for a term . Lady Sampleman undertake to be hostess to he for one night , the eve of Janet 's nuptial . he be quiet , unlikely to give annoyance to person not strongly predispose to hear sentence finish and exclamation fall into their right place . 
 Adieu to my darling ! there have be woman well win ; here be an adorable woman well lose . after twenty year of slight she , do I fancy she would turn to I and throw a man over in reward of my ultimate recovery of my sens ? or fancy that one so tenacious as she have prove would snap a tie depend on her pledge word ? she like Edbury ; she see the good of he , and like he . the improved young lord be her handiwork . after the year of humiliation from I , she have find herself court by a young nobleman who cling to she for help , show improvement , and bring she many compliment from a wonder world . she really feel that she be strength and true life to he . she resist Heriot : she resist a more powerful advocate , and this be the princess Ottilia . my aunt Dorothy tell I that the princess have write . Janet either do or affect to weigh the princess 's reasoning ; and she do not evade the task of furnish a full reply . 
 her resolution be unchanged . loss of colour , loss of light in her eye , be the sole sign of what it cost she to maintain it . our task be to transfer the idea of Janet to that of Julia in my father 's whirling brain , which at first rebel violently , and cast it out like a stick thrust between rapidly revolve wheel . 
 the night before I be to take he away , she give I her hand with a ' good - bye , dear Harry . ' my word be much the same . she have a ghastly face , but could not have know it , for she smile , and try to keep the shallow smile in play , as friend do . there be the end . 
 it come abruptly , and be schoolingly cold and short . 
 it have the effect on I of freeze my blood and set what seem to be the nerve of my brain at work in a fury of calculation to reckon the minute remain of her maiden day . I have expect nothing , but now we have part I think that one last scene to break my heart on should not have be deny to I . my aunt Dorothy be a mute ; she weep when I speak of Janet , whatever it be I say . 
 the minute run on from circumstance to circumstance of the destiny Janet have mark for herself , each one round in my mind of a blood colour like the edge about prismatic hue . I live through they a thousand time before they occur , as the wretch who fear death die multitudinously . 
 some womanly fib preserve my father from a shock on leave Janet 's house . she leave it herself at the same time that she drive he to Lady Sampleman 's , and I find he there soon after she have go to her bridesmaid . a letter be for I : 
  ' DEAR HARRY , I shall not live at Riversley , never go there again ; 
  do not let it be sell to a stranger ; it will happen unless you go 
  there . for the sake of the neighbourhood and poor people , I can not 
  allow it to be shut up . I be the cause of the chief misfortune . 
  you never blame I . let I think that the old place be not dead . 
  Adieu . 

  ' your affectionate , 
  ' JANET . ' 
 I tear the letter to piece , and keep they . 
 the aspect of the new intolerable world I be to live in after to - morrow , paralyzed sensation . my father chatter , Lady Sampleman hush he ; she say I might leave he to she , and I go down to Captain Welsh to bid he good - bye and get such peace as contact with a man clothe in armour proof against earthly calamity could give . 
 I be startled to see little Kiomi in Mabel 's company . 
 they have meet accidentally at the head of the street , and have be friend in childhood , Captain Welsh say , add : ' she hat man . ' 
 ' good reason , when they be beast , ' say Kiomi . 
 amid much weeping of Mabel and old Mrs. Welsh , Kiomi show as little trouble as the heath when the wood be sweep . 
 Captain Welsh want Mabel to be on board early , owing , he tell I , to information . Kiomi have offer to remain on board with she until the captain be able to come . he have business to do in the City . 
 we see they off from the waterside . 
 ' be I to leave that young woman behind I , on shore , I should be give the devil warrant to seize upon his prey , ' say Captain Welsh , turn his gaze from the boat which convey Kiomi and Mabel to the barque Priscilla . he have information that the misleader of her youth be hunt she . 
 he and I part , and for ever , at a corner of crossway in the central city . there I see the last of one who deem it as simple a matter to renounce his saving for old age , to rectify an error of justice , as to plant his foot on the pavement ; a man whose only burden be the folly of man . 
 I think to myself in despair , under what protest can I also escape from England and my own intemperate mind ? it seem a miraculous answer : there lie at my chamber a note write by Count Kesensky ; I go to the embassy , and hear of an austrian ship of war be at one of our port upon an expedition to the East , and be introduce to the captain , a gentlemanly fellow , like most of the officer of his government . find in I a german scholar , and a joyful willingness , he engage I to take the post of secretary to the expedition in the place of an invalided Freiherr von Redwitz . the bargain be strike immediately : I be to be ready to report myself to the captain on board not later than the follow day . Count Kesensky lead I aside : he regret that he could do nothing well for I : but I think his friendliness extreme and astonishing , and say so ; whereupon the count assure I that his intention be good , though he have not be of great use hitherto an allusion to the borough of Chippenden he have only hear of von Redwitz 's illness that afternoon . I thank he cordially , say I be much in his debt , and he bow I out , let I fancy , as my father have fancy before I , and as though I have never observe and reflect in my life , that the opportuneness of this intervention signify a special action of Providence . 
 the flattery of the thought serve for an elixir . but with whom would my father abide during my absence ? Captain Bulsted and Julia save I from a fit of remorse ; they have come up to town on purpose to carry he home with they , and have leave a message on my table , and an invitation to dinner at their hotel , where the name of Janet be the Marino Faliero of our review of Riversley people and old time . the captain and his wife be indignant at her conduct . since , however , I choose to excuse it , they say they would say nothing more about she , and she be turn face to the wall . I tell they how Janet have take he for month . ' but I will take he for year , ' say Julia . ' the truth be , Harry , my old dear ! William and I be never so united for I be ashamed to quarrel with he as when your father 's at Bulsted . he belong to we , and other people shall know you be not oblige to depend on your family for help , and your aunt Dorothy can come and see he whenever she like . ' 
 that be settle . Captain Bulsted go with I to Lady Sampleman 's to prepare my father for the change of nurse and residence . we be inform that he have go down with Alderman Duke Saddlebank to dine at one of the great City Companies ' hall . I could hardly believe it . ' ah ! my dear Mr. Harry , ' say Lady Sampleman , ' old friend know one another good , believe that , now . I treat he as if he be as well as ever he be , give he his turtle and madeira lunch ; and Alderman Saddlebank , who lunch here your father use to say , he look like a robin hop out of a larderquite jump to dine he in the City like old time ; and he will see a great spread of plate ! ' 
 she think my father only moderately unwell , want novelty . Captain Bulsted agree with I that it would be prudent to go and fetch he . at the door of the City hall stand Andrew Saddlebank , grow to be simply a large edition of Rippenger 's head boy , and he impart to we that my father be ' on his leg ' deliver a speech : it alarm I . with Saddlebank 's assistance I push in . 
 ' a prince ! a treacherous lover ! an unfatherly man ! ' 
 those be the word I catch : a reproduction of many of my phrase employ in our argument on this very subject . 
 he bid his audience to beware of prince , beware of idle prince ; and let his florid fancy loose on these eminent person , they be at one moment silver lamp , at another poise hawk , and again sprawl pumpkin ; anything except useful citizen . how could they be ? they have the attraction of the lamp , the appetite of the hawk , the occupation of the pumpkin : nothing be give they to do but to shine , destroy , and fatten . their hand be keep empty : a trifle in their head would topple they over ; they be monument of the english system of compromise . happy for mankind if they be monument only ! happy for they ! but they have the passion of man . the adulation of the multitude be raise to inflate they , whose self - respect have not one prop to rest on , unless it be contempt for the flatterer and prophetic foresight of their perfidy . they be the monument of a compromise between the past and terror of the future ; puppet as prince , mannikin as man , the snare of frail woman , stop - gap of the State , feather nonentity ! 
 so far   but not in epigram   he marshal the thing he have hear to his sound of drum and trumpet , like one repeat a lesson off - hand . steer on a sudden completely round , he give his audience an outline of the change he would have effect have he but triumph in his cause ; and now come the lashing of arm , a flood of eloquence . prince with brain , prince leader , prince flower of the land , he have offer they ! prince that should sway assembly , and not stultify the precept of a decent people ' by make you pay in the outrage of your moral for what you seem to gain in policy . ' these or similar word . the whole scene be too grotesque and afflict . but his command of his hearer be extraordinary , partly a consolation I think , until , have touch the arm of one of the gentleman of the banquet and say , ' I be his son ; I wish to remove he , ' the reply enlighten I : ' I ' m afraid there be danger in interrupt he ; I really be . ' 
 they be listen obediently to one whom they dare not interrupt for fear of provoke an outburst of madness . 
 I have to risk it . his dilated eye look ready to seize on I for an illustration . I speak peremptorily , and he bow his head low , say , ' my son , gentleman , ' and submit himself to my hand . the feaster show immediately that they feel release by rise and chat in group . Alderman Saddlebank express much gratitude to I for the service I have perform . ' that first half of your father 's speech be the most pathetic thing I ever hear ! ' I have not share his privilege , and could not say . the remark be current that a great deal be true of what have be say of the Fitzs . my father lean heavily on my arm with the step and bent head of an ancient pensioner of the Honourable City Company . he be Julia Bulsted 's charge , and I be on board the foreign vessel weigh anchor from England before dawn of Janet 's marriage - day . 




 CHAPTER LVI . CONCLUSION 

 the wind be high that morning . the rain come in gray ring , through which we work on the fretted surface of crumble sea , heave up and plunge , without an outlook . 
 I remember have thought of the barque Priscilla as I watch our lithe Dalmatians slide along the drench deck of the Verona frigate . at night it blow a gale . I could imagine it to have be send providentially to brush the torture of the land from my mind , and make I feel that man be trifle . 
 what be their passion , then ? the storm in the cloud even more short - live than the cloud . 
 I philosophize , but my anguish be great . 
 Janet 's ' good - bye , Harry , ' end everything I live for , and seem to strike the day , and bring out of it the remorseless rain . a featureless day , like those before the earth be build ; like night under an angry moon ; and each day the same until we touch the edge of a southern circle and see light , and I could use my brain . 
 the matter most present to I be my injustice regard my poor father 's speech in the City hall . he have cause I to suffer so much that I generally feel for myself when he appeal for sympathy , or provoke some pity : but I be past suffering , and let kindly recollection div the speech of its verbiage , I take it to my heart . it be true that he have in his blind way strike the keynote of his position , much as I myself have conceive it before . harsh trial have make I think of my own fortune more than of his . this I feel , and I think there never have be so move a speech . it seem to make the world in debt to we . what else be so consolatory to a ruin man ? 
 in reality the busy little creature within I , whom we call self , be dig pit for comfort to flow in , of any kind , in any form ; and it seize on every idea , every circumstance , to turn it to that purpose , and with such success , that when by - and - by I learn how entirely inactive special Providence have be in my affair , I have to collect myself before I could muster the conception of gratitude toward the noble woman who clothe I in the illusion . it be to the Princess Ottilia , act through Count Kesensky , that I owe both my waft away from England at a wretched season , and that chance of a career in Parliament ! the captain of the Verona hint as much when , after a year of voyaging , we touch at an East indian seaport , and von Redwitz join the vessel to resume the post I be occupy . Von Redwitz   the son of Prince Ernest 's Chancellor , I discover   could have tell I more than he do , but he hand I a letter from the princess , call I home urgently , and even prescribe my route , and bid I come straight to Germany and to sarkeld . the summon be distasteful , for I have settle into harness under my scientific superior , and have prove to my messmate that I be neither morose nor over - conceite . Captain Martinitz persuade I to return , and besides , there lie between the line of Ottilia 's letter a signification of welcome thing well guess at than know . be I not bind to do her bidding ? other have do it : young von Redwitz , for instance , in obey the telegraph wire and feign sickness to surrender his place to I , when she wish to save I from misery by hurry I to new scene with a task for my hand and head ; no mean stretch of devotion on his part . Ottilia be still my princess ; she my providence . she write : 
 ' come home , my friend Harry : you have be absent too long . he who intercept you to displace you have his career before he in the vessel , and you nearer home . the home be always here where I be , but it may now take root elsewhere , and it be from Ottilia you hear that delay be now really loss of life . I tell you no more . you know I , that when I say come , it be enough . ' 
 a simple adieu and her name end the mysterious letter . not a word of Prince Hermann . what have happen ? I guess at it curiously and incessantly and only know the nature of my suspicion by cease to hope as soon as I seem to have divine it . I do not wrong my soul 's high mistress beyond the one flash of tentative apprehension which in perplexity strike at impossibility . Ottilia would never have summon I to herself . but be Janet free ? the hope which refuse to live in that other atmosphere of pure calm , spring to full stature at the bare thought , and would not be extinguish though all the wind beset it . have my girl 's courage fail , to spare she at the last moment ? I fancy it might be : I be sure it be not so . yet the doubt press on I with the force of a world of unimagined shift and chance , and just keep the little flame alive , at time intoxicate I , though commonly hold I back to watch its forlorn conflict with probability know too well . it cost I a struggle to turn aside to Germany from the italian highroad . 
 I choose the line of the Brenner , and stop half a day at Innsbruck to pay a visit to Colonel Heddon , of whom I have the joyful tiding that two of his daughter be away to go through the german form of the betrothal of one of they to an Englishman . the turn of the tide have come to he . and it come to I , too , in a fresh spring tide whenever I have to speak of other instead of this everlastingly recur I of the autobiographer , of which the complacent penman have feel it to be his duty to expose the mechanism when out of action , and which , like so many of our sin of commission , appear in the shape of a terrible offence when the occasion for continue it draw to a close . the pleasant narrator in the first person be the happy bubble fool , not the philosopher who have come to know himself and his relation toward the universe . the word of this last be one to twenty ; his mind be bent upon the cause of event rather than their progress . as you see I on the page now , I stand somewhere between the two , approximate to the former , but with sufficient of the latter within I to tame the delightful expansiveness proper to that coming hour of marriage - bell and bridal - wreath . it be a sign that the end , and the delivery of reader and writer alike , should not be dally with . 
 the princess have invite Lucy Heddon to Sarkeld to meet Temple , and Temple to meet I . onward I fly . I see the old wood of the lake - palace , and , as it be , the light of my past passion wan above they . I be greet by the lady of all nobility with her gracious warmth , and in his usual abrupt manful fashion by Prince Hermann . and I have no time to reflect on the strangeness of my step freely under the roof where a husband claim Ottilia , before she lead I into the library , where sit my lost and recover , my darling ; and , unlike herself , for a moment , she falter in rise and breathe my name . 
 we be alone . I know she be no bondwoman . the question how it have come to pass lurk behind everything I say and do ; speculation on the visible feature , and touch of the unfettered hand , restrain I from utter or care to utter it . but it be wonderful . it thrust I back on Providence again for the explanation humbly this time . it be wonderful and blessed , as to love eye the first - draw breath of a drown creature restore to life . I kiss her hand . ' wait till you have hear everything , Harry , ' she say , and her voice be deep , soft , exquisitely strange in its known tone , as her manner be , and her eye . she be not the bloom , straight - shoulder , high - breathe girl of other day , but sister to the day of she ' good - bye , Harry , ' pale and worn . the eye have weep . this be Janet , haply widow . she wear no garb nor a shade of widowhood . perhaps she have throw it off , not to offend an implacable temper in I . I say , ' I shall hear nothing that can make you other than my own Janet if you will ? ' 
 she smile a little . ' we expect Temple 's arrival soon than your , Harry ! ' 
 ' do you take to his Lucy ? ' 
 ' yes , thoroughly . ' 
 the perfect ring of Janet be there . 
 Mention of Riversley make her conversation lively , and she give I moderately good news of my father , quaint , out of Julia Bulsted 's late letter to she . 
 ' then how long , ' I ask astonish , ' how long have you be stay with the princess ? ' 
 she answer , colour , ' so long , that I can speak fairish german . ' 
 ' and read it easily ? ' 
 ' I have actually take to reading , Harry . ' 
 her courage must have quail , and she must have be look for I on that morning of miserable aspect when I behold the last of England through wailful shower , like the scene of a burial . I do not speak of it , fear to hurt her pride , but say , ' have you be here month ? ' 
 ' yes , some month , ' she reply . 
 ' many ? ' 
 ' yes , ' she say , and drop her eyelid , and then , with a quick look at I , ' wait for Temple , Harry . he be a day behind his time . we can not   account for it . ' 
 I suggest , half in play , that perhaps he have decide , for the sake of a sea voyage , to come by our old route to Germany on board the barque Priscilla , with Captain Welsh . 
 a faint shudder pass over she . she shut her eye and shake her head . 
 our interview satisfy my heart 's hunger no far . the Verona 's erratic voyage have cut I off from letter . 
 Janet might be a widow , for aught I know . she be always Janet to I ; but why at liberty ? why many month at Sarkeld , the guest of the princess ? be she neither maid nor widow a wife fly from a brutal husband ? or separate , and forcibly free ? under such condition Ottilia would not have command my return but what be I to imagine ? a boiling couple of hour divide I from the time for dressing , when , as I meditate , I could put a chance question or two to the man commission to wait on I , and hear whether the English lady be a Fraulein . the Margravine and Prince Ernest be absent . Hermann work in his museum , display his treasure to Colonel Heddon . I sit with the lady in the airy look - out tower of the lake - palace , a prey to intense speculation , which devour themselves and change from fire to smoke , while I recount the adventure of our ship 's voyage , and they behave as if there be nothing to tell I in turn , each a sphinx hold the secret I thirst for . I should not certainly have thirst much if Janet have meet I as far half - way as a delicate woman may advance . the mystery lie in her evident affection , her apparent freedom and unfathomable reserve , and her desire that I should see Temple before she throw off her feminine armour , to which , judge by the indication , Ottilia seem to I to accede . 
 my old friend be spy first by his sweetheart Lucy , wind dilatorily over the hill away from Sarkeld , in one of the carriage send to meet he . he be guilty of waste a prodigious number of minute with his trumpery ' how d ' ye do be , ' and his glance and excuse , and then I have he up in my room , and the tale be tell ; it be not Temple 's fault if he do not begin straightforwardly . 
 I pluck he from his narrator 's vexatious and inevitable commencement : ' Temple , tell I , do she go to the altar ? ' 
 he answer ' yes ! ' 
 ' she do ? then she be a widow ? ' 
 ' no , she be not , ' say Temple , distract I by submit to the lead I distract he by take . 
 ' then her husband 's alive ? ' 
 Temple deny it , and a devil seize he to perceive some comicality in the dialogue . 
 ' be she marry ? ' 
 Temple say ' no , ' with a lurking drollery about his lip . he add , ' it be nothing to laugh over , Richie . ' 
 ' be I laugh ? speak out . do Edbury come to grief overnight in any way ? ' 
 again Temple pronounce a negative , this time wilfully enigmatical : he confess it , and accuse I of the provocation . he dash some laughter with gravity to prepare for my next assault . 
 ' be Edbury the one to throw up the marriage ? do he decline it ? ' 
 ' no , ' be the answer once more . 
 Temple stop my wrath by catch at I and beg I to listen . 
 ' Edbury be drown , Richie . ' 
 ' overnight ? ' 
 ' no , not overnight . I can tell it all in half - a - dozen word , if you will be quiet ; and I know you be go to be as happy as I be , or I should not   trifle an instant . he go overnight on board the barque Priscilla to see Mabel Sweetwinter , the only woman he ever could have care for , and he go the voyage , just as we do . he be trap , cage , and transport ; it be a repetition , except that the poor old Priscilla never come to land . she founder in a storm in the North Sea . that be all we know . every soul perish , the captain and all . I know how it would be with that crew of his some day or other . do not   you remember my say the Priscilla be the kind of name of a vessel that would go down with all hand , and leave a bottle to float to shore ? a gin - bottle be find on our East coast - the old captain must have discover in the last few moment that such thing be on board and in it there be a paper , and the passenger ' and crew 's name in his handwriting , write as if he have be sit in his parlour at home ; over they a line " the Lord 's will be about to be do " ; and underneath " we go to his judgement resign and cheerful . " you know the old captain , Richie ? 
 Temple have tear in his eye . we both stand blink for a second or two . 
 I could not but be curious to hear the reason for Edbury 's have determine to sail . 
 ' do not   you understand how it be , Richie ? ' say Temple . ' Edbury go to persuade she to stay , or just to see she for once , and he come to persuasion . he seem to have be succeed , but the captain step on board and he treat Edbury as he do we two : he make he take the voyage for discipline 's sake and " his soul 's health . " ' 
 ' how do you know all this , Temple ? ' 
 ' you know your friend Kiomi be one of the party . the captain send she back on shore because he have no room for she . she tell we Edbury offer bribe of hundred and thousand for the captain to let he and Mabel go off in the boat with Kiomi , and then he take to beg to go alone . he try to rouse the crew . the poor fellow cringe , she say ; he threaten to swim off . the captain lock he up . ' 
 my immediate reflection hit on the Bible lesson Edbury must have have to swallow , and the gap of the water when its truth be suddenly and tremendously bring home to he . 
 an odd series of accident ! I think . 
 Temple continue : ' Heriot hold his tongue about it next morning . he be one of the guest , though he have swear he would not   go . he say something to Janet that betray he , for she have not see he since . ' 
 ' how betray he ? ' say I. 
 ' why , ' say Temple , ' of course it be Heriot who put Edbury in Kiomi 's hand . Edbury would not   have know of Mabel 's sailing , or know the vessel she be in , without her help . she lead he down to the water and post he in sight before she go to Captain Welsh 's ; and when you and Captain Welsh walk away , Edbury row to the Priscilla . Old Heriot be not responsible for the consequence . what he suppose be likely enough . he think that Edbury and Mabel be much of a pair , and think , I suppose , that if Edbury see she he would find he could not   leave she , and old Lady Kane , who manage he , would stand nod her plume for nothing at the altar . and so she do : and a pretty scene it be . she snatch at the minute as they slip past twelve like fish , and snarl at the parson , and would have keep he stand till one P.M. , if Janet have not turn on her heel . the old woman get in front of she to block her way . " ah , Temple , " she say to I , " it would be hard if I could not think I have do all that be due to they . " I do not   see she again till she be start for Germany . and , Richie , she think you can never forgive she . she write I word that the princess be of another mind , but her own opinion , she say , be base upon know you . ' 
 ' Good heaven ! how little ! ' cry I. 
 Temple do I a further wrong by almost thank I on Janet 's behalf for my sustained love for she , while he praise the very quality of pride and a spirited sense of obligation which have reduce she to dread my unforgivingness . yet he and Janet have know I long . suppose that my idea of myself differed from theirs for the simple reason that I think of what I have grow to be , and they of what I have be through the previous year ? do I judge by the flower , and they by root and stem ? but the flower be a thing of the season ; the flower drop off : it may be a different development next year . do they not therefore judge I soundly ? 
 Ottilia be the keenest reader . Ottilia have divine what could be work out of I . I be still subject to the relapse of a not perfectly right nature , as I perceive when glance back at my thought of ' an odd series of accident ! ' which be but a disguised fashion of attribute to Providence the particular concern , in my fortune : an impiety and a folly ! this be the temptation of those who be rescue and make happy by circumstance . the wretched think themselves spit , and be merely childish , not egregious in egoism . Thither on lead to a chapter already write by the wise , doubtless . it do not become an atom of humanity to dwell on it beyond a point where student of the human condition may see he pass through the experience of the flesh and the brain . 
 meantime , Temple and I , at two hand - basin , soap and towel , and I be more discreet toward he than I have be to you , for I reserve from he altogether the pronunciation of the council of senator in the secret chamber of my head . whether , indeed , I have fairly paint the outer part of myself wax dubious when I think of his splutter laugh and shout ; ' Richie , you have not   change a bit you be just like a boy ! ' certain indication of external gravity , and a sinking of the natural spring within characterized Temple 's approach to the responsible position of a british husband and father . we talk much of Captain Welsh , and the sedate practical irony of his imprison one like Edbury to discipline he on high sea , as well as the singular situation of the couple of culprit under his admonishing regimen , and the tragic end . my next two minute alone with Janet be temper by it . only my eagerness for another term of privacy persuade she that I be her lover instead of judge , and then , have make the discovery that a single - minded gladness animate I in the hope that she and I would travel together one in body and soul , she surrender , with her last bit of pride break ; except , it may be , a fragment of reserve traceable in the confession that come quaintly after supreme self - blame , when she say she be bind to tell I that possibly probably , be the trial to come over again , she should again act as she have do . 
 happily for we both , my wit have be sharpen enough to know that there be more in man and woman than the stuff they utter . and bless privilege now ! if the lip be guilty of nonsense , I might stop they . besides , I be soon to be master upon such question . she admit it , admit with an unwonted emotional shiver , that absolute freedom could be the bad of peril . ' for woman ? ' say I. she prefer to say , ' for girl , ' and then ' yes , for woman , as they be educate at present . ' Spice of the princess 's conversation flavour her speech . the sign unfamiliar about she for I be mark of the fire she have come out of ; the struggle , the torture , the determined sacrifice , through pride 's conception of duty . she be iron once . she have come out of the fire fine steel . 
 ' Riversley ! Harry , ' she murmur , and my smile , and word , and squeeze in reply , bring back a whole gleam of the fresh English morning she have be in face , and voice , and person . 
 be it conceivable that we could go back to Riversley single ? 
 before that be answer she have to make a statement ; and in do it she blush , because it involve Edbury 's name , and seem to involve her attachment to he ; but she pay I the compliment of speak it frankly . it be that she have feel herself bind in honour to pay Edbury 's debt . even by such slight mean as her say , ' Riversley , Harry , ' and my kiss of her finger when a question of money be in debate , do we burst aside the vestige of mutual strangeness , and recognize one another , but with an add warmth of love . when I plead for the marriage to be soon , she say , ' I wish it , Harry . ' 
 sentiment you do not obtain from a Damascus blade . she most cordially despise the lady who parade and play on their sex , and be for ever act accord to the feminine standard : a dangerous stretch of contempt for one less strong than she . 
 rid behind she and Temple one day with the princess , I say , ' what take you most in Janet ? ' 
 she reply , ' her courage . and it be of a kind that may knot up every other virtue worth have . I have impulse , and be capable of desperation , but I have no true courage : so I envy and admire , even if I have to blame she ; for I know that this possession of her , which identify she and mark she from the rest of we , would bear the ordeal of fire . I can imagine the quality I have most pride in wither and decay under a prolong trial . I can not conceive her courage failing . perhaps because I have it not myself I think it the rare of precious gift . it seem to I to imply one half , and to dispense with the other . ' 
 I have live to think that Ottilia be right . as nearly right , too , in the wording of her opinion as one may be in three or four sentence design to be comprehensive . 
 my Janet 's readiness to meet calamity be show ere we reach home upon an evening of the late autumn , and set eye on a scene , for she the very sad that could have be devise to test her spirit of endurance , when , drive up the high heath - land , we see the dark sky ominously redden over Riversley , and , mount the ridge , have the funeral flame of the old Grange dash in our face . the blow be evil , sudden , unaccountable . villager , tenant , farm - labourer , group of a deputation that have go to the railway station to give we welcome ; and return , owe to a delay in our arrival , stand gaze from all quarter . the Grange be burn in two great wing , that soar in flame - tip and column of crimson smoke , leave the central hall and chamber untouche as yet , but alive inside with mysterious range of light , now curtain , now make bare a feeble contrast to the savage blaze to right and leave , save for the wonder arouse as to its significance . these be soon cloak . dead sable reign in they , and at once a jet of flame give the whole vast building to destruction . my wife thrust her hand in mine . fire at the heart , fire at the wing our old home stand in that majesty of horror which freeze the limb of man , bid they look and no more . 
 ' what have Riversley do to deserve this ? ' I hear Janet murmur to herself . ' his room ! ' she say , when at the south - east wing , where my old grandfather have sleep , there burst a glut of flame . we dove down to the park and along the carriage - road to the first red line of gazer . they tell we that no living creature be in the house . my aunt Dorothy be at Bulsted . I perceive my father 's man tollingby among the servant , and call he to I ; other come , and out of a clatter of tongue , and all eye fearfully askant at the wall of fire , we gather that a great reception have be prepare for we by my father : lamp , light in all the room , torch in the hall , illumination along the window , store of firework , such a display as only he could have dream of . the fire have break out at dusk , from an explosion of firework at one wing and some inexplicable mismanagement at the other . but the house must have be like a mine , what with the powder , the torch , the device in paper and muslin , and the extraordinary decoration fit up to celebrate our return in harmony with my father 's fancy . 
 gentleman on horseback dash up to we . Captain Bulsted seize my hand . he be hot from a ride to fetch engine , and sing sharp in my ear , ' have you get he ? ' it be my father he mean . the cry rise for my father , and the group be agitated and split , and the name of the miss man , without an answer to it , shout . Captain Bulsted have leave he bravely attempt to quench the flame after the explosion of firework . he ride about , interrogate the frightened servant and groom hold horse and dog . they could tell we that the cattle be safe , not a word of my father ; and amid shriek of woman at fresh fall of timber and ceiling into the pit of fire , and warning from the man , we run the heated circle of the building to find a loophole and offer aid if a live soul should be leave ; the night around we bright as day , busy than day , and a human now add to elemental horror . Janet would not quit her place . she send her carriage - horse to Bulsted , and sit in the carriage to see the last of burn Riversley . each time that I come to she she fold her arm on my neck and kiss I silently . 
 we gather from the subsequent testimony of man and woman of the household who have collect their wit , that my father must have remain in the doomed old house to look to the safety of my aunt Dorothy . he be never see again .