the roots of the MOUNTAINS wherein be tell somewhat of the life of 
 the MEN of burgdale their friend their NEIGHBOURS their FOEMEN and 
 their fellows in ARMS 
 BY WILLIAM MORRIS 




 Whiles carry o'er the iron road , 
 we hurry by some fair abode ; 
 the garden bright amidst the hay , 
 the yellow wain upon the way , 
 the dining man , the wind that sweep 
 Light lock from off the sun - sweet heap - 
 the gable grey , the hoary roof , 
 here now - and now so far aloof . 
 how sorely then we long to stay 
 and midst its sweetness wear the day , 
 and ' neath its change shadow sit , 
 and feel ourselves a part of it . 
 such rest , such stay , I strove to win 
 with these same leaf that lie herein . 



 CHAPTER I. of BURGSTEAD and its FOLK and its neighbour 



 once upon a time amidst the mountain and hill and fall stream 
 of a fair land there be a town or thorp in a certain valley . this 
 be well - nigh encompass by a wall of sheer cliff ; toward the East 
 and the great mountain they draw together till they go near to 
 meet , and leave but a narrow path on either side of a stony stream 
 that come rattle down into the Dale : toward the river at that end 
 the hill lower somewhat , though they still end in sheer rock ; 
 but up from it , and more especially on the north side , they swell 
 into great shoulder of land , then dip a little , and rise again 
 into the side of huge fell clothe with pine - wood , and cleft here and 
 there by deep ghyll : thence again they rise higher and steeper , and 
 ever high till they draw dark and naked out of the wood to meet 
 the snow - field and ice - river of the high mountain . but that be 
 far away from the pass by the little river into the valley ; and the 
 say river be no drain from the snow - field white and thick with the 
 grinding of the ice , but clear and bright be its water that come 
 from well amidst the bare rocky heath . 

 the upper end of the valley , where it first begin to open out from 
 the pass , be rugge and break by rock and ridge of water - bear 
 stone , but presently it smooth itself into mere grassy swelling 
 and knoll , and at last into a fair and fertile plain swell up 
 into a green wave , as it be , against the rock - wall which 
 encompass it on all side save where the river come gush out of 
 the strait pass at the east end , and where at the west end it pour 
 itself out of the Dale toward the lowland and the plain of the great 
 river . 

 now the valley be some ten mile of our measure from that place of 
 the rock and the stone - ridge , to where the face of the hill draw 
 somewhat anigh to the river again at the west , and then fall aback 
 along the edge of the great plain ; like as when ye fare a - sailing 
 past two ness of a river - mouth , and the main - sea lieth open before 
 you . 

 besides the river afore - mention , which man call the Weltering 
 Water , there be other water in the Dale . near the eastern pass , 
 entangle in the rocky ground be a deep tarn full of cold spring 
 and about two acre in measure , and therefrom run a stream which fall 
 into the Weltering Water amidst the grassy knoll . Black seem the 
 water of that tarn which on one side wash the rock - wall of the 
 Dale ; ugly and aweful it seem to man , and none know what lie 
 beneath its water save black mis - shapen trout that few care to 
 bring to net or angle : and it be call the Death - Tarn . 

 other water yet there be : here and there from the hill on both 
 side , but especially from the south side , come trickle of water 
 that run in pretty brook down to the river ; and some of these sprang 
 bubble up amidst the foot - mound of the sheer - rock ; some have cleft 
 a rugged and strait way through they , and come tumble down into the 
 Dale at diverse height from their face . but on the north side 
 about halfway down the Dale , one stream somewhat big than the 
 other , and deal with soft ground , have cleft for itself a wide 
 way ; and the folk have labour this way wide yet , till they have make 
 they a road run north along the west side of the stream . Sooth 
 to say , except for the strait pass along the river at the eastern 
 end , and the wide pass at the western , they have no other way   save 
 one of which a word anon   out of the Dale but such as mountain goat 
 and bold cragsman might take ; and even of these but few . 

 this midway stream be call the wildlake , and the way along it 
 Wildlake 's Way , because it come to they out of the wood , which on 
 that north side stretch away from nigh to the lip of the valley- 
 wall up to the pine wood and the high fell on the east and north , 
 and down to the plain country on the west and south . 

 now when the Weltering Water come out of the rocky tangle near the 
 pass , it be turn aside by the ground till it swing right up to the 
 foot of the southern crag ; then it turn and slowly bent round 
 again northward , and at last fairly double back on itself before it 
 turn again to run westward ; so that when , after its second double , 
 it have come to flow softly westward under the northern crag , it 
 have cast two third of a girdle round about a space of land a little 
 below the grassy knoll and toft aforesaid ; and there in that fair 
 space between the fold of the Weltering Water stand the Thorp 
 whereof the tale hath tell . 

 the man thereof have widen and deepen the Weltering Water about 
 they , and have bridge it over to the plain mead ; and athwart the 
 throat of the space leave clear by the water they have build they a 
 strong wall though not very high , with a gate amidst and a tower on 
 either side thereof . moreover , on the face of the cliff which be 
 but a stone 's throw from the gate they have make they stair and 
 ladder to go up by ; and on a knoll nigh the brow have build a watch- 
 tower of stone strong and great , lest war should come into the land 
 from over the hill . that tower be ancient , and therefrom the Thorp 
 have its name and the whole valley also ; and it be call Burgstead 
 in Burgdale . 

 so long as the Weltering Water run straight along by the northern 
 cliff after it have leave Burgstead , betwixt the water and the cliff 
 be a wide flat way fashion by man 's hand . thus be the water 
 again a good defence to the Thorp , for it run slow and deep there , 
 and there be no other ground betwixt it and the cliff save that 
 road , which be easy to bar across so that no foeman might pass 
 without battle , and this road be call the Portway . for a long 
 mile the river run under the northern cliff , and then turn into 
 the midst of the Dale , and go its way westward a broad stream 
 winding in gentle lap and fold here and there down to the out - gate 
 of the Dale . but the Portway hold on still underneath the rock - wall , 
 till the sheer - rock grow somewhat broken , and be cumber with 
 certain scree , and at last the wayfarer come upon the break in they , 
 and the ghyll through which run the Wildlake with Wildlake 's way 
 beside it , but the Portway still go on all down the Dale and away 
 to the plain - country . 

 that road in the ghyll , which be neither wide nor smooth , the 
 wayfarer into the wood must follow , till it lift itself out of the 
 ghyll , and leave the Wildlake come rattle down by many step from 
 the east ; and now the way go straight north through the woodland , 
 ever mount high ,   because the whole set of the land be toward 
 the high fell ,   but not in any cleft or ghyll . the wood itself 
 thereabout be thick , a blend growth of diverse kind of tree , but 
 most of oak and ash ; light and air enough come through their bough 
 to suffer the holly and bramble and eglantine and other small wood to 
 grow together into thicket , which no man could pass without hew a 
 way . but before it be tell whereto Wildlake 's way lead , it must be 
 say that on the east side of the ghyll , where it first begin just 
 over the Portway , the hill 's brow be clear of wood for a certain 
 space , and there , overlook all the Dale , be the mote - stead of the 
 Dalesmen , mark out by a great ring of stone , amidst of which be 
 the mound for the Judges and the Altar of the Gods before it . and 
 this be the holy place of the man of the Dale and of other folk 
 whereof the tale shall now tell . 

 for when Wildlake 's way have go some three mile from the Mote- 
 stead , the tree begin to thin , and presently afterwards be a 
 clearing and the dwelling of man , build of timber as may well be 
 think . these house be neither rich nor great , nor be the folk 
 a mighty folk , because they be but a few , albeit body by body they 
 be stout carle enough . they have not affinity with the Dalesmen , 
 and do not we d with they , yet it be to be deem that they be 
 somewhat akin to they . to be short , though they be freeman , yet as 
 regard the Dalesmen be they well - nigh their servant ; for they 
 be but poor in good , and have to lean upon they somewhat . no 
 tillage they have among those high tree ; and of beast nought save 
 some flock of goat and a few ass . hunter they be , and 
 charcoal - burner , and therein the deftest of man , and they could 
 shoot well in the bow withal : so they truck their charcoal and 
 their smoked venison and their peltrie with the Dalesmen for wheat 
 and wine and weapon and weed ; and the Dalesmen give they main good 
 pennyworth , as man who have abundance wherewith to uphold their 
 kinsman , though they be but far - away kin . stout hand have these 
 Woodlanders and true heart as any ; but they be few - speak and to 
 those that need they not somewhat surly of speech and grim of 
 visage : brown - skinned they be , but light - haired ; well - eye , with 
 but little red in their cheek : their woman be not very fair , for 
 they toil like the man , or more . they be think to be wise 
 than most man in foresee thing to come . they be much give to 
 spell , and song of wizardry , and be very mindful of the old 
 story - lay , wherein they be far more wordy than in their daily 
 speech . much skill have they in rune , and be exceed deft in 
 score they on treen bowl , and on stave , and door - post and roof- 
 beam and standing - bed and such like thing . many a day when the 
 snow be drift over their roof , and hang heavy on the tree- 
 bough , and the wind be roar through the tree aloft and rattle 
 about the close thicket , when the bough be clatter in the wind , 
 and crash down beneath the weight of the gathering freeze snow , 
 when all beast and man lay close in their lair , would they sit long 
 hour about the house - fire with the knife or the gouge in hand , with 
 the timber twixt their knee and the whetstone beside they , 
 hearken to some tale of old time and the day when their banner 
 be abroad in the world ; and they the while wheedle into growth out 
 of the tough wood knot and blossom and leaf and the image of 
 beast and warrior and woman . 

 they be call nought save the Woodland - Carles in that day , though 
 time have be when they have bear a nobler name : and their abode be 
 call Carlstead . shortly , for all they have and all they have not , 
 for all they be and all they be not , they be well - beloved by 
 their friend and fear by their foe . 

 now when Wildlake 's way be get to Carlstead , there be an end of 
 it toward the north ; though beyond it in a right line the wood be 
 thin , because of the hewing of the Carles . but the road itself 
 turn west at once and go on through the wood , till some four 
 mile far it first thin and then cease altogether , the ground 
 go down - hill all the way : for this be the low flank of the 
 first great upheaval toward the high mountain . but presently , after 
 the wood be end , the land break into swell down and winding 
 dale of no great height or depth , with a few scatter tree about 
 the hillside , mostly thorn or scrubby oak , gnarl and bent and 
 keep down by the western wind : here and there also be yew - tree , 
 and while the hillside would be grow over with box - wood , but none 
 very great ; and often juniper grow abundantly . this then be the 
 country of the Shepherds , who be friend both of the Dalesmen and 
 the Woodlanders . they dwelt not in any fence town or thorp , but 
 their homestead be scatter about as be handy for water and 
 shelter . nevertheless they have their own stronghold ; for amidmost of 
 their country , on the high of a certain down above a bottom where 
 a willowy stream wind , be a great earthwork : the wall thereof 
 be high and clean and overlap at the enter in , and amidst of 
 it be a deep well of water , so that it be a very defensible place : 
 and thereto would they drive their flock and herd when war be in 
 the land , for nought but a very great host might win it ; and this 
 stronghold they call Greenbury . 

 these Shepherd - Folk be strong and tall like the Woodlanders , for 
 they be partly of the same blood , but burn they be both ruddy 
 and brown : they be of more word than the Woodlanders but yet not 
 many - word . they know well all those old story - lay ,   and this 
 partly by the minstrelsy of the Woodlanders ,   but they have scant 
 skill in wizardry , and would send for the Woodlanders , both man and 
 woman , to do whatso they need therein . they be very hale and 
 long - live , whereas they dwelt in clear bright air , and they mostly 
 go light - clothe even in the winter , so strong and merry be they . 
 they wed with the Woodlanders and the Dalesmen both ; at least 
 certain house of they do so . they grow no corn ; nought but a few 
 pot - herb , but have their meal of the Dalesmen ; and in the summer they 
 drave some of their milch - kine into the Dale for the abundance of 
 grass there ; whereas their own hill and bent and wind valley 
 be not plenteously water , except here and there as in the bottom 
 under Greenbury . no swine they have , and but few horse , but of sheep 
 very many , and of the good both for their flesh and their wool . yet 
 be they nought so deft craftsman at the loom as be the Dalesmen , 
 and their woman be not very eager at the weaving , though they 
 loathe not the spindle and rock . shortly , they be merry folk 
 well - beloved of the Dalesmen , quick to wrath , though it abode not 
 long with they ; not very curious in their house and hall , which 
 be but little , and be deck mostly with the handiwork of the 
 Woodland - Carles their guest ; who when they be abide with they , 
 would oft stand long hour nose to beam , scoring and nicking and 
 hammering , answer no word speak to they but with aye or no , 
 desire nought save the endurance of the daylight . moreover , this 
 shepherd - folk heed not gay raiment over - much , but commonly go 
 clothe in white woollen or sheep - brown weed . 

 but beyond this shepherd - folk be more down and more , scantily 
 people , and that after a while by folk with whom they have no kinship 
 or affinity , and who be at while their foe . yet be there no 
 endure enmity between they ; and ever after war and battle come 
 peace ; and all blood - wite be duly pay and no long feud follow : 
 nor be the Dalesmen and the Woodlanders always in these war , 
 though at while they be . thus then it fare with these people . 

 but now that we have tell of the folk with whom the Dalesmen have 
 kinship , affinity , and friendship , tell we of their chief abode , 
 Burgstead to wit , and of its fashion . as hath be tell , it lie upon 
 the land make nigh into an isle by the fold of the Weltering Water 
 towards the uppermost end of the Dale ; and it be ward by the deep 
 water , and by the wall aforesaid with its tower . now the Dale at 
 its widest , to wit where Wildlake fall into it , be but nine furlong 
 over , but at Burgstead it be far narrower ; so that betwixt the wall 
 and the wandering stream there be but a space of fifty acre , and 
 therein lie Burgstead in a space of the shape of a sword - pommel : and 
 the house of the kinship lie about it , amidst of garden and 
 orchard , but little order into street and lane , save that a way 
 go clean through everything from the tower - ward gate to the 
 bridge over the Water , which be ward by two other tower on its 
 hither side . 

 as to the house , they be some big , some small , as the 
 housemate need . some be old , but not very old , save two only , 
 and some quite new , but of these there be not many : they be all 
 build fairly of stone and lime , with much fair and curious carve 
 work of knot and beast and man round about the door ; or while a 
 wale of such - like work all along the house - front . for as deft as 
 be the Woodlanders with knife and gouge on the oaken beam , even so 
 deft be the Dalesmen with mallet and chisel on the face of the hewn 
 stone ; and this be a great pastime about the Thorp . within these 
 house have but a hall and solar , with shut - bed out from the hall on 
 one side or two , with whatso of kitchen and buttery and out - bower man 
 deem handy . many man dwelt in each house , either kinsfolk , or such 
 as be join to the kindred . 

 near to the gate of Burgstead in that street aforesaid and face 
 east be the big house of the Thorp ; it be one of the two 
 abovesaid which be old than any other . its door - post and the 
 lintel of the door be carve with knot and twining stem fair 
 than other house of that stead ; and on the wall beside the door 
 carve over many stone be an image work in the likeness of a man 
 with a wide face , which be terrible to behold , although it smile : 
 he bear a bent bow in his hand with an arrow fit to its string , 
 and about the head of he be a ring of ray like the beam of the 
 sun , and at his foot be a dragon , which have creep , as it be , from 
 amidst of the blossom knot of the door - post wherewith the tail of 
 he be yet entwine . and this head with the ring of ray about it 
 be work into the adornment of that house , both within and 
 without , in many other place , but on never another house of the 
 Dale ; and it be call the House of the Face . Thereof hath the tale 
 much to tell hereafter , but as now it goeth on to tell of the way of 
 life of the Dalesmen . 

 in Burgstead be no mote - hall or Town - house or Church , such as we wot 
 of in these day ; and their market - place be wheresoever any might 
 choose to pitch a booth : but for the most part this be do in the 
 wide street betwixt the gate and the bridge . as to a meeting - place , 
 be there any small matter between man and man , these would the 
 Alderman or one of the Wardens deal with , sit in Court with the 
 neighbour on the wide space just outside the Gate : but if it be 
 to do with great matter , such as great manslaying and blood- 
 wite , or the making of war or ending of it , or the choosing of the 
 Alderman and the Wardens , such matter must be put off to the folk- 
 mote , which could but be hold in the place aforesaid where be the 
 doom - ring and the Altar of the Gods ; and at that folk - mote both the 
 Shepherd - Folk and the Woodland - Carles foregather with the Dalesmen , 
 and duly say their say . there also they hold their great cast and 
 make offering to the Gods for the Fruitfulness of the Year , the 
 ingathering of the increase , and in memory of their Forefathers . 
 Natheless at Yule - tide also they feast from house to house to be 
 glad with the rest of Midwinter , and many a cup drink at those feast 
 to the memory of the father , and the day when the world be wide 
 to they , and their banner fare far afield . 

 but besides these dwelling of man in the field between the wall and 
 the water , there be homestead up and down the Dale whereso man 
 find it easy and pleasant to dwell : their hall be build of much 
 the same fashion as those within the Thorp ; but many have a high 
 garth - wall cast about they , so that they might make a stout defence 
 in their own house if war come into the Dale . 

 as to their work afield ; in many place the Dale be fair with growth 
 of tree , and especially be there long grove of sweet chestnut 
 stand on the grass , of the fruit whereof the folk have much gain . 
 also on the south side nigh to the western end be a wood or two of 
 yew - tree very great and old , whence they gat they bow - stave , for 
 the Dalesmen also shoot well in the bow . much wheat and rye they 
 raise in the Dale , and especially at the nether end thereof . apple 
 and pear and cherry and plum they have in plenty ; of which tree , 
 some grow about the border of the acre , some in the garden of the 
 Thorp and the homestead . on the slope that have grow from the 
 breaking down here and there of the northern cliff , and which face 
 the South and the Sun 's burning , be row of goodly vine , whereof 
 the folk make they enough and to spare of strong wine both white and 
 red . 

 as to their beast ; swine they have a many , but not many sheep , since 
 herein they trust to their trucking with their friend the 
 Shepherds ; they have horse , and yet but a few , for they be stout in 
 go afoot ; and , have they a journey to make with woman big with 
 babe , or with child or outworn elder , they would yoke their oxen 
 to their wain , and go fair and softly whither they would . but the 
 say oxen and all their neat be exceed big and fair , far other 
 than the little beast of the Shepherd - Folk ; they be either dun of 
 colour , or white with black horn   and those very great   and black 
 tail - tuft and ear - tip . ass they have , and mule for the path of 
 the mountain to the east ; geese and hen enough , and dog not a few , 
 great hound strong than wolf , sharp - nosed , long - jaw , dun of 
 colour , shag - haired . 

 as to their ware ; they be very deft weaver of wool and flax , and 
 make a shift to dye the thrum in fair colour ; since both woad and 
 madder come to they good cheap by mean of the merchant of the plain 
 country , and of green weed be abundance at hand . good smith 
 they be in all the metal : they wash somewhat of gold out of the 
 sand of the Weltering Water , and copper and tin they fetch from 
 the rock of the eastern mountain ; but of silver they see little , 
 and iron they must buy of the merchant of the plain , who come to 
 they twice in the year , to wit in the spring and the late autumn just 
 before the snow . their ware they buy with wool spin and in the 
 fleece , and fine cloth , and skin of wine and young neat both steer 
 and heifer , and wrought copper bowl , and gold and copper by weight , 
 for they have no stamp money . and they gueste these merchant 
 well , for they love they , because of the tale they tell they of the 
 Plain and its city , and the manslaying therein , and the fall of 
 king and duke , and the uprising of Captains . 

 thus then live this folk in much plenty and ease of life , though not 
 delicately nor desire thing out of measure . they work with 
 their hand and weary themselves ; and they rest from their toil 
 and feast and be merry : to - morrow be not a burden to they , nor 
 yesterday a thing which they would fain forget : life sham they 
 not , nor do death make they afraid . 

 as for the Dale wherein they dwelt , it be indeed most fair and 
 lovely , and they deem it the Blessing of the Earth , and they trod 
 its flowery grass beside its ripple stream amidst its green tree- 
 bough proudly and joyfully with goodly body and merry heart . 



 CHAPTER II . of FACE - of - GOD and his KINDRED 



 tell the tale , that on an evening of late autumn when the weather 
 be fair , calm , and sunny , there come a man out of the wood hard by 
 the mote - stead aforesaid , who sit he down at the root of the 
 Speech - mound , cast down before he a roe - buck which he have just 
 slay in the wood . he be a young man of three and twenty summer ; 
 he be so clad that he have on he a sheep - brown kirtle and legging 
 of like stuff bind about with white leather thong ; he bear a short- 
 sword in his girdle and a little axe withal ; the sword with fair 
 work gild hilt and a dew - shoe of like fashion to its sheath . 
 he have his quiver at his back and bare in his hand his bow unstrung . 
 he be tall and strong , very fair of fashion both of limb and face , 
 white - skin , but for the sun 's tanning , and ruddy - cheek : his 
 beard be little and fine , his hair yellow and curl , cut somewhat 
 close , but for its length so plenteous , and so thick , that none could 
 fail to note it . he have no hat nor hood upon his head , nought but a 
 fillet of golden bead . 

 as he sit down he glance at the dale below he with a well - please 
 look , and then cast his eye down to the grass at his foot , as though 
 to hold a little long all unchanged the image of the fair place he 
 have just see . the sun be low in the heaven , and his slant beam 
 fall yellow all up the dale , gild the chestnut grove grow dusk 
 and grey with autumn , and the black mass of the elm - bough , and 
 gleam back here and there from the pool of the Weltering Water . 
 down in the midmost meadow the long - horn dun kine be move 
 slowly as they feed along the edge of the stream , and a dog be 
 bound about with exceed swiftness here and there among they . 
 at a sharply curved bight of the river the man could see a little 
 vermilion flame flicker about , and above it a thin blue veil of 
 smoke hang in the air , and cling to the bough of the willow 
 anear ; about it be a dozen menfolk clear to see , some sit , some 
 standing , some walk to and fro , but all in company together : four 
 of be brown - clothe and short - skirt like himself , and from above the 
 hand of one come a flash of light as the sun smite upon the steel of 
 his spear . the other be long - skirt and clothe gayer , and amongst 
 they be red and blue and green and white garment , and they be 
 clear to be see for woman . just as the young man look up again , 
 those of they who be sit down rise up , and those that be 
 stroll draw nigh , and they join hand together , and fall to 
 dance on the grass , and the dog and another one with he come up to 
 the dancer and race about and betwixt they ; and so clear to see 
 be they all and so little , be far away , that they look like 
 dainty well - work puppet . 

 the young man sit smile at it for a little , and then rise up and 
 shoulder his venison , and go down into Wildlake 's Way , and 
 presently be fairly in the Dale and stride along the Portway 
 beside the northern cliff , whose greyness be gild yet by the last 
 ray of the sun , though in a minute or two it would go under the 
 western rim . he go fast and cheerily , murmur to himself 
 snatch of old song ; none overtake he on the road , but he overtake 
 diver folk go alone or in company toward Burgstead ; swain and 
 old man , mother and maiden come from the field and the acre , or 
 go from house to house ; and one or two he meet but not many . all 
 these greet he kindly , and he they again ; but he stay not to 
 speak with any , but go as one in haste . 

 it be dusk by then he pass under the gate of Burgstead ; he go 
 straight thence to the door of the House of the Face , and enter as 
 one who be at home , and need go no far , nor abide a bidding . 

 the hall he come into straight out of the open air be long and 
 somewhat narrow and not right high ; it be well - nigh dark now within , 
 but since he know where to look , he could see by the flicker that 
 leapt up now and then from the smoulder brand of the hearth 
 amidmost the hall under the luffer , that there be but three man 
 therein , and belike they be even they whom he look to find there , 
 and for their part they look for his coming , and know his step . 

 he set down his venison on the floor , and cry out in a cheery 
 voice : ' Ho , Kettel ! be all man go without door to sleep so near 
 the winter - tide , that the Hall be as dark as a cave ? hither to I ! 
 or art thou also sleep ? ' 

 a voice come from the further side of the hearth : ' yea , lord , asleep 
 I be , and have be , and dream ; and in my dream I deal with the 
 flesh - pot and the cake - board , and thou shalt see my dream come true 
 presently to thy gain . ' 

 Quoth another voice : ' Kettel hath have out that share of his dream 
 already belike , if the saw sayeth sooth about cook . all ye have 
 be away , so belike he hath do as Rafe 's dog when Rafe run away 
 from the slain buck . ' 

 he laugh therewith , and Kettel with he , and a third voice join 
 the laughter . the young man also laugh and say : ' here I bring 
 the venison which my kinsman desire ; but as ye see I have bring it 
 over - late : but take it , Kettel . when cometh my father from the 
 stithy ? ' 

 Quoth Kettel : ' my lord hath be hard at it shape the Yule - tide 
 sword , and doth not lightly leave such work , as ye wot , but he will 
 be here presently , for he have send to bid we dight for supper 
 straightway . ' 

 say the young man : ' where be there lord in the dale , Kettel , or 
 hast thou make some thyself , that thou must be always throw they 
 in my tooth ? ' 

 ' Son of the Alderman , ' say Kettel , ' ye call I Kettel , which be no 
 name of mine , so why should I not call thee lord , which be no dignity 
 of thine , since it go well over my tongue from old use and will not ? 
 but here come my mate of the kettle , and the woman and lad . sit 
 down by the hearth away from their hurry , and I will fetch thee the 
 hand - water . ' 

 the young man sit down , and Kettel take up the venison and go his 
 way toward the door at the low end of the hall ; but ere he reach 
 it it open , and a noisy crowd enter of man , woman , boy , and 
 dog , some bear great wax candle , some bowl and cup and dish 
 and trencher , and some the board for the meal . 

 the young man sit quiet smile and wink his eye at the sudden 
 flood of light let into the dark place ; he take in without look at 
 this or the other thing the aspect of his Fathers ' House , so long 
 familiar to he ; yet to - night he have a pleasure in it above his will not , 
 and in all the stir of the household ; for the thought of the wood 
 wherein he have wander all day yet hang heavy upon he . come one of 
 the girl and cast fresh brand on the smoulder fire and stir 
 it into a blaze , and the wax candle be set up on the dai , so that 
 between they and the mew - quicken fire every corner of the hall be 
 bright . as aforesaid it be long and narrow , over - arch with stone 
 and not right high , the window high up under the springing of the 
 roof - arch and all on the side toward the street ; over against they 
 be the arch of the shut - bed of the housemate . the wall be 
 bare that evening , but folk be will not to hang up halling of weave 
 picture thereon when feast and high - day be toward ; and all along 
 the wall be the tenter - hook for that purpose , and diver weapon 
 and tool be hang from they here and there . about the dai 
 behind the thwart - table be now stick for adornment leavy bough of 
 oak now just begin to turn with the first frost . high up on the 
 gable wall above the tenter - hook for the hanging be carven fair 
 imagery and knot and twining stem ; for there in the hewn atone be 
 set forth that same image with the rayed head that be on the outside 
 wall , and he be smite the dragon and slay he ; but here inside 
 the house all this be stain in fair and lively colour , and the 
 sun - like ray round the head of the image be of beat gold . at 
 the low end of the hall be two door go into the buttery , 
 and kitchen , and other out - bower ; and above these door be a loft 
 upborne by stone pillar , which loft be the sleep chamber of the 
 goodman of the house ; but the outward door be halfway between the 
 say loft and the hearth of the hall . 

 so the young man take the shoe from his foot and then sit watch 
 the woman and lad array the board , till Kettel come again to he 
 with an old woman bear the ewer and basin , who wash his foot and 
 pour the water over his hand , and give he the towel with fair- 
 broider end to dry they withal . 

 Scarce have he make an end of this ere through the outer door come in 
 three man and a young woman with they ; the foremost of these be a 
 man young by some two year than the first - comer , but so like he 
 that none might misdoubt that he be his brother ; the next be an old 
 man with a long white beard , but hale and upright ; and lastly come a 
 man of middle - age , who lead the young woman by the hand . he be 
 tall than the first of the young man , though the other who enter 
 with he outwent he in height ; a stark carle he be , broad across 
 the shoulder , thin in the flank , long - armed and big - handed ; very 
 noble and well - fashioned of countenance , with a straight nose and 
 grey eye underneath a broad brow : his hair grow somewhat scanty 
 be do about with a fillet of golden bead like the young man his 
 son . for indeed this be their father , and the master of the House . 

 his name be iron - face , for he be the deftest of weapon - smith , and 
 he be the Alderman of the Dalesmen , and well - beloved of they ; his 
 kindre be deem the noblest of the Dale , and long have they dwelt 
 in the House of the Face . but of his son the young , the new- 
 comer , be name Hall - face , and his brother the eld face - of - god ; 
 which name be of old use amongst the kindred , and many great man and 
 stout warrior have bear it aforetime : and this young man , in great 
 love have he be get , and in much hope have he be rear , and 
 therefore have he be name after the good of the kindre . but his 
 mother , who be hight the Jewel , and have be a very fair woman , be 
 dead now , and Iron - face lack a wife . 

 face - of - god be well - beloved of his kindred and of all the Folk of 
 the Dale , and he have get a to - name , and be call gold - mane 
 because of the abundance and fairness of his hair . 

 as for the young woman that be lead in by Iron - face , she be the 
 betroth of face - of - god , and her name be the Bride . she look 
 with such eye of love on he when she see he in the hall , as though 
 she have never see he before but once , nor love he but since 
 yesterday ; though in truth they have grow up together and have see 
 each other most day of the year for many year . she be of the 
 kindre with whom the chief and great man of the face mostly wed , 
 which be indeed far away kindre of they . she be a fair woman and 
 strong : not easily daunt amidst peril she be hardy and handy and 
 light - foot : she could swim as well as any , and could shoot well in 
 the bow , and wield sword and spear : yet be she kind and 
 compassionate , and of great courtesy , and the very dog and kine 
 trust in she and love she . her hair be dark red of hue , long and 
 fine and plenteous , her eye great and brown , her brow broad and very 
 fair , her lip fine and red : her cheek not ruddy , yet nowise sallow , 
 but clear and bright : tall she be and of excellent fashion , but 
 well - knit and well - measure rather than slender and waver as the 
 willow - bough . her voice be sweet and soft , her word few , but 
 exceed dear to the listener . in short , she be a woman bear to be 
 the ransom of her Folk . 

 now as to the name which the menfolk of the Face bore , and they an 
 ancient kindre , a kindre of chieftain , it have be say that in 
 time past their image of the God of the Earth have over his treen 
 face a mask of beat gold fashion to the shape of the image ; and 
 that when the Alderman of the Folk die , he to wit who serve the God 
 and bore on his arm the gold - ring between the people and the altar , 
 this visor or face of God be lay over the face of he who have be 
 in a manner his priest , and therewith he be bear to mound ; and the 
 new Alderman and priest have it in charge to fashion a new visor for 
 the God ; and whereas for long this great kindred have be chieftain 
 of the people , they have be , and be all so name , that the word 
 Face be ever a part of their name . 



 CHAPTER III . they talk of diver matter in the hall 



 now face - of - god , who be also call gold - mane , rise up to meet the 
 new - comer , and each of they greet he kindly , and the Bride kiss 
 he on the cheek , and he she in likewise ; and he look kindly on 
 she , and take her hand , and go on up the hall to the dai , 
 follow his father and the old man ; as for he , he be of the 
 kindre of the House , and be foster - father of Iron - face and of his 
 son both ; and his name be stone - face : a stark warrior have he be 
 when he be young , and even now he could do a man 's work in the 
 battlefield , and his understanding be as good as that of a man in 
 his prime . so go these and four other up on to the dai and sit 
 down before the thwart - table look down the hall , for the meat be 
 now on the board ; and of the other there be some fifty man and 
 woman who be deem to be of the kindred and sit at the endlong 
 table . 

 so then the Alderman stand up and make the sign of the Hammer over 
 the meat , the token of his craft and of his God . then they fall to 
 with good heart , for there be enough and to spare of meat and 
 drink . there be bread and flesh   though not Gold - mane 's venison , 
 and leek and roasted chestnut of the grove , and red - cheek apple 
 of the garth , and honey enough of that year 's gathering , and medlar 
 sharp and mellow : moreover , good wine of the western bent go up 
 and down the hall in great gild copper bowl and in mazer girt and 
 lip with gold . 

 but when they be full of meat , and have drunken somewhat , they fall 
 to speech , and Iron - face spake aloud to his son , who have but be 
 speak softly to the Bride as one playmate to the other : but the 
 Alderman say : ' Scarce be the wood - deer grown , kinsman , when I must 
 need eat sheep 's flesh on a Thursday , though my son have lain abroad 
 in the wood all night to hunt for I . ' 

 and therewith he smile in the young man 's face ; but gold - mane 
 reddened and say : ' so be it , kinsman , I can hit what I can see ; but 
 not what be hide . ' 

 iron - face laugh and say : ' Hast thou be to the Woodland - Carles ? 
 be their woman fair than our cousin ? ' 

 face - of - god take up the Bride 's hand in his and kiss it and lay it 
 to his cheek ; and then turn to his father and say : ' Nay , father , 
 I see not the Wood - carle , nor go to their abode ; and on no day do 
 I lust after their woman . moreover , I bring home a roebuck of the 
 fat ; but I be over - late for Kettel , and the flesh be ready for 
 the board by then I come . ' 

 ' well , son , ' quoth iron - face , for he be merry , ' a roebuck be but a 
 little deer for such big man as be thou and I. but I rede thee take 
 the Bride along with thee the next time ; and she shall seek whilest 
 thou sleep , and hit when thou missest . ' 

 then face - of - god smile , but he frown somewhat also , and he say : 
 ' well be that , indeed ! but if ye must need drag a true tale out 
 of I : that roebuck I shoot at the very edge of the wood nigh to the 
 mote - stead as I be come home : hart have I see in the wood and 
 its lawn , and boar , and buck , and loose not at they : for indeed 
 when I awake in the morning in that wood - lawn ye wot of , I wander 
 up and down with my bow unbent . so it be that I fare as if I be 
 seek something , I know not what , that should fill up something 
 lack to I , I know not what . thus I feel in myself even so long 
 as I be underneath the black bough , and there be none beside I 
 and before I , and none to turn aback to : but when I come out again 
 into the sunshine , and I see the fair dale , and the happy abode lie 
 before I , and folk abroad in the mead merry in the eventide ; then 
 be I full fain of it , and loathe the wood as an empty thing that 
 have nought to give I ; and lo you ! all that I have be long for in 
 the wood , be it not in this House and ready to my hand ? - and that be 
 good meseemeth . ' 

 Therewith he drink of the cup which the Bride put into his hand after 
 she have kiss the rim , but when he have set it down again he spake 
 once more : 

 ' and yet now I be sit honour and well - beloved in the House of 
 my father , with the holy hearth sparkle and gleam down there 
 before I ; and she that shall bear my child sit soft and kind 
 by my side , and the bold lad I shall one day lead in battle drink 
 out of my very cup : now it seem to I that amidst all this , the 
 dark cold wood , wherein abide but the beast and the foe of the 
 Gods , be bid I to it and draw I thither . Narrow be the Dale 
 and the World be wide ; I would it be dawn and daylight , that I 
 might be afoot again . ' 

 and he half rise up from his place . but his father bend his brow on 
 he and say : ' Kinsman , thou hast a long tongue for a half - train 
 whelp : nor see I whitherward thy mind be wander , but if it be on 
 the road of a lad 's desire to go far and fare bad . Hearken 
 then , I will offer thee somewhat ! soon shall the west - country 
 merchant be here with their winter truck . how sayest thou ? hast 
 thou a mind to fare back with they , and look on the Plain and its 
 Cities , and take and give with the stranger ? to whom indeed thou 
 shalt be nothing save a purse with a few lump of gold in it , or 
 maybe a spear in the stranger 's band on the stricken field , or a bow 
 on the wall of an alien city . this be a craft which thou mayst well 
 learn , since thou shalt be a chieftain ; a craft good to learn , 
 however grievous it be in the learning . and I myself have be 
 there ; for in my youth I desire sore to look on the world beyond the 
 mountain ; so I go , and I fill my belly with the fruit of my own 
 desire , and a bitter meat be that ; but now that it have pass 
 through I , and I yet alive , belike I be more of a grown man for 
 have endure its gripe . even so may it well be with thee , son ; so 
 go if thou wilt ; and thou shalt go with my blessing , and with gold 
 and ware and wain and spearman . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' I thank thee , for it be well offer ; but I 
 will not go , for I have no lust for the Plain and its city ; I love 
 the Dale well , and all that be round about it ; therein will I live 
 and die . ' 

 Therewith he fall a - musing ; and the Bride look at he anxiously , 
 but spake not . Sooth to say her heart be sink , as though she 
 forebode some new thing , which should thrust itself into their merry 
 life . 

 but the old man stone - face take up the word and say : 

 ' Son Gold - mane , it behoveth I to speak , since belike I know the 
 wild - wood well than most , and have do for these three - score and 
 ten year ; to my cost . now I perceive that thou long for the wood 
 and the innermost of it ; and wot ye what ? this longing will at 
 while entangle the son of our chieftain , though this Alderman that 
 now be hath be free therefrom , which be well for he . for , time 
 be this longing come over I , and I go whither it lead I : 
 overlong it be to tell of all that befell I because of it , and how 
 my heart bleed thereby . so sorry be the tiding that come of it , 
 that now meseemeth my heart should be of stone and not my face , have 
 it not be for the love wherewith I have love the son of the 
 kindre . therefore , son , it be not ill if ye go west away with 
 the merchant this winter , and learn the dealing of the city , 
 and bring we back tale thereof . ' 

 but gold - mane cry out somewhat angrily , ' I tell thee , foster- 
 father , that I have no mind for the city and their man and their 
 fool and their whore and their runagate . but as for the wood and 
 its wonder , I have do with it , save for hunt there along with 
 other of the Folk . so let thy mind be at ease ; and for the rest , I 
 will do what the Alderman commandeth , and whatso my father craveth of 
 I . ' 

 ' and that be well , son , ' say stone - face , ' if what ye say come to 
 pass , as sore I misdoubt I it will not . but well it be , well it 
 be ! for such thing be in the wood , yea and before ye come to its 
 innermost , as may well try the stoutest heart . therein be Kobbolds , 
 and wight that love not man , thing unto whom the grief of man be as 
 the sound of the fiddle - bow unto we . and there abide the ghost of 
 those that may not rest ; and there wander the dwarf and the 
 mountain - dweller , the dealer in marvel , the giver of gift that 
 destroy house ; the forger of the curse that clingeth and the murder 
 that flitteth to and fro . there moreover be the lair of Wights in 
 the shape of woman , that draw a young man 's heart out of his body , 
 and fill up the empty place with desire never to be satisfied , that 
 they may mock he therewith and waste his manhood and destroy he . 
 nor say I much of the strong - thief that dwell there , since thou art 
 a valiant sword ; or of they who have be make wolf of the Holy 
 Places ; or of the Murder - Carles , the remnant and off - scouring of 
 wicked and wretche Folks - man who think as much of the life of a man 
 as of the life of a fly . yet happiest be the man whom they shall 
 tear in piece , than he who shall live burden by the curse of the 
 foe of the Gods . ' 

 the housemaster look on his son as the old carle spake , and a cloud 
 gather on his face a while ; and when stone - face have make an end he 
 spake : 

 ' this be long and evil talk for the end of a merry day , o fosterer ! 
 Wilt thou not drink a draught , o Redesman , and then stand up and set 
 thy fiddle - bow a - dancing , and cause it draw some fair word after it ? 
 for my cousin 's face hath grow sad than a young maid 's should be , 
 and my son 's eye gleam with thought that be far away from we and 
 abroad in the wild - wood seeking marvel . ' 

 then arise a man of middle - age from the top of the endlong bench on 
 the east side of the hall : a man tall , thin and scant - haired , with a 
 nose like an eagle 's neb : he reach out his hand for the bowl , and 
 when they have give to he he handle it , and raise it aloft and 
 cry : 

 ' here I drink a double health to face - of - god and the Bride , and the 
 love that lieth between they , and the love betwixt they twain and 
 we . ' 

 he drink therewith , and the wine go up and down the hall , and all 
 man drank , both carle and queen , with shout and great joy . then 
 Redesman put down the cup   for it have come into his hand again , and 
 reach his hand to the wall behind he , and take down his fiddle 
 hang there in its case , and draw it out and fall to tune it , 
 while the hall grow silent to hearken : then he handle the bow and 
 lay it on the string till they wail and chuckle sweetly , and 
 when the song be well awake and stir briskly , then he lift up 
 his voice and sing : 


 the Minstrel saith : 

 ' o why on this morning , ye maid , be ye trip 
  Aloof from the meadow yet fresh with the dew , 
 where under the west wind the river be lip 
  the fragrance of mint , the white bloom and the blue ? 

 for rough be the Portway where pant ye wander ; 
  on your foot and your gown - hem the dust lieth dun ; 
 come trip through the grass and the meadow - sweet yonder , 
  and forget neath the willow the sword of the sun . 

 the Maidens answer : 

 though fair be the moon - daisy down by the river , 
  and soft be the grass and the white clover sweet ; 
 though twixt we and the rock - wall the hot glare doth quiver , 
  and the dust of the wheel - way be dun on our foot ; 

 yet here on the way shall we walk on this morning 
  though the sun burneth here , and sweet , cool be the mead ; 
 for here when in old day the Burg give its warning , 
  stand stark under weapon the doughty of deed . 

 here come on the alien their proud word a - crying , 
  and here on our threshold they stumble and fall ; 
 here silent at even the steel - clothe be lie , 
  and here be our mother the story to tell . 

 here then on the morn of the eve of the wedding 
  we pray to the Mighty that we too may bear 
 such war - wall for warding of orchard and steading , 
  that the new day be merry as old day be dear . ' 


 Therewith he make an end , and shout and glad cry arise all about 
 the hall ; and an old man arise and cry : ' a cup to the memory of 
 the Mighty of the Day of the warding of the Ways . ' for you must know 
 this song tell of a custom of the Folk , hold in memory of a time of 
 bygone battle , wherein they have overthrow a great host of alien on 
 the Portway betwixt the river and the cliff , two furlong from the 
 gate of Burgstead . so now two week before Midsummer those maiden 
 who be presently to be wed go early in the morning to that 
 place clothe in very fair raiment , sword girt to their side and 
 spear in their hand , and abode there on the highway from morn till 
 even as though they be a guard to it . and they make merry there , 
 sing song and tell tale of time past : and at the sunsetting 
 their groom come to fetch they away to the Feast of the Eve of the 
 wedding . 

 while the song be a - sing face - of - god take the Bride 's hand in his 
 and caress it , and be soft and blithe with she ; and she redden 
 and tremble for pleasure , and call to mind wedding feast that have 
 be , and fair bride that she have see thereat , and she forget she 
 fear and her heart be at peace again . 

 and iron - face look well - pleased on the two from time to time , and 
 smile , but forbore word to they . 

 but up and down the hall man talk with one another about thing 
 long ago betid : for their heart be high and they desire deed ; 
 but in that fair Dale so happy be the year from day to day that 
 there be but little to tell of . so deepen the night and wan , 
 and gold - mane and the Bride still talk sweetly together , and at 
 while kindly to the other ; and by seem he have clean forget 
 the wood and its wonder . 

 then at last the Alderman call for the cup of good - night , and man 
 drink thereof and go their way to bed . 



 CHAPTER IV . FACE - of - GOD FARETH to the wood again 



 when it be the early morning and dawn be but just begin , 
 face - of - god awake and rise up from his bed , and come forth into the 
 hall naked in his shirt , and stand by the hearth , wherein the piled- 
 up ember be yet red , and look about and could see nothing 
 stir in the dimness : then he fetch water and wash the night- 
 tide off he , and clothe himself in haste , and be even as he be 
 yesterday , save that he leave his bow and quiver in their place and 
 take instead a short casting - spear ; moreover he take a leathern scrip 
 and go therewith to the buttery , and set therein bread and flesh 
 and a little gilded beaker ; and all this he do with but little 
 noise ; for he would not be question , lest he should have to answer 
 himself as well as other . 

 thus he go quietly out of door , for the door be but latch , 
 since no bolt or bar or lock be use in Burgstead , and through 
 the town - gate , which stand open , save when rumour of war be about . 
 he turn his face straight towards Wildlake 's way , walk briskly , 
 but at while look back over his shoulder toward the East to note 
 what way be make by the dawning , and how the sky lighten above the 
 mountain pass . 

 by then he be come to the place where the Maiden Ward be hold in 
 the summer the dawn be so far forward that all thing have their due 
 colour , and be clear to see in the shadowless day . it be a 
 bright morning , with an easterly air stir that drave away the 
 haze and dry the meadow , which have otherwise be rimy ; for it be 
 cold . gold - mane linger on the place a little , and his eye fall on 
 the road , as dusty yet as in Redesman 's song ; for the autumn have be 
 very dry , and the strip of green that edge the outside of the way 
 be wear and dusty also . on the edge of it , half in the dusty road , 
 half on the worn grass , be a long twine of briony red - berried and 
 black - leaved ; and right in the midst of the road be two twig of 
 great - leave sturdy pollard oak , as though they have be throw aside 
 there yesterday by woman or child a - sporting ; and the deep white 
 dust yet hold the mark of foot , some bare , some shod , cross each 
 other here and there . face - of - god smile as he pass on , as a man 
 with a happy thought ; for his mind show he a picture of the Bride 
 as she would be lead the Maiden Ward next summer , and sing 
 first among the singer , and he see she as clearly as he have often 
 see she verily , and before he be the fashion of her hand and all 
 her body , and the little mark on her right wrist , and the place where 
 her arm whiten , because the sleeve guard it against the sun , 
 which have long be pleasant unto he , and the little hollow in her 
 chin , and the lock of red - brown hair wave in the wind above her 
 brow , and shin in the sun as brightly as the Alderman 's cunningest 
 work of golden wire . soft and sweet seem that picture , till he 
 almost seem to hear her sweet voice call to he , and desire of 
 she so take hold of the youth , that it stir he up to go swiftli 
 as he stride on , the day brighten behind he . 

 now be it nigh sunrise , and he begin to meet folk on the way , though 
 not many ; since for most their way lie afield , and not towards the 
 Burg . the first be a woodlander , tall and gaunt , stride beside 
 his ass , whose pannier be laden with charcoal . the carle 's 
 daughter , a little maiden of seven winter , rid on the ass 's back 
 betwixt the pannier , and prattle to herself in the cold morning ; 
 for she be pleased with the clear light in the east , and the smooth 
 wide turf of the meadow , as one who have not often be far from the 
 shadow of the heavy tree of the wood , and their dark wall round 
 about the clearing where they dwelt . face - of - god give the twain the 
 sele of the day in merry fashion as he pass they by , and the sober 
 dark - faced man nod to he but spake no word , and the child stay 
 her prattle to watch he as he go by . 

 then come the sound of the rattle of wheel , and , as he double an 
 angle of the rock - wall , he come upon a wain draw by four dun kine , 
 wherein lie a young woman all muffle up against the cold with fur 
 and cloth ; beside the yoke - beast go her man , a well - knit trim- 
 face Dalesman clothe bravely in holiday raiment , girt with a goodly 
 sword , bear a bright steel helm on his head , in his hand a long 
 spear with a gay red and white shaft do about with copper band . 
 he look merry and proud of his wain - load , and the woman be smile 
 kindly on he from out of her scarlet and fur ; but now she turn a 
 weary happy face on Gold - mane , for they know he , as do all man of 
 the Dale . 

 so he stop when they meet , for the goodman have already stay his 
 slow beast , and the goodwife have rise a little on her cushion to 
 greet he , yet slowly and but a little , for she be great with child , 
 and not far from her time . that know gold - mane well , and what be 
 toward , and why the goodman wear his fine clothe , and why the wain 
 be deck with oak - bough and the yoke - beast with their good gild 
 bell and copper - adorn harness . for it be a custom with many of 
 the kindred that the goodwife should fare to her father 's house to 
 lie in with her first babe , and the day of her come home be make a 
 great feast in the house . so then face - of - god cry out : ' hail to 
 thee , o Warcliff ! Shrewd be the wind this morning , and thou dost 
 well to heed it carefully , this thine orchard , this thy garden , this 
 thy fair apple - tree ! to a good hall thou wendest , and the Wine of 
 increase shall be sweet there this even . ' 

 then smile Warcliff all across his face , and the goodwife hang her 
 head and redden . say the goodman : ' wilt thou not be with we , son 
 of the Alderman , as surely thy father shall be ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' though I be fain of it : my own matter 
 carry I away . ' 

 ' what matter ? ' say Warcliff ; ' perchance thou art for the city 
 this autumn ? ' 

 face - of - god answer somewhat stiffly : ' Nay , I be not ; ' and then 
 more kindly , and smile , ' all road lead not down to the Plain , 
 friend . ' 

 ' what road then far thou away from we ? ' say the goodwife . 

 ' the way of my will , ' he answer . 

 ' and what way be that ? ' say she ; ' take heed , lest I get a longing to 
 know . for then must thou need tell I , or deal with the carle there 
 beside thee . ' 

 ' nay , goodwife , ' say face - of - god , ' let not that longing take thee ; 
 for on that matter I be even as wise as thou . now good speed to thee 
 and to the new - comer ! ' 

 Therewith he go close up to the wain , and reach out his hand to 
 she , and she give he hers and he kiss it , and so go his way 
 smile kindly on they . then the carle cry to his kine , and they 
 bend down their head to the yoke ; and presently , as he walk on , he 
 hear the rumble of the wain mingle with the tinkling of their 
 bell , which in a little while become measured and musical , and 
 sound above the creaking of the axle and the rattle of the gear 
 and the roll of the great wheel over the road : and so it grow 
 thin and thin till it all die away behind he . 

 he be now come to where the river turn away from the sheer rock- 
 wall , which be not so high there as in most other place , as there 
 have be in old time long scree from the cliff , which have now grow 
 together , with the waxing of herb and the washing down of the earth 
 on to they , and make a steady slope or low hill go down riverward . 
 over this the road lift itself above the level of the meadow , 
 keep a little way from the cliff , while on the other side its 
 bank be somewhat broken and steep here and there . as face - of - god 
 come up to one of these broken place , the sun rise over the eastern 
 pass , and the meadow grow golden with its long beam . he linger , 
 and look back under his hand , and as he do so hear the voice and 
 laughter of woman come up from the slope below he , and presently a 
 young woman come struggle up the broken bank with hand and knee , 
 and cast herself down on the roadside turf laugh and pant . she 
 be a long - limbed light - make woman , dark - faced and black - haired : 
 amidst her laughter she look up and see gold - mane , who have stop 
 at once when he see she ; she hold out her hand to he , and say 
 lightly , though her face flush withal : 

 ' come hither , thou , and help the other to climb the bank ; for they 
 be beat in the race , and now must they do after my will ; that be 
 the forfeit . ' 

 he go up to she , and take her hand and kiss they , as be the 
 custom of the Dale , and say : 

 ' hail to thee , long - coat ! who be they , and whither away this morning 
 early ? ' 

 she look hard at he , and fondly belike , as she answer slowly : 
 ' they be the two maiden of my father 's house , whom thou know ; and 
 our errand , all three of we , be to Burgstead , the Feast of the Wine 
 of increase which shall be drunk this even . ' 

 as she spake come another woman half up the bank , to whom go face- 
 of - god , and , take her hand , draw she up while she laugh merrily 
 in his face : he salute she as he have long - coat , and then with a 
 laugh turn about to wait for the third ; who come indeed , but after 
 a little while , for she have abide , hear their voice . her also 
 gold - mane draw up , and kiss her hand , and she lie on the grass by 
 long - coat , but the second maiden stand up beside the young man . she 
 be white - skinned and golden - haire , a very fair damsel , whereas the 
 last - comer be but comely , as be well - nigh all the woman of the 
 Dale . 

 say face - of - god , look on the three : ' how come it , maidens , that 
 ye be but in your kirtle this sharp autumn morning ? or where have 
 ye leave your gown or your cloak ? ' 

 for indeed they be clothe but in close - fit blue kirtle of fine 
 wool , embroider about the hem with gold and coloured thread . 

 the last - comer laugh and say : ' what ail thee , Gold - mane , to be 
 so careful of we , as if thou wert our mother or our nurse ? yet if 
 thou must need know , there hang our gown on the thorn - bush down 
 yonder ; for we have be run a match and a forfeit ; to wit , that 
 she who be last on the highway should go down again and bring they 
 up all three ; and now that be my day 's work : but since thou art 
 here , Alderman 's son , thou shalt go down instead of I and fetch they 
 up . ' 

 but he laugh merrily and outright , and say : ' that will I not , for 
 there be but twenty - four hour in the day , and what between eat 
 and drink and talk to fair maiden , I have enough to do in 
 every one of they . Wasteful be ye woman , and simple be your 
 forfeit . now will I , who be the Alderman 's son , give forth a doom , 
 and will ordain that one of you fetch up the gown yourself , and 
 that long - coat be the one ; for she be the fleetest - foot and able 
 thereto . will ye take my doom ? for later on I shall not be wise . ' 

 ' yea , ' say the fair woman , ' not because thou art the Alderman 's son , 
 but because thou art the fair man of the Dale , and mayst bid we 
 poor soul what thou wilt . ' 

 face - of - god redden at her word , and the speaker and the last - comer 
 laugh ; but long - coat hold her peace : she cast one very sober look 
 on he , and then run lightly down the bent ; he draw near the edge of 
 it , and watch she go ; for her light - foot slimness be fair to 
 look on : and he note that when she be nigh the thorn - bush whereon 
 hang the bright - broider gown , and deem belike that she be not 
 see , she kiss both her hand where he have kiss they erst . 

 thereat he draw aback and turn away shyly , scarce look at the 
 other twain , who smile on he with somewhat jeer look ; but he 
 bid they farewell and depart speedily ; and if they speak , it be 
 but softly , for he hear their voice no more . 

 he go on under the sunlight which be now gild the outstanding 
 stone of the cliff , and still his mind be set upon the Bride ; and 
 his meeting with the mother of the yet unborn baby , and with the 
 three woman with their freshness and fairness , do somehow turn his 
 thought the more upon she , since she be the woman who be to be his 
 amongst all woman , for she be far fair than any one of they ; and 
 through all manner of life and through all kind of deed would he be 
 with she , and know more of her fairness and kindness than any other 
 could : and he - seem he could see picture of she and of he amidst 
 all these deed and way . 

 now he go very swiftly ; for he be eager , though he know not for 
 what , and he think but little of the thing on which his eye fall . 
 he meet none else on the road till he be come to Wildlake 's way , 
 though he see folk enough down in the meadow ; he be soon amidst the 
 first of the tree , and without make any stay set his face east and 
 somewhat north , that is , toward the slope that lead to the great 
 mountain . he say to himself aloud , as he wend the wood : 
 ' strange ! yestereven I think much of the wood , and I set my mind on 
 not go thither , and this morning I think nothing of it , and here 
 be I amidst its tree , and wend towards its innermost . ' 

 his way be easy at first , because the wood for a little space be 
 all of beech , so that there be no undergrowth , and he go lightly 
 betwixt the tall grey and smooth bole ; albeit his heart be nought 
 so gay as it be in the dale amidst the sunshine . after a while the 
 beech - wood grow thin , and at last give out altogether , and he come 
 into a space of rough break ground with nought but a few scrubby 
 oak and thorn - bush grow thereon here and there . the sun be 
 high in the heaven now , and shine brightly down on the waste , though 
 there be a few white cloud high up above he . the rabbit 
 scuttle out of the grass before he ; here and there he turn aside 
 from a stone on which lie coil an adder sun itself ; now and 
 again both hart and hind bound away from before he , or a sounder 
 of wild swine run grunt away toward close covert . but nought do 
 he see but the common sight and sound of the woodland ; nor do he 
 look for aught else , for he know this part of the woodland 
 indifferent well . 

 he hold on over this treeless waste for an hour or more , when the 
 ground begin to be less rugged , and he come upon tree again , but 
 thinly scatter , oak and ash and hornbeam not right great , with 
 thicket of holly and blackthorn between they . the set of the ground 
 be still steadily up to the east and north - east , and he follow it 
 as one who wendeth an assured way . at last before he seem to rise 
 a wall of tree and thicket ; but when he draw near to it , lo ! an 
 opening in a certain place , and a little path as if man be will not to 
 thread the tangle of the wood thereby ; though hitherto he have note 
 no slot of man , nor any sign of they , since he have plunge into the 
 deep of the beech - wood . he take the path as one who need must , and 
 go his way as it lead . in sooth it be well - nigh blind , but he be 
 a deft woodsman , and by mean of it skirt many a close thicket that 
 have otherwise stay he . so on he go , and though the bough be 
 close enough overhead , and the sun come through but in fleck , he 
 judge that it be grow towards noon , and he wotte well that he 
 be grow aweary . for he have be long afoot , and the more part of 
 the time on a rough way , or breast a slope which be at while 
 steep enough . 

 at last the track lead he skirt about an exceed close thicket 
 into a small clearing , through which run a little woodland rill 
 amidst rush and dead leaf : there be a low mound near the 
 eastern side of this wood - lawn , as though there have be once a 
 dwelling of man there , but no other sign or slot of man be there . 

 so face - of - god make stay in that place , cast himself down beside 
 the rill to rest he and eat and drink somewhat . whatever thought 
 have be with he through the wood   and they be many   concern 
 his House and his name , and his father , and the journey he might make 
 to the city of the Westland , and what be to befall he when he be 
 wed , and what war or trouble should be on his hand - all this be 
 now mingle together and confuse by this rest amidst his weariness . 
 he lay down his scrip , and draw his meat from it and eat what he 
 would , and dip his gild beaker into the brook , drank water 
 smacking of the damp musty savour of the woodland ; and then his head 
 sink back on a little mound in the short turf , and he fall asleep at 
 once . a long dream he have in short space ; and therein be blent his 
 thought of the morning with the deed of yesterday ; and other 
 matter long forget in his wake hour come back to his slumber 
 in unordered confusion : all which make up for he picture clear , 
 but of little meaning , save that , as oft befall in dream , whatever 
 he be a - do he feel himself belate . 

 when he awake , smile at something strange in his go - by dream , he 
 look up to the heaven , think to see sign of the even at hand , 
 for he seem to have be dream so long . the sky be thinly 
 overcast by now , but by his wonte woodcraft he know the whereabouts 
 of the sun , and that it be scant an hour after noon . he sit there 
 till he be wholly awake , and then drink once more of the woodland 
 water ; and he say to himself , but out loud , for he be fain of the 
 sound of a man 's voice , though it be but his own : 

 ' what be mine errand hither ? whither wend I ? what shall I have do 
 to - morrow that I have hitherto leave undo ? or what manner of man 
 shall I be then other than I be now ? ' 

 yet though he say the word he fail to think the thought , or it 
 leave he in a moment of time , and he think but of the Bride and her 
 kindness . yet that abode with he but a moment , and again he see 
 himself and those two woman on the highway edge , and long - coat 
 linger on the slope below , kiss his kiss on her hand ; and he 
 be sorry that she desire he over - much , for she be a fair woman 
 and a friendly . but all that also flow from he at once , and he 
 have no thought in he but that he also desire something that he 
 lack : and this be a burden to he , and he rise up frown , and 
 say to himself , ' be I become a mere sport of dream , whether I sleep 
 or wake ? I will go backward - or forward , but will think no more . ' 

 then he order his gear again , and take the path onward and upward 
 toward the Great Mountains ; and the track be even fainter than 
 before for a while , so that he have to seek his way diligently . 



 CHAPTER V. FACE - of - GOD fall in with MENFOLK ON the MOUNTAIN 



 now he plod on steadily , and for a long time the forest change 
 but little , and of wild thing he see only a few of those that love 
 the close covert . the ground still go up and up , though at 
 while be hollows , and steeper bent out of they again , and the 
 half - blind path or slot still lead past the close thicket and fall 
 tree , and he make way without let or hindrance . at last once more 
 the wood begin to thin , and the tree themselves to be small and 
 gnarl and ill - grow : therewithal the day be wan , and the sky 
 be quite clear again as the afternoon grow into a fair autumn 
 evening . 

 now the tree fail altogether , and the slope grow steeper be 
 cover with heather and ling ; and look up , he see before he 
 quite near by seem in the clear even   though indeed they be yet 
 far away   the snowy peak flush with the sink sun against the 
 frosty dark - grey eastern sky ; and below they the dark rock - mountain , 
 and below these again , and nigh to he indeed , the fell cover with 
 pine - wood and look like a wall to the heath he trod . 

 he stay a little while and turn his head to look at the way 
 whereby he have come ; but that way a swell of the oak - forest hide 
 everything but the wood itself , make a wall behind he as the pine- 
 wood make a wall before . there come across he then a sharp memory 
 of the bode word which stone - face have speak last night , and he 
 feel as if he be now indeed within the trap . but presently he 
 laugh and say : ' I be a fool : this come of be alone in the 
 dark wood and the dismal waste , after the merry face of the Dale have 
 sweep away my foolish musing of yesterday and the day before . Lo ! 
 here I stand , a man of the Face , sword and axe by my side ; if death 
 come , it can but come once ; and if I fear not death , what shall make 
 I afraid ? the Gods hate I not , and will not hurt I ; and they be 
 not ugly , but beauteous . ' 

 Therewith he stride on again , and soon come to a place where the 
 ground sink into a shallow valley and the ling give place to grass 
 for a while , and there be tall old pine scatter about , and 
 betwixt they grey rock ; this he pass through , climb a steep 
 bent out of it , and the pine be all about he now , though grow 
 wide apart , till at last he come to where they thicken into a wood , 
 not very close , wherethrough he go merrily , sing to himself and 
 swing his spear . he be soon through this wood , and come on to a 
 wide well - grass wood - lawn , hedge by the wood aforesaid on three 
 side , but slop up slowly toward the black wall of the thick 
 pine - wood on the fourth side , and about half a furlong overthwart and 
 endlong . the sun have set while he be in the last wood , but it be 
 still broad daylight on the wood - lawn , and as he stand there he be 
 ware of a house under the pine - wood on the other side , build long and 
 low , much like the house of the Woodland - Carles , but rougher 
 fashioned and of unhewn tree . he gaze on it , and say aloud to 
 himself as his will not be : 

 ' marvellous ! here be a dwelling of man , scarce a day 's journey from 
 Burgstead ; yet have I never hear tell of it : may happen some of the 
 Woodland - Carles have build it , and be on some errand of hunting 
 peltrie up in the mountain , or maybe be seek copper and tin 
 among the rock . well , at least let we go see what manner of man 
 dwell there , and if they be minded for a guest to - night ; for fain 
 be I of a bed beneath a roof , and of a board with strong meat and 
 drink on it . ' 

 Therewith he set forward , not heed much that the wood he have 
 pass through be hard on his left hand ; but he have go but twenty 
 pace when he see a red thing at the edge of the wood , and then a 
 glitter , and a spear come whistle forth , and smite his own spear so 
 hard close to the steel that it fly out of his hand ; then come a 
 great shout , and a man clothe in a scarlet kirtle run forth on he . 
 face - of - god have his axe in his hand in a twinkling , and run at once 
 to meet his foe ; but the man have the hill on his side as he rush on 
 with a short - sword in his hand . Axe and sword clash together for a 
 moment of time , and then both the man roll over on the grass 
 together , and face - of - god as he fall deem that he hear the shrill 
 cry of a woman . now face - of - god find that he be the nethermost , 
 for if he be strong , yet be his foe strong ; the axe have fly out 
 of his hand also , while the strange man still keep a hold of his 
 short - sword ; and presently , though he still struggle all he could , 
 he see the man draw back his hand to smite with the say sword ; and 
 at that nick of time the foeman 's knee be on his breast , his left 
 hand be double back behind he , and his right wrist be grip 
 hard in the stranger 's left hand . even therewith his ear , sharpen 
 by the come death , hear the sound of footstep and fluttering 
 raiment drawing near ; something dark come between he and the sky ; 
 there be the sound of a great stroke , and the big man loosen his 
 grip and fall off he to one side . 

 face - of - god leapt up and run to his axe and get hold of it ; but 
 turn round find himself face to face with a tall woman hold in 
 her hand a stout staff like the limb of a tree . she be calm and 
 smile , though forsooth it be she who have stricken the stroke and 
 stay the sword from his throat . his hand and axe drop down to 
 his side when he see what it be that face he , and that the woman 
 be young and fair ; so he spake to she and say : 

 ' what aileth , maiden ? be this man thy foe ? doth he oppress thee ? 
 shall I slay he ? ' 

 she laugh and say : ' thou art open - handed in thy proffer : he 
 might have ask the like concern thee but a minute ago . ' 

 ' yea , yea , ' say Gold - mane , laugh also , ' but he ask it not of 
 thee . ' 

 ' that be sooth , ' she say , ' but since thou hast ask I , I will tell 
 thee that if thou slay he it will be my harm as well as his ; and in 
 my country a man that taketh a gift be not will not to break the giver 's 
 head with it straightway . the man be my brother , o stranger , and 
 presently , if thou wilt , thou mayst be eat at the same board with 
 he . or if thou wilt , thou mayst go thy way unhurt into the wood . 
 but I have liefer of the twain that thou wert in our house to - night ; 
 for thou hast a wrong against we . ' 

 her voice be sweet and clear , and she spake the last word kindly , 
 and draw somewhat nigh to gold - mane . Therewithal the smite man 
 sit up , and put his hand to his head , and quoth he : 

 ' Angry be my sister ! good it be to wear the helm abroad when she 
 shaketh the nut - tree . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say she , ' it be thy luck that thou wert bare - head , else 
 have I be force to smite thee on the face . thou churl , since when 
 hath it be our will not to thrust knife into a guest , who be come of 
 great kin , a man of gentle heart and fair face ? come hither and 
 handsel he self - doom for thy fool 's onset ! ' 

 the man rise to his foot and say : ' well , sister , least say , 
 soon mend . a clout on the head be bad than a woman 's chiding ; 
 but since ye have give I one , ye may forbear the other . ' 

 Therewith he draw near to they . he be a very big - make man , most 
 stalwarth , with dark red hair and a thin pointed beard ; his nose be 
 straight and fine , his eye grey and well - open , but somewhat fierce 
 withal . yet be he in nowise evil - look ; he seem some thirty 
 summer old . he be clothe in a short scarlet kirtle , a goodly 
 garment , with a hood of like web pull off his head on to his 
 shoulder : he bear a great gold ring on his left arm , and a collar 
 of gold come down on to his breast from under his hood . 

 as for the woman , she be clothe in a long white linen smock , and over 
 it a short gown of dark blue woollen , and she have skin shoe on her 
 foot . 

 now the man come up to face - of - god , and take his hand and say : ' I 
 deem thee a foe , and I may not have over - many foe alive : but it 
 seem that thou art to be a friend , and that be well and well ; so 
 herewith I handsel thee self - doom in the matter of the onslaught . ' 

 then face - of - god laugh and say : ' the doom be soon give forth ; 
 against the tumble on the grass I set the clout on the head ; there be 
 nought leave over to pay to any man 's son . ' 

 say the scarlet - clothe man : ' belike by thine eye thou art a true 
 man , and wilt not bewray I . now be there no foeman here , but rather 
 maybe a friend both now and in time to come . ' Therewith he cast his 
 arm about face - of - god and kiss he . but face - of - god turn about 
 to the woman and say : ' be the peace wholly make ? ' 

 she shake her head and say soberly : ' nay , thou art too fair for a 
 woman to kiss . ' 

 he flush red , as his will not be when a woman praise he ; yet be his 
 heart full of pleasure and well - liking . but she lay her hand on his 
 shoulder and say : ' now be it for thee to choose betwixt the wild- 
 wood and the hall , and whether thou wilt be a guest or a wayfarer 
 this night . ' 

 as she touch he there take hold of he a sweetness of pleasure he 
 have never feel erst , and he answer : ' I will be thy guest and not 
 thy stranger . ' 

 ' come then , ' she say , and take his hand in her , so that he scarce 
 feel the earth under his foot , as they go all three together toward 
 the house in the gathering dusk , while eastward where the peak of 
 the great mountain dip be a light that tell of the rise of the 
 moon . 



 CHAPTER VI . of FACE - of - GOD and those MOUNTAIN - DWELLERS 



 a yard or two from the threshold Gold - mane hang back a moment , 
 entangle in some such misgiving as a man be will not to feel when he be 
 just about to do some new deed , but be not yet deep in the story ; his 
 new friend note that , for they smile each in their own way , and 
 the woman draw her hand away from his . face - of - god hold out his 
 still as though to take hers again , and therewithal he change 
 countenance and say as though he have stay but to ask that 
 question : 

 ' tell I thy name , tall man ; and thou , fair woman , tell I thine ; for 
 how can we talk together else ? ' 

 the man laugh outright and say : ' the young chieftain think that 
 this house also should be his ! Nay , young man , I know what be in thy 
 thought , be not ashamed that thou art wary ; and be assure ! we shall 
 hurt thee no more than thou hast be hurt . now as to my name ; the 
 name that be bear with I be go : the name that be give I hath 
 be take from I : now I belike must give myself a name , and that 
 shall be wild - wearer ; but it may be that thou thyself shalt one day 
 give I another , and call I Guest . ' 

 his sister gaze at he solemnly as he speak , and face - of - god 
 behold she the while , deem that her beauty grow and grow till 
 she seem as aweful as a Goddess ; and into his mind it come that 
 this over - strong man and over - lovely woman be nought mortal , and 
 they withal deal with he as father and mother deal with a wayward 
 child : then for a moment his heart fail he , and he long for the 
 peace of Burgdale , and even the lonely wood . but therewith she 
 turn to he and let her hand come into his again , and look kindly 
 on he and say : ' and as for I , call I the friend ; the name be 
 good and will serve for many thing . ' 

 he look down from her face and his eye light on her hand , and 
 when he note even amid the evening dusk how fair and lovely it be 
 fashion , and yet as though it be deft in the craft that the 
 daughter of menfolk use , his fear depart , and the pleasure of his 
 longing fill his heart , and he draw her hand to he to kiss it ; but 
 she hold it back . then he say : ' it be the custom of the Dale to 
 all woman . ' 

 so she let he kiss her hand , heed the kiss nothing , and say 
 soberly : 

 ' then art thou of Burgdale , and if it be lawful to guess , I would 
 say that thy name be face - of - god , of the House of the Face . ' 

 ' even so it be , ' say he , ' but in the Dale those that love I do 
 mostly call I gold - mane . ' 

 ' it be well name , ' she say , ' and seldom wilt thou be call 
 otherwise , for thou wilt be well - beloved . but come in now , gold- 
 mane , for night be at hand , and here have we meat and lodge such as 
 an hungry and weary man may take ; though we be break people , 
 dweller in the waste . ' 

 Therewith she lead he gently over the threshold into the hall , and it 
 seem to he as if she be the fair and the noble of all the 
 Queens of ancient story . 

 when he be in the house he look and see that , rough as it be 
 without it lack not fairness within . the floor be of hard - trodden 
 earth strew with pine - twig , and with here and there brown bearskin 
 lay on it : there be a standing table near the upper end athwart 
 the hall , and a day beyond that , but no endlong table . gold - mane 
 look to the shut - bed , and see that they be large and fair , 
 though there be but a few of they ; and at the low end be a loft 
 for a sleep chamber dight very fairly with broidered cloth . the 
 hanging on the wall , though they leave some place bare which be 
 hang with fresh bough , be fair than any he have ever see , so 
 that he deem that they must come from far country and the City of 
 city : therein be image work of warrior and fair woman of 
 old time and their dealing with the Gods and the Giants , and 
 wondrous wight ; and he deem that this be the story of some great 
 kindre , and that their token and the sign of their banner must need 
 be the Wood - wolf , for everywhere be it work in these picture 
 webs . perforce he look long and earnestly at these fair thing , 
 for the hall be not dark yet , because the brand on the hearth be 
 flame their last , and when Wild - wearer behold he so gaze , he 
 stand up and look too for a moment , and then smote his right hand 
 on the hilt of his sword , and turn away and stride up and down the 
 hall as one in angry thought . 

 but the woman , even the Friend , bestir herself for the service of 
 the guest , and bring water for his hand and foot , and when she have 
 wash he , bear he the wine of Welcome and drink to he and bade 
 he drink ; and he all the while be shameface ; for it be to he as 
 if one of the Ladies of the Heavenly Burg be do he service . 
 then she go away by a door at the low end of the hall , and wild- 
 wearer come and sit down by Gold - mane , and fall a - talk with he 
 about the way of the Dalesmen , and their garth , and the pasture 
 and growth thereof ; and what temper the carle themselves be of ; 
 which be good man , which be ill , which be love and which 
 scorn ; no otherwise than if he have be the goodman of some 
 neighbouring dale ; and gold - mane tell he whatso he know , for he see 
 no harm therein . 

 after a while the outer door open , and there come in a woman of 
 some five - and - twenty winter , trimly and strongly build ; short- 
 skirt she be and clothe as a hunter , with a bow in her hand and a 
 quiver at she back : she unsling a pouch , which she empty at wild- 
 wearer 's foot of a leash of hare and two brace of mountain grouse ; 
 of face - of - god she take but little heed . 

 say Wild - wearer : ' this be good for to - morrow , not for to - day ; the 
 meat be well - nigh on the board . ' 

 then gold - mane smile , for he call to mind his home - come of 
 yesterday . but the woman say : 

 ' the fault be not mine ; she tell I of the come guest but three 
 hour agone . ' 

 ' ay ? ' say Wild - wearer , ' she look for a guest then ? ' 

 ' yea , certe , ' say the woman , ' else why go I forth this afternoon , 
 as weary as I be with yesterday ? ' 

 ' well , well , ' say Wild - wearer , ' get to thy due work or go play ; I 
 meddle not with meat ! and for thee all jest be as bitter earnest . ' 

 ' and with thee , chief , ' she say , ' it be no otherwise ; surely I be 
 make on thy model . ' 

 ' thy tongue be long , friend , ' say he ; ' now tarry if thou wilt , and 
 if the supper 's service craveth thee not . ' 

 she turn away with one keen look at face - of - god , and depart 
 through the door at the low end of the hall . 

 by this time the hall be dusk , for there be no candle there , and 
 the hearth - fire be but smoulder . wild - wearer sit silent and 
 musing now , and face - of - god spake not , for he be deep in wild and 
 happy dream . at last the low door open and the fair woman come 
 into the hall with a torch in either hand , after whom come the 
 huntress , now clothe in a dark blue kirtle , and an old woman yet 
 straight and hale ; and these twain bore in the victual and the 
 table - gear . then the three fall to dighte the board , and when it 
 be all ready , and gold - mane and Wild - wearer be set down to it , and 
 with they the fair woman and the huntress , the old woman throw good 
 store of fresh brand on the hearth , so that the light shine into 
 every corner ; and even therewith the outer door open , and four more 
 man enter , whereof one be old , but big and stalwarth , the other 
 three young : they be all clothe roughly in sheep - brown weed , but have 
 helm upon their head and spear in their hand and great sword 
 girt to their side ; and they seem doughty man and ready for 
 battle . one of the young man cast down by the door the carcass of a 
 big - horn mountain sheep , and then they all troop off to the out- 
 bower by the low door , and come back presently fairly clad and 
 without their weapon . wild - wearer nod to they kindly , and they 
 sit at table pay no more heed to face - of - god than to cast he a 
 nod for salutation . 

 then say the old woman to they : ' well , lad , have ye be do or 
 sleep ? ' 

 ' sleep , mother , ' say one of the young man , ' as be but due after 
 last night be , and to - morrow shall be . ' 

 say the huntress : ' hold thy peace , wood - wise , and let thy tongue 
 help thy tooth to deal with thy meat ; for this be not the talk 
 hour . ' 

 ' Nay , Bow - may , ' say another of the swain , ' since here be a new man , 
 now be the time to talk to he . ' 

 say the huntress : " tis thine hand that talk well , wood - wont ; it 
 be not they that shall bring thee to shame . ' 

 Spake the third : ' what have we to do with shame here , far away from 
 doom and doomer , and elder , and warden , and guard castle ? if 
 the new man listeth to speak , let he speak ; or to fight , then let 
 he ; it shall ever be man to man . ' 

 then spake the old woman : ' Son Wood - wicked , hold thy peace , and 
 forget the steel that ever eggeth thee on to draw . ' 

 Therewith she set the last matter on the board , while the three 
 swain sit and eyed gold - mane somewhat fiercely , now that word have 
 stir they , and he have sit there say nothing , as one who be 
 well than they , and contemn they ; but now spake Wild - wearer : 

 ' whoso hungreth let he eat ! Whoso would slumber , let he to bed . 
 but he who would bicker , it must need be with I . here be a man of 
 the Dale , who hath seek the wood in peace , and hath find we . his 
 hand be ready and his heart be guileless : if ye fear he , run away 
 to the wood , and come back when he be go ; but none shall mock he 
 while I sit by : now , lad , be merry and blithe with the guest . ' 

 then the young man greet Gold - mane , and the old man say : ' art 
 thou of Burgstead ? then wilt thou be of the House of the Face , and 
 thy name will be face - of - god ; for that man be call the fairest of 
 the Dale , and there shall be none fair than thou . ' 

 face - of - god laugh and say : ' there be but few mirror in Burgdale , 
 and I have no mind to journey west to the city to see what manner 
 of man I be : that be ill husbandry . but now I have hear the 
 name of the three swain , tell I thy name , father ! ' 

 spake the huntress : ' this be my father 's brother , and his name be 
 Wood - father ; or ye shall call he so : and I be call Bow - may 
 because I shoot well in the bow : and this old carline be my eme 's 
 wife , and now belike my mother , if I need one . but thou , fair - face 
 Dalesman , little dost thou need a mirror in the Dale so long as woman 
 abide there ; for their face shall be instead of mirror to tell thee 
 whether thou be fair and lovely . ' 

 thereat they all laugh and fall to their victual , which be 
 abundant , of wood - venison and mountain - fowl , but of bread be no 
 great plenty ; wine lack not , and that of the good ; and gold - mane 
 note that the cup and the apparel of the horn and mazer be not 
 of gold nor gilded copper , but of silver ; and he marvel thereat , 
 for in the Dale silver be rare . 

 so they eat and drink , and gold - mane look ever on the Friend , and 
 spake much with she , and he deem she friendly indeed , and she 
 seem most pleased when he speak well , and lead he on to do so . 
 Wild - wearer be but of few word , and those somewhat harsh ; yet be 
 he as a man strive to be courteous and blithe ; but of the other 
 Bow - may be the great speaker . 

 wild - wearer call health to the Sun , and the Moon , and the Hosts of 
 Heaven ; to the Gods of the Earth ; to the Woodwights ; and to the 
 Guest . other health also he call , the meaning of which be dark 
 to gold - mane ; to wit , the jaw of the Wolf ; the Silver Arm ; the Red 
 Hand ; the Golden Bushel ; and the Ragged Sword . but when he ask the 
 Friend concern these name what they might signify , she shake she 
 head and answer not . 

 at last wild - wearer cry out : ' now , lad , the night weareth and the 
 guest be weary : therefore whoso of you hath in he any minstrelsy , 
 now let he make it , for later on it shall be over - late . ' 

 then arise Wood - wont and go to his shut - bed and grope therein , and 
 take from out of it a fiddle in its case ; and he open the case and 
 draw from it a very goodly fiddle , and he stand on the floor amidst 
 of the hall and Bow - may his cousin with he ; and he lay his bow on 
 the fiddle and wake up song in it , and when it be well awake she 
 fall a - singing , and he to answer her song , and at the last all 
 they of the house sing together ; and this be the meaning of the word 
 which they sing : 


 she singeth . 

 now be the rain upon the day , 
  and every water 's wide ; 
 why busk ye then to wear the way , 
  and whither will ye ride ? 

 he singeth . 

 our kine be on the eyot still , 
  the eddy lap they round ; 
 all dyke the wind - wear water fill , 
  and waneth grass and ground . 

 she singeth . 

 o ride ye to the river 's brim 
  in war - weed fair to see ? 
 or winter water will ye swim 
  in hauberk to the knee ? 

 he singeth . 

 Wild be the day , and dim with rain , 
  our sheep be ward ill ; 
 the wood - wolf gather for the plain , 
  their ravening maw to fill . 

 she singeth . 

 Nay , what be this , and what have ye , 
  a hunter 's band , to bear 
 the Banner of our Battle - glee 
  the skulk wolf to scare ? 

 he singeth . 

 o woman , when we wend our way 
  to deal with death and dread , 
 the Banner of our father ' day 
  must flap the wind o'erhead . 

 she singeth . 

 ah , for the maiden that ye leave ! 
  who now shall save the hay ? 
 what groom shall kiss our lip at eve , 
  when June hath master May ? 

 he singeth . 

 the wheat be win , the seed be sown , 
  here toileth many a maid , 
 and ere the hay knee - deep hath grow 
  your groom the grass shall wade . 

 they sing all together . 

 then fair befall the mountain - side 
  Whereon the play shall be ! 
 and fair befall the summer - tide 
  that whoso life shall see . 


 face - of - god think the song goodly , but to the other it be well 
 know . then say Wood - father : 

 ' o foster - son , thy foster - brother hath sing well for a wood abider ; 
 but we be deeming that his singing shall be but as a starling to a 
 throstle match against thy new - come guest . therefore , Dalesman , 
 sing we a song of the Dale , and if ye will , let it be of garden and 
 pleasant house of stone , and fair damsel therein , and swain with 
 they who toil not over - much for a scant livelihood , as do they of the 
 waste , whose head may not be see in the Holy Places . ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' Father , it be ill to set the word of a lonely man 
 afar from his kin against the song that cometh from the heart of a 
 noble house ; yet may I not gainsay thee , but will sing to thee what I 
 may call to mind , and it be call the Song of the Ford . ' 

 Therewith he sing in a sweet and clear voice : and this be the 
 meaning of his word : 


 in hay - tide , through the day new - bear , 
  across the mead we come ; 
 our hauberk brush the blossom corn 
  a furlong short of home . 

 Ere yet the gable we behold 
  Forth flasheth the red sun , 
 and smite our fallow helm and cold 
  though all the fight be do . 

 in this last mend of mow - grass 
  Sweet doth the clover smell , 
 crush neath our foot red with the pass 
  where hell be blent with hell . 

 and now the willowy stream be nigh , 
  down wend we to the ford ; 
 no shaft across its fish fly , 
  nor flasheth there a sword . 

 but lo ! what gleameth on the bank 
  across the water wan , 
 as when our blood the mouse - ear drank 
  and red the river run ? 

 Nay , hasten to the ripple clear , 
  look at the grass beyond ! 
 Lo ye the dainty band and dear 
  of maiden fair and fond ! 

 lo how they need must take the stream ! 
  the water hide their foot ; 
 on fair kind arm the gold doth gleam , 
  and midst the ford we meet . 

 up through the garden two and two , 
  and on the flower we drip ; 
 their wet foot kiss the morning dew 
  as lip lie close to lip . 

 here now we sing ; here now we stay : 
  by these grey wall we tell 
 the love that live from out the fray , 
  the love that fight and fall . 


 when he be do they all say that he have sing well , and that the 
 song be sweet . yet do Wild - wearer smile somewhat ; and Bow - may say 
 outright : ' Soft be the song , and hath be make by lad and 
 minstrel rather than by warrior . ' 

 ' Nay , kinswoman , ' say Wood - father , ' thou art hard to please ; the 
 guest be kind , and hath give we that I ask for , and I give he all 
 thank therefor . ' 

 face - of - god smile , but he heed little what they say , for as he 
 sing he have note that the Friend look kindly on he ; and he 
 think he see that once or twice she put out her hand as if to touch 
 he , but draw it back again each time . she spake after a little and 
 say : 

 ' here now hath be a stream of song run betwixt the Mountain and 
 the Dale even as doth a river ; and this be good to come between our 
 dream of what hath be and what shall be . ' then she turn to 
 gold - mane , and say to he scarce loud enough for all to hear : 

 ' herewith I bid thee good - night , o Dalesman ; and this other word I 
 have to thee : heed not what befalleth in the night , but sleep thy 
 well , for nought shall be to thy scathe . and when thou wak in the 
 morning , if we be yet here , it be well ; but if we be not , then 
 abide we no long while , but break thy fast on the victual thou wilt 
 find upon the board , and so depart and go thy way home . and yet 
 thou mayst look to it to see we again before thou di . ' 

 Therewith she hold out her hand to he , and he take it and kiss it ; 
 and she go to her chamber - aloft at the low end of the hall . and 
 when she be go , once more he have a deeming of she that she be of 
 the kindre of the Gods . at her departure he - seem that the hall 
 grow dull and small and smoky , and the night seem long to he and 
 doubtful the coming of the day . 



 CHAPTER VII . FACE - of - GOD talketh with the FRIEND on the MOUNTAIN 



 so now go all man to bed ; and face - to - god 's shut - bed be over 
 against the outer door and toward the low end of the hall , and on 
 the panel about it hang the weapon and shield of man . Fair be 
 that chamber and roomy , and the man be weary despite his eagerness , 
 so that he go to sleep as soon as his head touch the pillow ; but 
 within a while   he deem about two hour after midnight   he be 
 awake by the clattering of the weapon against the panel , and the 
 sound of man 's hand take they down ; and when he be fully awake , 
 he hear withal man go up and down the house as if on errand : 
 but he call to mind what the Friend have say to he , and he do not 
 so much as turn himself toward the hall ; for he say : ' belike these 
 man be outlaw and wolf of the Holy Places , yet by seem they 
 be good fellow and nought churlish , nor have I to do with take up 
 the feud against they . I will abide the morning . yet meseemeth that 
 she draw I hither : for what cause ? ' 

 Therewith he fall asleep again , and dream no more . but when he 
 awake the sun be shin broad upon the hall - floor , and he sit up 
 and listen , but could hear no sound save the moaning of the wind in 
 the pine - bough and the chatter of the starling about the gable of 
 the house ; and the place seem so exceed lonely to he that he 
 be in a manner fear by that loneliness . 

 then he arise and clothe himself , and go forth into the hall and 
 gaze about he , and at first he deem indeed that there be no one 
 therein . but at last he look and behold the upper gable and there 
 underneath a most goodly hang be the glorious shape of a woman 
 sit on a bench cover over with a cloth of gold and silver ; and 
 he look and look to see if the woman might stir , and if she be 
 alive , and she turn her head toward he , and lo it be the Friend ; 
 and his heart rise to his mouth for wonder and fear and desire . for 
 now he doubt whether the other folk be aught save show and 
 shadow , and she the Goddess who have fashion they out of nothing 
 for his bewilderment , presently to return to nothing . 

 yet whatever he might fear or doubt , he go up the hall towards she 
 till he be quite nigh to she , and there he stand silent , wonder 
 at her beauty and desire her kindness . 

 Grey - eyed she be like her brother ; but her hair the colour of red 
 wheat : her lip full and red , her chin round , her nose fine and 
 straight . her hand and all her body fashion exceed sweetly and 
 delicately ; yet not as if she be an image of which the like might 
 be find if the craftsman be but deft enough to make a perfect 
 thing , but in such a way that there be none like to she for those 
 that have eye to behold she as she be ; and none could ever be make 
 like to she , even by such a master - craftsman as could fashion a body 
 without a blemish . 

 she be clothe in a white smock , whose hem be broider with gold 
 wire and precious gem of the Mountains , and over that a gown weave 
 of gold and silver : scarce hath the world such another . on her head 
 be a fillet of gold and gem , and there be wondrous gold ring on 
 her arm : her foot lie bare on the dark grey wolf - skin that be 
 stretch before she . 

 she smile kindly upon his solemn and troubled face , and her voice 
 sound strangely familiar to he come from all that loveliness , as 
 she say : ' hail , face - of - god ! here be I leave alone , although I 
 deem last night that I should be go with the other . therefore 
 be I fain to show myself to thee in fair array than yesternight ; 
 for though we dwell in the wild - wood , from the solace of folk , yet 
 be we not of thrall ' blood . but come now , I bid thee break thy 
 fast and talk with I a little while ; and then shalt thou depart in 
 peace . ' 

 Spake face - of - god , and his voice tremble as he spake : ' what art 
 thou ? last night I deem at while once and again that thou wert of 
 the Gods ; and now that I behold thee thus , and it be broad daylight , 
 and of those other be no more to be see than if they have never 
 live , I can not but deem that it be even so , and that thou comest 
 from the City that shall never perish . now if thou be a goddess , I 
 have nought to pray thee , save to slay I speedily if thou hast a 
 mind for my death . but if thou art a woman - ' 

 she break in : ' gold - mane , stay thy prayer and hold thy peace for 
 this time , lest thou repent when repentance availeth not . and this I 
 say because I be none of the Gods nor akin to they , save far off 
 through the generation , as art thou also , and all man of goodly 
 kindre . now I bid thee eat thy meat , since ' tis ill talk betwixt 
 a full man and a fasting ; and I have dight it myself with mine own 
 hand ; for Bow - may and the Wood - mother go away with the rest three 
 hour before dawn . come sit and eat as thou hast a hardy heart ; as 
 forsooth thou shouldest do if I be a very goddess . take heed , 
 friend , lest I take thee for some damsel of the low Dale array in 
 Earl 's garment . ' 

 she laugh therewith , and lean toward he and put forth her hand 
 to he , and he take it and caress it ; and the exceed beauty of 
 her body and of the raiment which be as it be a part of she and 
 her loveliness , make her laughter and her friendly word strange to 
 he , as if one do not belong to the other ; as in a dream it might 
 be . nevertheless he do as she bid he , and sit at the board and 
 eat , while she lean forward on the arm of her chair and spake to 
 he in friendly wise . and he wonder as she spake that she know so 
 much of he and his : and he keep say to himself : ' she draw I 
 hither ; wherefore do she so ? ' 

 but she say : ' gold - mane , how fareth thy father the Alderman ? be he 
 as good a wright as ever ? ' 

 he tell she : Yea , that ever be his hammer on the iron , the copper , 
 and the gold , and that no wright in the Dale be as deft as he . 

 say she : ' would he not have have thee seek to the city , to see the 
 way of the outer world ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say he . 

 she say : ' thou wert wise to naysay that offer ; thou shalt have 
 enough to do in the Dale and round about it in twelve month ' time . ' 

 ' art thou foresighte ? ' say he . 

 ' folk have call I so , ' she say , ' but I wot not . but thy brother 
 Hall - face , how fareth he ? ' 

 ' well ; ' say he , ' to my deeming he be the Sword of our House , and the 
 Warrior of the Dale , if the day be ready for he . ' 

 ' and stone - face , that stark ancient , ' she say , ' doth he still love 
 the Folk of the Dale , and hate all other folk ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' he say , ' I know not that , but I know that he loveth as , and 
 above all I and my father . ' 

 again she spake : ' how fareth the Bride , the fair maid to whom thou 
 art affiance ? ' 

 as she spake , it be to he as if his heart be stricken cold ; but he 
 put a force upon himself , and neither reddened nor whiten , nor 
 change countenance in any way ; so he answer : 

 ' she be well the eve of yesterday . ' then he remember what she 
 be , and her beauty and valour , and he constrain himself to say : 
 ' each day she groweth fairer ; there be no man 's son and no daughter 
 of woman that do not love she ; yea , the very beast of field and 
 fold love she . ' 

 the Friend look at he steadily and spake no word , but a red flush 
 mount to her cheek and brow and change her face ; and he marvel 
 thereat ; for still he misdoubte that she be a Goddess . but it 
 pass away in a moment , and she smile and say : 

 ' guest , thou seemest to wonder that I know concern thee and the 
 Dale and thy kindred . but now shalt thou wot that I have be in the 
 Dale once and again , and my brother oftener still ; and that I have 
 see thee before yesterday . ' 

 ' that be marvellous , ' quoth he , ' for sure be I that I have not see 
 thee . ' 

 ' yet thou hast see I , ' she say ; ' yet not altogether as I be now ; ' 
 and therewith she smile on he friendly . 

 ' how be this ? ' say he ; ' art thou a skin - changer ? ' 

 ' yea , in a fashion , ' she say . ' Hearken ! dost thou perchance 
 remember a day of last summer when there be a market holden in 
 Burgstead ; and there stand in the way over against the House of the 
 Face a tall old carle who be truck deer - skin for diverse gear ; 
 and with he be a queen , tall and dark - skin , somewhat well- 
 liking , her hair bind up in a white coif so that none of it could be 
 see ; by the token that she have a large stone of mountain blue set in 
 silver stick in the say coif ? ' 

 as she speak she set her hand to her bosom and draw something from 
 it , and hold forth her hand to gold - mane , and lo amidst the palm the 
 great blue stone set in silver . 

 ' wondrous as a dream be this , ' say face - of - god , ' for these twain I 
 remember well , and what follow . ' 

 she say : ' I will tell thee that . there come a man of the Shepherd- 
 Folk , drunk or foolish , or both , who begin to chaffer with the big 
 carle ; but ever on the queen be his eye set , and presently he put 
 forth his hand to she to clip she , whereon the big carle hove up his 
 fist and smite he , so that he fall to earth noseling . then run the 
 folk together to hale off the stranger and help the shepherd , and it 
 be like that the stranger should be mishandle . then there thrust 
 through the press a young man with yellow hair and grey eye , who 
 cry out , " Fellows , let be ! the stranger have the right of it ; this 
 be no matter to make a quarrel or a court case of . let the market go 
 on ! this man and maid be true folk . " so when the folk hear the 
 young man and his bidding , they forebore and let the carle and the 
 queen be , and the shepherd go his way little hurt . now then , who 
 be this young man ? ' 

 Quoth Gold - mane : ' it be even I , and meseemeth it be no great deed 
 to do . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' and the big carle be my brother , and the tall 
 queen , it be myself . ' 

 ' how then , ' say he , ' for she be as dark - skinned as a dwarf , and 
 thou so bright and fair ? ' 

 she say : ' well , if the wood be good for nothing else , yet be 
 they good for the growing of herb , and I know the craft of simple ; 
 and with one of these herb have I stain my skin and my brother 's 
 also . and it show the dark beneath the white coif . ' 

 ' yea , ' say he , ' but why must ye need fare in feigned shape ? Ye 
 would have be welcome guest in the Dale howsoever ye have come . ' 

 ' I may not tell thee hereof as now , ' say she . 

 say Gold - mane : ' yet thou mayst belike tell I wherefore be that 
 thy brother desire to slay I yesterday , if he know I , who I be . ' 

 ' gold - mane , ' she say , ' thou art not slay , so little story need be 
 make of that : for the rest , belike he know thee not at that moment . 
 so it fall with we , that we look to see foe rather than friend in 
 the wild - wood . many uncouth thing be therein . moreover , I must 
 tell thee of my brother that while he be as the stall bull late 
 let loose , and nothing be good to he save battle and onset ; and then 
 be he blind and know not friend from foe . ' say face - of - god : ' Thou 
 hast ask of I and mine ; wilt thou not tell I of thee and thine ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' not as now ; thou must betake thee to the way . 
 Whither wert thou wending when thou happenedst upon we ? ' 

 he say : ' I know not ; I be seek something , but I know not what - 
 meseemeth that now I have find it . ' 

 ' art thou for the great mountain seek gem ? ' she say . ' yet go 
 not thither to - day : for who knoweth what thou shalt meet there that 
 shall be thy foe ? ' 

 he say : ' Nay , nay ; I have nought to do but to abide here as long as 
 I may , look upon thee and hearken to thy voice . ' 

 her eye be upon his , but yet she do not seem to see he , and for 
 a while she answer not ; and still he wonder that mere word 
 should come from so fair a thing ; for whether she move foot , or 
 hand , or knee , or turn this way or that , each time she stir it 
 be a caress to his very heart . 

 he spake again : ' may I not abide here a while ? what scathe may be 
 in that ? ' 

 ' it be not so , ' she say ; ' thou must depart , and that straightway : 
 lo , there lieth thy spear which the Wood - mother hath bring in from 
 the waste . take thy gear to thee and wend thy way . have patience ! 
 I will lead thee to the place where we first meet and there give thee 
 farewell . ' 

 Therewith she arise and he also perforce , and when they come to the 
 doorway she step across the threshold and then turn back and 
 give he her hand and so lead he forth , the sun flash back from 
 her golden raiment . together they go over the short grey grass of 
 that hillside till they come to the place where he have arise from 
 that wrestle with her brother . there she stay he and say : 

 ' this be the place ; here must we part . ' 

 but his heart fail he and he falter in his speech as he say : 

 ' when shall I see thee again ? wilt thou slay I if I seek to thee 
 hither once more ? ' 

 ' Hearken , ' she say , ' autumn be now a - die into winter : let winter 
 and its snow go past : nor seek to I hither ; for I thou should'st 
 not find , but thy death thou mightest well fall in with ; and I would 
 not that thou shouldest die . when winter be go , and spring be on 
 the land , if thou hast not forget we thou shalt meet we again . 
 yet shalt thou go far than this Woodland Hall . in Shadowy Vale 
 shalt thou seek to I then , and there will I talk with thee . ' 

 ' and where , ' say he , ' be Shadowy Vale ? for thereof have I never 
 hear tell . ' 

 she say : ' the token when it cometh to thee shall show thee thereof 
 and the way thither . art thou a babbler , gold - mane ? ' 

 he say : ' I have win no prize for babble hitherto . ' 

 she say : ' if thou listest to babble concern what hath befall 
 thee on the mountain , so do , and repent it once only , that is , thy 
 life long . ' 

 ' why should I say any word thereof ? ' say he . ' dost thou not know 
 the sweetness of such a tale untold ? ' 

 he spake as one who be somewhat wrathful , and she answer humbly and 
 kindly : 

 ' well be that . bide thou the token that shall lead thee to Shadowy 
 Vale . farewell now . ' 

 she draw her hand from his , and turn and go her way swiftly to 
 the house : he could not choose but gaze on she as she go 
 glitter - bright and fair in that grey place of the mountain , till 
 the dark doorway swallow up her beauty . then he turn away and 
 take the path through the pine - wood , mutter to himself as he 
 go : 

 ' what thing have I do now that hitherto I have not do ? what 
 manner of man be I to - day other than the man I be yesterday ? ' 



 CHAPTER VIII . FACE - of - GOD COMETH HOME again to burgstead 



 face - of - God go back through the wood by the way he have come , pay 
 little heed to the thing about he . for whatever he think of 
 stray not one whit from the image of the Fair Woman of the 
 mountain - side . 

 he go through the wood swiftli than yesterday , and make no stay 
 for noon or aught else , nor do he linger on the road when he be 
 come into the Dale , either to speak to any or to note what they do . 
 so he come to the House of the Face about dusk , and find no man 
 within the hall either carle or queen . so he cry out on the folk , 
 and there come in a damsel of the house , whom he greet kindly and 
 she he again . he bid she bring the washing - water , and she do so 
 and wash his foot and his hand . she be a fair maid enough , as 
 be most in the Dale , but he heed her little ; and when she be 
 do he kiss not her cheek for her pain , as his will not be , but let 
 she go her way unthanke . but he go to his shut - bed and open 
 his chest , and draw fair raiment from it , and do off his wood - gear , 
 and do on he a goodly scarlet kirtle fairly broider , and a collar 
 with gem of price therein , and other bravery . and when he be so 
 attire he come out into the hall , and there be old Stone - face 
 stand by the hearth , which be blaze brightly with fresh brand , 
 so that thing be clear to see . 

 stone - face note Gold - mane 's gay raiment , for he be not will not to wear 
 such attire , save on the feast and high day when he behove to . so 
 the old man smile and say : 

 ' welcome back from the Wood ! but what be it ? Hast thou be wed 
 there , or who hath make thee Earl and King ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' Foster - father , sooth it be that I have be to 
 the wood , but there have I see nought of manfolk bad than myself . 
 now as to my raiment , need must I keep it from the moth . and I be 
 weary withal , and this kirtle be light and easy to I . moreover , I 
 look to see the Bride here again , and I would pleasure she with the 
 sight of gay raiment upon I . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say stone - face , ' hast thou not see some woman in the wood 
 array like the image of a God ? and hath she not bid thee thus to 
 worship she to - night ? for I know that such wight be in the wood , 
 and that such be their wo not . ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' I worship nought save the Gods and the Fathers . 
 nor see I in the wood any such as thou sayest . ' 

 Therewith Stone - face shake his head ; but after a while he say : 

 ' art thou for the wood to - morrow ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say Gold - mane angrily , knit his brow . 

 ' the morrow of to - morrow , ' say stone - face , ' be the day when we look 
 to see the Westland merchant : after all , wilt thou not go hence 
 with they when they wend their way back before the first snow 
 fall ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' I have no mind to it , fosterer ; cease egg I on 
 hereto . ' 

 then stone - face shake his head again , and look on he long , and 
 mutter : ' to the wood wilt thou go to - morrow or next day ; or some 
 day when doom be thine undoing . ' 

 Therewith enter the service and torch , and presently after come 
 the Alderman with Hall - face ; and iron - face greet his son and say 
 to he : ' thou hast not hit the time to do on thy gay raiment , for 
 the Bride will not be here to - night ; she bideth still at the Feast at 
 the Apple - tree House : or wilt thou be there , son ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' I be over - weary . and as for my raiment , it 
 be well ; it be for thine honour and the honour of the name . ' 

 so to table they go , and Iron - face ask his son of his way again , 
 and whether he be quite fix in his mind not to go down to the 
 Plain and the Cities : ' for , ' say he , ' the morrow of to - morrow shall 
 the merchant be here , and this be great news for they if the son 
 of the Alderman should be their faring - fellow back . ' 

 but face - of - god answer without any haste or heat : ' Nay , father , it 
 may not be : fear not , thou shalt see that I have a good will to work 
 and live in the Dale . ' 

 and in good sooth , though he be a young man and love mirth and the 
 way of his own will , he be a stalwarth workman , and few could mow a 
 match with he in the hay - month and win it ; or fall tree as 
 certainly and swiftly , or drive as straight and clean a furrow 
 through the stiff land of the low Dale ; and in other matter also 
 be he deft and sturdy . 



 CHAPTER IX . those BRETHREN fare to the YEWWOOD with the BRIDE 



 next morning face - of - god dight himself for work , and take his axe ; 
 for his brother Hall - face have bid he go down with he to the Yew- 
 wood and cut timber there , since he of all man know where to go 
 straight to the stick that would quarter well for bow - stave ; 
 whereas the Alderman have the right of hewing in that wood . so they 
 go forth , those brother , from the House of the Face , but when they 
 be get to the gate , who should be there but the Bride await 
 they , and she with an ass duly saddle for bear the yew - stick . 
 because Hall - face have tell she that he and belike gold - mane be 
 go to hew in the wood , and she think it good to be of the 
 company , as oft have befall erst . when they meet she greet face- 
 of - god and kiss he as she will not be ; and he look upon she and see 
 how fair she be , and how kind and friendly be her eye that beheld 
 he , and how her whole face be eager for he as their lip part . 
 then his heart fail he , when he know that he no long desire she 
 as she do he , and he say within himself : 

 ' would that she have be of our nighest kindre ! would that I have 
 have a sister and that this be she ! ' 

 so the three go along the highway down the Dale , and Hall - face and 
 the Bride talk merrily together and laugh , for she be happy , 
 since she know that Gold - mane have be to the wood and be back safe 
 and much as he have be before . so indeed it seem of he ; for 
 though at first he be moody and of few word , yet presently he 
 curse himself for a mar - sport , and so fall into the talk , and 
 enforce himself to be merry ; and soon he be so indeed ; for he 
 think : ' she draw I thither : she hath a deed for I to do . I 
 shall do the deed and have my reward . soon will the spring - tide be 
 here , and I shall be a young man yet when it come . ' 

 so come they to the place where he have meet the three maiden 
 yesterday ; there they also turn from the highway ; and as they go 
 down the bent , Gold - mane could not but turn his eye on the beauty of 
 the Bride and the lovely way of her body : but presently he 
 remember all that have betid , and turn away again as one who be 
 note what it behove he not to note . and he say to himself : 
 ' where art thou , Gold - mane ? whose art thou ? yea , even if that have 
 be but a dream that I have dream , yet would that this fair woman 
 be my sister ! ' 

 so come they to the yew - wood , and the brother fall to work , and the 
 Bride with they , for she be deft with the axe and strong withal . 
 but at midday they rest on the green slope without the yew - wood ; 
 and they eat bread and flesh and onion and apple , and drank red 
 wine of the Dale . and while they be rest after their meat , the 
 Bride sing to they , and her song be a lay of time past ; and here ye 
 have somewhat of it : 


 ' tis over the hill and over the dale 
  Men ride from the city fast and far , 
 if they may have a soothfast tale , 
  true tiding of the host of war . 

 and first they hap on man - at - arm , 
  all clothe in steel from head to foot : 
 now tell true tale of the new - come harm , 
  and the gather host of the mountain - root . 

 fair sir , from murder - carle we flee , 
  whose fashion be as the mountain - troll ' ; 
 no man can tell how many they be , 
  and the voice of their host as the thunder roll . 

 they be weary man at the ending of day , 
  but they spur nor stay for long word . 
 now ye , O merchant , whither away ? 
  what do ye there with the helm and the sword ? 

 o we must fight for life and gear , 
  for our beast be spend and our wain be stay , 
 and the host of the mountain - man draw near , 
  that maketh all the world afraid . 

 they leave the chapman on the hill , 
  and through the eve and through the night 
 they ride to have true tiding still , 
  and be there on the way when the dawn be bright . 

 o damsel fair , what do ye then 
  to loiter thus upon the way , 
 and have no fear of the mountain - man , 
  the host of the carle that strip and slay ? 

 o rider weary with the road , 
  come eat and drink on the grass hereby ! 
 and lie you down in a fair abode 
  till the midday sun be broad and high ; 

 then unto you shall we come aback , 
  and lead you forth to the mountain - man , 
 to note their plenty and their lack , 
  and have true tiding there and then . 

 ' tis over the hill and over the dale 
  they ride from the mountain fast and far ; 
 and now have they learn a soothfast tale , 
  true tiding of the host of war . 

 it be summer - tide and the month of Hay , 
  and man and maid must fare afield ; 
 but we see the place be the bow - stave lay , 
  and the hall be hang with spear and shield . 

 when the moon be high we drink in the hall , 
  and they drink to the guest and be kind and blithe , 
 and they say : come back when the chestnut fall , 
  and the wine - cart wend across the hythe . 

 come oft and o'er again , they say ; 
  wander your way ; but we abide 
 for all the world in the little stead ; 
  for wise be we , though the world be wide . 

 Yea , come in arm if ye will , they say ; 
  and despite your host shall we abide 
 for life or death in the little stead ; 
  for wise be we , though the world be wide . 


 so she make an end and look at the fairness of the dale spreading 
 wide before she , and a robin come nigh from out of a thorn - bush and 
 sing his song also , the sweet herald of come winter ; and the 
 lapwing wheel about , black and white , above the meadow by the 
 river , send forth their wheedle pipe as they hang above the soft 
 turf . 

 she feel the brother near she , and know their friendliness from of 
 old , and she be happy ; nor have she look close at gold - mane would 
 she have note any change in he belike ; for the meat and the good 
 wine , and the fair sunny time , and the Bride 's sweet voice , and the 
 ancient song soften his heart while it feed the desire therein . 

 so in a while they arise from their rest and do what be leave they 
 of their work , and so go back to Burgstead through the fair 
 afternoon ; by seem all three in all content . but yet gold - mane , 
 as from time to time he look upon the Bride , keep say to 
 himself : ' o if she have be but my sister ! sweet have the kinship 
 be ! ' 



 CHAPTER X. NEW tiding in the DALE 



 it be three day thereafter that gold - mane , lead an ass , go 
 along the highway to fetch home certain fleece which be need for 
 the house from a stead a little west of wildlake ; but he have go 
 scant half a mile ere he fall in with a throng of folk go to 
 Burgstead . they be of the Shepherds ; they have weapon with they , 
 and some be clothe in coat of fence . they go along make a great 
 noise , for they be all talk each to each at the same time , and 
 seem very hot and eager about some matter . when they see gold - mane 
 anigh , they stop , and the throng open as if to let he into 
 their midmost ; so he mingle with they , and they stand in a ring 
 about he and an old man more ill - favour than it be the will not of 
 the Dalesmen to be . 

 for he be long , stoop , gaunt and spindle - shank , his hand big 
 and cripple with gout : his cheek be red after an old man 's 
 fashion , cover with a crimson network like a pippin ; his lip thin 
 and not well hide his few tooth ; his nose long like a snipe 's neb . 
 in short , a shame and a laugh - stock to the Folk , and a man whom 
 the kindred have in small esteem , and that for good reason . 

 face - of - god know he at once for a notable close - fist and starve - all 
 fool of the Shepherds ; and his name be now become Penny - thumb the 
 Lean , whatever it might once have be . 

 so face - of - god greet all man , and they he again ; and he say : 
 ' what aileth you , neighbour ? your weapon , be bare , but I see not 
 that they be bloody . what be it , goodman Penny - thumb ? ' 

 penny - thumb do but groan for all answer ; but a stout carle who stand 
 by with a broad grin on his face answer and say : 

 ' face - of - god , evil tiding be abroad ; the strong - thief of the wood 
 be astir ; and some deem that the wood - wight be help they . ' 

 ' yea , and what be the deed they have do ? ' say Gold - mane . 

 say the carle : ' Thou know Penny - thumb 's abode ? ' 

 ' yea surely , ' say face - of - god ; ' fair be the water - meadow about it ; 
 great gain of cheese can be get thence . ' 

 ' Hast thou be within the house ? ' say the carle . 

 ' Nay , ' say Gold - mane . 

 then spake Penny - thumb : ' within be scant gear : we gather for other 
 to scatter ; we make meat for other ' mouth . ' 

 the carle laugh : ' Sooth be that , ' say he , ' that there be little 
 gear therein now ; for the strong - thief have void both hall and 
 bower and byre . ' 

 ' and when be that ? ' say face - of - god . 

 ' the night before last night , ' say the carle , ' the door be smite 
 on , and when none answer it be break down . ' 

 ' yea , ' quoth Penny - thumb , ' a host enter , and they in arm . ' 

 ' no host be within , ' say the carle , ' nought but penny - thumb and his 
 sister and his sister 's son , and three carle that work for he ; and 
 one of they , Rusty to wit , be the bad man of the hill - country . 
 these then the host whereof the goodman telleth bound , but without 
 do they any scathe ; and they ransack the house , and take away 
 much gear ; yet leave some . ' 

 ' thou liest , ' say Penny - thumb ; ' they take little and leave none . ' 

 thereat all man laugh , for this seem to they good game , and 
 another man say : ' well , neighbour Penny - thumb , if it be so little , 
 thou hast do unneighbourly in give we such a heap of trouble 
 about it . ' 

 and they laugh again , but the first carle say : ' true it be , 
 goodman , that thou wert exceed eager to raise the hue and cry 
 after that little when we happe upon thee and thy housemate bind 
 in your chair yesterday morning . well , Alderman 's son , short be the 
 tale to tell : we could not fail to follow the gear , and the slot lead 
 we into the wood , and ill be the go there for us shepherd , who 
 be use to the bare down , save Rusty , who be a good woodsman and 
 lift the slot for we ; so he outwent we all , and run out of sight of 
 we , so presently we come upon he dead - slain , with the manslayer 's 
 spear in his breast . what then could we do but turn back again , for 
 now be the wood blind now Rusty be dead , and we know not whith to 
 follow the fray ; and the man himself be but little loss : so back we 
 turn , and tell goodman Penny - thumb of all this , for we have leave he 
 alone in his hall lament his gear ; so we bid to - day 's morn , and 
 have come out now , with our neighbour and the spear , and the dead 
 corpse of Rusty . stand aside , neighbour , and let the Alderman 's son 
 see it . ' 

 they do so , and there be the corpse of a thin - faced tall wiry man , 
 somewhat foxy of aspect , lie on a hand - bier cover with black 
 cloth . 

 ' yea , face - of - god , ' say the carle , ' he be not good to see now he be 
 dead , yet alive be he worse : but , look you , though the man be no 
 good man , yet be he of our people , and the feud be with we ; so we 
 would see the Alderman , and do he to wit of the tiding , that he may 
 call the neighbour together to seek a blood - wite for Rusty and 
 atonement for the ransacking . or what sayest thou ? ' 

 ' have ye the spear that ye find in Rusty ? ' quoth Gold - mane . 

 ' yea verily , ' say the carle . ' hither with it , neighbour ; give it 
 to the Alderman 's son . ' 

 so the spear come into his hand , and he look at it and say : 

 ' this be no spear of the smith ' work of the Dale , as my father will 
 tell you . we take but little keep of the forging of spearhead here , 
 so that they be well - temper and make so as to ride well on the 
 shaft ; but this head , daintily be it wrought , the blood - trench as 
 clean and trim as though it be an Earl 's sword . see you withal 
 this inlaying of rune on the steel ? it be do with no tin or 
 copper , but with very silver ; and these band about the shaft be of 
 silver also . it be a fair weapon , and the owner hath a loss of it 
 great than his gain in the slaying of Rusty ; and he will have leave 
 it in the wound so that he might be know hereafter , and that he 
 might be say not to have murder Rusty but to have slay he . or 
 how think ye ? ' 

 they all say that this seem like to be ; but that if the man who 
 have slay Rusty be one of the ransacker they might have a blood- 
 wite of he , if they could find he . gold - mane say that so it be , 
 and therewithal he give the shepherd good - speed and go on his way . 

 but they come to Burgstead and find the Alderman , and in due time 
 be a Court hold , and a finding utter , and outlawry give forth for 
 the manslaying and the ransacking against certain man unknown . as 
 for the spear , it be lay up in the House of the Face . 

 but face - of - god ponder these matter in his mind , for such 
 ransacking there have be none of in late year ; and he say to 
 himself that his friend of the Mountain must have other folk , of 
 which the Dalesmen know nought , whose gear they could lift , or how 
 could they live in that place . and he marvel that they should 
 risk draw the Dalesmen 's wrath upon they ; whereas they of the Dale 
 be strong man not easily daunt , albeit peaceable enough if not 
 stir to wrath . for in good sooth he have no doubt concern that 
 spear , whose it be and whence it come : for that very weapon have 
 be lean against the panel of his shut - bed the night he sleep on 
 the Mountain , and all the other spear that he see there be more or 
 less of the same fashion , and adorn with silver . 

 albeit all that he know , and all that he think of , he keep in his 
 own heart and say nothing of it . 

 so wear the autumn into early winter ; and the Westland merchant come 
 in due time , and depart without face - of - god , though his father make 
 he that offer one last time . he go to and fro about his work in 
 the Dale , and seem to most man 's eye nought change from what he 
 have be . but the Bride note that he see she less often than his 
 will not be , and abode with she a less space when he meet she ; and she 
 could not think what this might mean ; nor have she heart to ask he 
 thereof , though she be sorry and grieve , but rather withdraw her 
 company from he somewhat ; and when she perceive that he note it 
 not , and make no question of it , then be she the sorrier . 

 but the first winter - snow come on with a great storm of wind from the 
 north - east , so that no man stir abroad who be not compel 
 thereto , and those who go abroad risk life and limb thereby . 
 next morning all be calm again , and the snow be deep , but it do 
 not endure long , for the wind shift to the southwest and the thaw 
 come , and three day after , when folk could fare easily again up and 
 down the Dale , come tiding to Burgstead and the Alderman from the 
 Lower Dale , how a house call Greentofts have be ransack there , 
 and none know by whom . now the goodman of Greentofts be little 
 love of the neighbour : he be grasp and overbearing , and have 
 often cow other out of their due : he be very cross - grain , both 
 at home and abroad : his wife have flee from his hand , neither do his 
 son find it good to abide with he : therewithal he be wealthy of 
 good , a strong man and a deft man - at - arm . when his son and his 
 wife depart from he , and none other of the Dalesmen care to abide 
 with he , he go down into the Plain , and get thence man to be with 
 he for hire , man who be not well see to in their own land . these 
 to the number of twelve abode with he , and do his bidding whenso it 
 please they . two more have he have who have be slay by good man of 
 the Dale for their masterful way ; and no blood - wite have be pay 
 for they , because of their ill - doing , though they have not be make 
 outlaw . this man of Greentofts be call Harts - bane after his 
 father , who be a great hunter . 

 now the full tiding of the ransacking be these : the storm begin 
 two hour before sunset , and an hour thereafter , when it be quite 
 dark , for without none could see because the wind be at its height 
 and the drift of the snow be hard and full , the hall - door fly open ; 
 and at first man think it have be the wind , until they see in the 
 dimness   for all light but the fire on the hearth have be quench 
 certain thing tumble in which at first they deem be wolf ; 
 but when they take sword and stave against they , lo they be meet 
 by sword and axis , and they see that the seem wolf be man 
 with wolf - skin draw over they . so the new - comer cow they that 
 they throw down their weapon , and be bind in their place ; but 
 when they be bind , and have have time to note who the ransacker 
 be , they see that there be but six of they all tell , who have 
 cow and bind Harts - bane and his twelve masterful man ; and this 
 they deem a great shaming to they , as might well be . 

 so then the stead be ransack , and those wolf take away what they 
 would , and go their way through the fierce storm , and none could 
 tell whether they have live or die in it ; but at least neither the 
 man nor their prey be see again ; nor do they leave any slot , for 
 next morning the snow lie deep over everything . 

 no doubt have gold - mane but that these ransacker be his friend of 
 the Mountain ; but he hold his peace , abide till the winter should 
 be over . 



 CHAPTER XI . MEN make OATH AT burgstead on the HOLY BOAR 



 a week after the ransacking at Greentofts the snow and the winter 
 come on in earnest , and all the Dale lie in snow , and man go on 
 skid when they fare up and down the Dale or on the Mountain . 

 all be now tidingless till Yule over , and in Burgstead be there 
 feasting and joyance enough ; and especially at the House of the Face 
 be high - tide holden , and the Alderman and his son and stone - face 
 and all the kindre and all their man sit in glorious attire within 
 the hall ; and many other be there of the good of the kindred of 
 Burgstead who have be bid . 

 face - of - god sit between his father and stone - face ; and he look up 
 and down the table and the hall and see not the Bride , and his heart 
 misgave he because she be not there , and he wonder what have 
 befall and if she be sick of sorrow . 

 but iron - face behold he how he gaze about , and he laugh ; for he 
 be exceed merry that night and fare as a young man . then he 
 say to his son : ' whom seek thou , son ? be there someone lack ? ' 

 face - of - god redden as one who lie unused to it , and say : 

 ' yea , kinsman , so it be that I be seek the Bride my kinswoman . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say Iron - face , ' call she not kinswoman : therein be ill - luck , 
 lest it seem that thou art to we d one too nigh thine own blood . call 
 her the Bride only : to thee and to I the name be good . well , son , 
 desir thou sorely to see she ? ' 

 ' yea , yea , surely , ' say face - of - god ; but his eye go all about the 
 hall still , as though his mind stray from the place and that home 
 of his . 

 say Iron - face : ' have patience , son , thou shalt see her anon , and 
 that in such guise as shall please thee . ' 

 Therewithal come the maidens with the ewer of wine , and they fill 
 all horn and beaker , and then stand by the endlong table on either 
 side laugh and talk with the carle and the old woman ; and 
 the hall be a fair sight to see , for the many candle burn bright 
 and the fire on the hearth flare up , and those maid be clothe in 
 fair raiment , and there be none of they but be comely , and some 
 be fair , and some very fair : the wall also be hang with goodly 
 picture cloth , and the image of the God of the face look down 
 smile terribly from the gable - end above the high - seat . 

 thus as they sit they hear the sound of a horn wind close outside 
 the hall door , and the door be smite on . then rise iron - face 
 smile merrily , and cry out : 

 ' enter ye , whether ye be friend or foe : for if ye be foeman , yet 
 shall ye keep the holy peace of Yule , unless ye be the foe of all 
 kindred and nation , and then shall we slay you . ' 

 thereat some who know what be toward laugh ; but gold - mane , who have 
 be away from Burgstead some day past , marvel and knit his 
 brow , and let his right hand fall on his sword - hilt . for this folk , 
 who be of merry way , be will not to deal diversely with the yule- 
 tide custom in the manner of show ; and he know not that this be 
 one of they . 

 now be the outer door throw open , and there enter seven man , 
 whereof two be all - armed in bright war - gear , and two bore slug- 
 horn , and two bear up somewhat on a dish cover over with a piece 
 of rich cloth , and the seventh stand before they all wrap up in a 
 dark fur mantle . 

 thus they stand a moment ; and when he see their number , back to gold- 
 mane 's heart come the thought of those folk on the mountain : for 
 indeed he be somewhat out of himself for doubt and longing , else 
 would he have deem that all this be but a Yule - tide play . 

 now the man with the slug - horn set they to their mouth and blow a 
 long blast ; while the first of the new - comer set hand to the clasp 
 of the fur cloak and let it fall to the ground , and lo ! a woman 
 exceed beauteous , clothe in glistering raiment of gold and fine web ; 
 her hair wreathe with bay , and in her hand a naked sword with 
 goodly - work golden hilt and polished blue - gleam blade . 

 face - of - god start up in his sear , and star like a man new - waken 
 from a strange dream : because for one moment he deem verily that 
 it be the Woman of the Mountain array as he have last see she , and 
 he cry aloud ' the Friend , the Friend ! ' 

 his father brake out into loud laughter thereat , and clap his son 
 on the shoulder and say : ' yea , yea , lad , thou mayst well say the 
 Friend ; for this be thine old playmate whom thou hast be look 
 round the hall for , array this eve in such fashion as be meet for 
 her goodliness and her worthiness . yea , this be the Friend indeed ! ' 

 then wax face - of - god as red as blood for shame , and he sit he down 
 in his place again : for now he wotte what be toward , and see that 
 this fair woman be the Bride . 

 but stone - face from the other side look keenly on he . 

 then blow the horn again , and the Bride step daintily up the 
 hall , and the sweet odour of her raiment go from she about the 
 fire - warm dwelling , and her beauty move all heart with love . so 
 stand she at the high - table ; and those two who bear the burden set it 
 down thereon and draw off the covering , and lo ! there be the Holy 
 Boar of Yule on which man be will not to make oath of deed that they 
 would do in the come year , accord to the custom of their 
 forefather . then the Bride lay the goodly sword beside the dish , 
 and then go round the table and sit down betwixt face - of - god and 
 stone - face , and turn kindly to gold - mane , and be glad ; for now be 
 his fair face as its wo not be to be . he in turn smile upon she , for 
 she be fair and kind and his fellow for many a day . 

 now the man - at - arm stand each side the Boar , and out from they on 
 each side stand the two hornsman : then these blow up again , whereon 
 the Alderman stand up and cry : 

 ' ye son of the brave who have any deed that ye may be desirous of 
 do , come up , come lay your hand on the sword , and the point of the 
 sword to the Holy Beast , and swear the oath that lieth on your 
 heart . ' 

 Therewith he sit down , and there stride a man up the hall , strong- 
 build and sturdy , but short of stature ; black - haired , red - bearded , 
 and ruddy - faced : and he stand on the dai , and take up the sword and 
 lay its point on the Boar , and say : 

 ' I be Bristler , son of Brightling , a man of the Shepherds . here by 
 the Holy Boar I swear to follow up the ransacker of Penny - thumb and 
 the slayer of Rusty . and I take this feud upon I , although they be 
 no good man , because I be of the kin and it falleth to I , since 
 other forbear ; and when the Court be hallowed hereon I be away out 
 of the Dale and the Downs . so help I the Warrior , and the God of 
 the Earth . ' 

 then the Alderman nod his head to he kindly , and reach he out 
 a cup of wine , and as he drink there go up a rumour of praise from 
 the hall ; and man say that his oath be manly and that he be like 
 to keep it ; for he be a good man - at - arm and a stout heart . 

 then come up three man of the Shepherds and two of the Dale and swore 
 to help Bristler in his feud , and man think it well swear . 

 after that come a braggart , a man very gay of his raiment , and swear 
 with many word that if he live the year through he would be a 
 captain over the man of the Plain , and would come back again with 
 many gift for his friend in the Dale . this man deem foolishly 
 swear , for they know the man ; so they jeer at he and laugh as he 
 go back to his place ashame . 

 then swear three other oath not hard to be keep , and man laugh 
 and be merry . 

 at last uprose the Alderman , and say : ' Kinsmen , and good fellow , 
 good day and peaceable be in the Dale as now ; and of such day 
 little be the story , and little it availeth to swear a deed of 
 derring - do : yet three thing I swear by this Beast ; and first to 
 gainsay no man 's ask if I may perform it ; and next to set right 
 above law and mercy above custom ; and lastly , if the day change and 
 war cometh to we or we go to meet it , I will be no backwarder in the 
 onset than three fathom behind the foremost . so help I the 
 Warrior , and the God of the Face and the Holy Earth ! ' 

 Therewith he sit down , and all man shout for joy of he , and say 
 that it be most like that he would keep his oath . 

 last of all uprose face - of - god and take up the sword and look at 
 it ; and so bright be the blade that he see in it the image of the 
 golden bravery which the Bride bore , and even some broken image of 
 her face . then he handle the hilt and lay the point on the Boar , 
 and cry : 

 ' Hereby I swear to we d the fair woman of the Earth before the year 
 be wear to an end ; and that whether the Dalesmen gainsay I or the 
 man beyond the Dale . so help I the Warrior , and the God of the face 
 and the Holy Earth ! ' 

 Therewith he sit down ; and once more man shout for the love of he 
 and of the Bride , and they say he have swear well and like a 
 chieftain . 

 but the Bride note he that neither be his eye nor his voice like 
 to their will not as he swear , for she know he well ; and thereat be she 
 ill at ease , for now whatever be new in he be to she a threat of 
 evil to come . 

 stone - face also note he , and he know the young man well than all 
 other save the Bride , and he see withal that she be ill - pleased , 
 and he say to himself : ' I will speak to my fosterling to - morrow if 
 I may find he alone . ' 

 so come the swearing to an end , and they fall to on their meat and 
 feast on the Boar of Atonement after they have duly give the Gods 
 their due share , and the wine go about the hall and man be merry 
 till they drink the parting cup and fare to rest in the shut - bed , 
 and whereso else they might in the Hall and the House , for there be 
 many man there . 



 CHAPTER XII . stone - face telleth concern the wood - wights 



 early on the morrow Gold - mane arise and clothe himself and go out - a- 
 door and over the trodden snow on to the bridge over the Weltering 
 Water , and there betake himself into one of the coin of safety build 
 over the up - stream pile ; there he lean against the wall and turn 
 his face to the Thorp , and fall to ponder on his case . and first 
 he think about his oath , and how that he have swear to we d the 
 Mountain Woman , although his kindre and she kindre should gainsay 
 he , yea and herself also . Great seem that oath to he , yet at 
 that moment he wish he have make it great , and make all the 
 kindre , yea and the Bride herself , sure of the meaning of the word 
 of it : and he deem himself a dastard that he have not do so . 
 then he look round he and behold the winter , and he fall into mere 
 longing that the spring be come and the token from the Mountain . 
 thing seem too hard for he to deal with , and he between a mighty 
 folk and two wayward woman ; and he go nigh to wish that he have 
 take his father 's offer and go down to the Cities ; and even have he 
 meet his bane : well be that ! and , as young folk will , he set to 
 work make a picture of his deed there , have he be there . he 
 show himself the stricken fight in the plain , and the press , and 
 the struggle , and the breaking of the serrie band , and himself 
 amidst the ring of foeman do most valiantly , and fall there at 
 last , his shield o'er - heavy with the weight of foeman 's spear for a 
 man to uphold it . then the victory of his folk and the lamentation 
 and praise over the slain man of the Mountain Dales , and the burial 
 of the valiant warrior , the praise weeping folk meet he at the 
 City - gate , lay stark and cold in his arm on the gold - hang garlanded 
 bi . 

 there end his dream , and he laugh aloud and say : ' I be a fool ! 
 all this be good and sweet if I should see it myself ; and forsooth 
 that be how I be think of it , as if I still alive should see 
 myself dead and famous ! ' 

 then he turn a little and look at the house of the Thorp lie 
 dark about the snowy way under the starlit heaven of the winter 
 morning : dark they be indeed and grey , save where here and there 
 the half - burn Yule - fire redden the window of a hall , or where , 
 as in one place , the candle of some early waker shone white in a 
 chamber window . there be scarce a man astir , he deem , and no 
 sound reach he save the crowing of the cock muffle by their 
 house , and a faint sound of beast in the byre . 

 thus he stand a while , his thought wander now , till presently he 
 hear footstep come his way down the street and turn toward 
 they , and lo it be the old man stone - face . he have see gold - mane go 
 out , and have rise and follow he that he might talk with he 
 apart . gold - mane greet he kindly , though , sooth to say , he be 
 but half content to see he ; since he doubt , what be verily the 
 case , that his foster - father would give he many word , counsel 
 he to refrain from go to the wood , and this be loathsome to he ; 
 but he spake and say : 

 ' Meseems , father , that the eastern sky be brighten toward dawn . ' 

 ' yea , ' quoth stone - face . 

 ' it will be light in an hour , ' say face - of - god . 

 ' even so , ' say stone - face . 

 ' and a fair day for the morrow of Yule , ' say the swain . 

 ' yea , ' say stone - face , ' and what wilt thou do with the fair day ? 
 Wilt thou to the wood ? ' 

 ' maybe , father , ' say Gold - mane ; ' hall - face and some of the swain 
 be talk of elk up the fell which may be trap in the drift , 
 and if they go a - hunt they , I may go in their company . ' 

 ' ah , son , ' quoth stone - face , ' thou wilt look to see other kind of 
 beast than elk . thing may ye fall in with there who may not be 
 impound in the snow like to elk , but can go light - foot on the top 
 of the soft drift from one place to another . ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' Father , fear I not ; I shall either refrain I from 
 the wood , or if I go , I shall go to hunt the wood - deer with other 
 hunter . but since thou hast come to I , tell I more about the 
 wood , for thy tale thereof be fair . ' 

 ' yea , ' say stone - face , ' fair tale of foul thing , as oft it 
 befalleth in the world . Hearken now ! if thou deem that what thou 
 seek shall come readier to thine hand because of the winter and 
 the snow , thou err . for the wight that waylay the body and 
 soul of the mighty in the wild - wood heed such matter nothing ; yea 
 and at Yule - tide be they most abroad , and most armed for the fray . 
 even such an one have I see time agone , when the snow be deep and 
 the wind be rough ; and it be in the likeness of a woman clothe in 
 such raiment as the Bride bore last night , and she trod the snow 
 light - foot in thin raiment where it would scarce bear the skid of a 
 deft snow - runner . even so she stand before I ; the icy wind blow she 
 raiment round about she , and drift the hair from her garlanded head 
 toward I , and she as fair and fresh as in the midsummer day . up 
 the fell she fare , sweetest of all thing to look on , and beckon 
 on I to follow ; on I , the Warrior , the stout - heart ; and I follow , 
 and between we grief be bear ; but I it be that foster that child 
 and not she . always when she would be , be she merry and lovely ; and 
 even so be she now , for she be of those that be long - lived . and I 
 wot that thou hast see even such an one ! ' 

 ' tell I more of thy tale , foster - father , ' say Gold - mane , ' and fear 
 not for I ! ' 

 ' ah , son , ' he say , ' mayst thou have no such tale to tell to those 
 that shall be young when thou art old . yet hearken ! we sit in the 
 hall together and there be no third ; and methought that the bird 
 sing and the flower bloom , and sweet be their savour , though it 
 be midwinter . a rose - wreath be on her head ; grape be on the 
 board , and fair unwrinkled summer apple on the day that we feast 
 together . when be the feast ? sayst thou . long ago . what be the 
 hall , thou sayest , wherein ye feast ? I know not if it be on the 
 earth or under it , or if we ride the cloud that even . but on the 
 morrow what be there but the stark wood and the drift of the snow , 
 and the iron wind howl through the branch , and a lonely man , a 
 wanderer rise from the ground . a wanderer through the wood and up 
 the fell , and up the high mountain , and up and up to the edge of the 
 ice - river and the green cave of the ice - hill . a wanderer in 
 spring , in summer , autumn and winter , with an empty heart and a 
 burn never - satisfied desire ; who hath see in the uncouth place 
 many an evil unmanly shape , many a foul hag and change ugly 
 semblance ; who hath suffer hunger and thirst and wounding and 
 fever , and hath see many thing , but hath never again see that fair 
 woman , or that lovely feast - hall . 

 ' all praise and honour to the House of the Face , and the bounteous 
 valiant man thereof ! and the like praise and honour to the fair woman 
 whom they we d of the valiant and goodly House of the Steer ! ' 

 ' even so say I , ' quoth Gold - mane calmly ; ' but now wend we aback to 
 the House , for it be morning indeed , and folk will be stir 
 there . ' 

 so they turn from the bridge together ; and stone - face be kind and 
 fatherly , and be tell his foster - son many wise thing concern 
 the life of a chieftain , and the giving - out of doom and the 
 gathering for battle ; to all which talk face - of - god seem to hearken 
 gladly , but indeed hearken not at all ; for verily his eye be 
 behold that snowy waste , and the fair woman upon it ; even such an 
 one as stone - face have tell of . 



 CHAPTER XIII . they fare to the hunting of the ELK 



 when they come into the Hall , the hearth - fire have be quicken , and 
 the sleeper on the floor have be waken , and all folk be astir . 
 so the old man sit down by the hearth while gold - mane busy himself 
 in fetch wood and water , and in sweep out the Hall , and other 
 such work of the early morning . in a little while hall - face and the 
 other young man and warrior be afoot duly clothe , and the Alderman 
 come from his chamber and greet all man kindly . soon meat be set 
 upon the board , and man break their fast ; and day dawn while they 
 be about it , and ere it be all do the sun rise clear and golden , 
 so that all man know that the day would be fair , for the frost seem 
 hard and enduring . 

 then the eager young man and the hunter , and those who know the 
 mountain well draw together about the hearth , and fall to talk of 
 the hunting of the elk ; and there be three there who know both the 
 wood and also the fell right up to the ice - river well than any 
 other ; and these say that they who be fain of the hunting of the 
 elk would have no likeli time than that day for a year to come . 
 Short be the rede betwixt they , for they say they would go to the 
 work at once and make the most of the short winter daylight . so they 
 go each to his place , and some outside that House to their father ' 
 house to fetch each man his gear . face - of - god for his part go to 
 his shut - bed , and stand by his chest , and open it , and draw out of 
 it a fine hauberk of ring - mail which his father have make for he : 
 for though face - of - god be a deft wright , he be not by a long way so 
 deft as his father , who be the deftest of all man of that time and 
 country ; so that the alien merchant would give he what he would for 
 his hauberk and helm , whenso he would chaffer with they , which be 
 but seldom . so face - of - god do on this hauberk over his kirtle , and 
 over it he cast his foul - weather weed , so that none might see it : he 
 girt a strong war - sword to his side , cast his quiver over his 
 shoulder , and take his bow in his hand , although he have little lust 
 to shoot elk that day , even as stone - face have say ; therewithal he 
 take his skid , and go forth of the hall to the gate of the Burg ; 
 whereto gather the whole company of twenty - three , and gold - mane the 
 twenty - fourth . and each man there have his skid and his bow and 
 quiver , and whatso other weapon , as short - sword , or wood - knife , or 
 axe , seem good to he . 

 so they go out - a - gate , and clomb the stairway in the cliff which 
 lead to the ancient watch - tower : for it be on the low slope of 
 the fell which lie near to the Weltering Water that they look to 
 find the elk , and this be the nighest road thereto . when they have 
 get to the top they lose no time , but go their way nearly due 
 east , make way easily where there be but scatter tree close to 
 the lip of the sheer cliff . 

 they go merrily on their skid over the close - lie snow , and be 
 soon up on the great shoulder of the fell that go up from the 
 bank of the Weltering Water : at noon they come into a little dale 
 wherein be a few tree , and there they abide to eat their meat , 
 and be very merry , make for themselves table and bench of the 
 drift snow , and pile it up to windward as a defence against the 
 wind , which have now arise , little but bitter from the south - east ; so 
 that some , and they the wise , begin to look for foul weather : 
 wherefore they tarry the short while in the say dale or hollow . 

 but they be scarcely on their way again before the aforesaid south- 
 east wind begin to grow big , and at last blow a gale , and bring 
 up with it a drift of fine snow , through which they yet make their 
 way , but slowly , till the drift grow so thick that they could not see 
 each other five pace apart . 

 then perforce they make stay , and gather together under a bent 
 which by good luck they happen upon , where they be shelter from 
 the bad of the drift . there they abode , till in less than an 
 hour 's space the drift abate and the wind fall , and in a little 
 while after it be quite clear , with the sun shin brightly and the 
 young wax moon white and high up in the heaven ; and the frost be 
 hard than ever . 

 this seem good to they ; but now that they could see each other 's 
 face they fall to tell over their company , and there be none 
 missing save face - of - god . they be somewhat dismayed thereat , but 
 know not what to do , and they deem he might not be far off , either 
 a little behind or a little ahead ; and Hall - face say : 

 ' there be no need to make this to - do about my brother ; he can take 
 good care of himself ; neither do a warrior of the face die because 
 of a little cold and frost and snow - drift . Withal Gold - mane be a 
 wilful man , and of late day hath be wilful beyond his will not ; let we 
 now find the elk . ' 

 so they go on their way hop to fall in with he again . no long 
 story need be make of their hunting , for not very far from where they 
 have take shelter they come upon the elk , many of they , impound in 
 the drift , pretty much where the deft hunter look to find they . 
 there then be battle between the elk and the man , till the beast 
 be all slay and only one man hurt : then they make they sleigh 
 from wood which they find in the hollow thereby , and they lay the 
 carcasses thereon , and so turn their face homeward , drag their 
 prey with they . but they meet not face - of - god either there or on the 
 way home ; and Hall - face say : ' maybe gold - mane will lie on the fell 
 to - night ; and I would I be with he ; for adventure oft befall such 
 folk when they abide in the wild . ' 

 now it be late at night by then they reach Burgstead , so laden as 
 they be with the dead beast ; but they heed the night little , for 
 the moon be well - nigh as bright as day for they . but when they come 
 to the gate of the Thorp , there be assemble the goodman and swain 
 to meet they with torch and wine in their honour . there also be 
 gold - mane come back before they , yea for these two hour ; and he 
 stand clothe in his holiday raiment and smile on they . 

 then be there some jeering at he that he be come back empty - handed 
 from the hunting , and that he be not able to abide the wind and the 
 drift ; but he laugh thereat , for all this be but game and play , 
 since man know he for a keen hunter and a stout woodsman ; and they 
 have deem it a heavy loss of he if he have be cast away , as some 
 fear he have be : and his brother Hall - face embrace he and 
 kiss he , and say to he : ' now the next time that thou farest to 
 the wood will I be with thee foot to foot , and never leave thee , and 
 then meseemeth I shall wot of the tale that hath befall thee , and 
 belike it shall be no sorry one . ' 

 face - of - god laugh and answer but little , and they all betook they 
 to the House of the Face and hold high feast therein , for as late as 
 the night be , in honour of this hunting of the Elk . 

 no man care to question face - of - god closely as to how or where he 
 have stray from the hunt ; for he have tell his own tale at once as 
 soon as he come home , to wit , that his right - foot skid - strap have 
 break , and even while he stop to mend it come on that drift and 
 weather ; and that he could not move from that place without lose 
 his way , and that when it have clear he know not whither they have 
 go because the snow have cover their slot . so he deem it not 
 unlike that they have go back , and that he might come up with one or 
 two on the way , and that in any case he wotte well that they could 
 look after themselves ; so he turn back , not go very swiftly . 
 all this seem like enough , and a little matter except to jest 
 about , so no man make any question concern it : only old stone- 
 face say to himself : 

 ' now be I fain to have a true tale out of he , but it be little 
 likely that anything shall come of my much questioning ; and it be ill 
 force a young man to tell lie . ' 

 so he hold his peace , and the feast go on merrily and blithely . 



 CHAPTER XIV . concern FACE - of - GOD and the MOUNTAIN 



 but it must be tell of gold - mane that what have befall he be in 
 this wise . his skid - strap brake in good sooth , and he stay to mend 
 it ; but when he have do what be needful , he look up and see no 
 man nigh , what for the drift , and that they have go on somewhat ; so 
 he rise to his foot , and without more delay , instead of keep on 
 toward the elk - ground and the way his face have be set , he turn 
 himself north - and - by - east , and go his way swiftly towards that 
 airt , because he deem that it might lead he to the Mountain - hall 
 where he have gueste . he abode not for the storm to clear , but sweep 
 off through the thick of it ; and indeed the wind be somewhat at his 
 back , so that he go the swiftlier . but when the drift be get 
 to its very bad , he shelter himself for a little in a hollow 
 behind a thorn - bush he stumble upon . as soon as it begin to abate 
 he go on again , and at last when it be quite clear , and the sun 
 shine out , he find himself on a long slope of the fell cover deep 
 with smooth white snow , and at the high end a great crag rise 
 bare fifty foot above the snow , and more rock , but none so great , 
 and break ground as he judge   the snow be deep   about it on the 
 hither side ; and on the further , three great pine - tree all bent down 
 and mingle together by their load of snow . 

 Thitherward he make , as a man might , see nothing else to note 
 before he ; but he have not make many stride when forth from behind 
 the crag by the pine - tree come a man ; and at first face - of - god 
 think it might be one of his hunting - fellow go astray , and he 
 hail he in a loud voice , but as he look he see the sun flash 
 back from a bright helm on the new - comer 's head ; albeit he keep on 
 his way till there be but a space of two hundred yard between they ; 
 when lo ! the helm - bearer notch a shaft to his bent bow and loose 
 at face - of - god , and the arrow come whistle and pass six inch by 
 his right ear . then face - of - god stop perplex with his case ; for 
 he be on the deep snow in his skid , with his bow unbent , and he 
 know not how to bend it speedily . he be loth to turn his back and 
 flee , and indeed he scarce deem that it would help he . meanwhile 
 of his tarrying the archer loose again at he , and this time the 
 shaft fly close to his left ear . then face - of - god think to cast 
 himself down into the snow , but he be ashamed ; till there come a 
 third shaft which fly over his head amidmost and close to it . ' good 
 shooting on the mountain ! ' mutter he ; ' the next shaft will be 
 amidst my breast , and who know whether the Alderman 's handiwork will 
 keep it out . ' 

 so he cry aloud : ' thou shootest well , brother ; but art thou a foe ? 
 if thou art , I have a sword by my side , and so hast thou ; come hither 
 to I , and let we fight it out friendly if we must need fight . ' 

 a laugh come down the wind to he clear but somewhat shrill , and the 
 archer come swiftly towards he on his skid with no weapon in his 
 hand save his bow ; so that face - of - god do not draw his sword , but 
 stand wonder . 

 as they draw near he behold the face of the new - comer , and deem 
 that he have see it before ; and soon , for all that it be hood 
 close by the ill - weather raiment , he perceive it to be the face of 
 Bow - may , ruddy and smile . 

 she laugh out loud again , as she stop herself within three foot 
 of he , and say : 

 ' yea , friend yellow - hair , we hear of the elk and look to see thee 
 hereabout , and I know thee at once when I come out from behind the 
 crag and see thee stand bewilder . ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' hail to thee , Bow - may ! and glad be I to see thee . 
 but thou liest in say that thou knewest I ; else why didst thou 
 shoot those three shaft at I ? surely thou art not so quick as that 
 with all thy friend : these be sharp greeting of you Mountain- 
 folk . ' 

 ' thou lad with the sweet mouth , ' she say , ' I like to see thee and 
 hear thee talk , but now must I hasten thy departure ; so stand we here 
 no long . let we get down into the wood where we can do off our 
 skid and sit down , and then will I tell thee the tiding . come on ! ' 

 and she catch his hand in her , and they go speedily down the 
 slope toward the great oak - wood , the wind whistle past their ear . 

 ' Whither be we go ? ' say he . 

 say she : ' I be to show thee the way back home , which thou wilt not 
 know surely amidst this snow . come , no word ! thou shalt not have my 
 tale from I till we be in the wood : so the soon we be there the 
 soon shalt thou be pleased . ' 

 so face - of - god hold his peace , and they go on swiftly side by side . 
 but it be not Bow - may 's will not to be silent for long , so presently she 
 say : 

 ' thou art good so do as I bid thee ; but see thou , sweet playmate , for 
 all thou art a chieftain 's son , thou wert but feather - brain to ask 
 I why I shoot at thee . I shoot at thee ! that be a fine tale to 
 tell she this even ! or dost thou think that I could shoot at a big 
 man on the snow at two hundred pace and miss he three time ? 
 unless I aim to miss . ' 

 ' yea , Bow - may , ' say he , ' art thou so deft a Bow - may ? thou shalt be 
 in my company whenso I fare to battle . ' 

 ' indeed , ' she say , ' therein thou sayest but the bare truth : nowhere 
 else shall I be , and thou shalt find my bow no bad than a good 
 shield . ' 

 he laugh somewhat lightly ; but she look on he soberly and say : 
 ' Laugh in that fashion on the day of battle , and we shall be well 
 content with thee ! ' 

 so on they speed very swiftly , for their way be mostly down hill , so 
 that they be soon amongst the outskirte tree of the wood , and 
 presently after reach the edge of the thicket , beyond which the 
 ground be but thinly cover with snow . 

 there they take off their skid , and go into the thick wood and sit 
 down under a hornbeam tree ; and ere Gold - mane could open his mouth to 
 speak Bow - may begin and say : 

 ' well it be that I fall in with thee , Dalesman , else have there be 
 murder of man to tell of ; but ever she ordereth all thing wisely , 
 though unwisely hast thou do to seek to she . Hearken ! dost thou 
 think that thou hast do well that thou hast I here with my tale ? 
 well , hadst thou busy thyself with the slaying of elk , or with 
 sit quietly at home , yet shouldest thou have hear my tale , and 
 thou shouldest have see I in Burgstead in a day or two to tell thee 
 concern the flitting of the token . and ill it be that I have 
 miss it , for fain have I be to behold the House of the Face , and 
 to have see thee sit there in thy dignity amidst the kindre of 
 chieftain . ' 

 and she sigh therewith . but he say : ' hold up thine heart , bow- 
 may ! on the word of a true man that shall befall thee one day . but 
 come , playmate , give I thy tale ! ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' I must now tell thee in the wild - wood what else I 
 have tell thee in the Hall . Hearken closely , for this be the message : 

 ' seek not to I again till thou hast the token ; else assuredly wilt 
 thou be slain , and I shall be sorry for many a day . Thereof as now I 
 may not tell thee more . now as to the token : when March be wear two 
 week fail not to go to and fro on the place of the Maiden Ward for 
 an hour before sunrise every day till thou hear tiding . ' 

 ' now , ' quoth Bow - may , ' hast thou hearken and understand ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say he . 

 she say : ' then tell I the word of my message concern the 
 token . ' and he do so word for word . then she say : 

 ' it be well , there be no more to say . now must I lead thee till thou 
 know the wood ; and then mayst thou get on to the smooth snow 
 again , and so home merrily . yet , thou grey - eyed fellow , I will have 
 my pay of thee before I do that last work . ' 

 Therewith she turn about to he and take his head between her 
 hand , and kiss he well favouredly both cheek and mouth ; and she 
 laugh , albeit the tear stand in her eye as she say : ' now 
 smelleth the wood sweeter , and summer will come back again . and even 
 thus will I do once more when we stand side by side in battle array . ' 

 he smile kindly on she and nod as they both rise up from the 
 earth : she have take off her foul - weather glove while they spake , 
 and he kiss her hand , which be shapely of fashion albeit somewhat 
 brown , and hard of palm , and he say in friendly wise : 

 ' thou art a merry fare - fellow , Bow - may , and belike shalt be withal 
 a true fighting - fellow . come now , thou shalt be my sister and I thy 
 brother , in despite of those three shaft across the snow . ' 

 he laugh therewith ; she laugh not , but seem glad , and say 
 soberly : 

 ' yea , I may well be thy sister ; for belike I also be of the people of 
 the Gods , who have come into these Dales by many far way . I be of 
 the House of the Ragged Sword of the Kindred of the Wolf . come , 
 brother , let we toward Wildlake 's way . ' 

 Therewith she go before he and lead through the thicket as by an 
 assured and wonte path , and he follow hard at heel ; but his 
 thought go from she for a while ; for those word of brother and 
 sister that he have speak call to his mind the Bride , and their 
 kindness of little child , and the day when they seem to have 
 nought to do but to make the sun bright , and the flower fairer , 
 and the grass greener , and the bird happy each for the other ; and 
 a hard and evil thing it seem to he that now he should be make 
 all these thing nought and dreary to she , now when he have become a 
 man and deed lay before he . yet again be he solace by what bow- 
 may have say concern battle to come ; for he deem that she must 
 have have this from the friend 's foresee ; and he long sore for 
 deed to do , wherein all these thing might be clear up and washen 
 clean as it be . 

 so pass they through the wood a long way , and it be get dark 
 therein , and Gold - mane say : 

 ' hold now , Bow - may , for I be at home here . ' 

 she look around and say : ' yea , so it be : I be think of many 
 thing . farewell and live merrily till March come and the token ! ' 

 Therewith she turn and go her way and be soon out of sight , and 
 he go lightly through the wood , and then on skid over the hard 
 snow along the Dale 's edge till he be come to the watch - tower , when 
 the moon be bright in heaven . 

 thus be he at Burgstead and the House of the Face betime , and 
 before the hunter be get back . 



 CHAPTER XV . murder AMONGST the folk of the woodlander 



 so wear away midwinter tidingless . stone - face spake no more to face- 
 of - god about the wood and its wight , when he see that the young man 
 have come back hale and merry , seem not to crave over - much to go 
 back thither . as for the Bride , she be sad , and more than 
 misdoubte all ; but dauntless as she be in matter that try man 's 
 hardihood , she yet lack heart to ask of face - of - god what have 
 befall he since the autumn - tide , or where he be with she . so she 
 put a force upon herself not to look sad or craving when she be in 
 his company , as full oft she be ; for he rather seek she than 
 shun she . for when he see she thus , he deem thing be 
 change with she as they have change with he , and he bethink he 
 of what he have speak to Bow - may , and deem that even so he might 
 speak with the Bride when the time come , and that she would not be 
 grieve beyond measure , and all would be well . 

 now come on the thaw , and the snow go , and the grass grow all up 
 and down the Dale , and all water be big . and about this time 
 arise rumour of strange man in the wood , uncouth , vile , and 
 murderous , and many of the feebler sort be make timorous thereby . 

 but a little before March be bear come new tiding from the 
 Woodlanders ; to wit : there come on a time to the house of a woodland 
 carle , a worthy goodman well renowned of all , two wayfarer in the 
 first watch of the night ; and these man say that they be wend 
 down to the Plain from a far - away dale , rose - dale to wit , which all 
 man have hear of , and that they have stray from the way and be 
 exceed weary , and they crave a meal 's meat and lodge for the 
 night . 

 this the goodman might nowise gainsay , and he see no harm in it , 
 wherefore he bid they abide and be merry . 

 these man , say they who tell the tiding , be outlander , and no 
 man have see any like they before : they be arm , and bore short 
 bow make of horn , and round target , and coat - of - fence do over 
 with horn scale ; they have crook sword girt to their side , and 
 axis of steel forge all in one piece , right good weapon . they be 
 clothe in scarlet and have much silver on their raiment and about their 
 weapon , and great ring of the same on their arm ; and all this 
 silver seem brand - new . 

 now the Woodland Carle give they of such thing as he have , and be 
 kind and blithe to they : there be in his house besides himself 
 five man of his son and kindre , and his wife and three daughter 
 and two other maid . so they feast after the Woodlanders ' fashion , 
 and go to bed a little before midnight . two hour after , the carle 
 awake and hear a little stir , and he look and see the guest on 
 their foot amidst the hall clothe in all their war - gear ; and they have 
 betwixt they his two young daughter , maid of fifteen and twelve 
 winter , and have bind their hand and do clout over their mouth , 
 so that they might not cry out ; and they be just at point to carry 
 they off . Thereat the goodman , naked as he be , catch up his sword 
 and make at these murder - carle , and or ever they be ware of he he 
 have hew down one and turn to face the other , who smite at he with 
 his steel axe and give he a great wound on the shoulder , and 
 therewithal flee out at the open door and forth into the wood . 

 the Woodlander make no stay to raise the cry   there be no need , for 
 the hall be astir now from end to end , and man get to their 
 weapon , but run out after the felon even as he be ; and , in spite 
 of his grievous hurt , overrun he no long way from the house before 
 he have get into the thicket . but the man be nimble and strong , 
 and the goodman unsteady from his wound , and by then the other of 
 the household come up with the hue and cry he have get two more 
 sore wound and be just make an end of throttle the felon with 
 his bare hand . so he fall into their arm faint from weakness , 
 and for all they could do he die in two hour ' time from that axe- 
 wound in his shoulder , and another on the side of the head , and a 
 knife - thrust in his side ; and he be a man of sixty winter . 

 but the stranger he have slay outright ; and the one whom he have 
 smite in the hall die before the dawn , thrust all help aside , 
 and make no sound of speech . 

 when these tiding come to Burgstead they seem great to man , and to 
 gold - mane more than all . so he and many other take their weapon 
 and fare up to Wildlake 's Way , and so come to the Woodland Carles . 
 but the Woodlanders have bear out the carcass of those felon and 
 lay they on the green before wood - grey 's door   for that be the name 
 of the dead goodman , and they be say that they would not bury 
 such accursed folk , but would bear they a little way so that they 
 should not be vex with the stink of they , and cast they into the 
 thicket for the wolf and the wild - cat and the stoat to deal with ; and 
 they should lie there , weapon and silver and all ; and they deem it 
 base to strip such wretch , for who would wear their raiment or bear 
 their weapon after they . 

 there be a great ring of folk round about they when they of 
 Burgstead draw near , and they shout for joy to see their 
 neighbour , and make way before they . then the Dalesmen curse these 
 murderer who have slay so good a man , and they all praise his 
 manliness , whereas he run out into the night naked and wound after 
 his foe , and have fall like his folk of old time . 

 it be a bright spring afternoon in that clearing of the Wood , and 
 they look at the two dead man closely ; and gold - mane , who have be 
 somewhat silent and moody till then , become merry and wordy ; for he 
 behold the man and see that they be utterly strange to he : they 
 be short of stature , crooked - legged , long - arm , very strong for 
 their size : with small blue eye , snubbed - nosed , wide - mouthed , thin- 
 lip , very swarthy of skin , exceed foul of favour . he and all 
 other wonder who they be , and whence they come , for never have 
 they see their like ; and the Woodlanders , who often gueste 
 outlander stray from the way of diver kindred and nation , say 
 also that none such have they ever see . but stone - face , who stand by 
 Gold - mane , shake his head and quoth he : 

 ' the wild - wood holdeth many marvel , and these be of they : the spawn 
 of evil wight quickeneth therein , and at other while it melteth 
 away again like the snow ; so may it be with these carcass . ' 

 and some of the old folk of the Woodlanders who stand by hearken 
 what he say , and deem his word wise , for they remember their 
 ancient lore and many a tale of old time . 

 thereafter they of Burgstead go into Wood - grey 's hall , or as many 
 of they as might , for it be but a poor place and not right great . 
 there they see the goodman lay on the dai in all his war - gear , 
 under the last tie - beam of his hall , whereon be carve amidst much 
 goodly work of knot and flower and twining stem the image of the 
 Wolf of the Waste , his jaw open and gaping : the wife and daughter 
 of the goodman and other woman of the folk stand about the bi 
 sing some old song in a low voice , and some sob therewithal , 
 for the man be much beloved : and much people of the Woodlanders be 
 in the hall , and it be somewhat dusk within . 

 so the Burgstead man greet that folk kindly and humbly , and again 
 they fall to praise the dead man , say how his deed should long 
 be remember in the Dale and wide about ; and they call he a 
 fearless man and of great worth . and the woman hearken , and cease 
 their crooning and their sobbing , and stand up proudly and raise 
 their head with gleam eye ; and as the word of the Burgstead man 
 end , they lift up their voice and sing loudly and clearly , 
 stand together in a row , ten of they , on the dais of that poor 
 hall , face the gable and the wolf - adorn tie - beam , heed nought 
 as they sing what be about or behind they . 

 and this be some of what they sing : 


 why sit ye bare in the spinning - room ? 
 why weave ye naked at the loom ? 

 Bare and white as the moon we be , 
 that the Earth and the drift night may see . 

 now what be the bad of all your work ? 
 what curse amidst the web shall lurk ? 

 the bad of the work our hand shall win 
 be wrack and ruin round the kin . 

 shall the woollen yarn and the flaxen thread 
 be gear for live man or dead ? 

 the woollen yarn and the flaxen thread 
 shall flare ' twixt live man and dead . 

 o what be the ending of your day ? 
 when shall ye rise and wend away ? 

 our day shall end to - morrow morn , 
 when we hear the voice of the battle - horn . 

 where first shall eye of man behold 
 this weaving of the moonlight cold ? 

 there where the alien host abide 
 the gathering on the mountain - side . 

 how long aloft shall the fair web fly 
 when the bow be bent and the spear draw nigh ? 

 from eve to morn and morn till eve 
 aloft shall fly the work we weave . 

 what then be this , the web ye win ? 
 what wood - beast waxeth stark therein ? 

 we weave the Wolf and the gift of war 
 from the man that be to the man that be . 


 so sing they : and much be all man move at their singing , and 
 there be none but call to mind the old day of the Fathers , and 
 the year when their banner go wide in the world . 

 but the Woodlanders feast they of Burgstead what they might , and 
 then go the dalesman back to their house ; but on the morrow 's 
 morrow they fare thither again , and wood - grey be lay in mound 
 amidst a great assemblage of the Folk . 

 many man say that there be no doubt that those two felon be of 
 the company of those who have ransack the stead of Penny - thumb and 
 Harts - bane ; and so at first deem Bristler the son of Brightling : 
 but after a while , when he have have time to think of it , he change 
 his mind ; for he say that such man as these would have slay first 
 and ransack afterwards : and some who love neither Penny - thumb nor 
 Harts - bane say that they would not have be at the pain to choose 
 for ransack the two bad man about the Dale , whose loss be no 
 loss to any but themselves . 

 as for gold - mane he know not what to think , except that his friend 
 of the Mountain have have nought to do with it . 

 so wear the day awhile . 



 CHAPTER XVI . the BRIDE SPEAKETH with FACE - of - GOD 



 February have die into March , and March be now twelve day old , on a 
 fair and sunny day an hour before noon ; and face - of - god be in a 
 meadow a scant mile down the Dale from Burgstead . he have be 
 drive a bull into a goodman 's byre nearby , and have have to spend 
 toil and patience both in get he out of the field and into the 
 byre ; for the beast be hot with the spring day and the new grass . 
 so now he be rest himself in happy mood in an exceed pleasant 
 place , a little meadow to wit , on one side whereof be a great 
 orchard or grove of sweet chestnut , which go right up to the foot 
 of the Southern Cliffs : across the meadow run a clear brook towards 
 the Weltering Water , free from big stone , in some place dam up 
 for the flooding of the deep pasture - meadow , and with the grass 
 grow on its lip down to the very water . there be a low bank 
 just outside the chestnut tree , as if someone have raise a dyke 
 about they when they be young , which have be tread low and 
 spread through the lapse of year by the faring of many man and 
 beast . the primrose bloom thick upon it now , and here and there 
 along it be a low blackthorn bush in full blossom ; from the mid- 
 meadow and right down to the lip of the brook be the grass well nigh 
 hide by the blossom of the meadow - saffron , with daffodil 
 sprinkle about amongst they , and in the tree and bush the bird , 
 and chiefly the blackbird , be sing their loud . 

 there sit face - of - god on the bank rest after his toil , and happy 
 be his mood ; since in two day ' wear he should be pace the 
 Maiden Ward await the token that be to lead he to Shadowy Vale ; 
 so he sit call to mind the Friend as he have last see she , and 
 strive as it be to set her image stand on the flowery grass 
 before he , till all the beauty of the meadow seem bare and empty 
 to he without she . then it fall into his mind that this have be a 
 beloved trysting - place betwixt he and the Bride , and that often when 
 they be little would they come to gather chestnut in the grove , 
 and thereafter sit and prattle on the old dyke ; or in spring when the 
 season be warm would they go barefoot into the brook , seek its 
 treasure of troutlet and flower and clean - wash agate pebble . 
 Yea , and time not long ago have they meet here to talk as lover , and 
 sit on that very bank in all the kindness of good day without a 
 blemish , and both he and she have love the place well for its wealth 
 of blossom and deep grass and goodly tree and clear running stream . 

 as he think of all this , and how often there he have praise to 
 himself her beauty , which he scarce dare praise to she , he frown 
 and slowly rise to his foot , and turn toward the chestnut - grove , as 
 though he would go thence that way ; but or ever he step down from 
 the dyke he turn about again , and even therewith , like the very 
 image and ghost of his thought , lo ! the Bride herself come up from 
 out the brook and wend toward he , her wet naked foot gleam in 
 the sun as they trod down the tender meadow - saffron and brush past 
 the tuft of daffodil . he stand star at she discomforte , for on 
 that day he have much to think of that seem happy to he , and he 
 deem that she would now question he , and his mind ponder diver 
 way of answer she , and none seem good to he . she draw near 
 and let her skirt fall over her foot , and come to he , her gown hem 
 drag over the flower : then she stand straight up before he and 
 greet he , but reach not forth her hand to he nor touch he . 
 her face be pale that its will not , and her voice tremble as she spake 
 to he and say : 

 ' face - of - god , I would ask thee a gift . ' 

 ' all gift , ' he say , ' that thou may ask , and I may give , lie open 
 to thee . ' 

 she say : ' if I be alive when the time come this gift thou mayst 
 well give I . ' 

 ' Sweet kinswoman , ' say he , ' tell I what it be that thou would 
 have of I . ' and he be ill - at - ease as he wait for her answer . 

 she say : ' ah , kinsman , kinsman ! woe on the day that maketh kinship 
 accurse to I because thou desirest it ! ' 

 he hold his peace and be exceed sorry ; and she say : 

 ' this be the gift that I ask of thee , that in the day to come when 
 thou art wed , thou wilt give I the second man - child whom thou 
 begett . ' 

 he say : ' this shalt thou have , and would that I might give thee 
 much more . would that we be little child together other again , 
 as when we play here in other day . ' 

 she say : ' I would have a token of thee that thou shalt show to the 
 God , and swear on it to give I the gift . for the time change . ' 

 ' what token wilt thou have ? ' say he . 

 she say : ' when next thou farest to the Wood , thou shalt bring I 
 back , it maybe a flower from the bank ye sit upon , or a splinter from 
 the dais of the hall wherein ye feast , or maybe a ring or some matter 
 that the stranger be will not to wear . that shall be the token . ' 

 she speak slowly , hang her head adown , but she lift it presently 
 and look into his face and say : 

 ' Woe 's I , woe 's me , Gold - mane ! how evil be this day , when bewail 
 I I may not bewail thee also ! for I know that thine heart be glad . 
 all through the winter have I keep this hide in my heart , and durst 
 not speak to thee . but now the spring - tide hath drive I to it . 
 let summer come , and who shall say ? ' 

 Great be his grief , and his shame keep he silent , and he have no 
 word to say ; and again she say : 

 ' tell I , gold - mane , when goest thou thither ? ' 

 he say : ' I know not surely , may happen in two day , may happen in 
 ten . why askest thou ? ' 

 ' o friend ! ' she say , ' be it a new thing that I should ask thee 
 whither thou goest and whence thou com , and the time of thy 
 come and go . farewell to - day ! forget not the token . Woe 's I , 
 that I may not kiss thy fair face ! ' 

 she spread her arm abroad and lift up her face as one who waileth , 
 but no sound come from her lip ; then she turn about and go away 
 as she have come . 

 but as for he he stand there after she be go in all confusion , as 
 if he be undo : for he feel his manhood lessen that he should 
 thus and so sorely have hurt a friend , and in a manner against his 
 will . and yet he be somewhat wroth with she , that she have come upon 
 he so suddenly , and speak to he with such mastery , and in so few 
 word , and he with none to make answer to she , and that she have so 
 mar his pleasure and his hope of that fair day . then he sit he 
 down again on the flowery bank , and little by little his heart 
 soften , and he once more call to mind many a time when they have 
 be there before , and the play and the game they have have together 
 there when they be little . and he bethink he of the day that 
 be long to he then , and now seem short to he , and as if they 
 be all grow together into one story , and that a sweet one . then 
 his breast heave with a sob , and the tear rise to his eye and 
 burn and sting he , and he fall a - weeping for that sweet tale , and 
 weep as he have weep once before on that old dyke when there have be 
 some child 's quarrel between they , and she have go away and leave 
 he . 

 then after a while he cease his weeping , and look about he lest 
 anyone might be come , and then he arise and go to and fro in the 
 chestnut - grove for a good while , and afterwards go his way from 
 that meadow , say to himself : ' yet remaineth to I the morrow of 
 to - morrow , and that be the first of the day of the watching for the 
 token . ' 

 but all that day he be slow to meet the eye of man ; and in the hall 
 that eve he be silent and moody ; for from time to time it come over 
 he that some of his manhood have depart from he . 



 CHAPTER XVII . the TOKEN COMETH from the MOUNTAIN 



 the next day wear away tidingless ; and the day after face - of - god 
 arise betime ; for it be the first day of his watch , and he be at 
 the Maiden Ward before the time appoint on a very fair and bright 
 morning , and he go to and fro on that place , and have no tiding . 
 so he come away somewhat cast down , and say within himself : ' be it 
 but a lie and a mocking when all be say ? ' 

 on the morrow he go thither again , and the morn be wild and stormy 
 with drift of rain , and low cloud hurry over the earth , though 
 for the sunrise they lift a little in the east , and the sun come up 
 over the pass , amidst the red and angry rack of cloud . this morn 
 also give he no tiding of the token , and he be wroth and perturb 
 in spirit : but towards evening he say : 

 ' it be well : ten day she give I , so that she might be able to send 
 without fail on one of they ; she will not fail I . ' 

 so again on the morrow he be there betime , and the morn be windy 
 as on the day before , but the cloud higher and of well promise for 
 the day . face - of - god walk to and fro on the Maiden Ward , and as he 
 turn toward Burgstead for the tenth time , he hear , as he deem , a 
 bow - string twang afar off , and even therewith come a shaft fly 
 heavily like a wing bird , which smite a great stand stone on the 
 other side of the way , where of old some chieftain have be bury , 
 and fall to earth at its foot . he go up to it and handle it , and 
 see that there be a piece of thin parchment wrap about it , which 
 indeed he be eager to unwrap at once , but forebore ; because he be 
 on the highway , and people be already astir , and even then pass 
 by he a goodman of the Dale with a man of his go afield together , 
 and they give he the sele of the day . so he go along the highway 
 a little till he come to a place where be a footbridge over into the 
 meadow . he cross thereby and go swiftly till he reach a rise 
 ground grow over with hazel - tree ; there he sit down among the 
 rabbit - hole , the primrose and wild - garlic blooming about he , and 
 three blackbird answer one another from the edge of the coppice . 
 Straightway when he have look and see none come he break the 
 thread that be wind about the scroll and the arrow , and unroll 
 the parchment ; and there be write thereon in black ink of small 
 letter , but very fair , and this be what he read therein : 


 come thou to the Mountain Hall by the path which thou know of , on 
 the morrow of the day whereon thou readest this . rise betime and 
 come armed , for there be other man than we in the wood ; to whom thy 
 death should be a gain . when thou art come to the Hall , thou shalt 
 find no man therein ; but a great hound only , tie to a bench nigh the 
 dais . call he by his name , sure - foot to wit , and give he to eat 
 from the meat upon the board , and give he water to drink . if the 
 day be then far spend , as it be like to be , abide thou with the hound 
 in the hall through the night , and eat of what thou shalt find there ; 
 but see that the hound fare not abroad till the morrow 's morn : then 
 lead he out and bring he to the north - east corner of the Hall , and 
 he shall lift the slot for thee that leadeth to the Shadowy Yale . 
 follow he and all good go with thee . 


 now when he have read this , earth seem fair indeed about he , and he 
 scarce know whither to turn or what to do to make the most of his 
 joy . he presently go back to Burgstead and into the House of the 
 Face , where all man be astir now , and the day be clear . he hide 
 the shaft under his kirtle , for he would not that any should see it ; 
 so he go to his shut - bed and lay it up in his chest , wherein he 
 keep his chief treasure ; but the writing on the scroll he set in 
 his bosom and so hide it . he go joyfully and proudly , as one who 
 knoweth more tiding and well than those around he . but stone- 
 face behold he , and say ' Foster - son , thou art happy . be it that 
 the spring - tide be in thy blood , and maketh thee blithe with all 
 thing , or hast thou some new tiding ? Nay , I would not have an 
 answer out of thee ; but here be good rede : when next thou goest into 
 the wood , it be nought so ill for thee to have a valiant old carle 
 by thy side ; one that loveth thee , and would die for thee if need 
 be ; one who might watch when thou wert seek . or else beware ! 
 for there be evil thing abroad in the Wood , and moreover the 
 brother of those two felon who be slay at Carlstead . ' 

 then gold - mane constrain himself to answer the old carle softly ; 
 and he thank he kindly for his offer , and say that so it should 
 be before long . so the talk between they fall , and stone - face go 
 away somewhat well - pleased . 

 and now be face - of - god become wary ; and he would not draw man 's eye 
 and speech on he ; so he go afield with Hall - face to deal with the 
 lamb and the ewe , and do like other man . no less wary be he in 
 the hall that even , and neither spake much nor little ; and when his 
 father spake to he concern the Bride , and make game of he as a 
 somewhat sluggish groom , he do not change countenance , but answer 
 lightly what come to hand . 

 on the morrow ere the early dawn he be afoot , and he clothe himself 
 and do on his hauberk , his father 's work , which be fine - wrought and 
 a stout defence , and reach down to his knee ; and over that he do 
 on a goodly green kirtle well embroider : he girt his war - sword to 
 his side , and it be the work of his father 's father , and a very good 
 sword : its name be Dale - warden . he do a good helm on his head , 
 and sling a targe at his back , and take two spear in his hand , short 
 but strong - shaft and well - steel . thus array he leave Burgstead 
 before the dawn , and come to Wildlake 's way and betook he to the 
 Woodland . he make no stop or stay on the path , but eat his meat 
 standing by an oak - tree close by the half - blind track . when he come 
 to the little wood - lawn , where be the toft of the ancient house , he 
 look all round about he , for he deem that a likely place for 
 those ugly wood - wight to set on he ; but nought befell he , though 
 he stoop and drink of the woodland rill warily enough . so he 
 pass on ; and there be other place also where he fare warily , 
 because they seem like to hold lurking felon ; though forsooth the 
 whole wood might well serve their turn . but no evil befell he , and 
 at last , when it yet lack an hour to sunset , he come to the wood- 
 lawn where Wild - wearer have make his onset that other eve . 

 he go straight up to the house , his heart beat , and he scarce 
 believe but that he should find the Friend abide he there : but 
 when he push the door it give way before he at once , and he 
 enter and find no man therein , and the wall strip bare and no 
 shield or weapon hang on the panel . but the hound he see tie to 
 a bench nigh the dai , and the bristle on the beast 's neck arise , 
 and he snarl on face - of - god , and strain on his leathern leash . 
 then face - of - god go up to he and call he by his name , Sure- 
 foot , and give he his hand to lick , and he bring he water , and 
 feed he with flesh from the meat on the board ; so the beast become 
 friendly and wag his tail and whine and slobber his hand . 

 then he go all about the house , and see and hear no living thing 
 therein save the mouse in the panel and sure - foot . so he come back 
 to the dai , and sit he down at the board and eat his fill , and 
 think concern his case . and it come into his mind that the 
 Woman of the Mountain have some deed for he to do which would try his 
 manliness and exalt his fame ; and his heart rise high and he be 
 glad , and he see himself sit beside she on the dais of a very 
 fair hall belove and honour of all the folk , and none have aught to 
 say against he or owe he any grudge . thus he please himself in 
 thinking of the good day to come , sit there till the hall grow 
 dusk and dark and the night - wind moan about it . 

 then after a while he arise and rake together the brand on the 
 hearth , and make light in the hall and look to the door . and he 
 find there be bolt and bar thereto , so he shoot the bolt and 
 draw the bar into their place and make all as sure as might be . 
 then he bring sure - foot down from the dai , and tie he up so that 
 he might lie down athwart the door , and then lie down his hauberk 
 with his naked sword ready to his hand , and sleep long while . 

 when he awake it be dark than when he have lain he for the moon 
 have set ; yet he deem that the day be at point of breaking . so he 
 fetch water and wash the night off he , and see a little glimmer 
 of the dawn . then he eat somewhat of the meat on the board , and do 
 on his helm and his other gear , and unbar the door , and lead Sure- 
 foot without , and bring he to the north - east corner of the house , 
 and in a little while he lift the slot and they depart , the man 
 and the hound , just as break dawn from over the mountain . 

 sure - foot lead right into the heart of the pine - wood , and it be dark 
 enough therein , with nought but a feeble glimmer for some while , and 
 long be the way therethrough ; but in two hour ' space be there 
 something of a break , and they come to the shore of a dark deep tarn 
 on whose windless and green water the daylight shine fully . the 
 hound skirt the water , and lead on unchecked till the tree begin to 
 grow small and the air colder for all that the sun be high ; for 
 they have be go up and up all the way . 

 so at last after a six hour ' journey they come clean out of the 
 pine - wood , and before they lie the black wilderness of the bare 
 mountain , and beyond they , look quite near now , the great ice- 
 peak , the wall of the world . it be but an hour short of noon by 
 this time , and the high sun shine down on a barren boggy moss which 
 lie betwixt they and the rocky waste . sure - foot make no stay , but 
 thread the way that go betwixt the quagmire , and in another 
 hour lead face - of - god into a wind valley blind by great rock , 
 and everywhere stony and rough , with a trickle of water run 
 amidst of it . the hound fare on up the dale to where the water be 
 bridge by a great fall stone , and so over it and up a steep bent 
 on the further side , on to a marvellously rough mountain - neck , while 
 mere black sand cumber with scatter rock and stone , while 
 beset with mire grow over with the cottony mire - grass ; here and 
 there a little scanty grass grow ; otherwhere nought but dwarf 
 willow ever die ever grow , mingle with moss or red - blossom 
 sengreen ; and all blend together into mere desolation . 

 few live thing they see there ; up on the neck a few sheep be 
 graze the scanty grass , but there be none to tend they ; yet face- 
 of - god deem the sight of they good , for there must be man anigh who 
 own they . for the rest , the whimbrel laugh across the mire ; 
 high up in heaven a great eagle be hang ; once and again a grey 
 fox leapt up before they , and the heath - fowl whir up from under 
 face - of - god 's foot . a raven who be sit croak on a rock in 
 that first dale stir uneasily on his perch as he see they , and 
 when they be pass flap his wing and fly after they croak 
 still . 

 now they fare over that neck somewhat east , make but slow way 
 because the ground be so broken and rocky ; and in another hour 's 
 space sure - foot lead down - hill due east to where the stony neck sink 
 into another desolate miry heath still fall toward the east , but 
 whose further side be wall by a rampart of crag cleft at their 
 top into marvellous - shape , coal - black , ungrassed and unmossed . 
 Thitherward the hound lead straight , and gold - mane follow wonder : 
 as he draw near they he see that they be not very high , the tall 
 peak scant fifty foot from the face of the heath . 

 they make their way through the scatter rock at the foot of these 
 crag , till , just where the rock - wall seem the close , the way 
 through the stone turn into a path go through it skew - wise ; and 
 it be now so clear a path that belike it have be better by man 's 
 hand . down thereby face - of - god follow the hound , deeming that he 
 be come to the gate of the Shadowy Vale , and the path go down 
 steeply and swiftly . but when he have go down a while , the rock on 
 his right hand sink lower for a space , so that he could look over and 
 see what lie beneath . 

 there lie below he a long narrow vale quite plain at the bottom , 
 wall on the further side as on the hither by sheer rock of black 
 stone . the plain be grow over with grass , but he could see no tree 
 therein : a deep river , dark and green , run through the vale , 
 sometimes through its midmost , sometimes lap the further rock- 
 wall : and he think indeed that on many a day in the year the sun 
 would never shine on that valley . 

 thus much he see , and then the rock rise again and shut it from his 
 sight ; and at last they draw so close together over head that he be 
 in a way go through a cave with little daylight come from above , 
 and in the end he be in a cave indeed and mere darkness : but with 
 the last feeble glimmer of light he think he see carve on a smooth 
 space of the live rock at his left hand the image of a wolf . 

 this cave last but a little way , and soon the hound and the man 
 be go once more between sheer black rock , and the path grow 
 steep yet and be cut into step . at last there be a sharp turn , 
 and they stand on the top of a long stony scree , down which sure - foot 
 bound eagerly , give tongue as he go ; but face - of - god stand 
 still and look , for now the whole Dale lie open before he . 

 that river run from north to south , and at the south end the cliff 
 draw so close to it that look thence no outgate could be see ; but 
 at the north end there be as it be a dreary street of rock , the 
 river flow amidmost and leave little foothold on either side , 
 somewhat as it be with the pass lead from the mountain into 
 Burgdale . 

 Amidmost of the Dale a little toward the north end he see a doom - ring 
 of black stone , and hard by it an ancient hall build of the same 
 black stone both wall and roof , and thitherward be sure - foot now 
 run . face - of - god look up and down the Dale and could see no 
 break in the wall of sheer rock : toward the southern end he see a 
 few booth and cot build roughly of stone and thatch with turf ; 
 thereabout he see a few folk move about , the most of whom seem to 
 be woman and child ; there be some sheep and lamb near these 
 cot , and a herd of fifty or so of somewhat goodly mountain - kine be 
 feed higher up the valley . he could look down into the river from 
 where he stand , and he see that it run between rocky bank go 
 straight down from the face of the meadow , which be rather high 
 above the water , so that it seem little likely that the water 
 should rise over its bank , either in summer or winter ; and in summer 
 be it like to be high , because the vale be so near to the high 
 mountain and their snow . 



 CHAPTER XVIII . FACE - of - GOD talketh with the FRIEND in SHADOWY VALE 



 it be now about two hour after noon , and a broad band of sunlight 
 lie upon the grass of the vale below Gold - mane 's foot ; he go 
 lightly down the scree , and stride forward over the level grass 
 toward the doom - ring , his helm and war - gear glitter bright in the 
 sun . he must need go through the doom - ring to come to the Hall , and 
 as he step out from behind the last of the big upright - stone , he 
 see a woman stand on the threshold of the Hall - door , which be but 
 some score of pace from he , and know she at once for the Friend . 

 she be clothe like himself in a green kirtle gaily embroider and 
 fitting close to her body , and have no gown or cloak over it ; she have 
 a golden fillet on her head beset with blue mountain stone , and her 
 hair hang loose behind she . 

 her beauty be so exceeding , and so far beyond all memory of she that 
 his mind have hold , that once more fear of she fall upon face - of - god , 
 and he stand still with beat heart till she should speak to he . 
 but she come forward swiftly with both her hand hold out , smile 
 and happy - faced , and look very kindly on he , and she take his 
 hand and say to he : 

 ' now welcome , gold - mane , welcome , face - of - god ! and twice welcome art 
 thou and threefold . Lo ! this be the day that thou ask for : art 
 thou happy in it ? ' 

 he lift her hand to his lip and kiss they timorously , but say 
 nought ; and therewithal sure - foot come run forth from the Hall , 
 and fall to bound round about they , bark noisily after the 
 manner of dog who have meet their master again ; and still she hold 
 his hand and behold he kindly . then she call the hound to she , 
 and pat he on the neck and quiet he , and then turn to face- 
 of - god and laugh happily and say : 

 ' I do not bid thee hold thy peace ; yet thou sayest nought . be well 
 with thee ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say , ' and more than well . ' 

 ' thou seemest to I a goodly warrior , ' she say ; ' hast thou meet any 
 foeman yesterday or this morning ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' none hinder I ; thou hast make the way easy to 
 I . ' 

 she say soberly , ' such as I might do , I do . but we may not wield 
 everything , for our foe be many , and I fear for thee . but come 
 thou into our house , which be ours , and far more ours than the booth 
 before the pine - wood . ' 

 she take his hand again and lead he toward the door , but face - of - god 
 look up , and above the lintel he see carve on the dark stone that 
 image of the Wolf , even as he have see it carve on Wood - grey 's tie- 
 beam ; and therewith such thought come into his mind that he stop 
 to look , press the Friend 's hand hard as though bid her note 
 it . the stone wherein the image be carve be dark than the other 
 building stone , and might be call black ; the jaw of the wood- 
 beast be open and gaping , and have be paint with cinnabar , but 
 wind and weather have wear away the most of the colour . 

 spake the friend : ' so it be : thou behold the token of the God 
 and Father of out Fathers , that telleth the tale of so many day , 
 that the day which now pass by we be to they but as the drop in the 
 sea of water . Thou beholdest the sign of our sorrow , the memory of 
 our wrong ; yet be it also the token of our hope . maybe it shall lead 
 thee far . ' 

 ' Whither ? ' say he . but she answer not a great while , and he 
 look at she as she stand a - gaze on the image , and see how the 
 tear steal out of her eye and run adown her cheek . then again 
 come the thought to he of Wood - grey 's hall , and the woman of the 
 kindre stand before the Wolf and singing of he ; and though there 
 be little comeliness in they and she be so exceed beauteous , he 
 could not but deem that they be akin to she . 

 but after a while she wipe the tear from her face and turn to he 
 and say : ' my friend , the Wolf shall lead thee no - whither but where 
 I also shall be , whatsoever peril or grief may beset the road or lurk 
 at the ending thereof . thou shalt be no thrall , to labour while I 
 look on . ' 

 his heart swell within he as she speak , and he be at point to 
 beseech her love that moment ; but now her face have grow gay and 
 bright again , and she say while he be gather word to speak 
 withal : 

 ' come in , gold - mane , come into our house ; for I have many thing to 
 say to thee . and moreover thou art so hush , and so fearsome in thy 
 mail , that I think thou yet deemest I to be a Wight of the Waste , 
 such as stone - face thy Fosterer tell thee tale of , and forewarn 
 thee . so would I eat before thee , and sign the meat with the sign of 
 the Earth - god 's Hammer , to show thee that he be in error concern 
 I , and that I be a very woman flesh and fall , as my kindre be 
 before I . ' 

 he laugh and be exceed glad , and say : ' tell I now , kind 
 friend , dost thou deem that stone - face 's tale be mere mockery of 
 his dream , and that he be beguile by empty semblance or less ? or 
 be there such wight in the Waste . ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' the man be a true man ; and of these thing be 
 there many ancient tale which we may not doubt . yet so it be that 
 such wight have I never yet see , nor aught to scare I save evil 
 man : belike it be that I have be over - much busy in deal with 
 sorrow and ruin to look after they : or it may be that they fear I 
 and the wrath - breed grief of the kindred . ' 

 he look at she earnestly , and the wisdom of her heart seem to 
 enter into his ; but she say : ' it be of man we must talk , and of I 
 and thee . come with I , my friend . ' 

 and she step lightly over the threshold and draw he in . the Hall 
 be stern and grim and somewhat dusky , for its window be but 
 small : it be all of stone , both wall and roof . there be no 
 timber - work therein save the bench and chair , a little about the 
 door at the low end that lead to the buttery and out - bower ; and 
 this seem to have be work of late year ; yea , the chair 
 against the gable on the dai be of stone build into the wall , 
 adorn with carve somewhat sparingly , the image of the Wolf being 
 do over the midmost of they . he look up and down the Hall , and 
 deem it some seventy foot over all from end to end ; and he could 
 see in the dimness those same goodly hanging on the wall which he 
 have see in the woodland booth . 

 she lead he up to the dai , and stand there lean up against the 
 arm of one of those stone seat silent for a while ; then she turn 
 and look at he , and say : 

 ' yea , thou look a goodly warrior ; yet be I glad that thou cam 
 hither without battle . tell I , gold - mane , ' she say , take one of 
 his spear from his hand , ' art thou deft with the spear ? ' 

 ' I have be call so , ' say he . 

 she look at he sweetly and say : ' canst thou show I the feat of 
 spear - throwing in this Hall , or shall we wend outside presently that 
 I may see thee throw ? ' 

 ' the Hall sufficeth , ' he say . ' shall I set this steel in the lintel 
 of the buttery door yonder ? ' 

 ' Yea , if thou canst , ' she say . 

 he smile and take the spear from she , and poise it and shake it 
 till it quiver again , then suddenly draw back his arm and cast , and 
 the shaft speed whistle down the dim hall , and smite the aforesaid 
 door - lintel and stick there quiver : then he spring down from the 
 dais , and run down the hall , and put forth his hand and pull it 
 forth from the wood , and be on the dais again in a trice , and cast 
 again , and the second time set the spear in the same place , and then 
 take his other spear from the board and cast it , and there stand the 
 two stave in the wood side by side ; then he go soberly down the 
 hall and draw they both out of the wood and come back to she , while 
 she stand watch he , her cheek flush , her lip a little parted . 

 she say : ' good spear - casting , forsooth ! and far above what our folk 
 can do , who be no great thrower of the spear . ' 

 gold - mane laugh : ' Sooth be that , ' say he , ' or hardly be I here 
 to teach thee spear - throwing . ' 

 ' wilt thou never be pay for that simple onslaught ? ' she say . 

 ' have I be pay then ? ' say he . 

 she redden , for she remember her word to he on the mountain ; and 
 he put his hand on her shoulder and kiss she cheek , but timorously ; 
 nor do she withstand he or shrink aback , but say soberly : 

 ' good indeed be thy spear - throwing , and meseem my brother will love 
 thee when he hath see thee strike a stroke or two in wrath . but , 
 fair warrior , there be no foeman here : so get thee to the low end 
 of the Hall , and in the bower beyond shalt thou find fresh water ; 
 there wash the waste from off thee , and do off thine helm and 
 hauberk , and come back speedily and eat with I ; for I hunger , and so 
 dost thou . ' 

 he do as she bid he , and come back presently bear in his hand 
 both helm and hauberk , and he look light - limbed and trim and 
 lissome , an exceed goodly man . 



 CHAPTER XIX . the fair woman TELLETH FACE - of - GOD of her KINDRED 



 when he come back to the dais he see that there be meat upon the 
 board , and the Friend say to he : 

 ' now art thou gold - mane indeed : but come now , sit by I and eat , 
 though the wood - woman giveth thee but a sorry banquet , o guest ; but 
 from the Dale it be , and we be too far now from the dwelling of man 
 to have delicate meat on the board , though to - night when they come 
 back thy cheer shall be well . yet even then thou shalt have no 
 such dainty as stone - face hath imagine for thee at the hand of 
 the wood - wight . ' 

 she laugh therewith , and he no less ; and in sooth the meat be but 
 simple , of curd and new cheese , meat of the herdsman . but face - of- 
 god say gaily : ' sweet it shall be to I ; good be all that the 
 Friend giveth . ' 

 then she raise her hand and make the sign of the Hammer over the 
 board , and look up at he and say : 

 ' hath the Earth - god change my face , gold - mane , to what I verily be ? ' 

 he hold his face close to hers and look into it , and he - seem it 
 be as pure as the water of a mountain lake , and as fine and well- 
 work every deal of it as when his father have work in his stithy 
 many day and fashion a small piece of great mastery . he be 
 ashamed to kiss she again , but he say to himself , ' this be the 
 fair woman of the world , whom I have swear to we d this year . ' 
 then he spake aloud and say : 

 ' I see the face of the Friend , and it will not change to I . ' 

 again she redden a little , and the happy look in her face seem to 
 grow yet sweeter , and he be bewilder with longing and delight . 

 but she stand up and go to an ambrye in the wall and bring forth 
 a horn shod and lip with silver of ancient fashion , and she pour 
 wine into it and hold it forth and say : 

 ' o guest from the Dale , I pledge thee ! and when thou hast drunk to I 
 in turn we will talk of weighty matter . for indeed I bear hope in 
 my hand too heavy for the daughter of man to bear ; and thou art a 
 chieftain 's son , and mayst well help I to bear they ; so let we talk 
 simply and without guile , as folk that trust one another . ' 

 so she drink and hold out the horn to he , and he take the horn and 
 her hand both , and he kiss her hand and say : 

 ' here in this Hall I drink to the Sons of the Wolf , whosoever they 
 be . ' Therewith he drink and he say : ' simply and guilelessly indeed 
 will I talk with thee ; for I be weary of lie , and for thy sake have 
 I tell a many . ' 

 ' thou shalt tell no more , ' she say ; ' and as for the health thou hast 
 drunk , it be good , and shall profit thee . now sit we here in these 
 ancient seat and let we talk . ' 

 so they sit they down while the sun be westere in the March 
 afternoon , and she say : 

 ' tell I first what tiding have be in the Dale . ' 

 so he tell she of the ransacking and of the murder at Carlstead . 

 she say : ' these tiding have we hear before , and some deal of they 
 we know well than ye do , or can ; for we be the ransacker of 
 Penny - thumb and Harts - bane . Thereof will I say more presently . what 
 other tiding hast thou to tell of ? what oath be swear upon the 
 Boar last Yule ? ' 

 so he tell she of the oath of Bristler the son of Brightling . she 
 smile and say : ' he shall keep his oath , and yet redden no blade . ' 

 then he tell of his father 's oath , and she say : 

 ' it be good ; but even so would he do and no oath swear . all man may 
 trust iron - face . and thou , my friend , what oath didst thou swear ? ' 

 his face grow somewhat troubled as he say : ' I swear to we d the 
 fair woman in the world , though the dalesman gainsay I , and they 
 beyond the Dale . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' and there be no need to ask thee whom thou didst 
 mean by thy " fairest woman , " for I have see that thou deemest I 
 fair enough . my friend , maybe thy kindred will be against it , and 
 the kindre of the Bride ; and it might be that my kindre would have 
 gainsay it if thing be not as they be . but though all man 
 gainsay it , yet will not i. it be meet and right that we twain we d. ' 

 she spake very soberly and quietly , but when she have speak there be 
 nothing in his heart but joy and gladness : yet shame of her 
 loveliness refrain he , and he cast down his eye before her . 
 then she say in a kind voice : 

 ' I know thee , how glad thou art of this word of mine , because thou 
 lookest on I with eye of love , and thinkest of I as well than I 
 be ; though I be no ill woman and no beguiler . but this be not all 
 that I have to say to thee , though it be much ; for there be more 
 folk in the world than thou and I only . but I tell thee this first , 
 that thou might trust I in all thing . so , my friend , if thou 
 canst , refrain thy joy and thy longing a little , and hearken to what 
 concerneth thee and I , and thy people and mine . ' 

 ' fair woman and sweet friend , ' he say , ' thou know of a gladness 
 which be hard to bear if one must lay it aside for a while ; and of a 
 longing which be hard to refrain if it mingle with another longing - 
 know thou not ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' I know it . ' 

 ' yet , ' say face - of - god , ' I will forbear as thou bidd I . tell 
 I , then , what be the felon who be slay at Carlstead ? know 
 thou of they ? ' 

 ' over well , ' she say , ' they be our foe this many a year ; and since 
 we meet last autumn they have become foe of you Dalesmen also . soon 
 shall ye have tiding of they ; and it be against they that I bid 
 thee arm yesterday . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' be it against they that thou wouldst have we do 
 battle along with thy folk ? ' 

 ' so it be , ' she say ; ' no other foeman have we . and now , gold - mane , 
 thou art become a friend of the Wolf , and shalt before long be of 
 affinity with our House ; that other day thou didst ask I to tell 
 thee of I and mine , and now will I do accord to thine asking . 
 Short shall my tale be ; because maybe thou shalt hear it tell again , 
 and in goodly wise , before thine whole folk . 

 ' as thou wottest we be now outlaw and wolf ' head ; and while we 
 lift the gear of man , but ever if we may of ill man and not of good ; 
 there be no worthy goodman of the Dale from whom we would take one 
 hoof , or a skin of wine , or a cake of wax . 

 ' wherefore be we outlaw ? because we have be drive from our own , 
 and we bear away our life and our weapon , and little else ; and for 
 our land , thou se this Vale in the howl wilderness and how 
 narrow and poor it be , though it hath be the nurse of warrior in 
 time past . 

 ' Hearken ! time long ago come the kindred of the Wolf to these 
 Mountains of the World ; and they be in a pass in the stony maze and 
 the utter wilderness of the Mountains , and the foe be behind they in 
 number not to be bear up against . and so it befell that the pass 
 fork , and there be two way before our Folk ; and one part of they 
 would take the way to the north and the other the way to the south ; 
 and they could not agree which way the whole Folk should take . so 
 they sunder into two company , and one take one way and one 
 another . now as to those who fare by the southern road , we know not 
 what befell they , nor for long and long have we any tale of they . 

 ' but we who take the northern road , we happen on this Vale amidst 
 the wilderness , and we be weary of flee from the over - mastering 
 foe ; and the dale seem enough , and a refuge , and a place to dwell 
 in , and no man be there before we , and few be like to find it , and 
 we be but a few . so we dwelt here in this Vale for as wild as it 
 be , the place where the sun shineth never in the winter , and scant be 
 the summer sunshine therein . here we raise a doom - ring and build 
 we a Hall , wherein thou now sitt beside I , o friend , and we dwelt 
 here many season . 

 ' we have a few sheep in the wilderness , and a few neat feed down the 
 grass of the Vale ; and we find gem and copper in the rock about we 
 wherewith at while to chaffer with the alien , and fish we draw from 
 our river the Shivering Flood . also it be not to be hide that in 
 those day we do not spare to lift the good of man ; yea , while 
 would our warrior fare down unto the edge of the Plain and lie in 
 wait there till the time serve , and then drive the spoil from under 
 the very wall of the Cities . our man be not little - hearted , nor 
 do our woman lament the death of warrior over - much , for they be 
 there to bear more warrior to the Folk . 

 ' but the season pass , and the Folk multiply in Shadowy Vale , and 
 livelihood seem like to fail they , and need must they seek wide 
 land . so by way which thou wilt one day wot of , we come into a 
 valley that lieth north - west of Shadowy Vale : a land like thine of 
 Burgdale , or well ; wide it be , plenteous of grass and tree , well 
 water , full of all thing that man can desire . 

 ' be there man before we in this Dale ? sayest thou . yea , but not 
 very many , and they feeble in battle , weak of heart , though strong of 
 body . these , when they see the Sons of the Wolf with weapon in 
 their hand , feel themselves puny before we , and their heart fail 
 they ; and they come to we with gift , and offer to share the Dale 
 between they and we , for they say there be enough for both folk . 
 so we take their offer and become their friend ; and some of our 
 Houses wed wife of the stranger , and give they their woman to 
 wife . therein they do amiss ; for the blended Folk as the 
 generation pass become soft than our blood , and many be 
 untrusty and greedy and tyrannous , and the day of the whoredom fall 
 upon we , and when we deem ourselves the mighty then be we the 
 near to our fall . but the House whereof I be would never we d with 
 these Westlanders , and other Houses there be who have affinity with 
 we who chiefly wed with we of the Wolf , and their father have come 
 with ours into that fruitful Dale ; and these be call the Red 
 Hand , and the Silver Arm , and the Golden Bushel , and the Ragged 
 Sword . Thou hast hear those name once before , friend ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say , and as he speak the picture of that other day come 
 back to he , and he call to mind all that he have say , and his 
 happiness of that hour seem the more and the sweeter for that 
 memory . 

 she go on : ' fair and goodly be that Dale as mine own eye have 
 see , and plentiful of all thing , and up in its mountain to the 
 east be cave and pit whence silver be digge abundantly ; therefore 
 be the Dale call silver - dale . Hast thou hear thereof , my friend ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' though I have marvel whence ye gat such 
 foison of silver . ' 

 he look on she and marvel , for now she seem as if it be 
 another woman : her eye be gleam bright , her lip be part ; 
 there be a bright red flush on the pommel of her two cheek as she 
 spake again and say : 

 ' Happy live the Folk in silver - dale for many and many winter and 
 summer : the season be good and no lack be there : little 
 sickness there be and less war , and all seem well than well . it 
 be strange that ye dalesman have not hear of silver - dale . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' but I have not ; of Rose - dale have I hear , as a land 
 very far away : but no far do we know of toward that airt . Lieth 
 silver - dale anywhere nigh to rose - dale ? ' 

 she say : ' it be the next dale to it , yet be it a far journey 
 betwixt the two , for the ice - sea pusheth a horn in betwixt they ; and 
 even below the ice the mountain - neck be passable to none save a bold 
 crag - climber , and to he only bear his life in his hand . but , my 
 friend , I be but linger over my tale , because it grieveth I sore 
 to have to tell it . Hearken then ! in the day when I have see but 
 ten summer , and my brother be a very young man , but exceed 
 strong , and as beautiful as thou art now , war fall on we without 
 rumour or warning ; for there swarm into silver - dale , though not by 
 the way whereby we have enter it , a host of alien , short of 
 stature , crooked of limb , foul of aspect , but fierce warrior and 
 arm full well : they be man have no country to go back to , 
 though they have no woman or child with they , as we have when we 
 be young in these land , but use all woman whom they take as their 
 beastly lust bid they , make they their thrall if they slew they 
 not . soon we find that these foeman ask no more of we than all we 
 have , and therewithal our life to be cast away or use for their 
 service as beast of burden or pleasure . there then we gather our 
 fighting - man and withstand they ; and if we have be all of the 
 kindred of the Wolf and the fruit of the wife of warrior , we 
 should have drive back these felon and save the Dale , though it 
 maybe more than half ruin : but the most part of we be of that 
 mingle blood , or of the generation of the Dalesmen whom we have 
 conquer long ago , and stout as they be of body their heart 
 fail they , and they give themselves up to the alien to be as their 
 oxen and ass . 

 ' why make a long tale of it ? we who be leave , and could brook death 
 but not thraldom , fight it out together , woman as well as man , till 
 the sweetness of life and a happy chance for escape bid us flee , 
 vanquished but free man . for at the end of three day ' fight we have 
 be drive up to the easternmost end of the Dale , and up anigh to 
 the jaw of the pass whereby the Folk have first come into Silver- 
 dale , and we have those with we who know every cranny of that way , 
 while to stranger who know it not it be utterly impassable ; night 
 be come on also , and even those murder - carle be weary with 
 slaying ; and , moreover , on this last day , when they see that they have 
 win all , they be fight to keep , and not to slay , and a few 
 stubborn carle and queen , of what use would they be , or where be 
 the gain of risk life to win they ? 

 ' so they forbear we , and night come on moonless and dark ; and it be 
 the early spring season , when the day be not yet long , and so by 
 night and cloud we flee away , and back again to Shadowy Vale . 

 ' Forsooth , we be but a few ; for when we be get into this Vale , 
 this strip of grass and water in the wilderness , and have tell up our 
 company , we be but two hundred and thirty and five of man and woman 
 and child . for there be an hundred and thirty and three grown 
 man of all age , and of woman grow seventy and five , and one score 
 and seven child , whereof I be one ; for , as thou mayst deem , it 
 be easy for grown man with weapon in their hand to escape from 
 that slaught than for woman and child . 

 ' there sit we in yonder Doom - ring and take counsel , and to some it 
 seem good that we should all dwell together in Shadowy Vale , and 
 beset the skirt of the foeman till the day should well ; but 
 other deem that there be little avail therein ; and there be a 
 mighty man of the kindre , Stone - wolf by name , a man of middle - age , 
 and he say , that late in life have he taste of war , and though the 
 banquet be make bitter with defeat , yet do the meat seem wholesome 
 to he . " come down with I to the Cities of the Plain , " say he , 
 " all you who be stout warrior ; and leave we here the old man and 
 the swain and the woman and child . hateful be the folk there , 
 and full of malice , but soft withal and dastardly . let we go down 
 thither and make ourselves strong amongst they , and sell our valour 
 for their wealth till we come to rule they , and they make we their 
 king , and we establish the Folk of the Wolf amongst the alien ; then 
 will we come back hither and bring away that which we have leave . " 

 ' so he spake , and the more part of the warrior yea say his rede , 
 and they go with he to the Westland , and amongst these be my 
 brother Folk - might   for that be his name in the kindred . and I 
 sorrow at his departure , for he have bear I thither out of the 
 flame and the clash of sword and the press of battle , and to I have 
 he ever be kind and loving , albeit he hath have the word of hard 
 and froward use on he full oft . 

 ' so in this Vale abode we that be leave , and the season pass ; 
 some of the elder die , and some of the child also ; but more 
 child be bear , for amongst we be man and woman to whom it be 
 lawful to we d with each other . even with this scanty remnant be 
 leave some of the life of the kindre of old day ; and after we have 
 be here but a little while , the young man , yea and the old also , 
 and even some of the woman , would steal through pass that we , and 
 we only , know of , and would fall upon the Aliens in silver - dale as 
 occasion serve , and lift their good both live and dead ; and this 
 become both a craft and a pastime amongst we . nor may I hide that we 
 sometimes go lift otherwhere ; for in the summer and autumn we 
 would fare west a little and abide in the wood the season through , 
 and hunt the deer thereof , and while would we drive the spoil from 
 the scattered folk not far from your Shepherd - Folk ; but with the 
 Shepherds themselves and with you Dalesmen we meddle not . 

 ' now that little wood - lawn with the toft of an ancient dwelling in 
 it , wherein , saith Bow - may , thou didst once rest , be one of our 
 summer abode ; and later on we build the hall under the pine - wood 
 that thou know . 

 ' thus then grow up our young man ; and our maid be little soft ; 
 e'en such as Bow - may be   and kind be she withal , and it seem in 
 very sooth as if the Spirit of the Wolf be with we , and the 
 roughness of the Waste make we fierce ; and law we have not and heed 
 not , though love be amongst we . ' 

 she stop awhile and fall a - musing , and her face soften , and she 
 turn to he with that sweet happy look upon it and say : 

 ' desolate and dreary be the Dale , thou deemest , friend ; and yet for 
 I I love it and its dark - green water , and it be to I as if the 
 Fathers of the kindre visit it and hold converse with we ; and there 
 I grow up when I be little , before I know what a woman be , and 
 strange communing have I with the wilderness . friend , when we be 
 wed , and thou art a great chieftain , as thou wilt be , I shall ask 
 of thee the boon to suffer I to abide here at while that I may 
 remember the day when I be little and the love of the kindre wax 
 in I . ' 

 ' this be but a little thing to ask , ' say face - of - god ; ' I would thou 
 hadst ask I more . ' 

 ' fear not , ' she say , ' I shall ask thee for much and many thing ; and 
 some of they belike thou shalt deny I . ' 

 he shake his head ; but she smile in his face and say : 

 ' yea , so it be , friend ; but hearken . the season pass , and six 
 year wear , and I be grow a tall slim maiden , fleet of foot and 
 able to endure toil enough , though I never bore weapon , nor have 
 do . so on a fair even of midsummer when we be together , the most 
 of we , round about this Hall and the doom - ring , we see a tall man in 
 bright war - gear come forth into the Dale by the path that thou 
 camest , and then another and another till there be two score and 
 seven man - at - arm standing on the grass below the scree yonder ; by 
 that time have we get some weapon in our hand , and we stand 
 together to meet the new - comer , but they draw no sword and notch 
 no shaft , but come towards we laugh and joyous , and lo ! it be my 
 brother Folk - might and his man , those that be leave of they , come 
 back to we from the Westland . 

 ' Glad indeed be I to behold he ; and for he when he have take I in 
 his arm and look up and down the Dale , he cry out : ' in many 
 fair place and many rich dwelling have I be ; but this be the hour 
 that I have look for . ' 

 ' now when we ask he concern Stone - wolf and the other who be 
 miss   for ten ten of stalwarth man have fare to the Westland , he 
 sweep out his hand toward the west and say with a solemn face : 
 " there they lie , and grass groweth over their bone , and we who have 
 come aback , and ye who have abide , these be now the child of the 
 Wolf : there be no more now on the earth . " 

 ' let be ! it be a fair even and high be the feast in the Hall that 
 night , and sweet be the converse with our folk come back . a glad 
 man be my brother Folk - might when he hear that for year past we 
 have be lift the gear of man , and chiefly of the Aliens in 
 silver - dale : and he himself be become learn in war and a deft 
 leader of man . 

 ' so the day pass and the season , and we live on as we might ; but 
 with folk - might 's return there begin to grow up in all our heart 
 what have long be flourish in mine , and that be the hope of one 
 day win back our own again , and die amidst the dear grove of 
 silver - dale . within these year we have increase somewhat in number ; 
 for if we have lose those warrior in the Westland , and some old man 
 who have die in the Dale , yet our child have grow up   I have now 
 see twenty and one summer   and more be grow up . moreover , 
 after the first year , from the time when we begin to fall upon the 
 Dusky Men of silver - dale , from time to time they who go on such 
 adventure set free such thrall of our blood as they could fall in 
 with and whom they could trust in , and they dwell   and yet dwell 
 with we in the Dale : first and last we have take in three score and 
 twelve of such man , and a score of woman - thrall withal . 

 ' now during these season , and not very long ago , after I be a woman 
 grow , the thought come to I , and to Folk - might also , that there 
 be kindred of the people dwell anear we whom we might so deal 
 with that they should become our friend and brother in arm , and 
 that through they we might win back silver - dale . 

 ' of Rose - dale we wotte already that the Folk be nought of our 
 blood , feeble in the field , cow by the Dusky Men , and at last make 
 thrall to they ; so nought be to do there . but folk - might go to 
 and fro to gather tiding : at while I with he , at while one or 
 more of Wood - father 's child , who with their father and mother and 
 Bow - may have abide in the Vale ever since the Great Undoing . 

 ' soon he fall in with thy Folk , and first of all with the 
 Woodlanders , and that be a joy to he ; for wot ye what ? he get to 
 know that these man be the child of those of our folk who have 
 sunder from we in the mountain pass time long and long ago ; and 
 he love they , for he see that they be hardy and trusty , and 
 warrior at heart . 

 ' then he go amongst the Shepherd - Folk , and he deem they good man 
 easily stir , and deem that they might soon be win to friendship ; 
 and he know that they be mostly come from the Houses of the 
 Woodlanders , so that they also be of the kindred . 

 ' and last he come into Burgdale , and find there a merry and happy 
 Folk , little will not to war , but stout - hearted , and nowise puny either 
 of body or soul ; he go there often and learn much about they , and 
 deem that they would not be hard to win to fellowship . and he 
 find that the House of the Face be the chief house there ; and 
 that the Alderman and his son be well beloved of all the folk , and 
 that they be the man to be win first , since through they should all 
 other be win . I also go to Burgstead with he twice , as I tell 
 thee erst ; and I see thee , and I deem that thou would lightly 
 become our friend ; and it come into my mind that I myself might we d 
 thee , and that the House of the face thereby might have affinity 
 thenceforth with the child of the Wolf . ' 

 he say : ' why didst thou deem thus of I , o friend ? ' 

 she laugh and say : ' dost thou long to hear I say the word when 
 thou know my thought well ? so be it . I see thee both young and 
 fair ; and I know thee to be the son of a noble , worthy , guileless man 
 and of a beauteous woman of great wit and good rede . and I find 
 thee to be kind and open - handed and simple like thy father , and like 
 thy mother wise than thou thyself know of thyself ; and that thou 
 wert desirous of deed and fain of woman . ' 

 she be silent for a while , and he also : then he say : ' didst thou 
 draw I to the wood and to thee ? ' 

 she redden and say : ' I be no spell - wife : but true it be that 
 wood - mother make a waxen image of thee , and thrust through the heart 
 thereof the pin of my girdle - buckle , and stroke it every morning 
 with an oak - bough over which she have sing spell . but dost thou not 
 remember , gold - mane , how that one day last hay - month , as ye be 
 rest in the meadow in the cool of the evening , there come to you 
 a minstrel that play to you on the fiddle , and therewith sing a 
 song that melt all your heart , and that this song tell of the 
 wild - wood , and what be therein of desire and peril and beguiling and 
 death , and love unto death itself ? dost thou remember , friend ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say , ' and how when the minstrel be do Stone - face fall 
 to tell we more tale yet of the woodland , and the minstrel sing 
 again and yet again , till his tale have enter into my very heart . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' and that minstrel be wood - wont ; and I send he to 
 sing to thee and thine , deeming that if thou didst hearken , thou 
 would'st seek the woodland and happen upon we . ' 

 he laugh and say : ' thou didst not doubt but that if we meet , thou 
 mightest do with I as thou would ? ' 

 ' so it be , ' she say , ' that I doubt it little . ' 

 ' therein wert thou wise , ' say face - of - god ; ' but now that we be 
 talk without guile to each other , might thou tell I wherefore 
 it be that folk - might make that onslaught upon I ? for certain it 
 be that he be minded to slay I . ' 

 she say : ' it be sooth what I tell thee , that while he groweth so 
 battle - eager that whatso edge - tool he beareth must need come out of 
 the scabbard ; but there be more in it than that , which I could not 
 tell thee erst . two day before thy come he have be down to 
 Burgstead in the guise of an old carle such as thou saw he with 
 I in the market - place . there be he gueste in your Hall , and once 
 more see thee and the Bride together ; and he see the eye of love 
 wherewith she look on thee   for so much he tell I , and deem 
 that thou didst take her love but lightly . and he himself look on 
 she with such love   and this he tell I not   that he deem nought 
 good enough for she , and would have have thee give thyself up wholly 
 to she ; for my brother be a generous man , my friend . so when I tell 
 he on the morn of that day whereon we meet that we look to see thee 
 that eve   for indeed I be somewhat foresee , he say : " look thou , 
 Sun - beam , if he cometh , it be not unlike that I shall drive a spear 
 through he . " " wherefore ? " say I ; " can he serve our turn when he be 
 dead ? " say he : " I care little . mine own turn will I serve . Thou 
 say WHEREFORE ? I tell thee this stripling beguileth to she 
 torment the fair woman that be in the world - such an one as be 
 meet to be the mother of chieftain , and to stand by warrior in 
 their day of peril . I have see she ; and thus have I see she . " 
 then say I : " greatly forsooth shalt thou pleasure she by slay 
 he ! " and he answer : " I shall pleasure myself . and one day she 
 shall thank I , when she taketh my hand in hers and we go together to 
 the Bride - bed . " Therewith come over I a clear foresight of the 
 hour to come , and I say to he : " Yea , Folk - might , cast the spear 
 and draw the sword ; but he thou shalt not slay : and thou shalt one 
 day see he stand with we before the shaft of the Dusky Men . " so 
 I spake ; but he look fiercely at I , and depart and shun I 
 all that day , and by good hap I be hard at hand when thou drew 
 nigh our abode . Nay , Gold - mane , what would'st thou with thy sword ? 
 why art thou so red and wrathful ? Would'st thou fight with my 
 brother because he loveth thy friend , thine old playmate , thy 
 kinswoman , and thinketh pity of her sorrow ? ' 

 he say , with knit brow and gleam eye : ' would the man take she 
 away from I perforce ? ' 

 ' my friend , ' she say , ' thou art not yet so wise as not to be a fool 
 at while . be it not so that she herself hath take herself from 
 thee , since she hath come to know that thou hast give thyself to 
 another ? Hath she note nought of thee this winter and spring ? be 
 she well pleased with the way of thee ? ' 

 he say : ' Thou hast speak simply with I , and I will do no less 
 with thee . it be but four day agone that she do I to wit that 
 she know of I how I seek my love on the mountain ; and she put I 
 to sore shame , and afterwards I weep for her sorrow . ' 

 Therewith he tell she all that the Bride have say to he , as he well 
 might , for he have forget no word of it . 

 then say the friend : ' she shall have the token that she craveth , 
 and it be I that shall give it to she . ' 

 Therewith she take from her finger a ring wherein be set a very fair 
 changeful mountain - stone , and give it to he , and say : 

 ' thou shalt give she this and tell she whence thou hadst it ; and tell 
 she that I bid she remember that to - morrow be a new day . ' 



 CHAPTER XX . those two together hold the ring of the EARTH - GOD 



 and now they fall silent both of they , and sit hearken the sound 
 of the Dale , from the whistle of the plover down by the water - side to 
 the far - off voice of the child and maiden about the kine in the 
 low meadow . at last Gold - mane take up the word and say : 

 ' sweet friend , tell I the uttermost of what thou would'st have of 
 I . be it not that I should stand by thee and thine in the Folk - mote 
 of the Dalesmen , and speak for you when ye pray we for help against 
 your foeman ; and then again that I do my good when ye and we be 
 array for battle against the Dusky Men ? this be easy to do , and 
 great be the reward thou offer I . ' 

 ' I look for this service of thee , ' she say , ' and none other . ' 

 ' and when I go down to the battle , ' say he , ' shalt thou be sorry for 
 our sundering ? ' 

 she say : ' there shall be no sundering ; I shall wend with thee . ' 

 say he : ' and if I be slay in the battle , would'st thou lament 
 I ? ' 

 ' thou shalt not be slay , ' she say . 

 again be there silence betwixt they , till at last he say : 

 ' this then be why thou didst draw I to thee in the wild - wood ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say she . 

 again for a while no word be speak , and face - of - god look on she 
 till she cast her eye down before he . 

 then at last he spake , and the colour come and go in his face as he 
 say : ' tell I thy name what it be . ' 

 she say : ' I be call the Sun - beam . ' 

 then he say , and his voice tremble therewith : ' o Sun - beam , I have 
 be seek pleasant and cunning word , and can find none such . but 
 tell I this if thou wilt : dost thou desire I as I desire thee ? or 
 be it that thou wilt suffer I to we d thee and bed thee at last as 
 mere payment for the help that I shall give to thee and thine ? Nay , 
 doubt it not that I will take the payment , if this be what thou wilt 
 give I and nought else . yet tell I . ' 

 her face grow troubled , and she say : 

 ' gold - mane , maybe that thou hast now ask I one question too many ; 
 for this be no fair game to be play between we . for thee , as I 
 deem , there be this day but two people in the world , and that be 
 thou and I , and the earth be for we two alone . but , my friend , 
 though I have see but twenty and one summer , it be nowise so with 
 I , and to I there be many in the world ; and chiefly the Folk of 
 the Wolf , amidst whose very heart I have grow up . moreover , I can 
 think of she whom I have supplant , the Bride to wit ; and I know 
 she , and how bitter and empty her day shall be for a while , and how 
 vain all our rede for she shall seem to she . yea , I know she 
 sorrow , and see it and grieve for it : so canst not thou , unless thou 
 verily see she before thee , her face unhappy , and her voice change 
 and hard . well , I will tell thee what thou askest . when I draw thee 
 to I on the Mountain I think but of the friendship and brotherhood 
 to be knit up between our two Folks , nor do I anywise desire thy 
 love of a young man . but when I see thee on the heath and in the 
 Hall that day , it please I to think that a man so fair and 
 chieftain - like should one day lie by my side ; and again when I see 
 that the love of I have take hold of thee , I would not have thee 
 grieve because of I , but would have thee happy . and now what shall 
 I say ? - I know not ; I can not tell . yet be I the Friend , as erst I 
 call myself . 

 ' and , gold - mane , I have see hitherto but the outward show and image 
 of thee , and though that be goodly , how would it be if thou didst 
 shame I with little - heartedness and evil deed ? let I see thee in 
 the Folk - mote and the battle , and then may I answer thee . ' 

 then she hold her peace , and he answer nothing ; and she turn she 
 face from he and say : 

 ' out on it ! have I beguile myself as well as thee ? these be but 
 empty word I have be say . if thou wilt drag the truth out of 
 I , this be the very truth : that to - day be happy to I as it be to 
 thee , and that I have long sore for its coming . o gold - mane , O 
 speech - friend , if thou wert to pray I or command I that I lie in 
 thine arm to - night , I should know not how to gainsay thee . yet I 
 beseech thee to forbear , lest thy death and mine come of it . and why 
 should we die , o friend , when we be so young , and the world lie so 
 fair before we , and the happy day be at hand when the child of 
 the Wolf and the kindred of the Dale shall deliver the Folk , and all 
 day shall be good and all year ? ' 

 they have both rise up as she spake , and now he put forth his hand 
 to she and take she in his arm , wonder the while , as he draw she 
 to he , how much slenderer and small and weak she seem in his 
 embrace than he have think of she ; and when their lip meet , he feel 
 that she kiss he as he she . then he hold she by the shoulder at 
 arm ' length from he , and behold her face how her eye be close 
 and her lip quiver . but before he , in a moment of time , pass 
 a picture of the life to be in the fair Dale , and all she would give 
 he there , and the day good and lovely from morn to eve and eve to 
 morn ; and though in that moment it be hard for he to speak , at last 
 he speak in a voice hoarse at first , and say : 

 ' thou say sooth , o friend ; we will not die , but live ; I will not 
 drag our death upon we both , nor put a sword in the hand of folk- 
 might , who love I not . ' 

 then he kiss she on the brow and say : ' now shalt thou take I by 
 the hand and lead I forth from the Hall . for the day be wax old , 
 and here meseemeth in this dim hall there be word cross in the 
 air about us - word speak in day long ago , and tale of old time , 
 that keep egg I on to do my will and die , because that be all 
 that the world hath for a valiant man ; and to such word I would not 
 hearken , for in this hour I have no will to die , nor can I think of 
 death . ' 

 she take his hand and lead he forth without more word , and they go 
 hand in hand and pace slowly round the doom - ring , the light air 
 breathing upon they till their face be as calm and quiet as their 
 will not be , and her especially as bright and happy as when he have 
 first see she that day . 

 the sun be sink now , and only send one golden ray into the valley 
 through a cleft in the western rock - wall , but the sky overhead be 
 bright and clear ; from the meadow come the sound of the lowing of 
 kine and the voice of child a - sporting , and it seem to gold- 
 mane that they be draw nigh , both the child and the kine , 
 and somewhat he begrudge it that he should not be alone with the 
 Friend . 

 now when they have make half the circuit of the doom - ring , the Sun- 
 beam stop he , and then lead he through the Ring of Stones , and 
 bring he up to the altar which be amidst of it ; and the altar be 
 a great black stone hewn smooth and clean , and with the image of the 
 Wolf carven on the front thereof ; and on its face lie the gold ring 
 which the priest or captain of the Folk bore on his arm between the 
 God and the people at all folk - mote . 

 so she say : ' this be the altar of the God of Earth , and often hath 
 it be redden by mighty man ; and thereon lieth the Ring of the 
 Sons of the Wolf ; and now it be well that we swear troth on that 
 ring before my brother cometh ; for now will he soon be here . ' 

 then gold - mane take the Ring and thrust his right hand through it , 
 and take she right hand in his ; so that the Ring lie on both their 
 hand , and therewith he spake aloud : 

 ' I be face - of - god of the House of the Face , and I do thee to wit , o 
 God of the Earth , that I pledge my troth to this woman , the Sun - beam 
 of the Kindred of the Wolf , to beget my offspring on she , and to live 
 with she , and to die with she : so help I , thou God of the Earth , 
 and the Warrior and the God of the face ! ' 

 then spake the Sun - beam : ' I , the Sun - beam of the child of the 
 Wolf , pledge my troth to face - of - god to lie in his bed and to bear 
 his child and none other 's , and to be his speech - friend till I 
 die : so help I the Wolf and the Warrior and the God of the Earth ! ' 

 then they lay the Ring on the altar again , and they kiss each 
 other long and sweetly , and then turn away from the altar and 
 depart from the doom - ring , go hand in hand together down the 
 meadow , and as they go , the noise of the kine and the child grow 
 nearer and nearer , and presently come the whole company of they round 
 a ness of the rock - wall ; there be some thirty little lad and 
 lass drive on the milch - kine , with half a score of old maid 
 and grow woman , one of whom be Bow - may , who be lightly and 
 scantily clothe , as one who heed not the weather , or deem all month 
 midsummer . 

 the child come run up merrily when they see the Sun - beam , but 
 stop short shyly when they note the tall fair stranger with she . 
 they be all strong and sturdy child , and some very fair , but 
 brown with the weather , if not with the sun . Bow - may come up to 
 gold - mane and take his hand and greet he kindly and say : 

 ' so here thou art at last in Shadowy Vale ; and I hope that thou art 
 content therewith , and as happy as I would wish thee to be . well , 
 this be the first time ; and when thou comest the second time it may 
 well be that the world shall be grow well . ' 

 she hold the distaff which she bear in her hand   for she have be 
 spin   as if it be a spear ; her limb be goodly and shapely , 
 and she trod the thick grass of the Vale with a kind of wary 
 firmness , as though foeman might be lurk nearby . the Sun - beam 
 smile upon she kindly and say : 

 ' that shall not fail to be , Bow - may : ye have win a new friend to- 
 day . but tell I , when dost thou look to see the man here , for I be 
 down by the water when they go away yesterday ? ' 

 ' they shall come into the Dale a little after sunset , ' say Bow - may . 

 ' shall I abide they , my friend ? ' say Gold - mane , turn to the sun- 
 beam . 

 ' yea , ' she say ; ' for what else art thou come hither ? or art thou so 
 press to depart from we ? last time we meet thou wert not so hasty 
 to sunder . ' 

 they smile on each other ; and Bow - may look on they and laugh 
 outright ; then a flush showed in her cheek through the tan of they , 
 and she turn toward the child and the other woman who be 
 busy about the milking of the kine . 

 but those two sit down together on a bank amidst the plain meadow , 
 face the river and the eastern rock - wall , and the Sun - beam say : 

 ' I be fain to speak to thee and to see thine eye watch I while I 
 speak ; and now , my friend , I will tell thee something unasked which 
 have to do with what e'en now thou didst ask I ; for I would have thee 
 trust I wholly , and know I for what I be . time be I scheme and 
 plan for this day of betrothal ; but now I tell thee it have become 
 no long needful for bring to pass our fellowship in arm with 
 thy people . yea yesterday , ere he go on a hunt , whereof he shall 
 tell thee , Folk - might be against it , in word at least ; and yet as 
 one who would have it do if he might have no part in it . so , in 
 good sooth , this hand that lieth in thine be the hand of a wilful 
 woman , who desireth a man , and would keep he for her speech - friend . 
 now art thou fond and happy ; yet bear in mind that there be deed to 
 be do , and the troth we have just plight must be pay for . so 
 hearken , I bid thee . dost thou care to know why the wheedling of 
 thee be no long needful to we ? ' 

 he say : ' a little while ago I should have say , Yea , if thy lip 
 say the word . but now , o friend , it seemeth as if thine heart be 
 already become a part of mine , and I feel as if the chieftain be 
 grow up in I and the longing for deed : so I say , tell I , for I 
 be fain to hear what toucheth the welfare of thy Folk and their 
 fellowship with my Folk ; for on that also have I set my heart ? ' 

 she say gravely and with solemn eye : 

 ' what thou sayest be good : full glad be I that I have not plight 
 my troth to a mere goodly lad , but rather to a chieftain and a 
 warrior . now then hearken ! since I see thee first in the autumn 
 this hath happen , that the Dusky Men , increase both in number 
 and insolence , have it in their heart to win more than silver - dale , 
 and it be year since they have fall upon rose - dale and conquer 
 it , rather by murder than by battle , and make all man thrall there , 
 for feeble be the Folk thereof ; and doubt it not but that they will 
 look into Burgdale before long . they be already abroad in the 
 wood , and be it not for the fear of the Wolf they would be thick 
 therein , and fare wide ; for we have slay many of they , come 
 upon they unawares ; and they know not where we dwell , nor who we be : 
 so they fear to spread about over - much and pry into unknown place 
 lest the Wolf howl on they . yet beware ! for they will gather in 
 number that we may not meet , and then will they swarm into the Dale ; 
 and if ye would live your happy life that ye love so well , ye must 
 now fight for it ; and in that battle must ye need join yourself to 
 we , that we may help each other . Herein have ye nought to choose , 
 for now with you it be no long a thing to talk of whether ye will 
 help certain stranger and guest and thereby win some gain to 
 yourself , but whether ye have the heart to fight for yourself , 
 and the wit to be the fellow of tall man and stout warrior who 
 have pledge their life to win or die for it . ' 

 she be silent a little and then turn and look fondly on face - of- 
 god and say : 

 ' therefore , gold - mane , we need thee no long ; for thou must need 
 fight in our battle . I have no long aught to do to wheedle thee to 
 love I . yet if thou wilt love I , then be I a glad woman . ' 

 he say : ' thou wottest well that thou hast all my love , neither will 
 I fail thee in the battle . I be not little - hearted , though I would 
 have give myself to thee for no reward . ' 

 ' it be well , ' say the Sun - beam ; ' nought be undo by that which I 
 have do . moreover , it be good that we have plight troth to - day . 
 for Folk - might will presently hear thereof , and he must need abide 
 the thing which be do . Hearken ! he cometh . ' 

 for as she speak there come a glad cry from the woman and child , 
 and those two stand up and turn toward the west and beheld the 
 warrior of the Wolf come down into the Dale by the way that gold- 
 mane have come . 

 ' come , ' say the Sun - beam , ' here be your brother in arm , let we go 
 greet they ; they will rejoice in thee . ' 

 so they go thither , and there stand eighty and seven man on the 
 grass below the scree and Folk - might their captain ; and besides some 
 valiant woman , and a few carle who be on watch on the waste , and a 
 half score who have be leave in the Dale , these be all the warrior 
 of the Wolf . they be clothe in no holiday raiment , not even folk- 
 might , but be in sheep - brown gear of the coarse , like to 
 husbandman late come from the plough , but armed well and goodly . 

 but when the twain draw near , the man clash their spear on their 
 shield , and cry out for joy of they , for they all know what face- 
 of - god 's presence there betoken of fellowship with the kindred ; 
 but folk - might come forward and take face - of - god 's hand and greet 
 he and say : 

 ' Hail , son of the Alderman ! here hast thou come into the ancient 
 abode of chieftain and warrior , and belike deed await thee also . ' 

 yet his brow be knit as he say these word , and he spake slowly , 
 as one that constraineth himself ; but presently his face clear 
 somewhat and he say : 

 ' Dalesman , it behoveth thy people to bestir they if ye would live and 
 see good day . hath my sister tell thee what be toward ? or what 
 sayest thou ? ' 

 ' hail to thee , son of the Wolf ! ' say face - of - god . ' thy sister hath 
 tell I all ; and even if these Dusky Felons be not our foe - man 
 also , yet could I have my way , we should have give thee all help , 
 and should have bring back peace and good day to thy folk . ' 

 then folk - might flush red and spake , as he cast out his hand 
 towards the warrior and up and down toward the Dale : 

 ' these be my folk , and these only : and as to peace , only those of we 
 know of it who be old man . yet be it well ; and if we and ye 
 together be strong enough to bring back good day to the feeble man 
 whom the Dusky Ones torment in Silver - dale it shall be well yet . ' 

 then he turn about to his sister , and look keenly into her eye 
 till she redden , and take her hand and look at the wrist and 
 say : 

 ' o sister , see I not the mark on thy wrist of the Ring of the God of 
 the Earth ? have not oath be swear since yesterday ? ' 

 ' true it be , ' she say , ' that this man and I have plight troth 
 together at the altar of the doom - ring . ' 

 say folk - might : ' thou wilt have thy will , and I may not amend it . ' 
 Therewith he turn about to face - of - god and say : 

 ' Thou must look to it to keep this oath , whatever other one thou hast 
 fail in . ' 

 say face - of - god somewhat wrathfully : ' I shall keep it , whether thou 
 bidd I to keep it or break it . ' 

 ' that be well , ' say folk - might , ' and then for all that hath go 
 before thou mayest in a manner pay , if thou art dauntless before the 
 foe . ' 

 ' I look to be no blencher in the battle , ' say face - of - god ; ' that be 
 not the fashion of our kindre , whosoever may be before we . yea , and 
 even be it thy blade , o mighty warrior of the Wolf , I would do my 
 good to meet it in manly fashion . ' 

 as he spake he half draw forth Dale - warden from his sheath , look 
 steadily into the eye of Folk - might ; and the Sun - beam look upon 
 he happily . but folk - might laugh and say : 

 ' thy sword be good , and I deem that thine heart will not fail thee ; 
 but it be by my side and not in face of I that thou shalt redden the 
 good blade : I see not the day when we twain shall hew at each 
 other . ' 

 then in a while he spake again : 

 ' Thou must pardon we if our word be rough ; for we have stand in 
 rough place , where we have to speak both short and loud , whereas 
 there be much to do . but now will we twain talk of matter that 
 concern chieftain who be go on a hard adventure . and ye woman , 
 do ye dight the Hall for the evening feast , which shall be the feast 
 of the troth - plight for you twain . this indeed we owe thee , o guest ; 
 for little shall be thine heritage which thou shalt have with my 
 sister , over and above that thy sword winneth for thee . ' 

 but the Sun - beam say : ' hast thou any to - night ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say ; ' Spear - god , how many be it ? ' 

 there come forward a tall man bear an axe in his right hand , and 
 carry over his shoulder by his left hand a bundle of silver arm- 
 ring just such as Gold - mane have see on the felon who be slay by 
 Wood - grey 's house . the carle cast they on the ground and then knelt 
 down and fall to tell they over ; and then look up and say : 
 ' Twelve yesterday in the wood where the battle be go on ; and this 
 morning seven by the tarn in the pine - wood and six near this eastern 
 edge of the wood : one score and five all tell . but , Folk - might , 
 they be come nigh to Shadowy Vale . ' 

 ' Sooth be that , ' say folk - might ; ' but it shall be look to . come 
 now apart with I , face - of - god . ' 

 so the other go their way toward the Hall , while Folk - might lead 
 the Burgdaler to a sheltered nook under the sheer rock , and there 
 they sit down to talk , and Folk - might ask Gold - mane closely of the 
 muster of the Dalesmen and the Shepherds and the Woodland Caries , and 
 he be well pleased when face - of - god tell he of how many could march 
 to a stricken field , and of their archery , and of their weapon and 
 their goodness . 

 all this take some time in the telling , and now night be come on 
 apace , and Folk - might say : 

 ' now will it be time to go to the Hall ; but keep in thy mind that 
 these Dusky Men will overrun you unless ye deal with they betime . 
 these be of the kind that ye must cast fear into their heart by 
 fall on they ; for if ye abide till they fall upon you , they be 
 like the winter wolf that swarm on and on , how many soever ye slay . 
 and this above all thing shall help you , that we shall bring you 
 whereas ye shall fall on they unawares and destroy they as boy do 
 with a wasp 's nest . yet shall many a mother 's son bite the dust . 

 ' be it not so that in four week ' time be your spring - feast and 
 market at Burgstead , and thereafter the great Folk - mote ? ' 

 ' so it be , ' say Gold - mane . 

 ' thither shall I come then , ' say folk - might , ' and give myself out 
 for the slayer of Rusty and the ransacker of Harts - bane and Penny- 
 thumb ; and therefor shall I offer good blood - wite and theft - wite ; and 
 thy father shall take that ; for he be a just man . then shall I tell 
 my tale . yet it may be thou shalt see we before if battle betide . 
 and now fair befall this new year ; for soon shall the scabbard be 
 empty and the white sword be dance in the air , and spear and axis 
 shall be the growth of this spring - tide . ' 

 and he leap up from his seat and walk to and fro before gold- 
 mane , and now be it grow quite dark . then folk - might turn to 
 face - of - god and say : 

 ' come , guest , the window of the Hall be yellow ; let we to the 
 feast . to - morrow shalt thou get thee to the beginning of this work . 
 I hope of thee that thou art a good sword ; else have I do a folly 
 and my sister a bad one . but now forget that , and feast . ' 

 gold - mane arise , not very well at ease , for the man seem 
 overbearing ; yet how might he fall upon the Sun - beam 's kindre , and 
 the captain of these new brother in arm ? so he spake not . but 
 Folk - might say to he : 

 ' yet I would not have thee forget that I be wroth with thee when I 
 see thee to - day ; and have it not be for the come battle I have 
 draw sword upon thee . ' 

 then face - of - god 's wrath be stir , and he say : 

 ' there be yet time for that ! but why art thou wroth with I ? and I 
 shall tell thee that there be little manliness in thy chiding . for 
 how may I fight with thee , thou the brother of my plighted speech- 
 friend and my captain in this battle ? ' 

 ' therein thou say sooth , ' say folk - might ; ' but hard it be to see 
 you two stand together ; and thou canst not give the Bride to I as 
 I give my sister to thee . for I have see she , and I have see she 
 look at thee ; and I know that she will not have it so . ' 

 then they go on together toward the Hall , and face - of - god be 
 silent and somewhat troubled ; and as they draw near to the Hall , 
 folk - might spake again : 

 ' yet time may amend it ; and if not , there be the battle , and maybe 
 the end . now be we merry ! ' 

 so they go into the Hall together , and there be the Sun - beam 
 gloriously array , as erst in the woodland bower , and face - of - god 
 sit on the dais beside she , and the uttermost sweetness of desire 
 enter into his soul as he note her eye and her mouth , that be 
 grow so kind to he , and her hand that stray toward his . 

 the Hall be full of folk , and all those warrior be there with 
 Wood - father and his son , and wood - mother , and Bow - may and many other 
 woman ; and gold - mane look down the Hall and deem that he have 
 never see such stalwarth body of man , or so bold and meet for 
 battle : as for the woman he have see fair in Burgdale , but these 
 be fair of their own fashion , shapely and well - knit , and strong- 
 armed and large - limbed , yet sweet - voiced and gentle withal . Nay , the 
 very lad of fifteen winter or so , whereof a few be there , seem 
 bold and bright - eyed and keen of wit , and it seem like that if the 
 warrior fare afield these would be with they . 

 so wear the feast ; and folk - might as aforetime amongst the health 
 call on man to drink to the Jaws of the Wolf , and the Red Hand , and 
 the Silver Arm , and the Golden Bushel , and the Ragged Sword . but now 
 have face - of - god no need to ask what these mean , since he know that 
 they be the name of the kindred of the Wolf . they drink also to 
 the troth - plight and to those twain , and shout aloud over the 
 health and clash their weapon : and gold - mane wonder what echo 
 of that shout would reach to Burgstead . 

 then sing man song of old time , and amongst they Wood - wont stand 
 with his fiddle amidst the Hall and Bow - may beside he , and they sing 
 in turn to it sweetly and clearly ; and this be some of what they 
 sing : 


 she singeth . 

 Wild be the waste and long league over ; 
  Whither then wend ye spear and sword , 
 where nought shall see your helm but the plover , 
  far and far from the dear Dale 's sward ? 

 he singeth . 

 many a league shall we wend together 
  with helm and spear and bended bow . 
 Hark ! how the wind blow up for weather : 
  Dark shall the night be whither we go . 

 Dark shall the night be round the byre , 
  and dark as we drive the brindle kine ; 
 dark and dark round the beacon - fire , 
  Dark down in the pass round our waver line . 

 turn on thy path , o fair - foot maiden , 
  and come our way by the pathless road ; 
 look how the cloud hang low and laden 
  over the wall of the old abode ! 

 she singeth . 

 Bare be my foot for the rough waste 's wending , 
  Wild be the wind , and my kirtle 's thin ; 
 Faint shall I be ere the long way 's end 
  drop down to the Dale and the grief therein . 

 he singeth . 

 do on the brogue of the wild - wood rover , 
  do on the byrnie ' ring - close mail ; 
 take thou the staff that the barb hang over , 
  o'er the wind and the waste and the way to prevail . 

 come , for how from thee shall I sunder ? 
  come , that a tale may arise in the land ; 
 come , that the night may be hold for a wonder , 
  when the Wolf be lead by a maiden 's hand ! 

 she singeth . 

 now will I fare as ye be fare , 
  and wend no way but the way ye wend ; 
 and bear but the burden ye be bear , 
  and end the day as ye shall end . 

 and many an eve when the cloud be drift 
  down through the Dale till they dim the roof , 
 shall they tell in the Hall of the Maiden 's Lifting , 
  and how we drave the spoil aloof . 

 they sing together . 

 over the moss through the wind and the weather , 
  through the morn and the eve and the death of the day , 
 wend we man and maid together , 
  for out of the waste be bear the fray . 


 then the Sun - beam spake to Gold - mane softly , and tell he how this 
 song be make by a minstrel concern a foray in the early day of 
 their first abode in Shadowy Vale , and how in good sooth a maiden lead 
 the fray and be the captain of the warrior : 

 ' erst , ' she say , ' this be count as a wonder ; but now we be so 
 few that it be no wonder though the woman will do whatsoever they 
 may . ' 

 so they talk , and gold - mane be very happy ; but ere the good - night 
 cup be drunk , Folk - might spake to face - of - god and say : 

 ' it be well that ye rise betime in the morning : but thou shalt 
 not go back by the way thou camest . wood - wise and another shall go 
 with thee , and show thee a way across the neck and the heath , which 
 be rough enough as far as toil go , but where thy life shall be 
 safe ; and thereby shalt thou hit the ghyll of the Weltering Water , 
 and so come down safely into Burgdale . now that we be friend and 
 fellow , it be no hurt for thee to know the short way to Shadowy 
 Vale . what thou shalt tell concern we in Burgdale I leave the 
 tale thereof to thee ; yet belike thou wilt not tell everything till I 
 come to Burgstead at the spring market - tide . now must I presently to 
 bed ; for before daylight to - morrow must I be follow the hunt along 
 with two score good man of our . ' 

 ' what beast be afield then ? ' say Gold - mane . 

 say folk - might : ' the beast that beset our life , the Dusky Men . 
 in these day we have learn how to find company of they ; and 
 forsooth every week they draw nigh to this Dale ; and some day they 
 should happen upon we if we be not to look to it , and then would 
 there be a murder great and grim ; therefore we scour the heath round 
 about , and the skirt of the woodland , and we fall upon these felon 
 in diver guise , so that they may not know we for the same man ; 
 while be we clothe in homespun , as to - day , and seem like to field- 
 working carle ; while in scarlet and gold , like knight of the 
 Westland ; while in wolf - skin ; while in white glitter gear , like 
 the Wights of the Waste : and in all guise these felon , for all 
 their fierce heart , fear we , and flee from we , and we follow and 
 slay they , and so minish their number somewhat against the great day 
 of battle . ' 

 ' tell I , ' say Gold - mane ; ' when we fall upon silver - dale shall their 
 thrall , the old Dale - dweller , fight for they or for we ? ' 

 say folk - might : ' the Dusky Men will not dare to put weapon into 
 the hand of their thrall . Nay , the thrall shall help we ; for 
 though they have but small stomach for the fight , yet joyfully when 
 the fight be over shall they cut their master ' throat . ' 

 ' how be it with these thrall ? ' say Gold - mane . ' I have never see a 
 thrall . ' 

 ' but I , ' say folk - might , ' have see a many down in the Cities . and 
 there be thrall who be the tyrant of thrall , and hold the whip 
 over they ; and of the other there be some who be not very hardly 
 entreat . but with these it be otherwise , and they all bear 
 grievous pain daily ; for the Dusky Men be as hog in a garden of 
 lily . Whatsoever be fair there have they defile and deflower , 
 and they wallow in our fair hall as swine stray from the dunghill . 
 no delight in life , no sweet day do they have for themselves , and 
 they begrudge the delight of other therein . therefore their thrall 
 know no rest or solace ; their reward of toil be many stripe , and the 
 healing of their stripe grievous toil . to many have they appoint 
 to dig and mine in the silver - yield cliff , and of all the task 
 be that the sore , and there do stripe abound the most . such 
 thrall art thou happy not to behold till thou hast set they free ; as 
 we shall do . ' 

 ' tell I again , ' say face - of - god ; ' be there no mixed folk between 
 these Dusky Men and the Dalesmen , since they have no woman of their 
 own , but lie with the woman of the Dale ? moreover , do not the poor 
 folk of the Dale beget and bear child , so that there be thrall 
 bear of thrall ? ' 

 ' wisely thou ask this , ' say folk - might , ' but thereof shall I tell 
 thee , that when a Dusky Carle mingle with a woman of the Dale , the 
 child which she beareth shall oftenest favour his race and not her ; 
 or else shall it be witless , a fool natural . but as for the child 
 of these poor thrall ; yea , the master cause they to breed if so 
 their mastership will , and when the child be bear , they keep 
 they or slay they as they will , as they would with whelp or calf . 
 to be short , year by year these vile wretch grow fiercer and more 
 beastly , and their thrall more hapless and down - trodden ; and now at 
 last be come the time either to do or to die , as ye man of Burgdale 
 shall speedily find out . but now must I go sleep if I be to be where 
 I look to be at sunrise to - morrow . ' 

 Therewith he call for the sleeping - cup , and it be drunk , and all 
 man fare to bed . but the Sun - beam take Gold - mane 's hand ere they 
 part , and say : 

 ' I shall arise betime on the morrow ; so I say not farewell to - night ; 
 yea , and after to - morrow it shall not be long ere we meet again . ' 

 so gold - mane lie down in that ancient hall , and it seem to he ere 
 he sleep as if his own kindre be slip away from he and he 
 be become a child of the Wolf . ' and yet , ' say he to himself , ' I 
 be become a man ; for my friend , now she no long telleth I to do or 
 forbear , and I tremble . Nay , rather she be fain to take the word 
 from I ; and this great warrior and ripe man , he talketh with I as 
 if I be a chieftain meet for converse with chieftain . even so it 
 be and shall be . ' 

 and soon thereafter he fall asleep in the Hall in Shadowy Vale . 



 CHAPTER XXI . FACE - of - GOD LOOKETH on the dusky MEN 



 when he awake again he see a man stand over he , and know he for 
 wood - wise : he be clothe in his war - gear , and have his quiver at his 
 back and his bow in his hand , for Wood - father 's child be all 
 good bowman , though not so sure as Bow - may . he spake to face - of - god : 

 ' Dawn be in the sky , Dalesman ; there be yet time for thee to wash the 
 night off of thee in our bath of the Shivering Flood and to put thy 
 mouth to the milk - bowl ; but time for nought else : for I and Bow - may 
 be appoint thy fellow for the road , and it be well that we be 
 back home speedily . ' 

 so face - of - god leapt up and go forth from the Hall , and Wood - wise 
 lead to where be a pool in the river with step cut down to it in the 
 rocky bank . 

 ' this , ' say Wood - wise , ' be the Carle 's bath ; but the Queen 's be 
 low down , where the water be wide and shallow below the little 
 mid - dale force . ' 

 so gold - mane strip off his raiment and leapt into the ice - cold 
 pool ; and they have bring his weapon and war - gear with they ; so 
 when he come out he clothe and arm himself for the road , and then 
 turn with wood - wise toward the outgate of the Dale ; and soon they 
 see two man come from low down the water in such wise that they 
 would presently cross their path , and as yet it be little more than 
 twilight , so that they see not at first who they be , but as they 
 draw near they know they for the Sun - beam and Bow - may . the Sun- 
 beam be clothe but in her white linen smock and blue gown as he have 
 first see she , her hair be wet and dripping with the river , she 
 face fresh and rosy : she carry in her two hand a great bowl of 
 milk , and step delicately , lest she should spill it . but Bow - may 
 be clothe in her war - gear with helm and byrny , and a quiver at she 
 back , and a bended bow in her hand . so they greet each other 
 kindly , and the Sun - beam give the bowl to face - of - god and say : 

 ' drink , guest , for thou hast a long and thirsty road before thee . ' 

 so face - of - god drank , and give she the bowl back again , and she 
 smile on he and drank , and the other after she till the bowl be 
 empty : then Bow - may put her hand on Wood - wise 's shoulder , and they 
 lead on toward the outgate , while those twain follow they hand in 
 hand . but the Sun - beam say : 

 ' this then be the new day I speak of , and lo ! it bringeth our 
 sunder with it ; yet shall it be no long than a day when all be 
 say , and new day shall follow after . and now , my friend , I shall 
 see thee no later than the April market ; for doubt not that I shall 
 go thither with folk - might , whether he will or not . also as I lead 
 thee out of the house when we last meet , so shall I lead thee out of 
 the Dale to - day , and I will go with thee a little way on the waste ; 
 and therefore be I shod this morning , as thou seest , for the way on 
 the waste be rough . and now I bid thee have courage while my hand 
 holdeth thine . for afterwards I need not bid thee anything ; for thou 
 wilt have enough to do when thou com to thy Folk , and must need 
 think more of warrior then than of maidens . ' 

 he look at she and long for she , but say soberly : ' thou art 
 kind , o friend , and thinkest kindly of I ever . but methink it be 
 not well do for thee to wend with I over a deal of the waste , and 
 come back by thyself alone , when ye have so many foeman nearby . ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' they be nought so near as that yet , and I wot that 
 folk - might hath go forth toward the north - west , where he looketh to 
 fall in with a company of the foeman . his battle shall be a guard 
 unto we . ' 

 ' I pray thee turn back at the top of the outgate , ' say he , ' and be 
 not venturesome . Thou wottest that the pitcher be not break the 
 first time it goeth to the well , nor maybe the twentieth , but at last 
 it cometh not back . ' 

 she say : ' nevertheless I shall have my will herein . and it be but 
 a little way I will wend with thee . ' 

 Therewith be they come to the scree , and talk fall down between 
 they as they clomb it ; but when they be in the darksome passage of 
 the rock , and could scarce see one another , face - of - god say : 

 ' where then be another outgate from the Dale ? be it not up the 
 water ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' and there be none other : at the low end the 
 rock rise sheer from out the water , and a little far down be a 
 great force thunder betwixt they ; so that by no boat or raft may 
 ye come out of the Dale . but the outgate up the water be call the 
 Road of War , as this be name the Path of Peace . but now be all 
 way way of war . ' 

 ' there be peace in my heart , ' say Gold - mane . 

 she answer not for a while , but press his hand , and he feel she 
 breath on his cheek ; and even therewithal they come out of the dark , 
 and gold - mane see that her cheek be flush ; and now she spake : 

 ' one thing would I say to thee , my friend . Thou hast see I amongst 
 man of war , amongst outlaw who seek violence ; thou hast hear I bid 
 my brother to count the slain , and I shrink not ; thou know   for 
 I have tell thee   how I have scheme and scheme for victorious 
 battle . yet I would not have thee think of I as a Chooser of the 
 Slain , a warrior maiden , or as of one who hath no joy save in the 
 battle whereto she biddeth other . o friend , the many peaceful hour 
 that I have have on the grass down yonder , sit with my rock and 
 spindle in hand , the child round about my knee hearken to some 
 old story so well remember by I ! or the milking of the kine in the 
 dewy summer even , when all be still but for the voice of the water 
 and the cry of the happy child , and there round about I be 
 the dear and beauteous maiden with whom I have grow up , happy amidst 
 all our trouble , since their life be free and they know no guile . 
 in such time my heart be at peace indeed , and it seem to I as if 
 we have win all we need ; as if war and turmoil be over , after they 
 have bring about peace and good day for our little folk . 

 ' and as for the day that be , be they not as that rugge pass , full 
 of bitter wind and the voice of hurrying water , that leadeth yonder 
 to silver - dale , as thou hast divine ? and there be nought good in it 
 save that the breath of life be therein , and that it leadeth to 
 pleasant place and the peace and plenty of the fair dale . ' 

 ' sweet friend , ' he say , ' what thou sayest be well than well : for 
 time shall be , if we come alive out of this pass of battle and bitter 
 strife , when I shall lead thee into Burgdale to dwell there . and 
 thou wottest of our people that there be little strife and grudge 
 amongst they , and that they be merry , and fair to look on , both man 
 and woman ; and no man there lacketh what the earth may give we , and 
 it be a saying amongst we that there may a man have that which he 
 desireth save the sun and moon in his hand to play with : and of 
 this gladness , which be make up of many little matter , what story 
 may be tell ? yet amongst it shall I live and thou with I ; and ill 
 indeed it be if it weary thee and thou wert ever long for some 
 day of victorious strife , and to behold I come back from battle 
 high - raise on the shield of man and crown with bay ; if thine ear 
 must ever be tickle with the talk of man and their song concern 
 my warrior deed . for thus it shall not be . when I drive the herd 
 it shall be at the neighbour ' bidding whereso they will ; not neck 
 of man shall I smite , but the stalk of the tall wheat , and the bole 
 of the timber - tree which the woodreeve hath mark for felling ; the 
 stilt of the plough rather than the hilt of the sword shall harden 
 my hand ; my shaft shall be for the deer , and my spear for the 
 wood - boar , till war and sorrow fall upon we , and I fight for the 
 ceasing of war and trouble . and though I be call a chief and of 
 the blood of chief , yet shall I not be masterful to the goodman of 
 the Dale , but rather to my hound ; for my chieftainship shall be that 
 I shall be well beloved and trust , and that no man shall grudge 
 against I . Canst thou learn to love such a life , which to I 
 seemeth lovely ? and thou ? of whom I say that thou art as if thou 
 wert come down from the golden chair of the Burg of the Gods . ' 

 they be well - nigh out of the steep path by now , and the daylight 
 be bright about they ; there she stay her foot a moment and turn 
 to he and say : 

 ' all this should I love even now , if the grief of our Folk be but 
 heal , and hereafter shall I learn yet more of thy well - beloved 
 face . ' 

 Therewith she lay her face to his and kiss he fondly , and put his 
 hand to her side and hold it there , say : ' soon shall we be one in 
 body and in soul . ' 

 and he laugh with joy and pride of life , and take her hand and lead 
 she on again , and say : 

 ' yet feel the cold ring of my hauberk , my friend ; look at the spear 
 that cumber my hand , and at Dale - warden hanging by my side . thou 
 shalt yet see I as the Slain 's Chooser would see her speech - friend ; 
 for there be much to do ere we win wheat - harvest in Burgdale . ' 

 Therewith they step together on to the level ground of the waste , 
 and see Bow - may sit on a stone hard by , and wood - wise standing 
 beside she bend his bow . Bow - may smile on gold - mane and rise up , 
 and they all go on together , turn so that they go nearly 
 alongside the wall of the Vale , but westere a little ; then the Sun- 
 beam say : 

 ' many a time have I trodden this heath alongside our rock - wall ; for 
 if ye wend a little far as our face be turn , ye come to the 
 crag over the place where the Shivering Flood goeth out of Shadowy 
 Vale . there when ye have clomb a little may'st thou stand on the 
 edge of the rock - wall , and look down and behold the Flood swirling 
 and eddying in the black gorge of the rock , and see presently the 
 reek of the force go up , and hear the thunder of the water as they 
 pour over it : and all this about we now be as the garden of our 
 house - be it not so , Bow - may ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say she , ' and there be goodly cluster - berry to be get 
 hereabout in the autumn ; many a time have the Sun - beam and I redden 
 our lip with they . yet be it good to be wary when war be abroad and 
 hot withal . ' 

 ' yea , ' say the Sun - beam , ' and all this place come into the story of 
 our House : lo ! gold - mane , two score pace before we a little on our 
 right hand those five grey stone . they be call the Rocks of the 
 Elders : for there in the first day of our abiding in Shadowy Vale 
 the Elders be will not to come together to talk privily upon our 
 matter . ' 

 face - of - god look thither as she speak , but therewith see Bow - may , 
 who go on the left hand of the Sun - beam , as face - of - god on her 
 right hand , notch a shaft on her bent bow , and wood - wise , who be on 
 his right hand , see it also and do the like , and therewithal face- 
 of - god get his target on to his arm , and even as he do so Bow - may 
 cry out suddenly : 

 ' yea , yea ! cast thyself on to the ground , Sun - beam ! gold - mane , 
 targe and spear , targe and spear ! for I see steel gleam yonder 
 out from behind the Elders ' Rocks . ' 

 Scarce be the word out of her mouth ere three shaft come fly , 
 and the bow - string twang . gold - mane feel that one smite his helm 
 and glance from it . therewithal he see the Sun - beam fall to earth , 
 though he know not if she have but cast herself down as Bow - may bade . 
 Bow - may 's string twang at once , and a yell come from the foeman : 
 but wood - wise loose not , but set his hand to his mouth and give a 
 loud wild cry - ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! how - ow - ow ! - end in a long and 
 exceed great whoop like nought but the wolf 's howl . now gold - mane 
 thinking swiftly , in a moment of time , as war - meet man do , judge 
 that if the Sun - beam be hurt   and she have make no cry , it be yet 
 wise to fall on the foe before turn to tend she , or else all 
 might be lose ; so he rush forward spear in hand and target on arm , 
 and see , as he open up the flank of the Elders ' Rocks , six man , 
 whereof one lean aback on the rock with Bow - may 's shaft in his 
 shoulder , and two other be just in act of loosing at he . in a 
 moment , as he rush at they , one shaft go whistle by he , and 
 the other glance from off his target ; he cast a spear as he bound 
 on , and see it smite one of the shooter full in the naked face , and 
 see the blood spout out and change his face and the man roll over , 
 and then in another moment four man be hew at he with their 
 short steel axis . he thrust out his target against they , and then 
 let the weight of his body come on his other spear , and drave it 
 through the second shooter 's throat , and even therewith be smite 
 on the helm so hard that , though the Alderman 's work hold out , he 
 fall to his knee , hold his target over his head and strive to 
 draw forth Dale - warden ; in that nick of time a shaft whistle close 
 by his ear , and as he rise to his foot again he see his foeman 
 roll over and over , clutch at the ling with both hand . then 
 ring out again the terrible wolf - whoop from Wood - wise 's mouth , and 
 both he and Bow - may loose a shaft , for the two other foe have turn 
 their back and be flee fast . again Bow - may hit the clout , and 
 the Dusky Man fall dead at once , but wood - wise 's arrow fly over the 
 felon 's shoulder as he run . then in a trice be gold - mane bounding 
 after he like the hare just rouse from her form ; for it come into 
 his head that these felon have behold they come up out of the Vale , 
 and that if even this one man escape , he would bring his company 
 down upon the Vale - dweller . 

 strong and light - foot as any be face - of - god , and though he be 
 cumber with his hauberk , yet be iron - face 's handiwork far lighter 
 than the war - coat of the Dusky Man , and the race be soon over . the 
 felon turn breathless to meet gold - mane , who drave his target 
 against he and cast he to earth , and as he strove to rise smote off 
 his head at one stroke ; for Dale - warden be a good sword and the 
 Dalesman as fierce of mood as might be . there he let the felon lie , 
 and , turning , walk back swiftly toward the Elders ' Rocks , and find 
 there wood - wise and the dead foeman , for the carle have slay the 
 wound , and he be now draw the silver arm - ring off the slain 
 man ; for all these Dusky Felons bear silver arm - ring . but Bow - may 
 be walk towards the Sun - beam , and thitherward follow Gold - mane 
 speedily . 

 he find she sit on a tussock of grass close by where she have 
 fall , her face pale , her eye eager and gleaming ; she look up at 
 he as he draw nigh and say : 

 ' friend , art thou hurt ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' he say , ' and thou ? thou art pale . ' 

 ' I be not hurt , ' she say . then she smile and say again : 

 ' do I not tell thee that I be no warrior like Bow - may here ? such 
 deed make maiden pale . ' 

 say Bow - may : ' if ye will have the truth , gold - mane , she be not will not 
 to grow pale when battle be nigh she . look you , she hath have the 
 gift of a new delight , and findeth it sweet and soft than she have 
 any thought of ; and now hath she fear lest it should be take from 
 she . ' 

 ' bow - may saith but the sooth , ' say the Sun - beam simply , ' and kind it 
 be of she to say it . I see thee , Bow - may , and good be thy shooting , 
 and I love thee for it . ' 

 say Bow - may : ' I never shoot otherwise than well . but those idle 
 shooter of the Dusky Ones , whereabout nigh to thee go their 
 shaft ? ' 

 say the Sun - beam : ' one just lift the hair by my left ear , and 
 that be not so ill - aim ; as for the other , it pierce my raiment by 
 my right knee , and pin I to the earth , so that I totter and 
 fall , and my gown and smock be grievously wound , both of they . ' 

 and she take the fold of the garment in her hand to show the rent 
 therein ; and her colour be come again , and she be glad . 

 ' what be good to do now ? ' she say . 

 say face - of - god : ' let we tarry a little ; for some of thy carle 
 shall surely come up from the Vale : because they will have hear 
 Wood - wise 's whoop , since the wind set that way . ' 

 ' yea , they will come , ' say the Sun - beam . 

 ' Good be that , ' say face - of - god ; ' for they shall take the dead 
 felon and cast they where they be not see if perchance any more 
 stray hereby . for if they wind they , they may well happen on the 
 path down to the Vale . also , my friend , it be well if thou wert to 
 bid a good few of the carle that be in the Vale to keep watch and 
 ward about here , lest there be more foeman wander about the 
 waste . ' 

 she say : ' thou art wise in war , gold - mane ; I will do as thou 
 bidd I . but soothly this be a perilous thing that the Dusky Men 
 be get so close to the Vale . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' this will folk - might look to when he cometh home ; 
 and it be most like that he will deem it good to fall on they 
 somewhere a good way aloof , so as to draw they off from wander 
 over the waste . also I will do my good to busy they when I be home 
 in Burgdale . ' 

 Therewith come up wood - wise , and fall to talk with they ; and his mind 
 it be that these foeman be but a band of strayer , and have have no 
 inkling of Shadowy Vale till they have hear they talk together as 
 they come up the path from the Vale , and that then they have make that 
 ambush behind the Elders ' Rocks , so that they might slay the man , and 
 then bear off the woman . he say withal that it would be good to 
 carry their corps far on , so that they might be cast over the 
 cliff into the fierce stream of the Shivering Flood . 

 amidst this talk come up man from the Vale , a score of they , well 
 arm ; and they run to meet the wayfarer ; and when they hear what 
 have befall , they rejoice exceedingly , and be above all glad that 
 face - of - god have show himself doughty and deft ; and they deem his 
 rede wise , to set a watch thereabout till Folk - might come home , and 
 say that they would do even so . 

 then spake the Sun - beam and say : 

 ' now must ye wayfarer depart ; for the road be but rough , and the day 
 not over - long . ' 

 then she turn to face - of - god and put her hand on his shoulder , and 
 bring her face close to his and spake to he softly : 

 ' doth this second parting seem at all strange to thee , and that I be 
 now so familiar to thee , I whom thou didst once deem to be a very 
 goddess ? and now thou hast see I redden before thine eye because 
 of thee ; and thou hast see I grow pale with fear because of thee ; 
 and thou hast feel my caress which I might not refrain ; even as if 
 I be altogether such a maiden as ye warrior hang about for a nine 
 day ' wonder , and then all be over save an ache heart - wilt thou do 
 so with I ? tell I , have I not belittle myself before thee as if I 
 ask thee to scorn I ? for thus desire dealeth both with maid and 
 man . ' 

 he say : ' in all this there be but one thing for I to say , and that 
 be that I love thee ; and surely none the less , but rather the more , 
 because thou lovest I , and art of my kind , and mayest share in my 
 deed and think well of they . now be my heart full of joy , and one 
 thing only weigheth on it ; and that be that my kinswoman the Bride 
 begrudgeth our love together . for this be the thing that of all 
 thing most misliketh I , that any should bear a grudge against I . ' 

 she say : ' forget not the token , and my message to she . ' 

 ' I will not forget it , ' say he . ' and now I bid thee to kiss I even 
 before all these that be look on ; for there be nought to belittle 
 we therein , since we be troth - plight . ' 

 and indeed those folk stand all round about they gaze on they , but 
 a little aloof , that they might not hear their word if they be 
 minded to talk privily . for they have long love the Sun - beam , and 
 now the love of face - of - god have begin to spring up in their heart . 

 so the twain embrace and kiss one another , and make no haste 
 thereover ; and those man deem that but meet and right , and clash 
 their weapon on their shield in token of their joy . 

 then face - of - god turn about and stride out of the ring of man , with 
 Bow - may and wood - wise beside he , and they go on their journey over 
 the neck towards Burgstead . but the Sun - beam turn slowly from 
 that place toward the Vale , and two of the stout carle go along 
 with she to guard she from harm , and she go down into the Vale 
 ponder all these thing in her heart . 

 then the other carle drag off the corps of the Dusky Men till 
 they have bring they to the sheer rock above the Shivering Flood , 
 and there they toss they over into the boil caldron of the 
 force , and so depart take with they the silver arm - ring of the 
 slain to add to the tale . 

 but when they come back into the Vale the Sun - beam duly order that 
 watch and ward to keep the ingate thereto , and note all that should 
 befall till Folk - might come home . 



 CHAPTER XXII . FACE - of - GOD COMETH home to BURGSTEAD 



 but face - of - god with Bow - may and Wood - wise fare over the waste , 
 go at first alongside the cliff of the Shivering Flood , and then 
 afterwards turn somewhat to the west . they soon have to climb a 
 very high and steep bent go up to a mountain - neck ; and the way 
 over the neck be rough indeed when they be on it , and they toil 
 out of it into a barren valley , and out of the valley again on to a 
 rough neck ; and such - like their journey the day long , for they be 
 go athwart all those great dyke that go from the ice - mountain 
 toward the low dale like the outspread finger of a hand or the 
 root of a great tree . and the ice - mountain they have on their left 
 hand and while at their back . 

 they go very warily , with their bow bend and spear in hand , but 
 see no man , good or bad , and but few live thing . at noon they 
 rest in a valley where be a stream , but no grass , nought but 
 stone and sand ; but where they be at least sheltered from the 
 wind , which be mostly very great in these high waste ; and there 
 Bow - may drew meat and wine from a wallet she bear , and they eat and 
 drank , and be merry enough ; and Bow - may say : 

 ' I would I be go all the way with thee , Gold - mane ; for I long 
 sore to let my eye rest a while on the land where I shall one day 
 live . ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , ' art thou minded to dwell there ? we shall 
 be glad of that . ' 

 ' Whither be thy wit stray ? ' say she ; ' whether I be minded to it 
 or not , I shall dwell there . ' 

 and wood - wise nod a yea to she . but face - of - god say : 

 ' good will be thy dwelling ; but wherefore must it be so ? ' 

 then wood - wise laugh and say : ' I shall tell thee in few word 
 than she will , and time press now : wood - father and Wood - mother , 
 and I and my two brother and this woman have ever be about and 
 anigh the Sun - beam ; and we deem that war and other trouble have make 
 we of close kin to she than we be bear , whether ye call it 
 brotherhood or what not , and never shall we sunder from she in life 
 or in death . so when thou goest to Burgdale with she , there shall we 
 be . ' 

 then be face - of - god glad when he find that they deem his wedding 
 so settled and sure ; but wood - wise fall to make ready for the road . 
 and face - of - god say to he : 

 ' tell I one thing , wood - wise ; that whoop that thou gavest forth when 
 we be at handy - stroke e'en now - be it but a cry of thine own or be 
 it of thy Folk , and shall I hear it again ? ' 

 ' thou may'st look to hear it many a time , ' say Wood - wise , ' for it be 
 the cry of the Wolf . seldom indeed hath battle be join where man 
 of our blood be , but that cry be give forth . come now , to the 
 road ! ' 

 so they go their way and the road worsen upon they , and toilsome 
 be the climbing up steep bent and the scaling of doubtful path in 
 the cliff - side , so that the journey , though the distance of it be 
 not so long to the fowl fly , be much eke out for they , and it 
 be not till near nightfall that they come on the ghyll of the 
 weltering Water some six mile above Burgstead . Forsooth Wood - wise 
 say that the way might be make less toilsome though far long by 
 turn back eastward a little past the vale where they have rest at 
 midday ; and that seem good to gold - mane , in case they should be 
 wend hereafter in a great company between Burgdale and Shadowy 
 Vale . 

 but now those two go with face - of - god down a path in the side of 
 the cliff whereby he - seem he have go before ; and they come down 
 into the ghyll and sit down together on a stone by the water - side , 
 and face - of - god spake to they kindly , for he deem they good and 
 trusty faring - fellow . 

 ' Bow - may , ' say he , ' thou saidst a while ago that thou wouldst be 
 fain to look on Burgdale ; and indeed it be fair and lovely , and ye 
 may soon be in it if ye will . ye shall both be more than welcome to 
 the house of my father , and heartily I bid you thither . for night be 
 on we , and the way back be long and toilsome and beset with peril . 
 Sister Bow - may , thou wottest that it would be a sore grief to I if 
 thou camest to any harm , and thou also , fellow wood - wise . daylight 
 be a good faring - fellow over the waste . ' 

 say Bow - may : ' thou art kind , gold - mane , and that be thy will not , I 
 know ; and fain be I to - night of the candle in thine hall . but we 
 may not tarry ; for thou wottest how busy we be at home ; and Sun - beam 
 needeth I , if it be only to make she sure that no Dusky Man be 
 bear off thine head by its lovely lock . neither shall we journey 
 in the mirk night ; for look you , the moon yonder . ' 

 ' well , ' say face - of - god , ' parting be ill at the good , and I would I 
 could give you twain a gift , and especially to thee , my sister Bow- 
 may . ' 

 say wood - wise : ' thou may'st well do that ; or at least promise the 
 gift ; and that be all one as if we hold it in our hand . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Bow - may , ' wood - wise and I have be think in one way 
 belike ; and I be at point to ask a gift of thee . ' 

 ' what be it ? ' say Gold - mane . ' surely it be thine , if it be but a 
 guerdon for thy good shooting . ' 

 she laugh and handle the skirt of his hauberk as she say : 

 ' show we the dint in thine helm that the steel axe make this 
 morning . ' 

 ' there be no such great dint , ' say he ; ' my father forge that helm , 
 and his work be well than good . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Bow - may , ' and might I have hauberk and helm of his 
 handiwork , and wood - wise a good sword of the same , then be I a glad 
 woman , and this man a happy carle . ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' I be well pleased at thine asking , and so shall 
 iron - face be when he heareth of thine archery ; and how that hall - face 
 be now his only son but for thy close shooting . but now must I to 
 the way ; for my heart tell I that there may have be tiding in 
 Burgstead this while I have be aloof . ' 

 so they rise all three , and Bow - may say : 

 ' thou art a kind brother , and soon shall we meet again ; and that will 
 be well . ' 

 then he put his hand on her shoulder and kiss both her cheek ; 
 and he kiss Wood - wise , and turn and go his way , thread the 
 stony tangle about the Weltering Water , which be now at middle 
 height , and run clear and strong ; so turn once he behold wood- 
 wise and Bow - may climb the path up the side of the ghyll , and bow- 
 may turn to he also and wave her bow as token of farewell . then 
 he go upon his way , which be rough enough to follow by night , 
 though the moon be shin brightly high aloft . yet as he know his 
 road he make but little of it all , and in somewhat more than an hour 
 and a half be come out of the pass into the broken ground at the 
 head of the Dale , and begin to make his way speedily under the bright 
 moonlight toward the Gate , still go close by the water . but as he 
 go he hear of a sudden cry and rumour not far from he , unwonte 
 in that place , where none dwelt , and where the only folk he might 
 look to see be those who cast an angle into the pool and eddy of 
 the Water . moreover , he see about the place whence come the cry 
 torch move swiftly hither and thither ; so that he look to hear 
 of new tiding , and stay his foot and look keenly about he on 
 every side ; and just then , between his rough path and the shimmer of 
 the dancing moonlit water , he see the moon smite on something 
 gleaming ; so , as quietly as he could , he get his target on his arm , 
 and shorten his spear in his right hand , and then turn sharply 
 toward that gleam . even therewith up spring a man on his right hand , 
 and then another in front of he just betwixt he and the water ; an 
 axe gleam bright in the moon , and he catch a great stroke on his 
 target , and therewith drave his left shoulder straight forward , so 
 that the man before he fall over into the water with a mighty 
 splash ; for they be at the very edge of the deep eddy of the 
 Water . then he spin round on his heel , heed not that another 
 stroke have fall on his right shoulder , yet ill - aim , and not with 
 the full edge , so that it run down his byrny and rent it not . so he 
 send the thrust of his spear crash through the face and skull of 
 the smiter , and look not to he as he fall , but stand still , 
 brandish his spear and cry out , ' for the Burg and the Face ! 
 for the Burg and the face ! ' 

 no other foe come against he , but like to the echo of his cry rise a 
 clear shout not far aloof , ' for the face , for the Face ! for the Burg 
 and the face ! ' he mutter , ' so end the day as it begin , ' and 
 shout loud again , ' for the Burg and the face ! ' and in a minute 
 more come break forth from the stone - heap into the moonlit space 
 before the water the tall shape of the man of Burgstead , the red 
 torchlight and the moonlight flash back from their war - gear and 
 weapon ; for every man have his sword or spear in hand . 

 Hall - face be the first of they , and he throw his arm about his 
 brother and say : ' well meet , gold - mane , though thou com amongst 
 we like stone - fist of the Mountain . art thou hurt ? with whom hast 
 thou deal ? where be they ? whence com thou ? ' 

 ' Nay , I be not hurt , ' say face - of - god . ' stint thy question then , 
 till thou hast tell I whom thou seekest with spear and sword and 
 candle . ' 

 ' two felon be they , ' say Hall - face , ' even such as ye see lie 
 dead at Wood - grey 's the other day . ' 

 ' then may ye sheathe your sword and go home , ' say Gold - mane , ' for 
 one lieth at the bottom of the eddy , and the other , thy foot be 
 well - nigh treading on he , Hall - face . ' 

 then arise a rumour of praise and victory , and they bring the 
 torch nigh and look at the fallen man , and find that he be 
 stark dead ; so they even let he lie there till the morrow , and all 
 turn about toward the Thorp ; and many look on face - of - god and 
 wonder concern he , whence he be and what have befall he . 
 indeed , they would have ask he thereof , but could not get at he 
 to ask ; but whoso could , go as nigh to hall - face and he as they 
 might , to hearken to the talk between the brother . 

 so as they go along Hall - face do verily ask he whence he come : 
 ' for be it not so , ' say he , ' that thou didst enter into the wood 
 seek some adventure early in the morning the day before 
 yesterday ? ' 

 ' Sooth be that , ' say face - of - god , ' and I come to Shadowy Vale , and 
 thence be I come this morning . ' 

 say Hall - face : ' I know not Shadowy Vale , nor doth any of we . this 
 be a new word . how say ye , friend , doth any man here know of 
 Shadowy Vale ? ' 

 they all say , ' Nay . ' 

 then say Hall - face : ' hast thou be amongst mere ghost and 
 marvel , brother , or cometh this tale of thy minstrelsy ? ' 

 ' for all your word , ' say Gold - mane , ' to that Vale have I be ; and , 
 to speak shortly   for I desire to have your tale , and be wait for 
 it , I will tell thee that I find there no marvel or strange 
 wight , but a folk of valiant man ; a folk small in number , but great 
 of heart ; a folk come , as we be , from the Fathers and the Gods . and 
 this , moreover , be to be say of they , that they be the foe of 
 these felon of whom ye be chase these twain . and these same 
 Dusky Men of Silver - dale would slay they every man if they might ; and 
 if we look not to it they will soon be do the same by we ; for they 
 be many , and as venomous as adder , as fierce as bear , and as foul 
 as swine . but these valiant man , who bear on their banner the image 
 of the Wolf , should be our fellow in arm , and they have good will 
 thereto ; and they shall show we the way to silver - dale by blind 
 path , so that we may fall upon these felon while they dwell there 
 torment the poor people of the land , and thus may we destroy they 
 as lad a hornet 's nest . or else the day shall be hard for we . ' 

 the man who hang about they drink in his word greedily . but hall- 
 face be silent a little while , and then he say : ' brother gold- 
 mane , these be great tiding . time be when we might have deem 
 they but a minstrel 's tale ; for silver - dale we know not , of which 
 thou speak so glibly , nor the Dusky Men , any more than the Shadowy 
 Vale . Howbeit , thing have befall these two last day so strange 
 and new , that put they together with the murder at Wood - grey 's , 
 and thy word which seem somewhat wild , it may well seem to we that 
 tiding unlooked for be come our way . ' 

 ' come , then , ' say face - of - god , ' give I what thou hast in thy scrip , 
 and trust I , I shall not jeer at thy tale . ' 

 say Hall - face : ' I also will be short with the tale ; and that the 
 more , as meseemeth it be not yet do , and that thou thyself shalt 
 share in the ending of it . it be the day before yesterday , that be 
 the day when thou departedst into the wood on that adventure whereof 
 thou shalt one day tell I more , wilt thou not ? ' 

 ' yea , in good time , ' say face - of - god . 

 ' well , ' quoth Hall - face , ' we go into the wood that day and in the 
 morning , but after sunrise , to the number of a score : we look to 
 meet a bear and a she - bear with cub in a certain place ; for one of 
 the Woodlanders , a keen hunter , have tell we of their lair . also we 
 be wishful to slay some of the wild - swine , the yearling , if we 
 might . therefore , though we have no helm or shield or coat of 
 fence , we have bowshot a plenty , and good store of cast - weapon , 
 besides our wood - knife and an axe or so ; and some of we , of whom I 
 be one , bear our battle - sword , as we be will not ever to do , be the 
 foe beast or man . 

 ' thus armed we go up Wildlake 's way and come to Carlstead , where 
 half - a - score Woodlanders join themselves to we , so that we become a 
 band . we go up the half - clear place past Carlstead for a mile , 
 and then turn east into the wood , and go I know not how far , for 
 the Woodlanders lead we by crooked path , but two hour wear away in 
 our going , till we come to the place where they look to find the 
 bear . it be a place that may well be note , for it be unlike the 
 wood round about . there be a close thicket some two furlong about 
 of thorn and briar and ill - grow ash and oak and other tree , plant 
 by the bird belike ; and it stand as it be in an island amidst of 
 a wide - spread woodlawn of fine turf , set about in the most goodly 
 fashion with great tall straight - bole oak - tree , that seem to have 
 be plant of set purpose by man 's hand . yea , dost thou know the 
 place ? ' 

 ' Methinks I do , ' say Gold - mane , ' and I seem to have hear the 
 Woodlanders give it a name and call it Boars - bait . ' 

 ' that may be , ' say Hall - face . ' well , there we be , the dog and 
 the man , and we draw nigh the thicket and beset it , and doubt not 
 to find prey therein : but when we would set the dog at the thicket 
 to enter it , they be uneasy , and would not take up the slot , but 
 growl and turn about this way and that , so that we deem that 
 they wind some fierce beast at our flank or back . 

 ' even so it be , and fierce enough and deadly be the beast ; for 
 suddenly we hear bow - string twang , and shaft come fly ; and 
 iron - shield of the Upper Dale , who be close beside I , leapt up into 
 the air and fall down dead with an arrow through his back . then I 
 bethink I in the twinkling of an eye , and I cry out , " the foe 
 be on we ! take the cover of the tree - bole and be wary ! for the 
 Burg and the face ! for the Burg and the face ! " 

 ' so we scatter and cover ourselves with the oak - bole , but 
 besides Iron - shield , who be slay outright , two goodman be sorely 
 hurt , to wit bald - face , a man of our house , and Stonyford of the 
 Lower Dale . 

 ' I look from behind my tree - bole , a great one ; and far off down the 
 glade I see man move , clothe in gay raiment ; but near to I , not a 
 hundred yard from my cover , I see an arm clothe in scarlet come out 
 from behind a tree - bole , so I loose at it , and miss not ; for 
 straight there totter out from behind the tree one of those dusky 
 foul - favour man like to those that be slay by Wood - grey . I have 
 another shaft ready notch , so I loose and set the shaft in his 
 throat , and he fall . 

 ' Straightway be a yelling and howl about we like the cry of 
 scald cur , and the oak - wood swarm thick with these felon 
 rush on we ; for it seem that the man whom I have slay be a chief 
 amongst they , or we judge so by his goodly raiment . 

 ' methought then our last day be come . what could we do but run 
 together again after we have loose at a venture , and so withstand 
 they sword and spear in hand ? some fall beneath our shot , but not 
 many , for they come on very swiftly . 

 ' so they fall on we ; but for all their fierceness and their number 
 they might not break our array , and we slay four and hurt many by 
 sword - hewing and spear - casting and push of spear ; and five of we be 
 hurt and one slay by their dart - casting . so they draw off from we a 
 little , and strove to spread out and fall to shoot at we again ; 
 but this we would not suffer , but push on as they fall back , 
 keep as close together as we might for the tree . for we say 
 that we would all die together if need must ; and verily the stour 
 be hard . 

 ' yet hearken ! in that nick of time rise up a strange cry not far 
 from we , ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! how - ow - ow ! end like the howl of a wolf , 
 and then another and another and another , till the whole wood ring 
 again . 

 ' at first we deem that here be come fresh foeman , and that we 
 be undo indeed ; but when they hear it , the foe - man before we 
 falter and give way , and at last turn their back and flee , and 
 we follow , keep well together still : thereby the more part of 
 these man escape we , for they flee wildly here and there from those 
 who bear that cry with they ; so we know that our work be be do 
 for we ; therefore we stand , and see tall man clothe in sheep - brown weed 
 run through the glade pursue those felon and smite they 
 down , till both fleer and pursuer pass out of our sight like man 
 in a dream , or as when ye roll up a picture cloth to lay it in the 
 coffer . 

 ' but to stone - face 's mind those brown - clothe man be the Wights of the 
 Wood that be of the father ' blood , and our very friend ; and when 
 some of we would yet have go forward and foregather with they , 
 and follow the chase along with they , stone - face gainsay it , 
 bid we not to run into the arm of a second death , when we have 
 but just escape from the first . sooth to say , moreover , we have 
 diver hurt man that need look to . 

 ' so what with one thing , what with another , we turn back : but War- 
 cliff 's brother , a tall man , have fell two of those felon with an 
 oak sapling which he have tear from the thicket ; but he have not slay 
 they , and by now they be just awakening from their swoon , and be 
 sit up look round they with fierce rolling eye , expect the 
 stroke , for Raven of Longscree be stand over they with a naked 
 war - sword in his hand . but now that our blood be cool , we be loth 
 to slay they as they lie in our hand ; so we bind they and bring 
 they away with we ; and our own dead we carry also on such bier as 
 we might lightly make there , and with they three that be so 
 grievously hurt that they might not go afoot , these we leave at 
 Carlstead : they be tardy the Son of the Untamed , and Swan of bull- 
 meadow , both of the Lower Dale , and a Woodlander , Undoomed to wit . 
 but the dead be iron - shield aforesaid , and Wool - sark , and the 
 Hewer , a woodlander . 

 ' so come we sadly at eventide to Burgstead with the two dead 
 Burgdalers , and the captive felon , and the wound of we that might 
 go afoot ; and ye may judge that they of Burgdale and our father 
 deem these tiding great enough , and wotte not what next should 
 befall . stone - face would have have those two felon slay there and 
 then ; for no true tale could we get out of they , nor indeed any word 
 at all . but the Alderman would not have it so ; and he deem they 
 might serve our turn as hostage if any of our folk should be take : 
 for one and all we deem , and still deem , that war be on we and that 
 new folk have gather on our skirt . 

 ' so the captive be shut up in the red out - bower of our house ; and 
 our father be minded that thou mightest tell we somewhat of they 
 when thou wert come home . but about dusk to - day the word go that 
 they have break out and get they weapon and flee up the Dale ; and 
 so it be . 

 ' but to - morrow morning will a Gate - thing be holden , and there it will 
 be look for of thee that thou tell we a true tale of thy going . 
 for it be deem , and it be my deeming especially , that thou may'st 
 tell we more of these man than thou hast yet tell we . be it not so ? ' 

 ' yea , surely , ' say Gold - mane , ' I can make as many word as ye will 
 about it ; yet when all be say , it will come to much the same tale as 
 I have already tell thee . yet belike , if ye be minded to take up 
 the sword to defend you , I may tell you in what wise to lay hold on 
 the hilt . ' 

 ' and that be well , ' say Hall - face , ' and no less do I look for of 
 thee . but lo ! here be we come to the Gate of the Burg that abideth 
 battle . ' 



 CHAPTER XXIII . talk in the hall of the HOUSE of the face 



 in sooth they be come to the very Gate of Burgstead , and the great 
 gate be shut , and only a wicket be open , and a half score of 
 stout man in all their war - gear be hold ward thereby . they give 
 place to hall - face and his company , albeit some of the warder 
 follow they through the wicket that they might hear the story tell . 

 the street be full of folk , both man and woman , talk together 
 eagerly concern all these tiding , and when they see the man of 
 the Hue - and - cry they come throng about they , so that they might 
 scarce get to the door of the House of the Face because of the press ; 
 so hall - face   who be a very tall man   cry out : 

 ' good people , all be well ! the runaway be slain , and face - of - god be 
 come back with we ; give place a little , that we may come into our 
 house . ' 

 then the throng set up a shout , and make way a little , so that hall- 
 face and gold - mane and the other could get to the door . and they 
 enter into the Hall , and see much folk therein ; and man be 
 sit at table , for supper be not yet over . but when they see the 
 new - comer they mostly rise up from the board and stand silent to 
 hear the tale , for they have be talk many together each to each , 
 so that the Hall be full of confused noise . 

 so hall - face again cry out : ' man in this hall , good be the 
 tiding . the runaway be slay ; and it be face - of - god who slay 
 they as he come back safe from the waste . ' 

 then they shout for joy , and the brother and stone - face with they 
  for he have enter with they from the street   go up on to the 
 dais , while the other of the Hue - and - cry gat they seat where they 
 might at the endlong table . 

 but when face - of - god come up on to the dai , there sit iron - face 
 look down on the throng Hall with a ruddy cheerful countenance , 
 and beside he sit the Bride ; for he have cause she to be bring 
 thither when he have hear of the tiding of battle . she be daintily 
 clothe in a flame - colour kirtle embroider with gold about the bosom 
 and sleeve , and there be a fillet of golden rose on her ruddy 
 hair . her eye shine bright and eager , and the pommel of her cheek 
 be flush and red contrary to their wo not . need must gold - mane 
 sit by she , and when he come close to she he know not what to do , but 
 he put forth his hand to she , yet with a troubled countenance ; for he 
 fear her grief mingled with her beauty : as for she , she waver in 
 her mind whether she should forbear to touch he or not ; but she see 
 that man about be look at they , and especially be iron - face 
 look on she : therefore she stand up and take Gold - mane 's hand and 
 kiss his face as she have be will not to do , and by then be her face 
 as white as paper ; and her anguish pierce his heart , so that he 
 well - nigh groan for grief of she . but Iron - face look on she and 
 say kindly : 

 ' Kinswoman , thou art pale ; thou hast fear for thy mate amidst all 
 these tiding of war , and still fear for he . but pluck up a 
 heart ; for the man be a deft warrior for all his fair face , which 
 thou lovest as a woman should , and his hand may yet save his head . 
 and if he be slain , yet be there other man of the kindred , and the 
 earth will not be a desert to thee even then . ' 

 she look at Iron - face , and the colour be come back to her face 
 somewhat , and she say : 

 ' it be true ; I have fear for he ; for he goeth into perilous 
 place . but for thee , thou art kind , and I thank thee for it . ' 

 and therewith she kiss Iron - face and sit down in her place , and 
 strove to overmaster her grief , that her face might not be change by 
 it ; for now be thought of battle , and valiant hope arise in 
 man 's heart ; and it seem to she too grievous if she should mar 
 that feast on the eve of battle . 

 but iron - face kiss and embrace his son and say : ' art thou late 
 come from the waste ? Hast thou see new thing ? we look to have a 
 notable tale from thee ; though here also have be tiding , and it be 
 not unlike that we shall presently have new work on our hand . ' 

 ' Father , ' quoth face - of - god , ' I deem that when thou hast hear my 
 tale thou wilt think no less of it than that there be valiant folk 
 to be holpen , poor folk to be deliver , and evil folk to be sweep 
 from off the face of the earth . ' 

 ' it be well , son , ' say Iron - face . ' I see that thy tale be long ; let 
 it alone for to - night . to - morrow shall we hold a gate - thing , and 
 then shall we hear all that thou hast to tell . now eat thy meat and 
 drink a bowl of wine , and comfort thy troth - plight maiden . ' 

 so gold - mane sit down by the Bride , and eat and drink as he need 
 must ; but he be ill at ease and he durst not speak to she . for , on 
 the one hand , he think concern his love for the Sun - beam , and 
 how sweet and good a thing it be that she should take he by the 
 hand and lead he into noble deed and great fame , caress he so 
 softly and sweetly the while ; and , on the other hand , there sit the 
 Bride beside he , sorrowful and angry , begrudge all that sweetness 
 of love , as though it be something foul and unseemly ; and heavy on 
 he lie the weight of that grudge , for he be a man of a friendly 
 heart . 

 stone - face sit outward from he on the other side of the Bride ; and 
 he lean across she towards gold - mane and say : 

 ' fair shall be thy tale to - morrow , if thou tell we all thine 
 adventure . or wilt thou tell we less than all ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' in good time shalt thou know it all , foster- 
 father ; but it be not unlike that by the time that thou hast hear 
 it , there shall be so many other thing to tell of , that my tale 
 shall seem of little account to thee - even as the saw saith that one 
 nail driveth out the other . ' 

 ' yea , ' say stone - face , ' but one tale belike shall be knit up with 
 the other , as it fareth with the figure that come one after other 
 on the weaver 's cloth ; though one maketh not the other , yet one 
 cometh of the other . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' wise art thou now , foster - father , but thou shalt 
 be wise yet in this matter by then a month hath wear : and to - morrow 
 shalt thou know enough to set thine hand a - work . ' 

 so the talk fall between they ; and the night wear , and the man of 
 Burgdale feast in their ancient hall with merry heart , little 
 weigh down by thought of the battle that might be and the trouble 
 to come ; for they be valorous and kindly folk . 



 CHAPTER XXIV . FACE - of - GOD giveth that TOKEN to the BRIDE 



 now on the morrow , when face - of - god arise and other man with he , and 
 the Hall be astir and there be no little throng therein , the Bride 
 come up to he ; for she have sleep in the House of the Face by the 
 bidding of the Alderman ; and she spake to he before all man , and 
 bid he come forth with she into the garden , because she would speak 
 to he apart . he yeasaid she , though with a heavy heart ; and to the 
 folk about that seem meet and due , since those twain be deem to 
 be troth - plight , and they smile kindly on they as they go out of 
 the Hall together . 

 so they come into the garden , where the pear - tree be blossom 
 over the spring lily , and the cherry be shower their flower 
 on the deep green grass , and everything smell sweetly on the warm 
 windless spring morning . 

 she lead the way , go before he till they come by a smooth grass 
 path between the berry bush , to a square space of grass about which 
 be barberry tree , their first tender leaf bright green in the 
 sun against the dry yellowish twig . there be a sundial amidmost of 
 the grass , and betwixt the garden - bough one could see the long grey 
 roof of the ancient hall ; and sweet familiar sound of the nesting 
 bird and man and woman go on their errand be all about in the 
 scented air . she turn about at the sundial and face face - of - god , 
 her hand lightly lay on the score brass , and spake with no anger in 
 her voice : 

 ' I ask thee if thou hast bring I the token whereon thou shalt 
 swear to give I that gift . ' 

 ' yea , ' say he ; and therewith draw the ring from his bosom , and hold 
 it out to she . she reach out her hand to he slowly and take it , 
 and their finger meet as she do so , and he note that her hand be 
 warm and firm and wholesome as he well remember it . 

 she say : ' whence hadst thou this fair finger - ring ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' my friend there in the mountain - valley draw it 
 from off her finger for thee , and bid I bear thee a message . ' 

 her face flush red : ' yea , ' she say , ' and doth she send I a 
 message ? then doth she know of I , and ye have talk of I 
 together . well , give the message ! ' 

 say face - of - god : ' she saith , that thou shalt bear in mind , that to- 
 morrow be a new day . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' for she it be so , and for thee ; but not for I . 
 but now I have bring thee here that thou mightest swear thine oath 
 to I ; lie thine hand on this ring and on this brazen plate whereby 
 the sun measure the hour of the day for happy folk , and swear by 
 the spring - tide of the year and all glad thing that find a mate , and 
 by the God of the Earth that rejoiceth in the life of man . ' 

 then he lay his hand on the finger - ring as it lie on the dial - plate 
 and say : 

 ' by the spring - tide and the live thing that long to multiply their 
 kind ; by the God of the Earth that rejoiceth in the life of man , I 
 swear to give to my kinswoman the Bride the second man - child that I 
 beget ; to be her , to leave or cherish , to love or hate , as she will 
 may bid she . ' then he look on her soberly and say : ' it be duly 
 swear ; be it enough ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say ; but he see how the tear run out of her eye and 
 wet the bosom of her kirtle , and she hang her head for shame of 
 her grief . and Gold - mane be all abash , and have no word to say ; 
 for he know that no word of his might comfort she ; and he deem it 
 ill do to stay there and behold her sorrow ; and he know not how to 
 get he go , and be glad elsewhere , and leave she alone . 

 then , as if she have read his thought , she look up at he and say 
 smile a little amidst of her tear : 

 ' I bid thee stay by I till the flood be over ; for I have yet a word 
 to say to thee . ' 

 so he stand there gaze down on the grass in his turn , and not 
 dare to raise his eye to her face , and the minute seem long to 
 he : till at last she say in a voice scarcely yet clear of weeping : 

 ' wilt thou say anything to I , and tell I what thou hast do , and 
 why , and what thou deemest will come of it ? ' 

 he say : ' I will tell the truth as I know it , because thou askest it 
 of I , and not because I would excuse myself before thee . what have 
 I do ? yesterday I plight my troth to we d the woman that I meet 
 last autumn in the wood . and why ? I wot not why , but that I long 
 for she . yet I must tell thee that it seem to I , and yet seemeth , 
 that I might do no otherwise - that there be nothing else in the 
 world for I to do . what do I deem will come of it , sayest thou ? 
 this , that we shall be happy together , she and I , till the day of our 
 death . ' 

 she say : ' and even so long shall I be sorry : so far be we 
 sunder now . alas ! who look for it ? and whither shall I turn to 
 now ? ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' she bid I tell thee that to - morrow be a new day : 
 meseemeth I know her meaning . ' 

 ' no word of hers hath any meaning to I , ' say the Bride . 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' but hast thou not hear these rumour of war that 
 be in the Dale ? shall not these thing avail thee ? much may grow 
 out of they ; and thou with the mighty heart , so faithful and 
 compassionate ! ' 

 she say : ' what sayest thou ? what may grow out of they ? yea , I 
 have hear those rumour as a man sick to death heareth man talk of 
 their business down in the street while he lieth on his bed ; and 
 already he hath do with it all , and hath no world to mend or mar . 
 for I nought shall grow out of it . what mean thou ? ' 

 say Gold - mane : ' be there nought in the fellowship of Folks , and the 
 aiding of the valiant , and the deliverance of the hapless ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' there be nought to I . I can not think of it to - day 
 nor yet to - morrow belike . yet true it be that I may mingle in it , 
 though think nought of it . but this shall not avail I . ' 

 she be silent a little , but presently spake and say : ' thou sayest 
 right ; it be not thou that hast do this , but the woman who send I 
 the ring and the message of an old saw . o that she should be bear to 
 sunder we ! how hath it befall that I be now so little to thee and 
 she so much ? ' 

 and again she be silent ; and after a while face - of - god spake kindly 
 and softly and say : ' Kinswoman , wilt thou for ever begrudge our 
 love ? this grudge lieth heavy on my soul , and it be I alone that have 
 to bear it . ' 

 she say : ' this be but a light burden for thee to bear , when thou 
 hast nought else to bear ! but do I begrudge thee thy love , gold- 
 mane ? I know not that . rather meseemeth I do not believe in it - nor 
 shall do ever . ' 

 then she hold her peace a long while , nor do he speak one word : and 
 they be so still , that a robin come hop about they , close to 
 the hem of her kirtle , and a starling pitch in the apple - tree hard 
 by and whistle and chuckle , turn about and about , heed they 
 nought . then at last she lift up her face from look on the 
 grass and say : ' these be idle word and avail nothing : one thing 
 only I know , that we be sunder . and now it repenteth I that I 
 have show thee my tear and my grief and my sickness of the earth 
 and those that dwell thereon . I be ashamed of it , as if thou hadst 
 smite I , and I have come and show thee the stripe , and say , see 
 what thou hast do ! hast thou no pity ? yea , thou pitiest I , and 
 wilt try to forget thy pity . belike thou art right when thou sayest , 
 to - morrow be a new day ; belike matter will arise that will call I 
 back to life , and I shall once more take heed of the joy and sorrow 
 of my people . Nay , it be most like that this I shall feign to do 
 even now . but if to - morrow be a new day , it be to - day now and not 
 to - morrow , and so shall it be for long . hereof belike we shall talk 
 no more , thou and I. For as the day wear , the dealing between we 
 shall be that thou shalt but get thee away from my life , and I shall 
 be nought to thee but the name of a kinswoman . thus should it be 
 even wert thou to strive to make it otherwise ; and thou shalt not 
 strive . so let all this be ; for this be not the word I have to say to 
 thee . but hearken ! now be we sunder , and it irketh I beyond 
 measure that folk know it not , and be kind , and rejoice in our love , 
 and deem it a happy thing for the folk ; and this burden I may bear no 
 long . so I shall declare unto man that I will not we d thee ; and 
 belike they may wonder why it be , till they see thee wed to the 
 Woman of the Mountain . art thou content that so it shall be ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' Nay , thou shalt not take this all upon thyself ; I 
 also shall declare unto the folk that I will we d none but she , the 
 Mountain - Woman . ' 

 she say : ' this shalt thou not do ; I forbid it thee . and I will 
 take it all upon myself . shall I have it say of I that I be unmeet 
 to we d thee , and that thou hast find I out at last and at late ? 
 I lay this upon thee , that wheresoever I declare this and whatsoever 
 I may say , thou shalt hold thy peace . this at least thou may'st do 
 for I . Wilt thou ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say , ' though it shall put I to shame . ' 

 again she be silent for a little ; then she say : 

 ' o gold - mane , this would I take upon myself not soothly for any shame 
 of seem to be thy cast - off ; but because it be I who need must 
 bear all the sorrow of our sundering ; and I have the will to bear it 
 great and heavy , that I may be as the woman of old time , and they 
 that have come from the Gods , lest I belittle my life with malice and 
 spite and confusion , and it become poisonous to I . be at peace ! be 
 at peace ! and leave all to the wearing of the year ; and forget not 
 that which thou hast swear ! ' 

 Therewith she turn and go from that green place toward the House 
 of the Face , walk slowly through the garden amongst the sweet 
 odour , beneath the fair blossom , a body most dainty and beauteous 
 of fashion , but the casket of grievous sorrow , which all that 
 goodliness avail not . 

 but face - of - god linger in that place a little , and for that little 
 while the joy of his life be dull and overworn ; and the day 
 before his wandering on the mountain seem to he free and careless 
 and happy day that he could not but regret . he be ashamed , 
 moreover , that this so unquenchable grief should come but of he , and 
 the pleasure of his life , which he himself have find out for himself , 
 and which be but such a little portion of the Earth and the deed 
 thereof . but presently his thought wander from all this , and as he 
 turn away from the sundial and go his way through the garden , he 
 call to mind his longing for the day of the spring market , when he 
 should see the Sun - beam again and be cherish by the sweetness of 
 her love . 



 CHAPTER XXV . of the GATE - thing AT burgstead 



 but now must he hasten , for the Gate - thing be to be holden two hour 
 before noon ; so he betake he speedily to the Hall , and take his 
 shield and do on a goodly helm and girt his sword to his side , for 
 man must need go to all folk - mote with their weapon and clothe in 
 war - gear . thus he go forth to the Gate with many other , and there 
 already be many folk assemble in the space aforesaid betwixt the 
 Gate of the Burg and the sheer rock on the face of which be the 
 step that lead up to the ancient tower on the height . the Alderman 
 be sit on the great stone by the Gate - side which be his 
 appoint place , and beside he on the stone bench be the six 
 Wardens of the Burg ; but of the six Wardens of the Dale there be 
 but three , for the other have not yet hear tell of the battle or have 
 get the summon to the thing , since they have be about their 
 business down the Dale . 

 face - of - god take his place silently amongst the neighbour , but man 
 make way for he , so that he must need stand in front , face his 
 father and the Wardens ; and there go up a murmur of expectation 
 round about he , both because the word have go about that he have a 
 tale of new tiding to tell , and also because man deem he their 
 good and handy man , though he be yet so young . 

 now the Alderman look around and beheld a great throng gather 
 together , and he look on the shadow of the Gate which the 
 southere sun be cast on the hard white ground of the Thing- 
 stead , and he see that it have just take in the standing - stone which 
 be in the midst of the place . on the face of the say stone be 
 carven the image of a fight man with shield on arm and axe in 
 hand ; for it have be set there in old time in memory of the man who 
 have bid the Folk build the Gate and its wall , and have show they 
 how to fashion it : for he be a deft house - smith as well as a great 
 warrior ; and his name be iron - hand . so when the Alderman see that 
 this stone be wholly within the shadow of the Gate he know that it 
 be the due time for the hallowing - in of the thing . so he bid one 
 of the warden who sit beside he and have a great slug - horn slung 
 about he , to rise and set the horn to his mouth . 

 so that man arise and blow three great blast that go bellow 
 about the tower and down the street , and beat back again from the 
 face of the sheer rock and up they and over into the wild - wood ; and 
 the sound of it go on the light west - wind along the lip of the 
 Dale toward the mountain waste . and many a goodman , when he hear 
 the voice of the horn in the bright spring morning , leave spade or axe 
 or plough - stilt , or the foddering of the ewe and their youngling , 
 and turn back home to fetch his sword and helm and hasten to the 
 Thing , though he know not why it be summon : and woman wend 
 over the meadow , who have not yet hear of the battle in the wood , 
 hearken and stand still on the green grass or amidst the ripple of 
 the ford , and the threat of come trouble smite heavy on their 
 heart , for they know that great tiding must be towards if a thing 
 must need be summon so close to the Great Folk - mote . 

 but now the Alderman stand up and spake amidst the silence that 
 follow the last echo of the horn : 

 ' now be hallowed in this Gate - thing of the Burgstead Men and the man 
 of the Dale , wherein they shall take counsel concern matter late 
 befall , that press hard upon they . let no man break the peace of 
 the Holy Thing , lest he become a man accurse in holy place from the 
 plain up to the mountain , and from the mountain down to the plain ; a 
 man not to be cherish of any man of good will , not be holpen with 
 victual or edge - tool or draught - beast ; a man to be shelter under 
 no roof - tree , and warm at no hearth of man : so help we the Warrior 
 and the God of the Earth , and he of the face , and all the father ! ' 

 when he have speak man clash their weapon in token of assent ; and 
 he sit down again , and there be silence for a space . but presently 
 come thrust forward a goodman of the Dale , who seem as if he have 
 come hurriedly to the thing ; for his face be run down with 
 sweat , his wide - rim iron cap sit awry over his brow , and he be 
 girt with a rusty sword without a scabbard , and the girdle be ill- 
 brace up about his loin . so he say : 

 ' I be red - coat of waterless of the Lower Dale . early this morning as 
 I be go afield I meet on the way a man akin to I , Fox of Upton to 
 wit , and he tell I that man be be summon to a Gate - thing . so 
 I turn back home , and catch up any weapon that come handy , and 
 here I be , Alderman , ask thee of the tiding which hath drive 
 thee to call this thing so hard on the Great Folk - mote , for I know 
 they nothing so . ' 

 then stand up Iron - face the Alderman and say : ' this be well ask , 
 and soon shall ye be as wise as I be on this matter . know ye , o man 
 of Burgstead and the Dale , that we have not call this Gate - thing so 
 hard on the Great Folk - mote have not great need be to look into 
 troublous matter . long have ye dwelt in peace , and it be year on 
 year now since any foeman hath fall on the Dale : but , as ye will 
 bear in mind , last autumn be there ransacking in the Dale and 
 amidst of the Shepherds after the manner of deed of war ; and it 
 troubleth we that none can say who work these ill deed . next , 
 but a little while agone , be wood - grey , a valiant goodman of the 
 Woodlanders , slay close to his own door by evil man . these man we 
 take at first for mere gangrel felon and outcast from their own 
 folk : though there be some who speak against that from the 
 beginning . 

 ' but thirdly be new tiding again : for three day ago , while some 
 of the folk be hunt peaceably in the wild - wood and think no 
 evil , they be fall upon of set purpose by a host of man - at - arm , 
 and nought would serve but mere battle for dear life , so that many of 
 our neighbour be hurt , and three slain outright ; and now mark 
 this , that those who there fall upon our folk be clothe and arm 
 even as the two felon that slay wood - grey , and moreover be like 
 they in aspect of body . now stand forth Hall - face my son , and answer 
 to my question in a loud voice , so that all may hear thee . ' 

 so hall - face stand forth , clothe in gleam war - gear , with an axe over 
 his shoulder , and seem a doughty warrior . and Iron - face say to 
 he : 

 ' tell I , son , those whom ye meet in the wood , and of whom ye bring 
 home two captive , how much like be they to the murder - carle at 
 Wood - grey 's ? ' 

 say Hall - face : ' as like as pea out of the same cod , and to our 
 eye all those whom we see in the wood might have be son of one 
 father and one mother , so much alike be they . ' 

 ' yea , ' say the Alderman ; ' now tell I how many by thy deeming fall 
 upon you in the wood ? ' 

 say Hall - face : ' we deem that if they be any less than 
 threescore , they be little less . ' 

 ' Great be the odd , ' say the Alderman . ' or how many be ye ? ' 

 ' one score and seven , ' say Hall - face . 

 say the Alderman : ' and yet ye escape with life all save those 
 three ? ' 

 hall - face say : ' I deem that scarce one should have come back alive , 
 have it not be that as we fight come a noise like the howling of 
 wolf , and thereat the foeman turn and flee , and there follow on 
 the fleer tall man clothe in sheep - brown raiment , who smite they down 
 as they flee . ' 

 ' here then be the story , neighbour , ' say the Alderman , ' and ye may 
 see thereby that if those slayer of Wood - grey be outcast , their 
 band be a great one ; but it seemeth rather that they be man of a 
 folk whose craft it be to rob with the armed hand , and to slay the 
 robbed ; and that they be now gather on our border for war . yet , 
 moreover , they have foeman in the wood who should be fellow - in - arm 
 of we . how sayest thou , stone - face ? thou art old , and hast see 
 many war in the Dale , and know the wild - wood to its innermost . 

 ' Alderman , ' say stone - face , ' and ye neighbour of the Dale , maybe 
 these foe whom ye have meet be not of the race of man , but be 
 troll and wood - wight . now if they be troll it be ill , for then be 
 the world grow worser , and the wood shall be right perilous for 
 those who need must fare therein . yet if they be man it be a worse 
 matter ; for the troll would not come out of the waste into the 
 sunlight of the Dale . but these foe , if they be man , be lust 
 after our fair Dale to eat it up , and it be most like that they be 
 gather a huge host to fall upon we at home . such thing I have 
 hear of when I be young , and the aspect of the evil man who overrun 
 the kindred of old time , accord to all tale and lay that I have 
 hear , be even such as the aspect of those whom we have see of late . 
 as to those wolf who save the neighbour and chase their foeman , 
 there be one here who belike knoweth more of all this than we do , and 
 that , o Alderman , be thy son whom I have foster , face - of - god to 
 wit . bid he answer to thy questioning , and tell we what he hath 
 see and hear of late ; then shall we verily know the whole story as 
 far as it can be know . ' 

 then man press round , and be eager to hear what face - of - god would 
 be say . but or ever the Alderman could begin to question he , the 
 throng be cleave by new - comer , and these be the man who have be 
 send to bring home the corps of the Dusky Men : so they have cast 
 load hook into the Weltering Water , and have drag up he whom 
 face - of - god have shove into the eddy , and who have sink like a stone 
 just where he fall , and now they be bring he on a bi along 
 with he who have be slay a - land . they be set down in the place 
 before the Alderman , and man who have not see they before look 
 eagerly on they that they might behold the aspect of their foeman ; 
 and nought lovely be they to look on ; for the drowned man be 
 already bleach and swell with the water , and the other , his face 
 be all wrye and twist with that spear - thrust in the mouth . 

 then the Alderman say : ' I would question my son Face - of - god . let 
 he stand forth ! ' 

 and therewith he smile merrily in his son 's face , for he be 
 stand right in front of he ; and he say : 

 ' ask of I , Alderman , and I will answer . ' 

 ' Kinsman , ' say Iron - face , ' look at these two dead man , and tell I , 
 if thou hast see any such besides those two murder - carle who be 
 slay at Carlstead ; or if thou know aught of their folk ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' yesterday I see six other like to these both in 
 array and of body , and three of they I slay , for we be in battle 
 with they early in the morning . ' 

 there be a murmur of joy at this word , since all man take these 
 felon for deadly foeman ; but iron - face say : ' what mean thou by 
 " we " ? ' 

 ' I and the man who have gueste I overnight , ' say face - of - god , ' and 
 they slay the other three ; or rather a woman of they slay the 
 felon . ' 

 ' Valiant she be ; all good go with her hand ! ' say the Alderman . 
 ' but what be these people , and where do they dwell ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' as to what they be , they be of the kindre of 
 the Gods and the Fathers , valiant man , and guest - cherishing : rich 
 have they be , and now be poor : and their poverty cometh of these 
 same felon , who master they by number not to be withstand . as to 
 where they dwell : when I say the name of their dwelling - place man 
 mock at I , as if I name some valley in the moon : yet come I to 
 burgdale thence in one day across the mountain - neck lead by sure 
 guide , and I tell thee that the name of their abode be Shadowy 
 Vale . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Iron - face , ' knoweth any man here of Shadowy Vale , or 
 where it be ? ' 

 none answer for a while ; but there be an old man who be sit 
 on the shaft of a wain on the outskirt of the throng , and when he 
 hear this word he ask his neighbour what the Alderman be say , 
 and he tell he . then say that elder : 

 ' give I place ; for I have a word to say hereon . ' Therewith he 
 arise , and make his way to the front of the ring of man , and say : 
 ' Alderman , thou know I ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say Iron - face , ' thou art call the Fiddle , because of thy 
 sweet speech and thy minstrelsy ; whereof I mind I well in the time 
 when I be young and thou no long young . ' 

 ' so it be , ' say the Fiddle . ' now hearken ! when I be very young I 
 hear of a vale lie far away across the mountain - neck ; a vale 
 where the sun shine never in winter and scantily in summer ; for my 
 swear foster - brother , Fight - fain , a bold man and a great hunter , have 
 happen upon it ; and on a day in full midsummer he bring I 
 thither ; and even now I see the Vale before I as in a picture ; a 
 marvellous place , well grassed , treeless , narrow , betwixt great 
 cliff - wall of black stone , with a green river run through it 
 towards a yawn gap and a huge force . amidst that Vale be a doom- 
 ring of black stone , and nigh thereto a feast - hall well build of 
 the like stone , over whose door be carven the image of a wolf with 
 red gap jaw , and within it   for we enter into it   be stone 
 bench on the dais . thence we come away , and thither again we go 
 in late autumn , and so dusk and cold it be at that season , that we 
 know not what to call it save the valley of deep shade . but its real 
 name we never know ; for there be no man there to give we a name or 
 tell we any tale thereof ; but all be waste there ; the wimbrel 
 laugh across its water , the raven croak from its crag , the eagle 
 scream over it , and the voice of its water never cease ; and thus 
 we leave it . so the season pass , and we go thither no more : for 
 fight - fain die , and without he wander over the waste be irksome 
 to I ; so never have I see that valley again , or hear man tell 
 thereof . 

 ' now , neighbour , have I tell you of a valley which seemeth to be 
 Shadowy Vale ; and this be true and no make - up story . ' 

 the Alderman nod kindly to he , and then say to face - of - god : 
 ' Kinsman , be this word accord with what thou know of Shadowy 
 Vale ? ' 

 ' yea , on all point , ' say face - of - god ; ' he hath put before I a 
 picture of the valley . and whereas he saith , that in his youth it 
 be waste , this also goeth with my knowledge thereof . for once be 
 it people , and then be waste , and now again be it people . ' 

 ' tell we then more of the folk thereof , ' say the Alderman ; ' be they 
 many ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' they be not . how might they be many , 
 dwelling in that narrow Vale amid the waste ? but they be valiant , 
 both man and woman , and strong and well - liking . once they dwelt in a 
 fair dale call silver - dale , the name whereof will be to you as a 
 name in a lay ; and there be they wealthy and happy . then fall upon 
 they this murderous Folk , whom they call the Dusky Men ; and they 
 fight and be overcome , and many of they be slain , and many 
 enthral , and the remnant of they escape through the pass of the 
 mountain and come back to dwell in Shadowy Vale , where their 
 forefather have dwelt long and long ago ; and this overthrow befell 
 they ten year agone . but now their old foeman have break out from 
 silver - dale and have take to scour the wood seek prey ; so they 
 fall upon these Dusky Men as occasion serve , and slay they without 
 pity , as if they be adder or evil dragon ; and indeed they be 
 bad . and these valiant man know for certain that their foeman be 
 now of mind to fall upon this Dale and destroy it , as they have do 
 with other nigh to they . and they will slay our man , and lie with 
 our woman against their will , and enthrall our child , and torment 
 all those that lie under their hand till life shall be bad than 
 death to they . therefore , o Alderman and Wardens , and ye neighbour 
 all , it behoveth you to take counsel what we shall do , and that 
 speedily . ' 

 there be again a murmur , as of man nothing daunt , but intent on 
 take some way through the come trouble . but no man say aught 
 till the Alderman spake : 

 ' when didst thou first happen upon this Earl - folk , son ? ' 

 ' late last autumn , ' say face - of - god . 

 say Iron - face : ' then might thou have tell we of this tale 
 before . ' 

 ' yea , ' say his son , ' but I know it not , or but little of it , till 
 two day agone . in the autumn I wander in the woodland , and on the 
 fall I happen on a few of this folk dwelling in a booth by the 
 pine - wood ; and they be kind and guest - fain with I , and give I 
 meat and drink and lodge , and bid I come to Shadowy Vale in the 
 spring , when I should know more of they . and that be I fain of ; for 
 they be wise and goodly man . but I deem no more of those that I 
 see there save as man who have be outlaw by their own folk for 
 deed that be unlawful belike , but not shameful , and be bid 
 their time of return , and be live as they might meanwhile . but 
 of the whole Folk and their foeman know I no more than ye do , till 
 two day agone , when I meet they again in Shadowy Vale . also I think 
 before long ye shall see their chieftain in Burgstead , for he hath a 
 word for we . lastly , my mind it be that those brown - clothe man who 
 help hall - face and his company in the wood be nought but man of 
 this Earl - kin seek their foeman ; for indeed they tell I that they 
 have come upon a battle in the woodland wherein they have slay their 
 foeman . now have I tell you all that ye need to know concern 
 these matter . ' 

 again be there silence as Iron - face sit ponder a question for his 
 son ; then a goodman of the Upper Dale , Gritgarth to wit , spake and 
 say : 

 ' gold - mane mine , tell we how many be this folk ; I mean their 
 fighting - man ? ' 

 ' well ask , neighbour , ' say Iron - face . 

 say face - of - god : ' their fighting - man of full age may be five score ; 
 but besides that there shall be some two or three score of woman that 
 will fight , whoever say they nay ; and many of these be little bad 
 in the field than man ; or no bad , for they shoot well in the bow . 
 moreover , there will be a full score of swain not yet twenty winter 
 old whom ye may not hinder to fight if anything be a - doing . ' 

 ' this be no great host , ' say the Alderman ; ' yet if they deem there 
 be little to lose by fighting , and nought to gain by sit still , 
 they may go far in win their desire ; and that more especially if 
 they may draw into their quarrel some other valiant folk more in 
 number than they be . I marvel not , though , they be kind to thee , 
 son Gold - mane , if they know who thou wert . ' 

 ' they know it , ' say face - of - god . 

 ' neighbour , ' say the Alderman , ' have ye any rede hereon , and aught 
 to say to back your rede ? ' 

 then spake the fiddle : ' as ye know and may see , I be now very old , 
 and , as the word go , unmeet for battle : yet might I get I to the 
 field , either on mine own leg or on the leg of some four - foot 
 beast , I would strike , if it be but one stroke , on these pest of 
 the earth . and , Alderman , meseemeth we shall do amiss if we bid not 
 the Earl - folk of Shadowy Vale to be our fellow in arm in this 
 adventure . for look you , how few soever they be , they will be sure 
 to know the way of our foeman , and the mountain pass , and the 
 sure and nighest road across the neck and the mire of the waste ; 
 and though they be not a host , yet shall they be worth a host to we ? ' 

 when man hear his word they shout for joy of they ; for hatred of 
 the Dusky Men who should so mar their happy life in the Dale be 
 grow up in they , and the more that hatred wax , the more waxed 
 their love of those valiant one . 

 now red - coat of waterless spake again : he be a big man , both tall 
 and broad , ruddy - face and red - haired , some forty winter old . he 
 say : 

 ' life hath be well with we of the Lower Dale , and we deem that we 
 have much to lose in lose it . yet ill would the bargain be to buy 
 life with thralldom : we have be over - merry hitherto for that . 
 therefore I say , to battle ! and as to these man , these well - wisher 
 of face - of - god , if they also be minded for battle with our foe , we 
 be fool indeed if we do not join they to our company , be they 
 but one score instead of six . ' 

 man shout again , and they say that Red - coat have speak well . then 
 one after other the goodman of the Dale come and give their word for 
 fellowship in arm with the Men of Shadowy Vale , if there be such 
 as face - of - god have say , which they doubt not ; and amongst they 
 that spake be Fox of Nethertown , and Warwell , and Gritgarth , and 
 Bearswain , and Warcliff , and Hart of Highcliff , and Worm of 
 Willowholm , and Bullsbane , and highneb of the Marsh : all these be 
 stout man - at - arm and man of good counsel . 

 last of all the Alderman spake and say : 

 ' as to the war , that must we need meet if all be sooth that we have 
 hear , and I doubt it not . 

 ' now therefore let we look to it like wise man while time yet serve . 
 Ye shall know that the muster of the Dalesmen will bring under shield 
 eight long hundred of man well - arm , and of the Shepherd - Folk four 
 hundred , and of the Woodlanders two hundred ; and this be a goodly 
 host if it be well order and wisely lead . now be I your Alderman 
 and your Doomster , and I can heave up a sword as well as another 
 maybe , nor do I think that I shall blench in the battle ; yet I 
 misdoubt I that I be no leader or orderer of man - of - war : therefore 
 ye will do wisely to choose a wise man - at - arm than I be for your 
 war - leader ; and if at the Great Folk - mote , when all the Houses and 
 Kindreds be gather , man yeasay your choosing , then let he abide ; 
 but if they naysay it , let he give place to another . for time 
 press . will ye so choose ? ' 

 ' yea , yea ! ' cry all man . 

 ' Good be that , neighbour , ' say the Alderman . ' whom will ye have 
 for war - leader ? consider well . ' 

 Short be their rede , for every man open his mouth and cry out 
 ' face - of - god ! ' then say the Alderman : 

 ' the man be young and untried ; yet though he be so near akin to I , I 
 will say that ye will do wisely to take he ; for he be both deft of 
 his hand and brisk ; and moreover , of this matter he knoweth more 
 than all we together . now therefore I declare he your war - leader 
 till the time of the Great Folk - mote . ' 

 then all man shout with great glee and clash their weapon ; but 
 some few put their head together and spake apart a little while , and 
 then one of they , red - coat of waterless to wit , come forward and 
 say : ' Alderman , some of we deem it good that stone - face , the old 
 man wise in war and in the way of the Wood , should be name as a 
 counsellor to the war - leader ; and hall - face , a very brisk and strong 
 young man , to be his right hand and sword - bearer . ' 

 ' good be that , ' say Iron - face . ' neighbour , will ye have it so ? ' 
 this also they yeasaid without delay , and the Alderman declare 
 Stone - face and Hall - face the helper of face - of - god in this business . 
 then he say : 

 ' if any hath aught to say concern what be good to be do at once , 
 it be good that he say it now before all and not to murmur and 
 grudge hereafter . ' 

 none spake save the Fiddle , who say : ' Alderman and War - leader , one 
 thing would I say : that if these foeman be anywise akin to those 
 overrunner of the folk of whom the tale go in my youth   for I 
 also as well as stone - face mind I well of those tale concern 
 they , it shall not avail we to sit still and await their onset . for 
 then may they not be withstood , when they have gather head and 
 burst out and over the folk that have be happy , even as the water 
 that overtop a dyke and cover with their muddy ruin the deep green 
 grass and the flower - bud of spring . therefore my rede be , as soon 
 as may be to go seek these folk in the woodland and wheresoever else 
 they may be wander . what sayest thou , face - of - god ? ' 

 ' my rede be as thine , ' say he ; ' and to begin with , I do now call 
 upon ten ten of good man to meet I in arm at the beginning of 
 Wildlake 's way to - morrow morning at daybreak ; and I bid my brother 
 Hall - face to summon such as be most meet thereto . for this I deem 
 good , that we scour the wood daily at present till we hear fresh 
 tiding from they of Shadowy Vale , who be nigh than we to the 
 foeman . now , neighbour , be ye ready to meet I ? ' 

 then all shout , ' yea , we will go , we will go ! ' 

 say the Alderman : ' now have we make provision for the war in that 
 which be near to our hand . yet have we to deal with the matter 
 of the fellowship with the Folk whom face - of - god hath see . this be 
 a matter for thee , son , at least till the Great Folk - mote be holden . 
 tell I then , shall we send a messenger to Shadowy Vale to speak with 
 this folk , or shall we abide the chieftain be come ? ' 

 ' by my rede , ' say face - of - god , ' we shall abide his coming : for 
 first , though I might well make my way thither , I doubt if I could 
 give any the bearing , so that he could come there without I ; and 
 belike I be need at home , since I be become war - leader . moreover , 
 when your messenger cometh to Shadowy Vale , he may well chance to 
 find neither the chieftain there , nor the good of his man ; for while 
 be they here , and while there , as they wend follow after the 
 Dusky Men . ' 

 ' it be well , son , ' say the Alderman , ' let it be as thou sayest : 
 soothly this matter must need be bring before the Great Folk - mote . 
 now will I ask if any other hath any word to say , or any rede to give 
 before this Gate - thing sundereth ? ' 

 but no man come forward , and all man seem well content and of good 
 heart ; and it be now well past noontide . 



 CHAPTER XXVI . the ending of the GATE - thing 



 but just as the Alderman be on the point of rise to declare the 
 breaking - up of the thing , there come a stir in the throng and it 
 open , and a warrior come forth into the innermost of the ring of 
 man , array in goodly glitter war - gear ; clothe in such wise that a 
 tunicle of precious gold - wrought web cover the hauberk all but the 
 sleeve thereof , and the hem of it beset with blue mountain - stone 
 smite against the ankle and well - nigh touch the foot , shod with 
 sandal gold - embroider and gem . this warrior bear a goodly 
 gild helm on the head , and hold in hand a spear with gold - garland 
 shaft , and be gird with a sword whose hilt and scabbard both be 
 adorn with gold and gem : beardless , smooth - cheeked , exceed 
 fair of face be the warrior , but pale and somewhat haggard - eye : 
 and those who be nearby beheld and wonder ; for they see that 
 there be come the Bride array for war and battle , as if she be a 
 messenger from the House of the Gods , and the Burg that endureth for 
 ever . 

 then she fall to speech in a voice which at first be somewhat hoarse 
 and break , but clear as she go on , and she say : 

 ' there sitt thou , o Alderman of Burgdale ! be face - of - god thy son 
 anywhere nigh , so that he can hear I ? ' 

 but iron - face wonder at her word , and say : ' he be beside thee , as 
 he should be . ' for indeed face - of - god be touch she , shoulder to 
 shoulder . but she look not to the right hand nor the left , but 
 say : 

 ' Hearken , Iron - face ! chief of the House of the Face , Alderman of the 
 Dale , and ye also , neighbour and goodman of the Dale : I be a woman 
 call the Bride , of the House of the Steer , and ye have hear that I 
 have plight my troth to face - of - god to we d with he , to love he , 
 and lie in his bed . but it be not so : we be not troth - plight ; nor 
 will I we d with he , nor any other , but will wend with you to the 
 war , and play my part therein accord to what might be in I ; nor 
 will I be worse than the wife of Shadowy Vale . ' 

 face - of - god hear her word with no change of countenance ; but Iron- 
 face redden over all his face , and star at she , and knit his 
 brow and say : 

 ' Maiden , what be these word ? what have we do to thee ? have I 
 not be to thee as a father , and love thee dearly ? be not my son 
 goodly and manly and deft in arm ? hath it not ever be the will not of 
 the House of the Face to we d in the House of the Steer ? and in these 
 two Houses there hath never yet be a goodly man and a lovelier 
 maiden than be ye two . what have we do then ? ' 

 ' ye have do nought against I , ' she say , ' and all that thou sayest 
 be sooth ; yet will I not we d with face - of - god . ' 

 yet fiercer wax the face of the Alderman , and he say in a loud 
 voice : 

 ' but how if I tell thee that I will speak with thy kindre of the 
 Steer , and thou shalt do after my bidding whether thou wilt or 
 whether thou wilt not ? ' 

 ' and how will ye compel I thereto ? ' she say . ' be there thrall in 
 the Dale ? or will ye make I an outlaw ? who shall heed it ? or I 
 shall betake I to Shadowy Vale and become one of their warrior- 
 maiden . ' 

 now be the Alderman 's face change from red to white , and belike he 
 forgat the thing , and what he be do there , and he cry out : 

 ' this be an evil day , and who shall help I ? Thou , face - of - god , what 
 hast thou to say ? wilt thou let this woman go without a word ? what 
 hath bewitch thee ? ' 

 but never a word spake his son , but stand look straight forward , 
 cold and calm by seem . then turn Iron - face again to the Bride , 
 and say in a soft voice : 

 ' tell I , maiden , whom I erst call daughter , what hath befall , 
 that thou wilt leave my son ; thou who wert once so kind and love to 
 he ; whose hand be always seek his , whose eye be ever 
 follow his ; who wouldst go where he bid , and come when he call . 
 what hath betid that ye have cast he out , and flee from our House ? ' 

 she flush red beneath her helm and say : 

 ' there be war in the land , and I have see it come , and that thing 
 shall change around we . I have look about I and see man happy 
 and woman content , and child weary for mere mirth and joy . and I 
 have think , in a day , or two day or three , all this shall be 
 change , and the woman shall be , some anxious and weary with 
 waiting , some cast all hope away ; and the man , some shall come 
 back to the garth no more , and some shall come back maimed and 
 useless , and there shall be loss of friend and fellow , and mirth 
 depart , and dull day and empty hour , and the child wander 
 about marvel at the sorrow of the house . all this I see before 
 I , and grief and pain and wounding and death ; and I say : shall I 
 be any well than the bad of the folk that loveth I ? Nay , this 
 shall never be ; and since I have learn to be deft with mine hand 
 in all the play of war , and that I be as strong as many a man , and as 
 hardy - hearted as any , I will give myself to the Warrior and the God 
 of the face ; and the battle - field shall be my home , and the after- 
 grief of the fight my banquet and holiday , that I may bear the burden 
 of my people , in the battle and out of it ; and know every sorrow that 
 the Dale hath ; and cast aside as a grievous and ugly thing the bed of 
 the warrior that the maiden desire , and the toying of lip and hand 
 and soft word of desire , and all the joy that dwelleth in the Castle 
 of Love and the Garden thereof ; while the world outside be sick and 
 sorry , and the field lie waste and the harvest burneth . even so 
 have I swear , even so will I do . ' 

 her eye glitter and her cheek be flushed , and her voice be clear 
 and ring now ; and when she end there arise a murmur of praise 
 from the man round about she . but Iron - face say coldly : 

 ' these be great word ; but I know not what they mean . if thou wilt 
 to the field and fight among the carle   and that I would not naysay , 
 for it hath oft be do and praise aforetime , why shouldest thou 
 not go side by side with face - of - god and as his plighted maiden ? ' 

 the light which the sweetness of speech have bring into her face have 
 die out of it now , and she look weary and hapless as she answer 
 he slowly : 

 ' I will not we d with face - of - god , but will fare afield as a virgin of 
 war , as I have swear to the Warrior . ' 

 then wax iron - face exceeding wroth , and he rise up before all man 
 and cry loudly and fiercely : 

 ' there be some lie abroad , that windeth about we as the gossamer in 
 the lane of an autumn morning . ' 

 and therewith he stride up to face - of - god as though he have nought to 
 do with the thing ; and he stand before he and cry out at he while 
 all man wonder : 

 ' Thou ! what hast thou do to turn this maiden 's heart to stone ? who 
 be it that be devise guile with thee to throw aside this worthy 
 wedding in a worthy House , with whom our son be ever will not to we d ? 
 speak , tell the tale ! ' 

 but face - of - god hold his peace and stand calm and proud before all 
 man . 

 then the blood mount to iron - face 's head , and he forgat folk and 
 kindre and the war to come , and he cry so that all the place ring 
 with the word of his anger : 

 ' Thou dastard ! I see thee now ; it be thou that hast do this , and 
 not the maiden ; and now thou hast make she bear a double burden , and 
 set she on to speak for thee , whilst thou stand by say nought , 
 and wilt take no scruple 's weight of her shame upon thee ! ' 

 but his son spake never a word , and Iron - face cry : ' out on thee ! 
 I know thee now , and why thou would not to the west - land last 
 winter . I be no fool ; I know thee . where hast thou hide the 
 stranger woman ? ' 

 Therewith he draw forth his sword and hove it aloft as if to hew down 
 face - of - god , who spake not nor flinch nor raise a hand from his 
 side . but the Bride throw herself in front of gold - mane , while there 
 arise an angry cry of ' the Peace of the Holy Thing ! peace - breaking , 
 peace - breaking ! ' and some cry , ' for the war - leader , the War- 
 leader ! ' and as man could for the press they draw forth their sword , 
 and there be tumult and noise all over the thing - stead . 

 but stone - face catch hold of the Alderman 's right arm and drag 
 down the sword , and the big carle , red - coat of Waterless , come up 
 behind he and cast his arm about his middle and draw he back ; and 
 presently he look around he , and slowly sheathe his sword , and 
 go back to his place and sit he down ; and in a little while the 
 noise abate and sword be sheathe , and man wax quiet again , and 
 the Alderman arise and say in a loud voice , but in the wonte way of 
 the head man of the thing : 

 ' here hath be trouble in the Holy Thing ; a violent man hath 
 trouble it , and draw sword on a neighbour ; will the neighbour give 
 the doom hereof into the hand of the Alderman ? ' 

 now all know Iron - face , and they cry out , ' that will we . ' so he 
 spake again : 

 ' I doom the troubler of the Peace of the Holy Thing to pay a fine , to 
 wit double the blood - wite that would be duly pay for a full - grow 
 freeman of the kindred . ' 

 then the cry go up and man yeasaid his doom , and all say that it 
 be well and fairly doom ; and iron - face sit still . 

 but stone - face stand forth and say : 

 ' here have be wild word in the air ; and dream have take shape 
 and come amongst we , and have bewitch we , so that friend and kin 
 have wrangle . and meseemeth that this be through the wizardry of 
 these felon , who , even dead as they be , have cast spell over we . 
 good it be to cast they into the Death Tarn , and then to get to our 
 work ; for there be much to do . ' 

 all man yeasaid that ; and Forkbeard of Lea go with those who have 
 bear the corps thither to cast they into the black pool . 

 but the Fiddle spake and say : 

 ' stone - face sayeth sooth . o Alderman , thou art no young man , yet be 
 I old enough to be thy father ; so will I give thee a rede , and say 
 this : face - of - god thy son be no liar or dastard or beguiler , but he 
 be a young man and exceed goodly of fashion , well - speak and kind ; 
 so that few woman may look on he and hear he without desire his 
 kindness and love , and to such man as this many thing happen . 
 moreover , he hath now become our captain , and be a deft warrior with 
 his hand , and as I deem , a sober and careful leader of man ; 
 therefore we need he and his courage and his skill of lead . so 
 rage not against he as if he have do an ill deed not to be 
 forgive - whatever he hath do , whereof we know not - for life be 
 long before he , and most like we shall still have to thank he for 
 many good deed towards we . as for the maiden , she be both lovely 
 and wise . she hath a sorrow at her heart , and we deem that we know 
 what it be . yet hath she not lie when she say that she would bear 
 the burden of the grief of the people . even so shall she do ; and 
 whether she will , or whether she will not , that shall heal her own 
 grief . for to - morrow be a new day . therefore , if thou do after my 
 rede , thou wilt not meddle betwixt these twain , but wilt remember all 
 that we have to do , and that war be come upon we . and when that be 
 over , we shall turn round and behold each other , and see that we be 
 not wholly what we be before ; and then shall that which be hard 
 to forgive , be forget , and that which be remember be easy to 
 forgive . ' 

 so he spake ; and iron - face sit still and put his left hand to his 
 beard as one who pondereth ; but the Bride look in the face of the 
 old man the Fiddle , and then she turn and look at Gold - mane , and 
 her face soften , and she stand before the Alderman , and bent down 
 before he and hold out both her hand to he the palm upward . then 
 she say : ' Thou hast be wroth with I , and I marvel not ; for thy 
 hope , and the hope which we all have , hath deceive thee . but kind 
 indeed hast thou be to I ere now : therefore I pray thee take it 
 not amiss if I call to thy mind the oath which thou swearedst on the 
 Holy Boar last Yule , that thou wouldst not gainsay the prayer of any 
 man if thou could perform it ; therefore I bid thee naysay not 
 mine : and that be , that thou wilt ask I no more about this matter , 
 but wilt suffer I to fare afield like any swain of the Dale , and to 
 deal so with my folk that they shall not hinder I . also I pray thee 
 that thou wilt put no shame upon face - of - god my playmate and my 
 kinsman , nor show thine anger to he openly , even if for a little 
 while thy love for he be abate . no more than this will I ask of 
 thee . ' 

 all man who hear she be move to the heart by her kindness and the 
 sweetness of her voice , which be like to the robin sing suddenly 
 on a frosty morning of early winter . but as for gold - mane , his heart 
 be smite sorely by it , and her sorrow and her friendliness grieve 
 he out of measure . 

 but iron - face answer after a little while , speak slowly and 
 hoarsely , and with the shame yet cling to he of a man who have 
 be wroth and have speedily let his wrath run off he . so he say : 

 ' it be well , my daughter . I have no will to forswear myself ; nor 
 hast thou ask I a thing which be over - hard . yet indeed I would 
 that to - day be yesterday , or that many day be wear away . ' 

 then he stand up and cry in a loud voice over the throng : 

 ' let none forget the muster ; but hold he ready against the time that 
 the Warden shall come to he . let all man obey the war - leader , face- 
 of - god , without question or delay . as to the fine of the peace- 
 breaker , it shall be lay on the altar of the God at the Great folk- 
 mote . Herewith be the thing break up . ' 

 then all man shout and clash their weapon , and so sunder , and 
 go about their business . 

 and the talk of man it be that the breaking of the troth - plight 
 between those twain be ill ; for they love face - of - god , and as for 
 the Bride they deem she the Dearest of the kindred and the Jewel 
 of the Folk , and as if she be the fair and the kind of all 
 the Gods . neither do the wrath of Iron - face mislike any ; but they 
 say he have do well and manly both to be wroth and to let his wrath 
 run off he . as to the war which be to come , they keep a good heart 
 about it , and deem it as a game to be play , wherein they might 
 show themselves deft and valiant , and so get back to their merry life 
 again . 

 so wear the day through afternoon to even and night . 



 CHAPTER XXVII . FACE - of - GOD leadeth a band through the wood 



 Next morning tryst be hold faithfully , and an hundred and a half 
 be gather together on Wildlake 's way ; and face - of - god order 
 they into three company . he make hall - face leader over the first 
 one , and bid he hold on his way northward , and then to make for 
 Boars - bait and see if he should meet with anything thereabout where 
 the battle have be . red - coat of waterless he make captain of the 
 second band ; and he have it in charge to wend eastward along the edge 
 of the Dale , and not to go deep into the wood , but to go as far as he 
 might within the time appoint , toward the Mountains . furthermore , 
 he bid both Hall - face and red - coat to bring their band back to 
 Wildlake 's way by the morrow at sunset , where other goodman should be 
 come to take the place of their man ; and then if he and his company 
 be back again , he would bid they far what to do ; but if not , as 
 seem likely , then hall - face 's band to go west toward the Shepherd 
 country half a day 's journey , and so back , and red - coat 's east along 
 the Dale 's lip again for the like time , and then back , so that there 
 might be a constant watch and ward of the Dale keep against the 
 Felons . 

 all be order Gold - mane lead his own company north - east through 
 the thick wood , think that he might so fare as to come nigh to 
 silver - dale , or at least to hear tiding thereof . this intent he 
 tell to stone - face , but the old man shake his head and say : 

 ' good be this if it may be do ; but it be not for everyone to go 
 down to Hell in his lifetime and come back safe with a tale thereof . 
 however , whither thou wilt lead , thither will I follow , though 
 assure death waylayeth we . ' 

 and the old carle be joyous and proud to be on this adventure , and 
 say , that it be good indeed that his foster - son have with he a man 
 well stricken in year , who have both see many thing , and learn 
 many , and have good rede to give to valiant man . 

 so they go on their way , and fare very warily when they be 
 get beyond those part of the wood which they know well . by this 
 time they be string out in a long line ; and they note their road 
 carefully , blaze the tree on either side when there be tree , 
 and pile up little stone - heap where the tree fail they . for 
 Stone - face say that oft it befell man amidst the thicket and the 
 waste to be mislead by wight that begrudge man their life , so that 
 they go round and round in a ring which they might not depart from 
 till they die ; and no man doubt his word herein . 

 all day they go , and meet no foe , nay , no man at all ; nought but the 
 wild thing of the wood ; and that day the wood change little about 
 they from mile to mile . there be many thicket across their road 
 which they have to go round about ; so that to the crow fly over the 
 tree - top the journey have not be long to the place where night come 
 upon they , and where they have to make the wood their bedchamber . 

 that night they light no fire , but eat such cold victual as they 
 might carry with they ; nor have they shoot any venison , since they have 
 with they more than enough ; they make little noise or stir therefore 
 and fall asleep when they have set the watch . 

 on the morrow they arise betime , and break their fast and go their 
 way till noon : by then the wood have thin somewhat , and there be 
 little underwood betwixt the scrubby oak and ash which be pretty 
 nigh all the tree about : the ground also be break , and here and 
 there rocky , and they go into and out of rough little dale , most 
 of which have in they a brook of water run west and southwest ; and 
 now face - of - god lead his man somewhat more easterly ; and still for 
 some while they meet no man . 

 at last , about four hour after noon , when they be go less 
 warily , because they have hitherto come across nothing to hinder they , 
 rise over the brow of a somewhat steep ridge , they see down in the 
 valley below they a half score of man sit by the brook - side 
 eating and drink , their weapon lie beside they , and along with 
 they stand a woman with her hand tie behind her back . 

 they see at once that these man be of the Felons , so they that have 
 their bow bent , loose at they without more ado , while the other 
 run in upon they with sword and spear . the felon leapt up and run 
 scatter down the dale , such of they as be not smite by the 
 shaft ; but he who be nighest to the woman , ere he run , turn and 
 catch up a sword from the ground and thrust it through she , and the 
 next moment fall across the brook with an arrow in his back . 

 no one of the felon be nimble enough to escape from the fleet - foot 
 hunter of Burgdale , and they be all slay there to the number of 
 eleven . 

 but when they come back to the woman to tend she , she breathe she 
 last in their hand : she be a young and fair woman , black - haire 
 and dark - eyed . she have on her body a gown of rich web , but nought 
 else : she have be bruise and sore mishandle , and the Burgdale 
 carle weep for pity of she , and for wrath , as they straighten she 
 limb on the turf of the little valley . they let she lie there a 
 little , whilst they search round about , lest there should be any 
 other poor soul need their help , or any felon lurk thereby ; but 
 they find nought else save a bundle wherein be another rich gown 
 and diver woman 's gear , and sundry ring and jewel , and therewithal 
 the weapon and war - gear of a knight , delicately work after the 
 Westland fashion : these seem to they to betoken other foul deed 
 of these murder - carle . so when they have abide a while , they lay 
 the dead woman in mould by the brook - side , and bury with her the 
 other woman 's attire and the knight 's gear , all but his sword and 
 shield , which they have away with they : then they cast the carcass 
 of the felon into the brake , but bring away their weapon and the 
 silver ring from their arm , which they wear like all the other of 
 they whom they have fall in with ; and so go on their way to the 
 north - east , full of wrath against those dastard of the Earth . 

 it be hard on sunset when they leave the valley of murder , and they 
 go no long way thence before they must need make stay for the 
 night ; and when they have array their sleeping - stead the moon be 
 up , and they see that before they lie the close wood again , for they 
 have make their lair on the top of a little ridge . 

 there then they lay , and nought stir they in the night , and 
 betime on the morrow they be afoot , and enter the abovesaid 
 thicket , wherein two of they , keen hunter , have be aforetime , but 
 have not go deep into it . through this wood they go all day 
 toward the north - east , and meet nought but the wild thing therein . 
 at last , when it be near sunset , they come out of the thicket into a 
 small plain , or shallow dale rather , with no great tree in it , but 
 thorn - brake here and there where the ground sink into hollow ; a 
 little river run through the midst of it , and wind round about a 
 height whose face toward the river go down sheer into the water , 
 but away from it sink down in a long slope to where the thick wood 
 begin again : and this height or burg look well - nigh west . 

 Thitherward they go ; but as they be draw nigh to the river , 
 and be on the top of a bent above a bushy hollow between they and 
 the water , they espy a man stand in the river near the bank , who 
 see they not , because he be stoop down intent on something in the 
 bank or under it : so they gat they speedily down into the hollow 
 without noise , that they might get some tiding of the man . 

 then face - of - god bid his man abide hide under the bush and stole 
 forward quietly up the further bank of the hollow , his target on his 
 arm and his spear poise . when he be behind the last bush on the 
 top of the bent he be within half a spear - cast of the water and the 
 man ; so he look on he and see that he be quite naked except for a 
 clout about his middle . 

 face - of - god see at once that he be not one of the Dusky Men ; he be 
 a black - haired man , but white - skin , and of fair stature , though 
 not so tall as the Burgdale folk . he be busy in tickle trout , 
 and just as face - of - god come out from the bush into the westering 
 sunlight , he throw up a fish on to the bank , and look up 
 therewithal , and beheld the weapone man glitter , and utter a 
 cry , but flee not when he see the spear poise for cast . 

 then face - of - god spake to he and say : ' come hither , Woodsman ! we 
 will not harm thee , but we desire speech of thee : and it will not 
 avail thee to flee , since I have bowman of the good in the hollow 
 yonder . ' 

 the man put forth his hand towards he as if pray he to forbear 
 casting , and look at he hard , and then come dripping from out the 
 water , and seem not greatly afeard ; for he stoop down and pick 
 up the trout he have take , and come towards face - of - god string 
 the last - catch one through the gill on to the withy whereon be 
 the other : and face - of - god see that he be a goodly man of some 
 thirty winter . 

 then face - of - god look on he with friendly eye and say : 

 ' art thou a foeman ? or wilt thou be helpful to we ? ' 

 he answer in the speech of the kindred with the hoarse voice of a 
 much weather - beat man : 

 ' Thou seest , lord , that I be naked and unarmed . ' 

 ' yet may'st thou bewray we , ' say face - of - god . ' what man art thou ? ' 

 say the man : ' I be the runaway thrall of evil man ; I have flee from 
 rose - dale and the Dusky Men . Hast thou the heart to hurt I ? ' 

 ' we be the foeman of the Dusky Men , ' say face - of - God ; ' wilt thou 
 help we against they ? ' 

 the man knit his brow and say : ' yea , if ye will give I your word 
 not to suffer I to fall into their hand alive . but whence art 
 thou , to be so bold ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' we be of Burgdale ; and I will swear to thee on 
 the edge of the sword that thou shalt not fall alive into the hand 
 of the Dusky Men . ' 

 ' of Burgdale have I hear , ' say the man ; ' and in sooth thou seemest 
 not such a man as would bewray a hapless man . but now have I well 
 bring you to some lurking - place where ye shall not be easily find of 
 these devil , who now oft - time scour the wood hereabout . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' come first and see my fellow ; and then if thou 
 think we have nee to hide , it be well . ' 

 so the man go side by side with he towards their lair , and as they 
 go gold - mane note mark of stripe on his back and side , and 
 say : ' sorely hast thou be mishandle , poor man ! ' 

 then the man turn on he and say somewhat fiercely : ' say I not 
 that I have be a thrall of the Dusky Men ? how then should I have 
 escape tormenting and scourging , if I have be with they for but 
 three day ? ' 

 as he spake they come about a thorn - bush , and there be the burgdale 
 man down in the hollow ; and the man say : ' be these thy fellow ? 
 call to mind that thou hast swear by the edge of the sword not to 
 hurt I . ' 

 ' poor man ! ' say face - of - god ; ' these be thy friend , unless thou 
 bewray we . ' 

 then he cry aloud to his folk : ' here be now a good hap ! this be a 
 runaway thrall of the Dusky Men ; of he shall we hear tiding ; so 
 cherish he all ye may . ' 

 so the carle throng about he and bestir themselves to help 
 he , and one give he his surcoat for a kirtle , and another cast a 
 cloak about he ; and they bring he meat and drink , such as they 
 have ready to hand : and the man look as if he scarce believe in 
 all this , but deem himself to be in a dream . but presently he 
 turn to face - of - god and say : 

 ' now I see so many man and weapon I deem that ye have no need to 
 skulk in cave to - night , though I know of good one : yet shall ye do 
 well not to light a fire till moon - setting ; for the flame ye may 
 lightly hide , but the smoke may be see from far aloof . ' 

 but they bid he to meat , and he need no second bidding but ate 
 lustily , and they give he wine , and he drink a great draught and 
 sigh as for joy . then he say in a trembling voice , as though he 
 fear a naysay : 

 ' if ye be from Burgdale ye shall be fare back again presently ; and 
 I pray you to take I with you . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' yea surely , friend , that will we do , and rejoice 
 in thee . ' 

 then he drink another cup which Warcliff hold out to he , and spake 
 again : ' yet if ye would abide here till about noon to - morrow , or 
 mayhappen a little later , I would bring other runaway to see you ; 
 and they also might ye take with you : ye may think when ye see they 
 that ye shall have small gain of their company ; for poor wretched 
 folk they be , like to myself . yet since ye seek for tiding , herein 
 might they do you more service than I ; for amongst they be some who 
 come out of the hapless Dale within this moon ; and it be six month 
 since I escape . moreover , though they may look spend and outwear 
 now , yet if ye give they a little rest , and feed they well , they 
 shall yet do many a day 's work for you : and I tell you that if ye 
 take they for thrall , and put collar on their neck , and use they 
 no bad than a goodman useth his oxen and his ass , beat they 
 not save when they be idle or at fault , it shall be to they as if 
 they be come to heaven out of hell , and to such goodhap as they 
 have not think of , save in dream , for many and many a day . and 
 thus I entreat you to do because ye seem to I to be happy and 
 merciful man , who will not begrudge we this happiness . ' 

 the carle of Burgdale listen eagerly to what he say , and they 
 look at he with great eye and marvel ; and their heart be 
 move with pity towards he ; and stone - face say : 

 ' Herein , O war - leader , need I give thee no rede , for thou mayst see 
 clearly that all we deem that we should lose our manhood and become 
 the dastard of the Warrior if we do not abide the coming of these 
 poor man , and take they back to the Dale , and cherish they . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Wolf of Whitegarth , ' and great thank we owe to this man 
 that he biddeth we this : for great will be the gain to we if we 
 become so like the Gods that we may deliver the poor from misery . 
 now must I need think how they shall wonder when they come to 
 burgdale and find out how happy it be to dwell there . ' 

 ' surely , ' say face - of - god , ' thus shall we do , whatever cometh of it . 
 but , friend of the wood , as to thrall , there be none such in the 
 Dale , but therein be all man friend and neighbour , and even so 
 shall ye be . ' 

 and he fall a - musing , when he bethink he of how little he have 
 know of sorrow . 

 but that man , when he behold the happy face of the Burgdalers , and 
 hearken to their friendly voice , and understand what they say , 
 and he also be become strong with the meat and drink , he bow his 
 head adown and weep a long while ; and they meddle not with he , till 
 he turn again to they and say : 

 ' since ye be in arm , and seem to be seek your foeman , I suppose 
 ye wot that these tyrant and man - queller will fall upon you in 
 Burgdale ere the summer be well worn . ' 

 ' so much we deem indeed , ' say face - of - god , ' but we be fain to hear 
 the certainty of it , and how thou know thereof . ' 

 say the man : ' it be six moon ago that I flee , as I have tell you ; 
 and even then it be the common talk amongst our master that there 
 be fair dale to the south which they would overrun . Man would say 
 to man : we be over many in silver - dale , and we need more 
 thrall , because those we have be lessen , and especially the 
 woman ; now be we more at ease in Rose - dale , though we have send 
 thrall to silver - dale ; but yet we can bear no more man from thence 
 to eat up our stock from we : let they fare south to the happy dale , 
 and conquer they , and we will go with they and help therein , whether 
 we come back to Rose - dale or no . such talk do I hear then with mine 
 own ear : but some of those whom I shall bring to you to - morrow 
 shall know well what be do , since they have flee from Rose - dale 
 but a few day . moreover , there be a man and a woman who have flee 
 from Silver - dale itself , and be but a month from it , journey all 
 the time save when they must need hide ; and these say that their 
 master have get to know the way to Burgdale , and be minded for it 
 before the winter , as I say ; and nought else but the way thither do 
 they desire to know , since they have no fear . ' 

 by then be night come , and though the moon be high in heaven , and 
 light all that waste , the Burgdalers must need light a fire for 
 cook their meat , whatsoever that woodsman might say ; moreover , the 
 night be cold and somewhat frosty . a little before they have come to 
 that place they have shoot a fat buck and some small deer , but of 
 other meat they have no great store , though there be wine enough . so 
 they light their fire in the thickest of the thorn - bush to hide it all 
 they might , and thereat they cook their venison and the trout 
 which the runaway have take , and they fall to , and eat and drank and 
 be merry , make much of that poor man till he - seem he be 
 get into the company of the kind of the Gods . 

 but when they be full , face - of - god spake to he , and ask he his 
 name ; and he name himself Dallach ; but say he : ' Lord , this be 
 accord to the naming of man in Rose - dale before we be 
 enthral : but now what name have thrall ? also I be not 
 altogether of the blood of they of Rose - dale , but of well and more 
 warrior - like kin . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' Thou hast name Silver - dale ; know thou it ? ' 

 Dallach answer : ' I have never see it . it be far hence ; in a 
 week 's journey , make all diligence , and not be force to hide 
 and skulk like those runaway , ye shall come to the mouth thereof 
 lie west , where its rock - wall fall off toward the plain . ' 

 ' but , ' say face - of - god , ' be there no other way into that Dale ? ' 

 ' Nay , none that folk wot of , ' say Dallach , ' except to bold cragsman 
 with their life in their hand . ' 

 ' know thou aught of the affair of silver - dale ? ' say face - of - god . 

 say Dallach : ' somewhat I know : we wot that but a few year ago 
 there be a valiant folk dwell therein , who be lord of the 
 whole dale , and that they be vanquish by the Dusky Men : but 
 whether they be all slay and enthral we wot not ; but we deem it 
 otherwise . as for I it be of their blood that I be partly come ; for 
 my father 's father come thence to settle in Rose - dale , and wed a 
 woman of the Dale , who be my father 's mother . ' 

 ' when be it that ye fall under the Dusky Men ? ' say face - of - god . 

 say Dallach : ' it be five year ago . they come into the Dale a 
 great company , all in arm . ' 

 ' be there battle betwixt you ? ' say face - of - god . 

 ' alas ! not so , ' say Dallach . ' we be a happy folk there ; but soft 
 and delicate : for the Dale be exceed fertile , and beareth wealth 
 in abundance , both corn and oil and wine and fruit , and of beast for 
 man 's service the good that may be . would that there have be 
 battle , and that I have die therein with those that have a heart to 
 fight ; and even so saith now every man , yea , every woman in the Dale . 
 but it be not so when the elder meet in our Council - House on the day 
 when the Dusky Men bid we pay they tribute and give they house to 
 dwell in and land to live by . then have we weapon in our hand , but 
 no heart to use they . ' 

 ' what befell then ? ' say the goodman of Whitegarth . 

 say Dallach : ' look ye to it , lord , that it befall not in Burgdale ! 
 we give they all they ask for , and deem we have much left . what 
 befell , sayst thou ? we sit quiet ; we go about our work in fear and 
 trembling , for grim and hideous be they to look on . at first they 
 meddle not much with we , save to take from our house what they 
 would of meat and drink , or raiment , or plenishe . and all this we 
 deem we might bear , and that we need no more than to toil a 
 little more each day so as to win somewhat more of wealth . but soon 
 we find that it would not be so ; for they have no mind to till the 
 teem earth or work in the acre we have give they , or to sit at 
 the loom , or hammer in the stithy , or do any manlike work ; it be we 
 that must do all that for their behoof , and it be altogether for 
 they that we labour , and nought for ourselves ; and our body be 
 only so much our own as they be needful to be keep alive for 
 labour . Herein be our task hard than the toil of any mule or 
 ass , save for the young and goodly of the woman , whom they 
 would keep fair and delicate to be their bed - thrall . 

 ' yet not even so be our body safe from their malice : for these 
 man be not only tyrant , but fool and madman . let alone that 
 there be few day without stripe and torment to satiate their 
 fury or their pleasure , so that in all street and nigh any house 
 might you hear wail and scream and groaning ; but moreover , 
 though a wise man would not willingly slay his own thrall any more 
 than his own horse or ox , yet do these man so wax in folly and 
 malice , that they would often hew at man or woman as they meet they in 
 the way from mere grimness of soul ; and if they slay they it be 
 well . Thereof indeed come quarrel enough betwixt master and master , 
 for they be much give to man - slay amongst themselves : but what 
 profit to we thereof ? Nay , if the dead man be a chieftain , then 
 woe betide the thrall ! for thereof must many an one be slain on his 
 grave - mound to serve he on the hell - road . to be short : we have 
 hear of man who be fierce , and man who be grim ; but these we may 
 scarce believe we to be man at all , but troll rather ; and ill will 
 it be if their race waxeth in the world . ' 

 the burgdale man hearken with all their ear , and wonder that 
 such thing could befall ; and they rejoice at the work that lay 
 before they , and their heart rise high at the thought of battle in 
 that behalf , and the fame that should come of it . as for the 
 runaway , they make so much of he that the man marvel ; for they 
 deal with he like a woman cherish a son , and know not how to be 
 kind enough to he . 



 CHAPTER XXVIII . the MEN of BURGDALE meet the RUNAWAYS 



 now ere the night be far spend , Dallach arise and say : 

 ' kind folk , ye will presently be sleep ; but I bid you keep a good 
 watch , and if ye will be rule by I , ye will kindle no fire on the 
 morrow , for the smoke riseth thick in the morning air , and be as a 
 beacon . as for I , I shall leave you here to rest , and I myself will 
 fare on mine errand . ' 

 they bid he sleep and rest he after so many toil and hardship , 
 say that they be not tie to an hour to be back in Burgdale ; but 
 he say : ' Nay , the moon be high , and it be as good as daylight to 
 I , who could find my way even by starlight ; and your tarrying here 
 be nowise safe . moreover , if I could find those folk and bring they 
 part of the way by night and cloud it be well ; for if we be take 
 again , burn quick would be the good death by which we should die . 
 as for I , now be I strong with meat and drink and hope ; and when I 
 come to Burgdale there will be time enough for rest and slumber . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' shall I not wend with thee to see these people 
 and the lair wherein they hide ? ' 

 the man smile : ' Nay , earl , ' say he , ' that shall not be . for wot 
 ye what ? if they be to see I in company of a man - at - arm they 
 would deem that I be bring the foe upon they , and would flee , or 
 mayhappen would fall upon we . for as for I , when I see thee , thou 
 wert close anigh I , so I know thee to be no Dusky Man ; but they 
 would see the glitter of thine arm from afar , and to they all 
 weapone man be foeman . Thou , lord , know not the heart of a 
 thrall , nor the fear and doubt that be in it . Nay , I myself must 
 cast off these clothe that ye have give I , and fare naked , lest 
 they mistrust I . only I will take a spear in my hand , and sle a 
 knife round my neck , if ye will give they to I ; for if the bad 
 happen , I will not be take alive . ' 

 Therewith he cast off his raiment , and they give he the weapon and 
 wish he good speed , and he go his way twixt moonlight and 
 shadow ; but the Burgdalers go to sleep when they have set a watch . 

 early in the morning they awake , and the sun be shin and the 
 thrush singing in the thorn - brake , and all seem fair and 
 peaceful , and a little haze still hang about the face of the burg 
 over the river . so they go down to the water and wash the night 
 from off they ; and thence the most part of they go back to their 
 lair among the thorn - bush : but four of they go up the dale into 
 the oak - wood to shoot a buck , and five more they send out to watch 
 their skirt around they ; and face - of - god with old Stone - face go 
 over a ford of the stream , and come on to the low slope of the 
 burg , and so go up it to the top . thence they look about to see 
 if aught be stir , but they see little save the waste and the 
 wood , which on the north - east be thick of big tree stretch out a 
 long way . their own lair be clear to see over its bank and the 
 bush thereof , and that mislike face - of - god , lest any foe should 
 climb the burg that day . the morning be clear , and face - of - god 
 look north - and - by - west deem he see smoke rise into the air 
 over the tree - cover ridge that hide the further distance toward 
 that airt , though far east upheave the black shoulder of the 
 Great that Waste and the snowy peak behind they . the say smoke be 
 not such as cometh from one great fire , but be like a thin veil 
 stain the pale blue sky , as when man be burn ling on the 
 heath - side and it be see aloof . 

 he show that smoke to stone - face , who smile and say : 

 ' now will they be light the cook fire in Rose - dale : would I 
 be there with a few hundred of axis and stave at my back ! ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , smile in his face , ' but where I pray thee 
 be these elf and wood - wight , that we meet they not ? grim thing 
 there be in the wood , and thing fair enough also : but meseemeth 
 that the troll and the elf of thy young year have be fright 
 away . ' 

 say stone - face : ' maybe , foster - son ; that hath be see ere now , 
 that when one race of man overrunneth the land inhabit by another , 
 the wight and elve that love the vanquished be see no more , or 
 get they away far off into the outermost wild , where few man ever 
 come . ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , ' that may well be . but deem thou by that 
 token that we shall be vanquish ? ' 

 ' as for we , I know not , ' say stone - face ; ' but thy friend of Shadowy 
 Vale have be vanquish . moreover , concern these felon whom 
 now we be hunt , be we all so sure that they be man ? certain it 
 be , that when I go into battle with they , I shall smite with no more 
 pity than my sword , as if I be smite thing that may not feel the 
 woe of man . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' yea , even so shall it be with I . but what 
 think thou of these runaway ? shall we have tiding of they , or 
 shall Dallach bring the foe upon we ? it be for the sake of that 
 question that I have clomb the burg : and that we might watch the 
 land about we . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say stone - face , ' I have see many man , and I deem of Dallach 
 that he be a true man . I deem we shall soon have tiding of his 
 fellow ; and they may have see the elf and wood - wight : I would 
 fain ask they thereof , and be eager to see they . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' and I somewhat dread to see they , and their rag 
 and their misery and the weal of their stripe . it irk I to see 
 dallach when he first fall to his meat last night , how he eat like a 
 dog for fear and famine . how shall it be , moreover , when we have 
 they in the Dale , and they fall to the deed of kind there , as they 
 need must . will they not bear we evil and thrall - like man ? ' 

 ' maybe , ' say stone - face , ' and maybe not ; for they have be thrall 
 but for a little while : and I deem that in no long time shall ye see 
 they much better by plenteous meat and rest . and after all be 
 say , this Dallach bear he like a valiant man ; also it be valiant 
 of he to flee ; and of the other may ye say the like . but look you ! 
 there be man go down yonder towards our lair : belike those shall 
 be our guest , and there be no Dusky Men amongst they . come , let we 
 home ! ' 

 so face - of - god look and beheld from the height of the burg shape 
 of man grey and colourless creep toward the lair from sunshine to 
 shadow , like wild creature shy and fearful of the hunter , or so he 
 deem of they . 

 so he turn away , angry and sad of heart , and the twain go down 
 the burg and across the water to their camp , have see little to 
 tell of from the height . 

 when they come to their campment there be their folk stand in a 
 ring round about Dallach and the other runaway . they make way for 
 the war - leader and stone - face , who come amongst they and beheld the 
 Runaways , that they be many more than they look to see ; for they 
 be of carle one score and three , and of woman eighteen , all tell 
 save Dallach . when they see those twain come through the ring of man 
 and perceive that they be chieftain , some of they fall down on 
 their knee before they and hold out their joined hand to they , and 
 kiss the Burgdalers ' foot and the hem of their garment , while the 
 tear stream out of their eye : some stand move little and 
 star before they stupidly : and some keep glance from face to 
 face of the well - like happy burgdale carle , though for a while 
 even their face be sad and downcast at the sight of the poor man : 
 some also keep murmur one or two word in their country tongue , 
 and Dallach tell face - of - god that these be cry out for victual . 

 it must be say of these poor folk that they be of diver 
 condition , and chiefly of three : and first there be seven of 
 rose - dale and five of silver - dale late come to the wood   of these 
 silver - daler Dallach have tell but of two , for the other three be 
 but just come . of these twelve be seven woman , and all , save two 
 of the woman , be clothe in one scanty kirtle or shirt only ; for such 
 be the will not of the Dusky Men with their thrall . they have bring 
 away weapon , and have amongst they six axis and a spear , and a sword , 
 and five knife , and one man have a shield . 

 yet though these be clothe and armed , yet in some wise be they the 
 bad of all ; they be so timorous and cringing , and most of they 
 heavy - eyed and sullen and down - look . many of they have be 
 grievously mishandle : one man have have his left hand smite off ; 
 another be dock of three of his toe , and the gristle of his nose 
 slit up ; one be halt , and four have be ear - cropped , nor do any 
 lack weal of whipping . of the silver - dale new - comer the three man 
 be the bad of all the Runaways , with wild wandering eye , but 
 sullen also , and cringe if any draw nigh , and would not look anyone 
 in the face , save presently face - of - god , on whom they be soon fond 
 to fawn , as a dog on his master . but the woman who be with they , 
 and who be well - nigh as timorous as the man , be those two gaily- 
 dad one , and they be soft - handed and white - skin , save for the 
 last day of weather in the wood ; for they have be bed - thrall of 
 the Dusky Men . 

 such be the new - comer to the wood . but other have be , like 
 Dallach , month therein ; it may be say that there be eighteen of 
 these , carle and queen together . little raiment they have amongst 
 they , and some be all but stark naked , so that on these might well 
 be see as on Dallach the mark of old stripe , and of these also 
 be there man who have be shorn of some member or other , and they 
 be all burn and blacken by the weather of the woodland ; yet for 
 all their nakedness , they bear themselves bolder and more manlike 
 than the later comer , nor do they altogether lack weapon take 
 from their foeman , and most of they have some edge - tool or another . 
 of these folk be four from silver - dale , though Dallach know it not . 

 besides these be a half score and one who have be year in the 
 wood instead of month ; weather - beat indeed be these , shaggy and 
 rough - skinned like wild man of kind . some of they have make 
 themselves skin breech or clout , some go stark naked ; of weapon 
 of the Dale have they few , but they bear bow of hazel or wych - elm 
 string with deer - gut , and shaft head with flint stone ; stave 
 also of the same fashion , and great club of oak or holly : some of 
 they also have make they target of skin and willow - twig , for these 
 be the warrior of the Runaways : they have a few steel knife 
 amongst they , but have mostly learn the craft of use sharp flint 
 for knife : but four of these be woman . 

 three of these man be of the kindred of the Wolf from silver - dale , 
 and have be in the wood for hard upon ten year , and wild as they 
 be , and without hope of meet their fellow again , they go 
 proudly and boldly amongst the other , overtop they by the head 
 and more . for the great part of these man be somewhat short of 
 stature , though by nature strong and stout of body . 

 it must be tell that though Dallach have thus get all these many 
 Runaways together , yet have they not be dwell together as one 
 folk ; for they durst not , lest the Dusky Men should hear thereof and 
 fall upon they , but they have keep themselves as well they could in 
 cave and in brake three together or two , or even fare alone as 
 Dallach do : only as he be a strong and stout - hearted man , he go 
 to and fro and wander about more than the other , so that he 
 foregather with most of they and know they . he say also that he 
 doubt not but that there be more Runaways in the wood , but these 
 be all he could come at . diver who have flee have die from time to 
 time , and some have be catch and cruelly slay by their master . 
 they be none of they old ; the old , say Dallach , scant of forty 
 winter , though many from their aspect might have be old enough . 

 so face - of - god look and beheld all these poor people ; and say to 
 himself , that he might well have dread that sight . for here be he 
 bring face to face with the Sorrow of the Earth , whereof he have 
 know nought heretofore , save it might be as a tale in a minstrel 's 
 song . and when he think of the minute that have make the hour , 
 and the hour that have make the day that these man have pass 
 through , his heart fail he , and he be dumb and might not speak , 
 though he perceive that the man of Burgdale look for speech from 
 he ; but he wave his hand to his folk , and they understand he , for 
 they have hear Dallach say that some of they be cry for victual . 
 so they set to work and dighte for they such meat as they have , and 
 they set they down on the grass and make themselves their carver and 
 serve - man , and bid they eat what they would of such as there be . 
 yet , indeed , it grieve the Burgdalers again to note how these folk 
 be drive to eat ; for they themselves , though they be merry folk , 
 be exceed courteous at table , and of great observance of 
 manner : whereas these poor Runaways eat , some of they like hungry 
 dog , and some hide their meat as if they fear it should be take 
 from they , and some cower over it like falcon , and scarce any 
 with a manlike pleasure in their meal . and , their eat over , the 
 more part of they sit dull and mopish , and as if all thing be 
 forget for the time present . 

 albeit presently Dallach bestir he and say to face - of - god : 
 ' Lord of the Earl - folk , if I might give thee rede , it be good to 
 turn your face to Burgdale without more tarrying . for we be over- 
 nigh to rose - dale , be but thus many in company . but when we come 
 to our next resting - place , then shall bring thee to speech with the 
 last - comer from silver - dale ; for there they talk with the tongue of 
 the kindred ; but we of Rose - dale for the more part talk otherwise ; 
 though in my house it come down from father to son . ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , gaze still on that unhappy folk , as they 
 sit or lie upon the grass at rest for a little while : but he - seem 
 as he gaze that some memory of past time stir in some of they ; 
 for some , they hang their head and the tear steal out of their eye 
 and roll down their cheek . but those old Runaways of Silver- 
 dale be not crouch down like most of the other , but stride up 
 and down like beast in a den ; yet be the tear on the face of one 
 of these . then face - of - god constrain himself , and spake to the 
 folk , and say : ' we be now over - nigh to our foe of rose - dale to 
 lie here any long , be too few to fall upon they . we will come 
 hither again with a host when we have duly question these man who 
 have seek refuge with we : and let we call yonder height the Burg 
 of the Runaways , and it shall be a landmark for we when we be on the 
 road to rose - dale . ' 

 then the Burgdalers bid the Runaways courteously and kindly to arise 
 and take the road with they ; and by that time be their man all come 
 in ; and four of they have venison with they , which be needful , if 
 they be to eat that night or the morrow , as the guest have eat 
 they to the bone . 

 so they tarry no more , but set out on the homeward way ; and face- 
 of - god bade Dallach walk beside he , and ask he such concern 
 rose - dale and its Dusky Men . Dallach tell he that these be not so 
 many as they be masterful , not be above eight hundred of man , 
 all fight - man . as to woman , they have none of their own race , but 
 lie with the Daleswomen at their will , and begat child of they ; 
 and all or most of the say child favour the race of their 
 begetter . of the man - child they rear most , but the women- 
 child they slay at once ; for they value not woman of their own 
 blood : but besides the woman of the Dale , they would go at while in 
 band to the edge of the plain and beguile wayfarer , and bring back 
 with they thence woman to be their bed - thrall ; albeit some of these 
 be buy with a price from the Westland man . 

 as to the number of the folk of Rose - dale , its own folk , he say they 
 would number some five thousand soul , one with another ; of whom some 
 thousand might be fit to bear arm if they have the heart thereto , as 
 they have none . yet be closely question , he deem that they 
 might fall on their master from behind , if battle be join . 

 he say that the folk of Rose - dale have be a goodly folk before they 
 be enthral , and peaceable with one another , but that now it be 
 a sport of the Dusky Men to set a match between their thrall to 
 fight it out with sword and buckler or otherwise ; and the vanquish 
 man , if he be not sore hurt , they would scourge , or shear some 
 member from he , or even slay he outright , if the match between the 
 owner be so make . and many other sad and grievous tale he tell 
 to face - of - god , more than need be tell again ; so that the war - leader 
 go along sorry and angry , with his tooth set , and his hand on the 
 sword - hilt . 

 thus they go till night fall on they , and they could scarce see the 
 sign they have make on their outward journey . then they make stay in 
 a little valley , have set a watch duly ; and since they be by this 
 time far from Rose - dale , and be a great company as regard 
 scatter band of the foe , they light their fire and cook their 
 venison , and make good cheer to the Runaways , and so go to sleep in 
 the wild - wood . 

 when morning be come they gat they at once to the road ; and if the 
 Burgdalers be eager to be out of the wood , their eagerness be as 
 nought to the eagerness of the Runaways , most of whom could not be 
 easy now , and deem every minute lose unless they be wend on to 
 the Dale ; so that this day they be willing to get over the more 
 ground , whereas they have not set out on their road till afternoon 
 yesterday . 

 Howsoever , they rest at noontide , and face - of - god bade Dallach 
 bring he to speech with other of the Runaways , and first that he 
 might talk with those three man of the kindred who have flee from 
 silver - dale in early day . so Dallach bring they to he ; but he 
 find that though they spake the tongue , they be so few - speak from 
 wildness and loneliness , at least at first , that nought could come 
 from they that be not drag from they . 

 these man say that they have be in the wood more than nine year , 
 so that they know but little of the condition of the Dale in that 
 present day . however , as to what Dallach have say concern the 
 Dusky Men , they strengthen his word ; and they say that the Dusky 
 Men take no delight save in behold torment and misery , and that 
 they doubt if they be man or troll . they say that since they 
 have dwell in the wood they have slay not a few of the foeman , 
 waylay they as occasion serve , but that in this warfare they have 
 lose two of their fellow . when face - of - god ask they of their 
 deeming of the number of the Dusky Men , they say that before those 
 band have break into Rose - dale , they count they , as far as they 
 could call to mind , at about three thousand man , all warrior ; and 
 that somewhat less than one thousand have go up into Rose - dale , and 
 some have die , and many have be cast away in the wild - wood , their 
 fellow know not how . yet have not their number in silver - dale 
 diminish ; because two year after they   the speaker   have flee , 
 come three more Dusky Companies or Tribes into silver - dale , and each 
 of these tribe be of three long hundred ; and with their come have 
 the cruelty and misery much increase in the Dale , so that the 
 thrall begin to die fast ; and that drave the Dusky Men beyond the 
 border of silver - dale , so that they fall upon Rose - dale . when ask 
 how many of the kindred might yet be abide in silver - dale , their 
 face cloud , and they seem exceed wroth , and answer , that 
 they would willingly hope that most of those that have not be slay 
 at the time of the overthrow be now dead , yet indeed they fear 
 there be yet some alive , and mayhappen not a few woman . 

 by then must they get on foot again , and so the talk fall between 
 they ; but when they make stay for the night , after they have do 
 their meat , face - of - god pray Dallach bring to he some of the 
 late - come folk from Silver - dale , and he bring to he the man and 
 the woman who have be in the Dale within that moon . as to the man , 
 if those of the Earl - folk have be few - speak from fierceness and 
 wildness , he be no less so from mere dulness and weariness of 
 misery ; but the woman 's tongue go glibly enough , and it seem to 
 pleasure she to talk about her past misery . as aforesaid , she be 
 well clothe than most of those of rose - dale , and indeed might be 
 call gaily clothe , and where her raiment be befoul or rent , it be 
 from the roughness of the wood and its weather , and not from the 
 thralldom . she be a young and fair woman , black - haired and grey- 
 eye . she have wash herself that day in a woodland stream which 
 they have cross on the road , and have array her garment as trimly 
 as she might , and have pluck some fumitory , wherewith she have make a 
 garland for her head . she sit down on the grass in front of face - of- 
 god , while the man her mate stand lean against a tree and look 
 on her greedily . the burgdale carle draw near to she to hearken she 
 story , and look kindly on the twain . she smile on they , but 
 especially on face - of - god , and say : 

 ' Thou hast send for I , lord , and I wot well thou wouldst hear my 
 tale shortly , for it would be long to tell if I be to tell it 
 fully , and bring into it all that I have endure , which have be 
 bitter enough , for all that ye see I smooth of skin and well - liking 
 of body . I have be the bed - thrall of one of the chieftain of the 
 Dusky Men , at whose house many of their great man would assemble , so 
 that ye may ask I whatso ye will ; as I have hear much talk and may 
 call it to mind . now if ye ask I whether I have flee because of the 
 shame that I , a free woman come of free folk , should be a mere thrall 
 in the bed of the foe of my kin , and with no price pay for I , I 
 must need say it be not so ; since over long have we of the Dale be 
 thrall to be ashamed of such a matter . and again , if ye deem that I 
 have flee because I have be burden with grievous toil and be 
 drive thereto by the whip , ye may look on my hand and my body and 
 ye will see that I have toil little therewith : nor again do I 
 flee because I could not endure a few stripe now and again ; for such 
 usage do thrall look for , even when they be delicately keep for the 
 sake of the fairness of their body , and this they may well endure ; 
 yea also , and the mere fear of death by torment now and again . but 
 before I lie death both assured and horrible ; so I take mine own 
 counsel , and tell none for fear of bewrayal , save he who guard I ; 
 and that be this man ; who flee not from fear , but from love of I , 
 and to he I have give all that I might give . so we get out of the 
 house and down the Dale by night and cloud , and hide for one whole day 
 in the Dale itself , where I tremble and fear , so that I deem I 
 should die of fear ; but this man be well pleased with my company , 
 and with the lack of toil and beat even for the day . and in the 
 night again we flee and reach the wild - wood before dawn , and well- 
 nigh fall into the hand of those who be hunt we , and have 
 outgone we the day before , as we lie hid . well , what be to say ? 
 they see we not , else have we not be here , but scatter piece - meal 
 over the land . this carle know the pass of the wood , because he 
 have follow his master therein , who be a great hunter in the 
 waste , contrary to the will not of these man , and he have lie a night on 
 the burg yonder ; therefore he bring I thither , because he know 
 that thereabout be plenty of prey easy to take , and he have a bow 
 with he ; and there we fall in with other of our folk who have flee 
 before , and with Dallach ; who e'en now tell we what be hard to 
 believe , that there be a fair young man like one of the Gods lead 
 a band of goodly warrior , and seek for we to bring we into a 
 peaceful and happy land ; and this man would not have go with he 
 because he fear that he might fall into thralldom of other folk , 
 who would take I away from he ; but for I , I say I would go in any 
 case , for I be weary of the wood and its roughness and toil , and 
 that if I have a new master he would scarcely be bad than my old one 
 be at his good , and he I could endure . so I go , and glad and 
 glad I be , whatever ye will do with I . and now will I answer whatso 
 ye may ask of I . ' 

 she lay her limb together daintily and look fondly on face - of- 
 god , and the carle scowl at she somewhat at first , but presently , 
 as he watch she , his face smooth itself out of its wrinkle . 

 but face - of - god ponder a little while , and then ask the woman if 
 she have hear any word to remember of late day concern the 
 affair of the Dusky Men and their intent ; and he say : 

 ' I pray thee , sister , be truthful in thine answer , for somewhat lieth 
 on it . ' 

 she say : ' how could I speak aught but the sooth to thee , o lovely 
 lord ? the last word speak hereof I mind I well : for my master have 
 be mishandle I , and I be sullen to he after the smart , and he 
 mock and jeered I , and say : ye woman deem we can not do without 
 you , but ye be fool , and know nothing ; we be go to conquer a 
 new land where the woman be plenty , and far fair than ye be ; and 
 we shall leave you to fare afield like the other thrall , or work in 
 the digging of silver ; and belike ye wot what that meaneth . also he 
 say that they would leave we to the new tribe of their folk , far 
 wilder than they , whom they look for in the Dale in about a moon 's 
 wear ; so that they need must seek to other land . also this same 
 talk would we hear whenever it please any of they to mock we their 
 bed - thrall . now , my sweet lord , this be nought but the very sooth . ' 

 again spake face - of - god after a while : 

 ' tell I , sister , hast thou hear of any of the Dusky Men be slay 
 in the wood ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , and turn pale therewith and catch her breath as 
 one choke ; but say in a little while : 

 ' this alone be it hard for I to tell thee amongst all the I grief 
 I have bear , whereof I might have tell thee many tale , and will do 
 one day if thou wilt suffer it ; but fear make this hard for I . for 
 in very sooth this be the cause of my fleeing , that my master be 
 bring in slain by an arrow in the wood ; and he be to be bear to 
 bale and burn in three day ' wear ; and we three bed - thrall of 
 his , and three of the good of the man - thrall , be to be burn 
 quick on his bale - fire after sore torment ; therefore I flee , and hide 
 a knife in my bosom , that I might not be take alive ; but sweet be 
 life to I , and belike I should not have smite myself . ' 

 and she weep sore for pity of herself before they all . but face - of- 
 god say : 

 ' know thou , sister , by whom the man be slay ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , still sob ; ' but I hear nought thereof , nor have 
 I note it in my terror . the death of other , who be slay before 
 he , and the loss of many , we know not how , make they more bitterly 
 cruel with we . ' 

 and again be she weep ; but face - of - god say kindly to she : ' weep 
 no more , sister , for now shall all thy trouble be over ; I feel in my 
 heart that we shall overcome these felon , and make an end of they , 
 and there then be Burgdale for thee in its length and breadth , or 
 thine own Dale to dwell in freely . ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' never will I go back thither ! ' and she turn round 
 to he and kiss his foot , and then arise and turn a little toward 
 her mate ; and the carle catch she by the hand and lead she away , and 
 seem glad so to do . 

 so once again they fall asleep in the wood , and again the next 
 morning fare on their way early that they might come into Burgdale 
 before nightfall . when they stay a while at noontide and eat , 
 face - of - god again have talk with the Runaways , and this time with 
 those of rose - dale , and he hear much the same story from they that 
 he have hear before , tell in diver way , till his heart be sick 
 with the hearing of it . 

 on this last day face - of - god lead his man well athwart the wood , so 
 that he hit Wildlake 's way without come to Carl - stead ; and he come 
 down into the Dale some four hour after noon on a bright day of 
 latter March . at the ingate to the Dale he find watch set , the 
 man whereof tell he that the tiding be not right great . hall- 
 face 's company have fall in with a band of the Felons three score in 
 number in the oak - wood nigh to Boars - bait , and have slay some and 
 chase the rest , since they find it hard to follow they home as they 
 run for the tangled thicket : of the Burgdalers have two be slay 
 and five hurt in this battle . 

 as for red - coat 's company , they have fall in with no foeman . 



 CHAPTER XXIX . they bring the runaway to burgstead 



 so now be out of the wood , they go peaceably and safely along 
 the Portway , the Runaways mingle with the Dalesmen . Strange show 
 amidst the health and wealth of the Dale the rag and misery and 
 nakedness of the thrall , like a dream amidst the trim gaiety of 
 spring ; and whomsoever they meet , or come up with on the road , whatso 
 his business might be , could not refrain himself from follow they , 
 but mingle with the man - at - arm , and ask they of the tiding ; and 
 when they hear who these poor people be , even deliver thrall of 
 the Foemen , they be glad at heart and cry out for joy ; and many 
 of the woman , nay , of the man also , when they first come across that 
 misery from out the heart of their own pleasant life , weep for pity 
 and love of the poor folk , now at last set free , and bless the 
 sword that should do the like by the whole people . 

 they go slowly as man begin to gather about they ; yea , some of the 
 good folk that live hard by must need fare home to their house to 
 fetch cake and wine for the guest ; and they make they sit down and 
 rest on the green grass by the side of the Portway , and eat and drink 
 to cheer their heart ; other , woman and young swain , while they 
 rest go down into the meadow and pluck of the spring flower , 
 and twin they hastily with deft and well - wont finger into chaplet 
 and garland for their head and body . thus indeed they cover 
 their nakedness , till the lower face and weather - beat skin of 
 those hardly - entreat thrall look grimly out from amidst the 
 knot of cowslip and oxlip , and the branch of the milk - white 
 blackthorn bloom , and the long trumpet of the daffodil , of the hue 
 that wrappeth round the quill which the webster take in hand when 
 she would pleasure her soul with the sight of the yellow grow upon 
 the dark green web . 

 so they go on again as the evening be wan , and when they be 
 get within a furlong of the Gate , lo ! there be come the 
 minstrelsy , the pipe and the tabor , the fiddle and the harp , and the 
 folk that have learn to sing the sweetest , both man and woman , and 
 Redesman at the head of they all . 

 then fall the throng into an order company ; first go the music , 
 and then a score of face - of - god 's warrior with draw sword and 
 uplifted spear ; and then the flower - bedeck misery of the Runaways , 
 man and woman go together , gaunt , befoul , and hollow - eye , with 
 here and there a flushed cheek or gleam eye , or tear - bedew face , 
 as the joy and triumph of the eve pierce through their wonte 
 weariness of grief ; then the rest of the warrior , and lastly the 
 mingle crowd of Dalesfolk , tall man and fair woman gaily array , 
 clean - faced , clear - skin , and sleek - haired , with glance eye and 
 ruddy lip . 

 and now Redesman turn about to the music and draw his bow across 
 his fiddle , and the other bow run out in concert , and the harp 
 follow the story of they , and he lift up his voice and sing the 
 word of an old song , and all the singer join he and blend 
 their voice with his . and these be some of the word which they 
 sing : 


 Lo ! here be Spring , and all we be live , 
  we that be wan with Winter 's fear ; 
 reach out your hand to her hand that be give , 
  Lest ye lose her love and the light of the year . 

 many a morn do we wake to sorrow , 
  when low on the land the cloud - wrath lay ; 
 many an eve we fear to - morrow , 
  the unbegun unfinishe day . 

 ah we - we hop not , and thou wert tardy ; 
  Nought wert thou helping ; nought we pray . 
 where be the eager heart , the hardy ? 
  where be the sweet - voice unafraid ? 

 but now thou lovest , now thou leadest , 
  where be go the grief of our mind ? 
 what be the word of the tale , that thou heed 
  e'en as the breath of the bygone wind ? 

 Green and green be thy garment grow 
  over thy blossoming limb beneath ; 
 up o'er our foot rise the blade of thy sowing , 
  Pierced be our heart with thine odorous breath . 

 but where art thou wending , thou new - comer ? 
  hurry on to the Courts of the Sun ? 
 where art thou now in the House of the Summer ? 
  tell be thy day and thy deed be do . 

 Spring have be here for we that be live 
  after the day of Winter 's fear ; 
 here in our hand be the wealth of her giving , 
  the Love of the Earth , and the Light of the Year . 


 thus come they to the Gate , and lo ! the Bride thereby , lean 
 against a buttress , gaze with no dull eye at the come throng . 
 she be now clothe in her woman 's attire again , to wit a light flame- 
 coloured gown over a green kirtle ; but she yet bear a gild helm on 
 her head and a sword girt to her side in token of her oath to the 
 God . she have be in Hall - face 's company in that last battle , and 
 have do a man 's service there , fight very valiantly , but have not 
 be hurt , and have come back to Burgstead when the shift of man be . 

 now she draw herself up and stand a little way before the Gate and 
 look forth on the throng , and when her eye beheld the Runaways 
 amidst of the weapone carle of Burgdale , her face flush , and her 
 eye fill with tear as she stand , partly wonder , partly deeming 
 what they be . she wait till stone - face come by she , and then she 
 take the old man by the sleeve , and draw he apart a little and say 
 to he : ' what meaneth this show , my friend ? who hath clothe these 
 folk thus strangely ; and who be these three naked tall one , so 
 fierce - look , but somewhat noble of aspect ? ' 

 for indeed those three man of the kindred , when they have get into 
 the Dale , and have rest they , and drink a cup of wine , and when they 
 have see the chaplet and wreath of the spring - flower wherewith 
 they be bedeck , and have smell the sweet savour of they , fall to 
 walk proudly , heed not their nakedness ; for no rag have they 
 upon they save breech - clout of deer - skin : they have change weapon 
 with the burgdale carle ; and one have get a great axe , which he 
 bear over his shoulder , and the shaft thereof be all do about with 
 copper ; and another have shoulder a long heavy thrusting - spear , and 
 the third , an exceed tall man , bear a long broad - bladed war - sword . 
 thus they go , brown of skin beneath their flower - garland , their 
 long hair bleach by the sun fall about their shoulder ; high 
 they stride amongst the shuffle carle and trip woman of the 
 later - come thrall . but when they hear the music , and see that they 
 be come to the Gate in triumph , strange thought of old memory 
 swell up in their heart , and they refrain they not from weeping , 
 for they feel that the joy of life have come back to they . 

 nor must it be deem that these be the only one amongst the 
 Runaways whose heart be cheer and soften : already be many 
 of they come back to life , as they feel their worn body caress 
 by the clear soft air of Burgdale , and the sweetness of the flower 
 that hang about they , and see all round about the kind and happy 
 face of their well - willer . 

 so stone - face look on the Bride as she stand with face yet tear- 
 bedew , await his answer , and say : 

 ' Daughter , thou sayest who clothe these folk thus ? it be misery that 
 hath so dight they ; and they be the image of what we shall be if we 
 love foul life well than fair death , and so fall into the hand of 
 the Felons , who be the master of these man . as for the tall naked 
 man , they be of our own blood , and kinsman to face - of - god 's new 
 friend ; and they be of the good of the vanquish : it be in early 
 day that they flee from thralldom ; as we may have to do . now , 
 daughter , I bid thee be as joyous as thou art valiant , and then shall 
 all be well . ' 

 Therewith she smile on he , and he depart , and she stand a little 
 while , as the throng move on and be swallow by the Gate , and 
 look after they ; and for all her pity for the other folk , she 
 think chiefly of those fearless tall man who be of the blood of 
 those with whom it be lawful to we d. 

 there she stand as the wind dry the tear upon her cheek , think 
 of the sorrow which these folk have endure , and their stripe and 
 mocking , their squalor and famine ; and she wonder and look on her 
 own fair and shapely hand with the precious finger - ring thereon , 
 and on the dainty cloth and trim broidery of her sleeve ; and she 
 touch her smooth cheek with the back of her hand , and smile , and 
 feel the spring sweet in her mouth , and its savour goodly in her 
 nostril ; and therewith she call to mind the aspect of her lovely 
 body , as while she have see it image , all its full measure , in the 
 clear pool at midsummer , or piece - meal , in the shin steel of the 
 Westland mirror . she think also with what joy she draw the breath 
 of life , yea , even amidst of grief , and of how sweet and pure and 
 well - nurture she be , and how well beloved of many friend and the 
 whole folk , and she set all this beside those woeful body and 
 lower face , and feel shame of her sorrow of heart , and the pain 
 it have bring to she ; and ever amidst shame and pity of all that 
 misery rise up before she the image of those tall fierce man , and it 
 seem to she as if she have see something like to they in some dream 
 or imagination of her mind . 

 so come the Burgdalers and their guest into the street of Burgstead 
 amidst music and singing ; and the throng be great there . then face- 
 of - god bade make a ring about the stranger , and they do so , and he 
 and the Runaways alone be in the midst of it ; and he spake in a 
 loud voice and say : 

 ' man of the Dale and the Burg , these folk whom here ye see in such a 
 sorry plight be they whom our deadly foe have rejoice to torment ; 
 let we therefore rejoice to cherish they . now let those man come 
 forth who deem that they have enough and more , so that they may each 
 take into their house some two or three of these friend such as 
 would be fain to be together . and since I be war - leader , and have 
 the right hereto , I will first choose they whom I will lead into the 
 House of the Face . and lo you ! will I have this man   and he lay his 
 hand on Dallach , who be he whom I first come across , and who find we 
 all these other , and next I will have yonder tall carle , the three 
 of they , because I perceive they to be man meet to be with a War- 
 leader , and to follow he in battle . ' 

 Therewith he draw the three Men of the Wolf towards he , but Dallach 
 already be stand beside he . and folk rejoice in face - of - god . 

 but the Bride come forward next , and spake to he meekly and simply : 

 ' war - leader , let I have of the woman those who need I most , that I 
 may bring they to the House of the Steer , and try if there be not 
 some good day yet to be find for they , wherein they shall but 
 remember the past grief as an ugly dream . ' 

 then face - of - god look on she , and he - seem he have never see she 
 so fair ; and all the shame wherewith he have behold she of late be 
 go from he , and his heart run over with friendly love towards she 
 as she look into his face with kindly eye ; and he say : 

 ' Kinswoman , take thy choice as thy kindness biddeth , and happy shall 
 they be whom thou choosest . ' 

 she bow her head soberly , and choose from among the guest four 
 woman of the sad and most grievous , and no man of their kindre 
 spake for go along with they ; then she go her way home , lead 
 one of they by the hand , and strange be it to see those twain go 
 through sun and shade together , that poor wretch along with the 
 goodly of woman . 

 then come forward one after other of the worthy goodman of the Dale , 
 and especially such as be old , and they lead away one one man , and 
 another two , and another three , and often would a man crave to go 
 with a woman or a woman with a man , and it be not gainsay they . so 
 be all the guest apportion , and ill - content be those goodman 
 that have to depart without a guest ; and one man would say to another : 
 ' such - an - one , be not downcast ; this guest shall be between we , if he 
 will , and shall dwell with thee and I month about ; but this first 
 month with I , since I be first comer . ' and so forth be it say . 

 now to prevent the time to come , it may be say about the Runaways , 
 that when they have be a little while amongst the Burgdalers , well 
 fed and well clothe and kindly cherish , it be marvellous how they 
 be better in aspect of body , and it begin to be see of they that 
 they be well - favour people , and diver of the woman exceed 
 goodly , black - haired and grey - eye , and very clear - skin and white- 
 skin ; most of they be young , and the old have not see above 
 forty winter . they of Rose - dale , and especially such as have first 
 flee away to the wood , be very soon see to be merry and kindly 
 folk ; but they who have be long in captivity , and notably those 
 from silver - dale who be not of the kindred , be for a long time 
 sullen and heavy , and it avail little to trust to they for the 
 doing of work ; albeit they would follow about their friend of 
 Burgdale with the love of a dog ; also they be , diver of they , 
 somewhat thievish , and if they lack anything would liefer take it 
 by stealth than ask for it ; which forsooth the burgdale man take not 
 amiss , but deem of it as a jest rather . 

 very few of the Runaways have any will to fare back to their old 
 home , or indeed could be get to go into the wood , or , after a day or 
 two , to say any word of Rose - dale or silver - dale . in this and other 
 matter the Burgdalers deal with they as with child who must have 
 their way ; for they deem that their guest have much time to make 
 up ; also they be well content when they see how goodly they be , 
 for these dalesman love to see man goodly of body and of a cheerful 
 countenance . 

 as for Dallach and the three silver - dale man of the kindred , they 
 go gladly whereas the burgdale man would have they ; and half a 
 score other take weapon in their hand when the war be foughten : 
 concern which more hereafter . 

 but on the even whereof the tale now tell , face - of - god and stone- 
 face and their company meet after nightfall in the Hall of the face 
 clothe in glorious raiment , and therewith be Dallach and the man of 
 silver - dale , washen and dock of their long hair , after the fashion 
 of warrior who bear the helm ; and they be clothe in gay attire , with 
 battle - sword girt to their side and gold ring on their arm . 
 somewhat stern and sad - eyed be those silver - daler yet , though they 
 look on those about they kindly and courteously when they meet their 
 eye ; and face - of - god yearn towards they when he call to mind the 
 beauty and wisdom and loving - kindness of the Sun - beam . they be , as 
 aforesaid , strong man and tall , and one of they tall than any 
 amidst that house of tall man . their name be Wolf - stone , the 
 tall , and God - swain , and Spear - fist ; and God - swain the young 
 be of thirty winter , and Wolf - stone of forty . they come into the 
 Hall in such wise , that when they be wash and attire , and all 
 man be assemble in the Hall , and the Alderman and the chieftain 
 sit on the dai , face - of - god bring they in from the out - bower , 
 hold Dallach by the right hand and Wolf - stone by the left ; and he 
 look but a stripling beside that huge man . 

 and when the man in the Hall beheld such goodly warrior , and 
 remember their grief late past , they all stand up and shout for 
 joy of they . but face - of - god pass up the Hall with they , and stand 
 before the dais and say : 

 ' o Alderman of the Dale and Chief of the House of the Face , here I 
 bring to you the foe of our foeman , whom I have meet in the wild- 
 wood , and bid to our House ; and meseemeth they will be our 
 friend , and stand beside we in the day of battle . therefore I say , 
 take these guest and I together , or put we all to the door 
 together ; and if thou wilt take they , then show they to such place 
 as thou deem meet . ' 

 then stand up the Alderman and say : 

 ' man of silver - dale and rose - dale , I bid you welcome ! be ye our 
 friend , and abide here with we as long as seemeth good to you , and 
 share in all that be ours . Son face - of - god , show these warrior to 
 seat on the dais beside thee , and cherish they as well as thou 
 know how . ' 

 then face - of - god bring they up on to the dais and sit down on the 
 right hand of his father , with Dallach on his right hand , and then 
 Wolf - stone out from he ; then sit stone - face , that there might be a 
 man of the Dale to talk with they and serve they ; and on his right 
 hand first Spear - fist and then God - swain . and when they be all sit 
 down , and the meat be on the board , Iron - face turn to his son 
 face - of - god and take his hand , and say in a loud voice , so that many 
 might hear he : 

 ' Son face - of - god , son Gold - mane , thou bearest with thee both ill luck 
 and good . erewhile , when thou wanderedst out into the wild - wood , 
 seek thou knew not what from out of the Land of Dreams , thou 
 didst but bring aback to we grief and shame ; but now that thou hast 
 go forth with the neighbour seek thy foeman , thou hast come 
 aback to we with thine hand full of honour and joy for we , and we 
 thank thee for thy gift , and I call thee a lucky man . herewith , 
 kinsman , I drink to thee and the lasting of thy luck . ' 

 Therewith he stand up and drank the health of the war - leader and the 
 Guests : and all man be exceed joyous thereat , when they call 
 to mind his wrath at the Gate - thing , and they shout for gladness as 
 they drink that health , and the feast become exceed merry in the 
 House of the Face ; and as to the war to come , it seem to they as if 
 it be over and do in all triumph . 



 CHAPTER XXX . HALL - FACE goeth toward ROSE - DALE 



 on the morrow face - of - god take counsel with Hall - face and stone - face 
 as to what be good to be do , and they sit on the dais in the Hall 
 to talk it over . 

 Short be the time that have wear since that day in Shadowy Vale , for 
 it be but eight day since then ; yet so many thing have befall in 
 that time , and , to speak shortly , the outlook for the Burgdalers have 
 change so much , that the time seem long to all the three , and 
 especially to face - of - god . 

 it be yet twenty day till the Great Folk - mote should beholden , and 
 to Hall - face the time seem long enough to do somewhat , and he 
 deem it be good to gather force and fall on the Dusky Men in 
 rose - dale , since now they have get man who could lead they the 
 nighest way and by the safe pass , and who know all the way of 
 the foeman . but to stone - face this rede seem not so good ; for they 
 would have to go and come back , and fight and conquer , in less time 
 than twenty day , or be belate of the Folk - mote , and meanwhile much 
 might happen . 

 ' for , ' say stone - face , ' we may deem the fighting - man of Rose - dale to 
 be little less than one thousand , and however we fall on they , even 
 if it be unawares at first , they shall fight stubbornly ; so that we 
 may not send against they many less than they be , and that shall 
 strip Burgdale of its fighting - man , so that whatever befall , we that 
 be leave shall have to bide at home . ' 

 now be face - of - god of the same mind as stone - face ; and he say 
 moreover : ' when we go to Rose - dale we must abide there a while 
 unless we be overthrow . for if ye conquer it and come away at once , 
 presently shall the tiding come to the ear of the Dusky Men in 
 silver - dale , and they shall join themselves to those of rose - dale who 
 have flee before you , and between they they shall destroy the unhappy 
 people therein ; for ye can not take they all away with you : and that 
 shall they do all the more now , when they look to have new thrall in 
 Burgdale , both man and woman . and this we may not suffer , but must 
 abide till we have meet all our foeman and have overcome they , so that 
 the poor folk there shall be safe from they till they have learn 
 how to defend their dale . now my rede be , that we send out the War- 
 arrow at once up and down the Dale , and to the Shepherds and 
 Woodlanders , and appoint a day for the Muster and Weapon - show of all 
 our Folk , and that day to be the day before the Spring Market , that 
 be to say , four day before the Great Folk - mote , and meantime that we 
 keep sure watch about the border of the wood , and now and again scour 
 the wood , so as to clear the Dale of their wandering band . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Hall - face ; ' and I pray thee , brother , let I have an 
 hundred of man and thy Dallach , and let we go somewhat deep into the 
 wood towards rose - dale , and see what we may come across ; peradventure 
 it might be something well than hart or wild - swine . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' I see no harm therein , if Dallach goeth with thee 
 freely ; for I will have no force put on he or any other of the 
 Runaways . yet meseemeth it be not ill for thee to find the road to 
 rose - dale ; for I have it in my mind to send a company thither to give 
 those Rose - dale man - queller somewhat to do at home when we fall upon 
 silver - dale . therefore go find Dallach , and get thy man together at 
 once ; for the soon thou art go on thy way the well . but this I 
 bid thee , go no furth than three day out , that ye may be back home 
 betime . ' 

 at this word hall - face 's eye gleam with joy , and he go out from 
 the Hall straightway and seek Dallach , and find he at the Gate . 
 iron - face have give he a new sword , a good one , and have bid he 
 call it thicket - clear , and he would not leave it any moment of the 
 day or night , but would lay it under his pillow at night as a child 
 do with a new toy ; and now he be lean against a buttress and 
 draw the say sword half out of the scabbard and pore over its 
 blade , which be indeed fair enough , be work with dark grey 
 wave line like the eddy of the Weltering Water . 

 so hall - face greet he , and smile and say : 

 ' Guest , if thou wilt , thou may'st take that new blade of my father 's 
 work which thou lov so , a journey which shall rejoice it . ' 

 ' yea , ' say Dallach , ' I suppose that thou would fare on thy 
 brother 's footstep , and deemest that I be the man to lead thee on 
 the road , and even far than he go ; and though it might be 
 think by some that I have see enough of rose - dale and the part 
 thereabout for one while , yet will I go with thee ; for now be I a man 
 again , body and soul . ' 

 and therewith he draw thicket - clear right out of his sheath and 
 wave he in the air . and Hall - face be glad of he and say he be 
 well apaid of his help . so they go away together to gather man , 
 and on the morrow Hall - face depart and go into the wild - wood with 
 Dallach and an hundred and two score man . 

 but as for face - of - god , he fare up and down the Dale follow the 
 War - arrow , and go into all house , and talk with the folk , both 
 young and old , man and woman , and tell they closely all that have 
 betid and all that be like to betide ; and he be well pleased with 
 that which he see and hear ; for all take his word well , and be 
 nought afeard or dismay by the tiding ; and he see that they would 
 not hang aback . meantime the day wear , and Hall - face come not back 
 till the seventh day , and he bring with he twelve more Runaways , 
 of whom five be woman . but he have lose four man , and have with he 
 Dallach and five other of the dalesman bear upon litter sore hurt ; 
 and this be his story : 

 they get to the Burg of the Runaways on the forenoon of the third 
 day , and thereby come on five carle of the Runaways - man who have 
 miss meeting Dallach that other day , but know what have be do ; 
 for one of they have be sick and could not come with he , and he have 
 tell the other : so now they be hang about the Burg of the 
 Runaways hop somewhat that he might come again ; and they meet the 
 Burgdalers full of joy , and bring they trout that they have catch 
 in the river . 

 as for the other runaway , namely , five woman and two more carle - 
 they have get they close to the entrance into silver - dale , where by 
 night and cloud they come on a campment of the Dusky Men , who be 
 lead home these seven poor wretch , runaway whom they have 
 catch , that they might slay they most evilly in Rose - stead . so 
 Hall - face fall on the Dusky Men , and deliver their captive , but 
 slew not all the foe , and they that flee bring pursuer on they who 
 come up with they the next day , so near be rose - dale , though they 
 make all diligence homeward . the Burgdalers must need turn and 
 fight with those pursuer , and at last they drave they aback so that 
 they might go on their way home . they let not the grass grow 
 beneath their foot thereafter , till they be assure by meet a 
 band of the Woodlanders , who have go forth to help they , and with 
 whom they rest a little . but neither so be they quite do with 
 the foeman , who come upon they next day a very many : these however 
 they and the Woodlanders , who be all fresh and unwounded and very 
 valiant , speedily put to the bad ; and so they come on to Burgstead , 
 leave those of they who be sorest hurt to be tend by the 
 Woodlanders at Carlstead , who , as might be look for , deal with they 
 very lovingly . 

 it be in the first fight that they suffer that loss of slain and 
 wound ; and therein the newly deliver thrall fight valiantly 
 against their master : as for Dallach , it be no marvel , say Hall- 
 face , that he be hurt ; but rather a marvel that he be not slain , so 
 little he recke of point and edge , if he might but slay the foeman . 

 such be Hall - face's - tale ; and face - of - god deem that he have do 
 unwisely to let he go that journey ; for the slaying of a few Dusky 
 Men be but a light gain to set against the loss of so many 
 Burgdalers ; yet be he glad of the deliverance of those Runaways , and 
 deem it a gain indeed . but henceforth would he hold all still till 
 he should have tiding of Folk - might ; so nought be do thereafter 
 save the warding of the Dale , from the country of the Shepherds to 
 the Waste above the Eastern pass . 

 but face - of - god himself go up amongst the Shepherds , and abode with 
 a goodman hight Hound - under - Greenbury , who gather to he the folk 
 from the country - side , and they go up on to Greenbury , and sit on 
 the green grass while he speak with they and tell they , as he have 
 tell the other , what have be do and what should be do . and 
 they hear he gladly , and he deem that there would be no blenching 
 in they , for they be all in one tale to live and die with their 
 friend of Burgdale , and they say that they would have no other word 
 save that to bear to the Great Folk - mote . 

 so he go away well - pleased , and he fare on thence to the 
 Woodlanders , and gueste at the house of a valiant man hight 
 Wargrove , who on the morrow morn call the folk together to a green 
 lawn of the wild - wood , so that there be scarce a soul of they that 
 be not there . then he lay the whole matter before they ; and if the 
 Dalesmen have be merry and ready , and the Shepherds stout - hearted 
 and friendly , yet be the Wood - lander more eager still , so that 
 every hour seem long to they till they stand in their war - gear ; and 
 they tell he that now at last be the hour draw nigh which they 
 have dream of , but have scarce dare to hope for , when the lose way 
 should be find , and the crooked make straight , and that which have 
 be break should be mend ; that their meat and drink , and sleep 
 and wake , and all that they do be now become to they but the 
 mean of living till the day be come whereon the two remnant of the 
 child of the Wolf should meet and become one folk to live or die 
 together . 

 then go face - of - god back to Burgstead again , and as he stand anigh 
 the thing - stead once more , and look down on the Dale as he have 
 behold it last autumn , he bethink he that with all that have be 
 do and all that have be promise , the earth be clear of her 
 trouble , and that now there be nought betwixt he and the happy day 
 of life which the Dale should give to the dweller therein , save the 
 gathering host of the battle - field and the day when the last word 
 should be speak and the first stroke smitten . so he go down on to 
 the Portway well content . 

 thereafter till the day of the Weapon - show there be nought to tell 
 of , save that Dallach and the other wounded man begin to grow whole 
 again ; and all man sit at home , or go on the woodland ward , 
 expect great tiding after the holding of the Folk - mote . 



 CHAPTER XXXI . of the WEAPON - SHOW of the MEN of BURGDALE and their 
 neighbour 



 now on the day appoint for the Weapon - show come the Folk flock - meal 
 to the great and wide meadow that be cleave by wildlake as it run to 
 join the Weltering Water . early in the morning , even before sunrise , 
 have the wain full of woman and child begin to come thither . also 
 there come little horse and ass from the Shepherd country with one 
 or two or three damsel or child sit on each , and by wain - side 
 or by beast strode the man of the house , merry and fair in their war- 
 gear . the Woodlanders , moreover , man and woman , eld and swain and 
 young damsel , stream out of the wood from Carlstead , eager to make 
 the day begin before the sunrise , and end before his setting . 

 then all man fall to pitching of tent and tilt over of wain ; for 
 the April sun be hot in the Dale , and when he arise the mead be 
 gay with more than the spring flower ; for the tent and the tilt 
 be stain and broider with many colour , and there be none who 
 have not furbish up his war - gear so that all shone and glitter . 
 and many wear gay surcoat over their armour , and the woman be clothe 
 in all their bravery , and the Houses mostly of a suit ; for one bore 
 blue and another corn - colour , and another green , and another brazil , 
 and so forth , and all gleam and glow with broidery of gold and 
 bright hue . but the woman of the Shepherds be all clothe in white , 
 embroider with green bough and red blossom , and the Woodland 
 woman wear dark red kirtle . moreover , the woman have set garland of 
 flower on their head and the helm of the man , and for the most 
 part they be slim of body and tall and light - limbed , and as dainty 
 to look upon as the willow - bough that wave on the brook - side . 

 Thither have the goodman who be gueste the Runaways bring their 
 guest , even now much better by their new soft day ; and much the 
 poor folk marvel at all this joyance , and they scarce know where 
 they be ; but to some it bring back to their mind day of joyance 
 before the thralldom and all that they have lose , so that their heart 
 be heavy a while , till they see the warrior of the kindred 
 streaming into the mead and bethink they why they carry steel . 

 now by then the sun be fully up there be a great throng on the 
 Portway , and this be the folk of the Burg on their way to the 
 Weapon - mead . the man - at - arm be in the midst of the throng , and at 
 the head of they be the war - leader , with the banner of the face 
 before he , wherein be do the image of the God with the ray - ring 
 head . but at the rearward of the warrior go the Alderman and the 
 Burg - warden , before whom be bear the banner of the Burg picture 
 with the Gate and its tower ; but in the midst betwixt those two be 
 the banner of the Steer , a white beast on a green field . 

 so when the Dale - warden who be down in the meadow hear the music 
 and beheld who be come , they bid the company of the Dale and 
 the Shepherds and the Woodlanders who be down there to pitch their 
 banner in a half circle about the ingle of the meadow which be make 
 by the stream of Wildlake and the Weltering Water , and gather to 
 they to be order there under their leader of score and half- 
 hundred and hundred ; and even so they do . but the banner of the 
 Dale without the Burg be the Bridge , and the Bull , and the Vine , 
 and the Sickle . and the Shepherds have three banner , to wit 
 Greenbury , and the Fleece , and the Thorn . 

 as for the Woodlanders , they say that they be abide their great 
 banner , but it should come in good time ; ' and meantime , ' say they , 
 ' here be the war - token that we shall fight under ; for they be good 
 enough banner for we poor man , the remnant of the valiant of time 
 past . ' therewith they show two great spear , and athwart the one 
 be tie an arrow , its point dip in blood , its feather sing 
 with fire ; and they say , ' this be the banner of the War - shaft . ' 

 on the other spear there be nought ; but the head thereof be great 
 and long , and they have so burnish the steel that the sun smite out 
 a ray of light from it , so that it might be see from afar . and they 
 say : ' this be the Banner of the Spear ! down yonder where the 
 raven be gather ye shall see a banner fly over we . there 
 shall fall many a mother 's son . ' 

 smile the dale - warden , and say that these be good banner to 
 fight under ; and those that stand nearby shout for the valiancy of 
 the Woodland Carles . 

 now the Dale - warden go to the entrance from the Portway to the 
 meadow , and there meet the Men of the Burg , and two of they go one 
 on either side of the war - leader to show he to his seat , and the 
 other abode till the Alderman and Burg - warden come up , and then 
 join themselves to they , and the horn blow up both in the meadow 
 and on the road , and the new - comer go their way to their 
 appoint place amidst the shout of the Dalesmen ; and the woman and 
 child and old man from the Burg follow after , till all the mead 
 be cover with bright raiment and glitter gear , save within the 
 ring of man at the further end . 

 so come the war - leader to his seat of green turf raise in the ingle 
 aforesaid ; and he stand beside it till the Alderman and Wardens have 
 take their place on a seat behind he raise higher than his ; below 
 he on the step of his seat sit the Scrivener with his pen and ink- 
 horn and scroll of parchment , and man have bring he a smooth shield 
 whereon to write . 

 on the left side of face - of - god stand the man of the face all 
 glitter in their arm , and amongst they be Wolf - stone and his 
 two fellow , but Dallach be not yet whole of his hurt . on his 
 right be the folk of the House of the Steer : the leader of that 
 House be an old white - bearded man , grandfather of the Bride , for her 
 father be dead ; and who but the Bride herself stand beside he in 
 her glorious war - gear , look as if she be new come from the City 
 of the Gods , think most man ; but those who behold she closely 
 deem that she look heavy - eyed and haggard , as if she be aweary . 
 nevertheless , wheresoever she pass , and whosoever look on she 
  and all man look on she , there arise a murmur of praise and love ; 
 and the woman , and especially the young one , say how fair her deed 
 be , and how meet she be for it ; and some of they be for do on 
 war - gear and fare to battle with the carle ; and of these some be 
 sober and solemn , as be well see afterwards , and some spake 
 lightly : some also fall to boasting of how they could run and climb 
 and swim and shoot in the bow , and fall to baring of their arm to 
 show how strong they be : and indeed they be no weakling , though 
 their arm be fair . 

 there then stand the ring of man , each company under its banner ; and 
 beyond they stand the woman and child and man unmeet for battle ; 
 and beyond they again the tilt wain and the tent . 

 now face - of - god sit he down on the turf - seat with his bright helm on 
 his head and his naked sword across his knee , while the horn blow 
 up loudly , and when they have do , the elder of the Dale - warden 
 cry out for silence . then again arise face - of - god and say : 

 ' man of the Dale , and ye friend of the Shepherds , and ye , O valiant 
 Woodlanders ; we be not assemble here to take counsel , for in three 
 day ' time shall the Great Folk - mote be holden , whereat shall be 
 counsel enough . but since I have be appoint your Chief and War- 
 leader , till such time as the Folk - mote shall either yeasay or naysay 
 my leadership , I have send for you that we may look each other in the 
 face and number our host and behold our weapon , and see if we be 
 meet for battle and for the dealing with a great host of foeman . for 
 now no long can it be say that we be go to war , but rather 
 that war be on our border , and we be blend with it ; as many have 
 learn to their cost ; for some have be slay and some sorely hurt . 
 therefore I bid you now , all ye that be weapone , wend past we that 
 the tale of you may be take . but first let every hundred - leader and 
 half - hundred - leader and score - leader make sure that he hath his tale 
 aright , and give his word to the captain of his banner that he in 
 turn may give it out to the Scrivener with his name and the House and 
 Company that he leadeth . ' 

 so he spake and sit he adown ; and the horn blow again in token that 
 the company should go past ; and the first that come be hall - ward 
 of the House of the Steer , and the first of those that go after he 
 be the Bride , go as if she be his son . 

 so he cry out his name , and the name of his House , and say , ' an 
 hundred and a half , ' and pass forth , his man follow he in most 
 goodly array . each man be gird with a good sword and bear a long 
 heavy spear over his shoulder , save a score who bare bow ; and no man 
 lack a helm , a shield , and a coat of fence . 

 then come a goodly man of thirty winter , and stay before the 
 Scrivener and cry out : 

 ' write down the House of the Bridge of the Upper Dale at one hundred , 
 and War - well their leader . ' 

 and he stride on , and his man follow clothe and weapone like those 
 of the Steer , save that some have axis hang to their girdle 
 instead of sword ; and most bore casting - spear instead of the long 
 spear , and half a score be bowman . 

 then come Fox of Upton lead the man of the Bull of Middale , an 
 hundred and a half lack two ; very great and tall be his man , and 
 they also bear long spear , and one score and two be bowman . 

 then Fork - beard of Lea , a man well on in year , lead on the man of the 
 Vine , an hundred and a half and five man thereto ; two score of they 
 bare bow in hand and be gird with sword ; the rest bear their sword 
 naked in their right hand , and their shield   which be but small 
 buckler   hang at their back , and in the left hand each bore two 
 casting - spear . with these go two doughty woman - at - arm among the 
 bowman , tall and well - knit , already grow brown with the spring 
 sun , for their work lie among the stock of the vine on the 
 southward - look bent . 

 Next come a tall young man , yellow - haired , with a thin red beard , and 
 give himself out for Red - beard of the Knolls ; he bear his father 's 
 name , as the custom of their house be , but the old man , who have long 
 be head man of the House of the Sickle , be late dead in his bed , 
 and the young man have not see twenty winter . he bid the Scrivener 
 write the tale of the Men of the Sickle at an hundred and a half , and 
 his folk fare past the war - leader joyously , be one half of they 
 bowman ; and fall shooter they be ; the other half be gird with 
 sword , and bore withal long ashen stave armed with great blade 
 curved inward , which weapon they call heft - sax . 

 all these band , as the name and the tale of they be declare be 
 greet with loud shout from their fellow and the bystander ; but 
 now arise a great shout still , as stone - face , clothe in goodly 
 glitter array , come forth and say : 

 ' I be stone - face of the House of the Face , and I bring with I two 
 hundred of man with their good war - gear and weapon : write it down , 
 Scrivener ! ' 

 and he stride on like a young man after those who have go past , and 
 after he come the tall Hall - face and his man , a gallant sight to 
 see : two score bowman girt with sword , and the other with naked 
 sword wave aloft , and each bear two casting - spear in his left 
 hand . 

 then come a man of middle age , broad - shoulder , yellow - haired , blue- 
 eyed , of wide and ruddy countenance , and after he a goodly company ; 
 and again great be the shout that go up to the heaven ; for he 
 say : 

 ' Scrivener , write down that hound - under - Greenbury , from amongst the 
 dweller in the hill where the sheep feed , leadeth the man who go 
 under the banner of Greenbury , to the tale of an hundred and four 
 score . ' 

 Therewith he pass on , and his man follow , stout , stark , and 
 merry - faced , girt with sword , and bear over their shoulder long- 
 stave axis , and spear not so long as those which the Dalesmen bore ; 
 and they have but a half score of arrow - shot with they . 

 Next come a young man , blue - eyed also , with hair the colour of flax 
 on the distaff , broad - faced and short - nosed , low of stature , but very 
 strong - build , who cry out in a loud , cheerful voice : 

 ' I be Strongitharm of the Shepherds , and these valiant man be of the 
 Fleece and the thorn blend together , for so they would have it ; and 
 their tale be one hundred and two score and ten . ' 

 then the man of those kindred go past merry and shout , and they 
 be clothe and weapone like to they of Greenbury , but have with they a 
 score of bowman . and all these Shepherd - folk wear over their 
 hauberk white woollen surcoat broider with green and red . 

 now again uprise the cry , and there stand before the war - leader a 
 very tall man of fifty winter , dark - faced and grey - eye , and he 
 spake slowly and somewhat softly , and say : 

 ' war - leader , this be Red - wolf of the Woodlanders lead the man who 
 go under the sign of the War - shaft , to the number of an hundred and 
 two . ' 

 then he pass on , and his man after he , tall , lean , and silent 
 amidst the shouting . all these man bare bow , for they be keen 
 hunter ; each have at his girdle a little axe and a wood - knife , and 
 some have long sword withal . they wear , everyone of the carle , 
 short green surcoat over their coat of fence ; but amongst they be 
 three woman who bear like weapon to the man , but be clothe in red 
 kirtle under their hauberk , which be of good ring - mail gleaming 
 over they from throat to knee . 

 last come another tall man , but young , of twenty - five winter , and 
 spake : 

 ' Scrivener , I be Bears - bane of the Woodlanders , and these that come 
 after I wend under the sign of the Spear , and they be of the tale 
 of one hundred and seven . ' 

 and he pass by at once , and his man follow he , clothe and weapone 
 no otherwise than they of the war - shaft , and with they be two 
 woman . 

 now go all those company back to their banner , and stand there ; 
 and there arise among the bystander much talk concern the Weapon- 
 show , and who be the good array of the Houses . and of the old 
 man , some spake of past weapon - show which they have see in their 
 youth , and they set they beside this one , and praise and blame . so 
 it go on a little while till the horn blow again , and once more 
 there be silence . then arise face - of - god and say : 

 ' Men of Burgdale , and ye Shepherd - folk , and ye of the Woodland , now 
 shall ye wot how many weaponed man we may bring together for this 
 war . Scrivener , arise and give forth the tale of the company , as 
 they have be tell unto you . ' 

 then the Scrivener stand up on the turf - bench beside face - of - god , and 
 spake in a loud voice , read from his scroll : 

 ' of the Men of Burgdale there have pass by I nine hundred and 
 six ; of the Shepherds three hundred and eight and ten ; and of the 
 Woodlanders two hundred and nine ; so that all tell our man be 
 fourteen hundred and thirty and three . ' 

 now in those day man reckon by long hundred , so that the whole 
 tale of the host be one thousand , five hundred , and four score and 
 one , tell the tale in short hundred . 

 when the tale have be give forth and heard , man shout again , and 
 they rejoice that they be so many . for it exceed the reckoning 
 which the Alderman have give out at the Gate - thing . but face - of - god 
 say : 

 ' neighbour , we have hold our Weapon - show ; but now hold you ready , 
 each man , for the Hosting toward very battle ; for belike within seven 
 day shall the leader of hundred and twenty summon you to be 
 ready in arm to take whatso fortune may befall . now be sunder the 
 Weapon - show . be ye as merry to - day as your heart bid you to be . ' 

 Therewith he come down from his seat with the Alderman and the 
 Wardens , and they mingle with the good folk of the Dale and the 
 Shepherds and the Woodlanders , and merry be their converse there . 
 it yet lack an hour of noon ; so presently they fall to and feast 
 in the green meadow , drink from wain to wain and from tent to 
 tent ; and thereafter they play and sport in the mead , shoot 
 at the butt and wrestling , and try other mastery . then they 
 fall to dance one and all , and so at last to supper on the green 
 grass in great merriment . nor might you have know from the 
 demeanour of any that any threat of evil overhang the Dale . Nay , so 
 glad be they , and so friendly , that you might rather have deem 
 that this be the land whereof tale tell , wherein people die not , 
 but live for ever , without grow any old than when they first 
 come thither , unless they be bear into the land itself , and then they 
 grow into fair manhood , and so abide . in sooth , both the land and 
 the folk be fair enough to be that land and the folk thereof . 

 but a little after sunset they sunder , and some fare home ; but 
 many of they abode in the tent and tilt wain , because the morrow 
 be the first day of the Spring market : and already be some of the 
 Westland chapman come ; yea , two of they be with the bystander in 
 the meadow ; and more be look for ere the night be far spend . 



 CHAPTER XXXII . the MEN of SHADOWY VALE COME to the spring market AT 
 burgstead 



 on the morrow betime in the morning the Westland chapman , who be 
 now all come , go out from the House of the Face , where they be 
 ever will not to be lodge , and set up their booth adown the street 
 betwixt gate and bridge . Gay be the show ; for the booth be 
 tilt over with paint cloth , and the merchant themselves be 
 clothe in long gown of fine cloth ; scarlet , and blue , and white , and 
 green , and black , with broidered welt of gold and silver ; and their 
 knave be gaily attire in short coat of diver hue , with silver 
 ring about their arm , and short sword girt to their side . People 
 begin to gather about these chapman at once when they fall to open 
 their bale and their pack , and unload their wain . there have 
 they iron , both in pig and forge scrap and nail ; steel they have , 
 and silver , both in ingot and vessel ; pearl from over sea ; cinnabar 
 and other colour for staining , such as be not in the mountain : 
 madder from the marsh , and purple of the sea , and scarlet grain 
 from the holm - oak by its edge , and woad from the deep clayey field 
 of the plain ; silken thread also from the outer ocean , and rare webs 
 of silk , and jar of olive oil , and fine pottery , and scented wood , 
 and sugar of the cane . but gold they have none with they , for that 
 they take there ; and for weapon , save a few silver - gilt toy , they 
 have no market . 

 so presently they fall to chaffer ; for the carle bring they little 
 bag of the river - bear gold , so that the weight and scale be at 
 work ; other have with they scroll and tally to tell the number of 
 the beast which they have to sell , and the chapman give they ware 
 therefor without behold the beast ; for they wotte that the 
 Dalesmen lie not in chaffer . while the day be yet young withal 
 come the Dalesmen from the mid and nether Dale with their ware and 
 set up their booth ; and they have with they flask and keg of the 
 wine which they have to sell ; and bale of the good winter - weave 
 cloth , some grey , some dye , and piece of fine linen ; and blade of 
 sword , and knife , and axis of such fashion as the Westland man 
 use ; and golden cup and chain , and fair ring set with mountain- 
 blue stone , and copper bowl , and vessel gilt and parcel - gilt , and 
 mountain - blue for stain . there be man of the Shepherds also 
 with such fleece as they could spare from the daily chaffer with the 
 neighbour . and of the Woodlanders be four carle and a woman with 
 peltrie and dress deer - skin , and a few piece of well - carven 
 wood - work for bedstead and chair and such like . 

 soon be the Burg throng with folk in all its open place , and all 
 be eager and merry , and it could not have be tell from their 
 demeanour and countenance that the shadow of a grievous trouble hang 
 over they . true it be that every man of the Dale and the neighbour 
 be gird with his sword , or bore spear or axe or other weapon in his 
 hand , and that most have their buckler at their back and their helm 
 on their head ; but this be ever their custom at all meeting of 
 man , not because they dread war or be fain of strife , but in 
 token that they be free man , from whom none should take the weapon 
 without battle . 

 such be the folk of the land : as for the chapman , they be well- 
 speak and courteous , and blithe with the folk , as they well might 
 be , for they have good pennyworth of they ; yet they deal with they 
 without use measureless lying , as behoved folk deal with simple 
 and proud people ; and many be the tale they tell of the tiding of 
 the Cities and the Plain . 

 there amongst the throng be the Bride in her maiden 's attire , but 
 girt with the sword , go from booth to booth with her guest of the 
 Runaways , and do those poor people what pleasure she might , and 
 give they gift from the good there , such as they set their heart 
 on . and the more part of the Runaways be about among the people of 
 the Fair ; but Dallach , be still weak , sit on a bench by the door 
 of the House of the Face look on well - pleased at all the stir of 
 folk . 

 Hall - face be go on the woodland ward ; while face - of - god go among 
 the folk in his most glorious attire ; but he soon betook he to the 
 place of meeting without the Gate , where stone - face and some of the 
 elder be sit along with the Alderman , beside whom sit the head 
 man of the merchant , clothe in a gown of fine scarlet embroider with 
 the good work of the Dale , with a golden chaplet on his head , and a 
 good sword , golden - hilte , by his side , all which the Alderman have 
 give to it he that morning . these chief be talk together 
 concern the tiding of the Plain , and many a tale the guest tell 
 to the Dalesmen , some true , some false . for there have be battle 
 down there , and the fall of king , and destruction of people , as oft 
 befalleth in the guileful city . he tell they also , in answer to 
 their story of the Dusky Men , of how man even such - like , but rid 
 on horse , or draw in wain , an host not to be number , have 
 erewhile overthrow the host of the Cities of the Plain , and have 
 wrought evil scarce to be tell of ; and how they have pile up the 
 skull of slaughter folk into great hill beside the city - gate , so 
 that the sun might no long shine into the street ; and how because 
 of the death and the rapine , grass have grow in the king ' chamber , 
 and the wolf have chase deer in the temple of the Gods . 

 ' but , ' quoth he , ' I know you , bold tiller of the soil , valiant 
 scourer of the wild - wood , that the bad that can befall you will be 
 to die under shield , and that ye shall suffer no torment of the 
 thrall . may the undying Gods bless the threshold of this Gate , and 
 oft may I come hither to taste of your kindness ! may your race , the 
 uncorrupt , increase and multiply , till your valiant man and clean 
 maiden make the bitter sweet and purify the earth ! ' 

 he spake smooth - tongue and smile , handle the while the fold of 
 his fine scarlet gown , and belike he mean a full half of what he 
 say ; for he be a man very eloquent of speech , and have speak with 
 king , uncowed and pleased with his speaking ; and for that cause and 
 his rich have he be make chief of the chapman . as he spake the 
 heart of face - of - god swell within he , and his cheek flush ; but 
 iron - face sit up straight and proud , and a light smile play about 
 his face , as he say gravely : 

 ' Friend of the Westland , I thank thee for the blessing and the kind 
 word . such as we be , we be ; nor do I deem that the very god shall 
 change we . and if they will be our friend , it be well ; for we 
 desire nought of they save their friendship ; and if they will be our 
 foe , that also shall we bear ; nor will we curse they for do that 
 which their life bid they to do . what sayest thou , face - of - god , my 
 son ? ' 

 ' yea , father , ' say face - of - god , ' I say that the very god , though 
 they slay I , can not unmake my life that have be . if they do deed , 
 yet shall we also do . ' 

 the Outlander smile as they spake , and bow his head to iron - face 
 and face - of - god , and wonder at their pride of heart , marvel 
 what they would say to the great man of the Cities if they should 
 meet they . 

 but as they sit a - talk , there come two man run to they from 
 the Portway , their weapon all clatter upon they , and they hear 
 withal the sound of a horn wind not far off very loud and clear ; 
 and the Chapman 's cheek pal : for in sooth he doubt that war be 
 at hand , after all he have hear of the Dalesmen 's dealing with the 
 Dusky Men . and all battle be loathsome to he , nor for all the gain 
 of his chaffer have he come into the Dale , have he know that war be 
 look for . 

 but the chief of the Dalesmen stir not , nor change countenance ; 
 and some of the goodman who be in the street nigh the Gate come 
 forth to see what be toward ; for they also have hear the voice of 
 the horn . 

 then one of those messenger come up breathless , and stand before the 
 chief , and say : 

 ' new tiding , Alderman ; here be weapone stranger come into the 
 Dale . ' 

 the Alderman smile on he and say : ' yea , son , and be they a great 
 host of man ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say the man , ' not above a score as I deem , and there be a 
 woman with they . ' 

 ' then shall we abide they here , ' say the Alderman , ' and thou 
 mightest have save thy breath , and suffer they to bring tiding of 
 themselves ; since they may scarce bring we war . for no man desireth 
 certain and present death ; and that be all that such a band may win 
 at our hand in battle to - day ; and all who come in peace be welcome 
 to we . what like be they to behold ? ' 

 say the man : ' they be tall man gloriously attire , so that they 
 seem like kinsman of the Gods ; and they bear flower bough in 
 their hand . ' 

 the Alderman laugh , and say : ' if they be god they be welcome 
 indeed ; and they shall grow the wiser for their come ; for they 
 shall learn how guest - fain the burgdale man may be . but if , as I 
 deem , they be like unto we , and but the child of the Gods , then 
 be they as welcome , and it may be more so , and our greeting to they 
 shall be as their greeting to we would be . ' 

 even as he spake the horn be wind near yet , and more loudly , and 
 folk come pour out of the Gate to learn the tiding . presently 
 the stranger come from off the Portway into the space before the 
 Gate ; and their leader be a tall and goodly man of some thirty 
 winter , in glorious array , helm on head and sword by side , his 
 surcoat green and flowery like the spring mead . in his right hand 
 he hold a branch of the blossom black - thorn   for some be yet in 
 blossom , and his left have hold of the hand of an exceeding fair 
 woman who go beside he : behind he be a score of weapone man in 
 goodly attire , some bear bow , some long spear , but each bearing 
 a flower bough in hand . 

 the tall man stop in the midst of the space , and the Alderman and 
 they with he stir not ; though , as for face - of - god , it be to he 
 as if summer have come suddenly into the midst of winter , and for the 
 very sweetness of delight his face grow pale . 

 then the new - comer draw nigh to the Alderman and say : 

 ' hail to the Gate and the man of the Gate ! hail to the kindred of 
 the child of the Gods ! ' 

 but the Alderman stand up and spake : ' and hail to thee , tall man ! 
 fair greeting to thee and thy company ! wilt thou name thyself with 
 thine own name , or shall I call thee nought save Guest ? Welcome art 
 thou , by whatsoever name thou wilt be call . here may'st thou and 
 thy folk abide as long as ye will . ' 

 say the new - comer : ' thank have thou for thy greeting and for thy 
 bidding ! and that bidding shall we take , whatsoever may come of it ; 
 for we be minded to abide with thee for a while . but know thou , O 
 Alderman of the Dalesmen , that I be not sackless toward thee and 
 thine . my name be folk - might of the child of the Wolf , and this 
 woman be the Sun - beam , my sister , and these behind I be of my 
 kindre , and be well beloved and trusty . we be no evil man or 
 wrong - doer ; yet have we be drive into sore strait , wherein man 
 must need at while do deed that make their friend few and their 
 foe many . so it may be that I be thy foeman . yet , if thou doubtest 
 of I that I shall be a baneful guest , thou shalt have our weapon of 
 we , and then mayest thou do thy will upon we without dread ; and here 
 first of all be my sword ! ' 

 Therewith he cast down the flower branch he be bear , and 
 pull his sword from out his sheath , and take it by the point , and 
 hold out the hilt to iron - face . 

 but the Alderman smile kindly on he and say : 

 ' the blade be a good one , and I say it who know the craft of sword- 
 forge ; but I need it not , for thou se I have a sword by my side . 
 keep your weapon , one and all ; for ye have come amongst many and 
 those no weakling : and if so be that thy guilt against we be so 
 great that we must need fall on you , ye will need all your war - gear . 
 but hereof be no need to speak till the time of the Folk - mote , which 
 will be holden in three day ' wear ; so let we forbear this matter 
 till then ; for I deem we shall have enough to say of other matter . 
 now , folk - might , sit down beside I , and thou also , Sun - beam , fairest 
 of woman . ' 

 Therewith he look into her face and redden , and say : 

 ' yet belike thou hast a word of greeting for my son , face - of - god , 
 unless it be so that ye have not see he before ? ' 

 then face - of - god come forward , and take folk - might by the hand and 
 kiss he ; and he stand before the Sun - beam and take her hand , and 
 the world wax a wonder to he as he kiss her cheek ; and in no 
 wise do she change countenance , save that her eye soften , and she 
 gaze at he full kindly from the happiness of her soul . 

 then face - of - god say : ' welcome , Guests , who erewhile gueste I so 
 well : now beginneth the day of your well - do to the man of 
 Burgdale ; therefore will we do to you as well as we may . ' 

 then folk - might and the Sun - beam sit they down with the chieftain , 
 one on either side of the Alderman , but face - of - god pass forth to 
 the other , and greet they one by one : of they be Wood - father and 
 his three son , and Bow - may ; and they rejoice exceedingly to see 
 he , and Bow - may say : 

 ' now it gladden my heart to look upon thee alive and thriving , and 
 to remember that day last winter when I meet thee on the snow , and 
 turn thee back from the perilous path to thy pleasure , which the 
 Dusky Men be beset , of whom thou knewest nought . yea , it be 
 merry that tide ; but this be well . Nay , friend , ' she say , ' it 
 availeth thee nought to strive to look out of the back of thine head : 
 let it be enough to thee that she be there . thou art now become a 
 great chieftain , and she be no less ; and this be a meeting of 
 chieftain , and the folk be look on and expect demeanour of 
 they as of the Gods ; and she be not to be deal with as if she be 
 the daughter of some little goodman with whom one hath make tryst in 
 the meadow . there ! hearken to I for a while ; at least till I tell 
 thee that thou seemest to I to hold thine head higher than when last 
 I see thee ; though that be no long time either . Hast thou be in 
 battle again since that day ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' he say , ' I have stricken no stroke since I slay two felon 
 within the same hour that we part . and thou , sister , what hast 
 thou do ? ' 

 she say : ' the grey goose hath be on the wing thrice since that , 
 bear on it the bane of evil thing . ' 

 then say wood - wise : ' Kinswoman , tell he of that battle , since thou 
 art deft with thy tongue . ' 

 she say : ' weary on battle ! it be nought save this : twelve day 
 agone need must every fighting - man of the Wolf , carle or of queen , 
 wend away from Shadowy Vale , while those unmeet for battle we hide 
 away in the cave at the nether end of the Dale : but Sun - beam would 
 not endure that night , and fare with we , though she handle no 
 weapon . all this we have to do because we have learn that a great 
 company of the Dusky Men be over - nigh to our Dale , and need must 
 we fall upon they , lest they should learn too much , and spread the 
 story . well , so wise be folk - might that we come on they unawares by 
 night and cloud at the edge of the pine - wood , and but one of our man 
 be slain , and of they not one escape ; and when the fight be over 
 we count four score and ten of their arm - ring . ' 

 he say : ' do that or aught else come of our meeting with they that 
 morning ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' nought come of it : those we slew be but a 
 stray band . Nay , the four score and ten slay in the pine - wood 
 know not of Shadowy Vale belike , and have no intent for it : they be 
 but scour the wood seek their warrior that have go out from 
 silver - dale and come not aback . ' 

 ' thou art wise in war , Bow - may , ' say face - of - god , and he smile 
 withal . 

 Bow - may reddened and say : ' Friend Gold - mane , dost thou perchance 
 deem that there be aught ill in my warring ? and the Sun - beam , she 
 naysayeth the bearing of weapon ; though I deem that she hath little 
 fear of they when they come her way . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' Nay , I deem no ill of it , but much good . for I 
 suppose that thou hast learn overmuch of the will not of the Dusky Men , 
 and hast see their thrall ? ' 

 she knit her brow , and all the merriment go out of her face at 
 that word , and she answer : ' yea , thou hast it ; for I have both 
 see their thrall and be in the Dale of thralldom ; and how then 
 can I do less than I do ? but for thee , I perceive that thou hast 
 be nigh unto our foe and hast fall in with their thrall ; and 
 that be well ; for whatso tale we have tell thee thereof it be like 
 thou wouldst not have trowe in , as now thou must do , since thou 
 thyself hast see these poor folk . but now I will tell thee , gold- 
 mane , that my soul be sick of these coming and going for the 
 slaughter of a few wretch ; and I long for the Great Day of Battle , 
 when it will be see whether we shall live or die ; and though I laugh 
 and jest , yet doth the wearing of the day wear I . ' 

 he look kindly on she and say : ' I be war - leader of this Folk , and 
 trust I that the waiting - tide shall not be long ; wherefore now , 
 sister , be merry to - day , for that be but meet and right ; and cast 
 aside thy care , for presently shalt thou behold many new friend . 
 but now meseemeth overlong have ye be stand before our Gate , and 
 it be time that ye should see the inside of our Burg and the inside 
 of our House . ' 

 indeed by this time so many man have come out of the street that the 
 place before the Gate be all throng , and from where he stand face- 
 of - god could scarce see his father , or Folk - might and the Sun - beam 
 and the chieftain . 

 so he take Wood - father by the hand , and close behind he come wood- 
 wise and Bow - may , and he cry out for way that he might speak with 
 the Alderman , and man give way to they , and he lead those new - comer 
 close up to the gate - seat of the Elders , and as he clove the press 
 smile and bright - eyed and happy , all gaze on he ; but the sun- 
 beam , who be sit between Iron - face and the Westland Chapman , and 
 who heretofore have be agaze with eye behold little , past whose 
 ear the word go unheard , and whose mind wander into thought of 
 thing unfashioned yet , when she behold he close to she again , then , 
 take unawares , her eye caress he , and she turn as red as a 
 rise , as she feel all the sweetness of desire go forth from she to 
 meet he . so that , he perceive it , his voice be the clear and 
 sweet for the inward joy he feel , as he say : 

 ' Alderman , meseemeth it be now time that we bring our guest into the 
 House of our Fathers ; for since they be in warlike array , and we be 
 no long live in peace , and I be now war - leader of the Dale , I 
 deem it but meet that I should have the guesting of they . moreover , 
 when we be come into our House , I will bid thee look into thy 
 treasury , that thou may'st find therein somewhat which it may 
 pleasure we to give to our guest . ' 

 say iron - face : ' thou sayest well , son , and since the day be now 
 wear past noon , and these folk be but just come from the Waste , 
 therefore such as we have of meat and drink abideth they . and surely 
 there be within our house a coffer which belongeth to thee and I ; 
 and forsooth I know not why we keep the treasure hoard therein , 
 save that it be for this cause : that if we be to give to our 
 friend that which we ourselves use and love , which would be of all 
 thing pleasant to we , if we give they such good , they would be wear 
 and worsen by our use of they . for this reason , therefore , do we 
 keep fair thing which we use not , so that we may give they to our 
 friend . 

 ' now , guest , both of the Waste and the Westland , since here be no 
 Gate - thing or meeting of the Dale - warden , and we sit here but for 
 our pleasure , let we go take our pleasure within door for a while , 
 if it seem good to you . ' 

 Therewith he arise , and the folk make way for he and his guest ; and 
 Folk - might go on the right hand of iron - face , and beside he go 
 the Chapman , who look on he with a half - smile , as though he know 
 somewhat of he . but on the other side of Iron - face go the sun- 
 beam , whose hand he hold , and after these come face - of - god , lead 
 in the rest of the new - comer , who yet hold the flowery branch in 
 their hand . 

 now so much have face - of - god tell the Dalesmen , that they deem they 
 all know these man for their battle - fellow of whom they have hear 
 tell ; and this the more as the man be so goodly and manly of 
 aspect , especially folk - might , so that they seem as if they be 
 nigh akin to the Gods . as for the Sun - beam , they know not how to 
 praise her beauty enough , but they say that they have never know 
 before how fair the Gods might be . so they raise a great shout of 
 welcome as the man come through the Gate into the Burg , and all man 
 turn their back on the booth , so eager be they to behold 
 closely these new friend . 

 but as the Guests go from the Gate to the House of the Face , go 
 very slowly because of the press , there in the front of the throng 
 stand the Bride with the woman of the Runaways , whom she have cause 
 to be clothe very fairly ; and she be fain to do they a pleasure by 
 bring they to sight of these new - comer , of whom she have not hear 
 who they be , though she have hear the cry that stranger be at 
 hand . so there she stand smile a little with the pleasure of 
 show a fair sight to the poor people , as folk do with child . 
 but when she see those twain go on each side of the Alderman she 
 know they at once ; and when the Sun - beam , who be on his left side , 
 pass so close to she that she could see the very smoothness and 
 dainty fashion of her skin , then be she astonied , and the world 
 seem strange to she , and till they be go by , and for a while 
 afterwards , she know not where she be nor what she do , though it 
 seem to she as if she still see the face of that fair woman as in a 
 picture . 

 but the Sun - beam have note she at first , even amongst the fair woman 
 of Burgstead , and she so steady and bright beside the wandering 
 timorous eye and lower face of the thrall . but suddenly , as 
 eye meet eye , she see her face change ; she see her cheek whiten , her 
 eye stare , and her lip quiver , and she know at once who it be ; for 
 she have not see she before as Folk - might have . then the Sun - beam 
 cast her eye adown , lest her compassion might show in her face , and 
 be a fresh grief to she that have lose the wedding and the love ; and 
 so she pass on . 

 as for folk - might , he have see she at once amongst all that folk as 
 he come into the street , and in sooth he be look for she ; and 
 when he see her face change , as the sight of the Sun - beam smote upon 
 her heart , his own face burn with shame and anger , and he look 
 back at she as he go toward the House . but she see he not , nor 
 note he ; and none deem it strange that he look long on the 
 Bride , the treasure of Burgstead . but for some while Folk - might be 
 few - speak and sharp - speak amongst the chieftain ; for he be slow 
 to master his longing and his wrath . 

 so when all the Guests have enter the door of the House of the Face , 
 the Alderman turn back , and , stand on the threshold of his 
 House , spake unto the throng : 

 ' man of the Dale , and ye Outlanders who may be here , know that this 
 be a happy day ; for hither have come to we Guests , man of the kindre 
 of the Gods , and they be even those of whom face - of - god my son hath 
 tell you . and they be friend of our friend and foe of our foe . 
 these man be now in my House , as be but right ; but when they come 
 forth I look to you to cherish they in the good way ye know , and make 
 much of they , as of those who may help we and who may by we be 
 holpen . ' 

 Therewith he go in again and into the Hall , and bade show the New- 
 comer to the dais ; and wine of the good , and meat such as be to 
 hand , be set before they . he bid man also get ready high feast as 
 great as might be against the evening ; and they do his bidding 
 straightway . 



 CHAPTER XXXIII . the ALDERMAN give GIFTS to they of SHADOWY VALE 



 in the Hall of the Face Folk - might sit on the dai at the right hand 
 of the Alderman , and the Sun - beam on his left hand . but iron - face 
 also have behold the Bride how her face change , and he know the 
 cause , and be grieve and angry and ashamed thereof : also he 
 bethink he how this stranger be sit in the very place where 
 the Bride use to sit , and of all the love , as of a very daughter , 
 that he have have for she ; howbeit he constrain himself to talk 
 courteously and kindly both to folk - might and 

 the Sun - beam , as behove the Chief of the House and the Alderman of 
 the Dale . moreover , he be not a little move by the goodliness and 
 wisdom of the Sun - beam and the manliness of Folk - might , who be the 
 most chieftain - like of man . 

 but while they sit there face - of - god go from man to man of the 
 guest , and make much of each , but especially of Wood - father and his 
 son and Bow - may , and they love he , and praise he , and deem he 
 the good of hall - mate . nor might the Sun - beam altogether refrain 
 she from look lovingly on he , and it could be see of she that 
 she deem he be do well , and like a wise leader and chieftain . 

 so wear away awhile , and man be fulfil of meat and drink ; so 
 then the Alderman arise and spake , and say : 

 ' be it not so , Guests , that ye would now gladly behold our market , 
 and the goodly ware which the chapman have bring we from the 
 city ? ' 

 then most man cry out : ' yea , yea ! ' and Iron - face say : 

 ' then shall ye go , nor be holden by I from your pleasure . and ye 
 kinsman who be the most guest - fain and the wise , go ye with our 
 friend , and make all thing easy and happy for they . but first of 
 all , Guests , I be well pleased if ye would take some small matter 
 out of our abundance ; for it be well that ye see they ere ye stand 
 before the chapman 's booth , lest ye chaffer with they for what ye 
 have already . ' 

 they all praise his bounty and thank he for his goodwill : so he 
 arise to go to his treasury , and bade certain of his folk go along 
 with he to bear in the gift . but ere he have take three step down 
 the hall , face - of - god prevent he and say : 

 ' Kinsman , if thou hast anywhere a hauberk somewhat well than folk 
 be will not to bear , such as thine own hand fashioneth , and a sword of 
 the like stuff , I would have thee give they , the sword to my brother- 
 in - arm wood - wise here , and the war - coat to my sister Bow - may , who 
 shooteth so well in the bow that none may shoot close , and very few 
 as close ; and her shaft it be that deliver I when my skull be 
 amongst the axis of the Dusky Men : else have I not be here . ' 

 Thereat Bow - may reddened and look down , like a scholar who hath 
 be over - praise for his learning and diligence ; but the Alderman 
 smile on she and say : 

 ' I thank thee , son , that thou hast let I know what these our two 
 friend may be fain of : and as for this damsel - at - arm , it be a 
 little thing that thou askest for she , and we might have find she 
 something more worthy of her goodliness ; yet forsooth , since we be 
 all bind for the place where shaft and stave shall be good cheap , 
 a great treasure might be of less avail to she . ' 

 thereat man laugh , and the Alderman go down the Hall with those 
 bearer of gift , and be away for a space while they drink and make 
 merry : but presently back they come from the treasury bear load 
 of goodly thing which be lay on one of the endlong board . then 
 begin the gift - giving : and first he give unto Folk - might six golden 
 cup marvellously fashion , the work of four generation of wright 
 in the Dale , and he himself have work the last two thereof . to 
 Sun - beam he give a girdle of gold , fashion with great mastery , 
 whereon be image of the Gods and the Fathers , and warrior , and 
 beast of the field and fowl of the air ; and as he girt it about she 
 loin , he say in a soft voice so that few hear : 

 ' sun - beam , thou fair woman , time have be when thou wert to we as the 
 edge of the poisonous sword or the midnight torch of the murderer ; 
 but now I know not how it will be , or if the grief which thou hast 
 give I will ever wear out or not . and now that I have beheld thee , 
 I have little to do to blame my son ; for indeed when I look on thee I 
 can not deem that there be any evil in thee . yea , however it may be , 
 take thou this gift as the reward of thine exceed beauty . ' 

 she look on he with kind eye , and say meekly : 

 ' indeed , if I have hurt thee unwittingly , I grieve to have hurt so 
 good a man . hereafter belike we may talk more of this , but now I 
 will but say , that whereas at first I need but to win thy son 's 
 goodwill , so that our folk might come to life and thrive again , now 
 it be come to this , that he holdeth my heart in his hand and may do 
 what he will with it ; therefore I pray thee withhold not thy love 
 either from he or from I . ' 

 he look on her wondering , and say : ' thou art such an one as might 
 make the old man young , and the boy grow into manhood suddenly ; and 
 thy voice be as sweet as the voice of the song - bird sing in the 
 dawn of early summer soundeth to he who hath be sick unto death , 
 but who hath escape it and be mend . and yet I fear thee . ' 

 Therewith he kiss her hand and turn unto the other , and he give 
 unto Bow - may a hauberk of ring - mail of his own fashioning , a sure 
 defence and a wonderful work , and the collar thereof be do with 
 gold and gem . 

 but he say to she : ' fair damsel - at - arm , faithful be thy face , and 
 the fashion of thee be goodly : now art thou become one of the good 
 of our friend , and this be little enough to give thee ; yet would we 
 fain ward thy body against the foeman ; so grieve we not by gainsay 
 we . ' 

 and Bow - may be exceed glad , and scarce know how to cease handle 
 that marvel of ring - mail . 

 then to Wood - wise Iron - face give a most goodly sword , the blade all 
 mark with dark line like the stream of an eddying river , the hilt 
 of steel and gold marvellously wrought ; and all the work of a smith 
 who have dwell in the house of his father 's father , and be a great 
 warrior . 

 Unto Wood - father he give a very goodly helm parcel - gild ; and to his 
 son and the other folk fair gift of weapon and jewel and girdle 
 and cup and other good thing ; so that their heart be full of 
 joy , and they all praise his open hand . 

 then some of the good and merriest of the kinsman of the Face , and 
 face - of - god with they , bring the Guests out into the street and 
 among the booth . there face - of - god beheld the Bride again ; and she 
 be stand by the booth of a chapman and deal with he for a 
 piece of goodly silken cloth to be a gown for one of her guest , and 
 she be talk and smile as she chaffer with he , as she will not 
 be ; for she be ever very friendly of demeanour with all man . but 
 he note that she be yet exceed pale , and he be right sorry 
 thereof , for he love her friendly ; yet now have he no shame for all 
 that have befall , when he bethink he of the Sun - beam and the love 
 she have for he . and also he have a deeming that the Bride would 
 well of her grief . 



 CHAPTER XXXIV . the chieftain take COUNSEL in the hall of the face 



 then turn face - of - god back into the Hall , and see where iron - face 
 sit at the dai , and with he Folk - might and stone - face and the elder 
 of the Dale - warden , and Sun - beam withal ; so he go soberly up to 
 the board , and sit himself down thereat beside stone - face , over 
 against Folk - might and his father , beside whom sit the Sun - beam ; and 
 Folk - might look on he gravely , as a man powerful and trustworthy , 
 yet be his look somewhat sour . 

 then the Alderman say : ' my son , I say not to thee come back 
 presently , because I wotte that thou wouldst surely do so , know 
 that we have much to speak of . for , whatever these thy friend may 
 have do , or whatsoever thou hast do with they to grieve we , all 
 that must be set aside at this present time , since the matter in hand 
 be to save the Dale and its folk . what sayest thou hereon ? since , 
 young as thou mayst be , thou art our war - leader , and doubtless shalt 
 so be after the Folk - mote hath be holden . ' 

 face - of - god answer not hastily : indeed , as he sit think for a 
 minute or two , the fair spring day seem to darken about they or to 
 glare into the light of flame amidst the night - tide ; and the joyous 
 clamour without door seem to grow hoarse and fearful as the sound 
 of wail and shriek . but he spake firmly and simply in a clear 
 voice , and say : 

 ' there can be no two word concern what we have to aim at ; these 
 Dusky Men we must slay everyone , though we be few than they be . ' 

 folk - might smile and nod his head ; but the other sit star 
 down the hall or into the hanging . 

 then spake folk - might : ' thou wert a boy methought when I cast my 
 spear at thee last autumn , face - of - god , but now hast thou grow into 
 a man . now tell I , what deem thou we must do to slay they all ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' once again it be clear that we must fall upon 
 they at home in Rose - dale and silver - dale . ' 

 again folk - might nod : but iron - face say : 

 ' Needeth this ? may we not ward the Dale and send many band into the 
 wood to fall upon they when we meet they ? yea , and so do these 
 our guest have already slay many , as this valiant man hath tell I 
 e'en now . will ye not slay so many at last , that they shall learn to 
 fear we , and abide at home and leave we at peace ? ' 

 but face - of - god say : ' Meseemeth , father , that this be not thy rede , 
 and that thou sayest this but to try I : and perchance ye have be 
 talk about I when I be without in the street e'en now . even if 
 it might be that we should thus cow these felon into abide at home 
 and torment their own thrall at their ease , yet how then be our 
 friend of the Wolf holpen to their own again ? and I shall tell thee 
 that I have promise to this man and this woman that I will give they 
 no less than a man 's help in this matter . moreover , I have speak in 
 every house of the Dale , and to the Shepherds and the Woodlanders , 
 and there be no man amongst they but will follow I in the quarrel . 
 furthermore , they have hear of the thralldom that be do on man no 
 great way from their own house ; yea , they have see it ; and they 
 remember the old saw , " Grief in thy neighbour 's hall be grief in thy 
 garth , " and sure it be , father , that whether thou or I gainsay they , 
 go they will to deliver the thrall of the Dusky Men , and will leave 
 we alone in the Dale . ' 

 ' this be no less than sooth , ' say the Dale - warden , ' never have man 
 go forth more joyously to a merry - making than all man of we shall 
 wend to this war . ' 

 ' but , ' say face - of - god , ' of one thing ye may be sure , that these man 
 will not abide our pleasure till we cut they all off in scattered 
 band , nor will they sit deedless at home . nor indeed may they ; for 
 we have hear from their thrall that they look to have fresh tribe 
 of they come to hand to eat their meat and waste their servant , and 
 these and they must find new abode and new thrall ; and they be now 
 warn by the overthrow and slaying that they have have at our hand 
 that we be astir , and they will not delay long , but will fall upon 
 we with all their host ; it might even be to - day or to - morrow . ' 

 say folk - might : ' in all this thou say sooth , brother of the 
 Dale ; and to cut this matter short , I will tell you all , that 
 yesterday we have with we a runaway from Silver - dale   it be overlong 
 to tell how we fall in with she ; for it be a woman . but she tell 
 we that this very moon be a new tribe come into the Dale , six long 
 hundred in number , and twice as many more be look for in two 
 eight of day , and that ere this moon hath wan , that is , in 
 twenty - four day , they will wend their way straight for Burgdale , 
 for they know the way thereto . so I say that face - of - god be right 
 in all wise . but tell I , brother , hast thou think of how we shall 
 come upon these man ? ' 

 ' how many man wilt thou lead into battle ? ' say face - of - god . 

 Folk - might reddened , and say : ' a few , a few ; maybe two - hundred all 
 tell . ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , ' but some special gain wilt thou be to we . ' 

 ' so I deem at least , ' say Folk - might . 

 say face - of - god : ' Good be that . now have we hold our Weapon - show 
 in the Dale , and we find that we together with you be sixteen long 
 hundred of man ; and the tale of the foeman that be now in Silver- 
 dale , new - comer and all , shall be three thousand or thereabout , and 
 in Rose - dale hard on a thousand . ' 

 ' scarce so many , ' say folk - might ; ' some of the felon have die ; we 
 tell over our silver arm - ring yesterday , and the tale be three 
 hundred and eighty and six . besides , they be never so many as thou 
 deemest . ' 

 ' well , ' say face - of - god , ' yet at least they shall outnumber we 
 sorely . we may scarce leave the Dale unguarde when our host be 
 go ; therefore I deem that we shall have but one thousand of man for 
 our onslaught on silver - dale . ' 

 ' how come ye to that ? ' say stone - face . 

 say face - of - god : ' abide a while , fosterer ! though the odd between 
 we be great , it be not to be hide that I wot how ye of the Wolf 
 know of privy pass into silver - dale ; yea , into the heart thereof ; 
 and this be the special gain ye have to give we . therefore we , the 
 thousand man , fall on the foe unawares , shall make a great 
 slaughter of they ; and if the murder be but grim enough , those 
 thrall of theirs shall fear we and not they , as already they hate 
 they and not we , so that we may look to they for root out these 
 sorry weed after the overthrow . and what with one thing , what with 
 another , we may cherish a good hope of clear silver - dale at one 
 stroke with the said thousand man . 

 ' there remaineth rose - dale , which will be easy to deal with , 
 because the Dusky Men therein be few and the thrall as many : 
 that also would I fall on at the same time as we fall on silver - dale 
 with the man that be leave over from the silver - dale onslaught . 
 wherefore my rede be , that we gather all those unmeet for battle in 
 the field into this Burg , with ten ten of man to strengthen they ; 
 which shall be enough for they , along with the old man , and lad , and 
 sturdy woman , to defend themselves till help come , if aught of evil 
 befall , or to flee into the mountain , or at the bad to die 
 valiantly . then let the other five hundred fare up to Rose - dale , 
 and fall on the Dusky Men therein about the same time , but not before 
 our onslaught on silver - dale : thus shall hand help foot , so that 
 stumbling be not fall ; and we may well hope that our rede shall 
 thrive . ' 

 then be he silent , and the Sun - beam look upon he with gleam 
 eye and part lip , wait eagerly to hear what Folk - might would 
 say . he hold his peace a while , drum on the board with his 
 finger , and none else spake a word . at last he say : 

 ' war - leader of Burgdale , all that thou hast speak like I well , and 
 even so must it be do , save that parting of our host and send 
 one part to fall upon Rose - dale . I say , nay ; let we put all our 
 might into that one stroke on silver - dale , and then we be undo 
 indeed if we fail ; but so shall we be if we fail anywise ; but if we 
 win silver - dale , then shall rose - dale lie open before we . ' 

 ' my brother , ' say face - of - god , ' thou art a try warrior , and I but 
 a lad : but dost thou not see this , that whatever we do , we shall not 
 at one onslaught slay all the Dusky Men of silver - dale , and those 
 that flee before we shall betake they to Rose - dale , and tell all the 
 tale , and what shall hinder they then from fall on Burgdale   since 
 they be no great way from it   after they have murder what they 
 will of the unhappy people under their hand ? ' 

 say folk - might : ' I say not but that there be a risk thereof , but in 
 war we must need run such risk , and all should be risk rather 
 than that our blow on silver - dale be light . for we be the few ; and 
 if the foeman have time to call that to mind , then be we all lose . ' 

 say stone - face : ' Meseemeth , war - leader , that there be nought much 
 to dread in leave Rose - dale to itself for a while ; for not only may 
 we follow hard on the fleer if they flee to rose - dale , and be there 
 no long time after they , before they have time to stir their host but 
 also after the overthrow we shall be free to send man back to 
 Burgdale by way of Shadowy Vale . I deem that herein Folk - might hath 
 the right of it . ' 

 ' even so say I , ' say the Alderman ; ' besides , we might theft leave 
 more folk behind we for the warding of the Dale . so , son , the risk 
 whereof thou speak groweth the less the long it be look on . ' 

 then spake the Dale - warden : ' yet save your wisdom , Alderman , the 
 risk be there yet . for if these felon come into the Dale at all , 
 even if the folk leave behind hold the Burg and keep themselves 
 unmurdered , yet may they not hinder the foe from spoil our 
 homestead ; so that our folk come back in triumph shall find ruin 
 at home , and spend weary day in hunt their foeman , who shall , 
 many of they , escape into the wild - wood . ' 

 ' yea , ' say the Sun - beam , ' sooth be that ; and face - of - god be wise to 
 think of it and of other matter . yet one thing we must bear in 
 mind , that all may not go smoothly in our day 's work in silver - dale ; 
 so we must have force there to fall back on , in case we miss our 
 stroke at first . therefore , I say , send we no man to rose - dale , and 
 leave we no able man - at - arm behind in the Burg , so that we have with 
 we every blade that may be gather . ' 

 iron - face smile and say : ' thou art wise , damsel ; and I marvel that 
 so fair - fashioned a thing as thou can think so hardly of the meeting 
 of the fallow blade . but hearken ! will not the Dusky Men hear that 
 we have strip the Dale of fighting - man , and may they not then give 
 our host the go - by and send folk to ruin we ? ' 

 there be silence while face - of - god look down on the board ; but 
 presently he lift up his face and say : 

 ' folk - might be right when he say that all must be risk . let we 
 leave rose - dale till we have overcome they of silver - dale . moreover , 
 my father , thou must not deem of these felon as if they be of like 
 wit to we , to forecast the deed to come , and weigh the chance 
 nicely , and unravel tangle clew . rather they move like to the 
 stare in autumn , or the winter wild - geese , and will all be thrust 
 forward by some sting that entereth into their imagination . 
 therefore , if they have appoint one moon to wear before they fall 
 upon we , they will not stir till then , and we have time enough to do 
 what must be do . wherefore be I now of one mind with the rest of 
 you . now meseemeth it be well that these thing which we have 
 speak here , and shall speak , should not be noise abroad openly ; 
 nay , at the Folk - mote it would be well that nought be say about the 
 day or the way of our onslaught on silver - dale , lest the foe take 
 warning and be on their guard . though , sooth to say , do I deem that 
 if they have word of our intent they of Rose - dale would join 
 themselves to they of silver - dale , and that we should thus have all 
 our foe in one net , then be I fain if the word would reach they . 
 for my soul loathe the hunting that shall befall up and down the 
 wood for the slaying of a man here , and two or three there , and the 
 wearing of the day in wander up and down with weapon in the 
 hand , and the spinning out of hatred and delaying of peace . ' 

 then iron - face reach his hand across the board and take his son 's 
 hand , and say : 

 ' hail to thee , son , for thy word ! Herein thou speak as if from my 
 very soul , and fain be I of such a war - leader . ' 

 and desire draw the eye of the Sun - beam to face - of - god , and she 
 behold he proudly . but he say : 

 ' all hath be speak that the other of we may speak ; and now it 
 falleth to the part of Folk - might to order our going for the tryst 
 for the onslaught , and the trysting - place shall be in Shadowy Vale . 
 how sayest thou , Chief of the Wolf ? ' 

 say folk - might : ' I have little to say ; and it be for the war - leader 
 to see to this closely and piecemeal . I deem , as we all deem , that 
 there should be no delay ; yet be it good to wend not all together 
 to Shadowy Vale , but in diver band , as soon as ye may after the 
 Folk - mote , by the sure and nigh way that we shall show you . and 
 when we be gather there , short be the rede , for all be ready there 
 to wend by the pass which we know throughly , and whereby it be but 
 two day ' journey to the head of silver - dale , nigh to the cave of 
 the silver , where the felon dwell the thickest . ' 

 he set his tooth , and his colour come and go : for as constantly as 
 the onslaught have be in his mind , yet whenever he spake of the 
 great day of battle , hope and joy and anger work a tumult in his 
 soul ; and now that it be so nigh withal , he could not refrain his 
 joy . 

 but he spake again : ' now therefore , war - leader , it be for thee to 
 order the going of thy folk . but I will tell thee that they shall 
 not need to take aught with they save their weapon and victual for 
 the way , that is , for thirty hour ; because all be ready for they in 
 Shadowy Vale , though it be but a poor place as to victual . canst 
 thou tell we , therefore , what thou wilt do ? ' 

 face - of - god have knit his brow and become gloomy of countenance ; but 
 now his face clear , and he set his hand to his pouch , and draw 
 forth a write parchment , and say : 

 ' this be the order whereof I have bethink I . before the Folk - mote 
 I and the Wardens shall speak to the leader of hundred , who be 
 mostly here at the Fair , and give they the day and the hour whereon 
 they shall , each hundred , take their weapon and wend to Shadowy 
 Vale , and also the place where they shall meet the man of yours who 
 shall lead they across the Waste . these hundred - leader shall then 
 go straightway and give the word to the captain of score , and the 
 captain of score to the captain of ten ; and if , as be scarce 
 doubtful , the Folk - mote yea - say the onslaught and the fellowship 
 with you of the Wolf , then shall those leader of ten bring their 
 man to the trysting - place , and so go their way to Shadowy Vale . now 
 here I have the roll of our Weapon - show , and I will look to it that 
 none shall be pass over ; and if ye ask I in what order they have 
 good get on the way , my rede be that a two hundred should depart on 
 the very evening of the day of the Folk - mote , and these to be of our 
 folk of the Upper Dale ; and on the morning of the morrow of the folk- 
 mote another two hundred from the Dale ; and in the evening of the 
 same day the folk of the Shepherds , three hundred or more , and that 
 will be easy to they ; again on the next day two more band of the 
 Lower Dale , one in the morning , one in the evening . lastly , in the 
 early dawn of the third day from the Folk - mote shall the 
 Woodlanders wend their way . but one hundred of man let we leave 
 behind for the warding of the Burg , even as we agree before . as for 
 the place of tryst for the faring over the Waste , let it be the end 
 of the knoll just by the jaw of the pass yonder , where the 
 Weltering Water come into the Dale from the East . how say ye ? ' 

 they all say , and Folk - might especially , that it be right well 
 devise , and that thus it should be do . 

 then turn face - of - god to the Dale - warden , and say : 

 ' it be good , brother , that we see the other warden as soon as may 
 be , to do they to wit of this order , and what they have to do . ' 

 Therewith he arise and take the elder of the Dale - warden away with 
 he , and the twain set about their business straight - way . neither 
 do the other abide long in the Hall , but go out into the Burg to 
 see the chapman and their ware . there the Alderman buy what he 
 need of iron and steel and other matter ; and folk - might cheapen 
 he a dagger curiously work , and a web of gold and silk for the 
 Sun - beam , for which ware he pay in silver arm - ring , new - wrought 
 and of strange fashion . 

 but amidst of the chaffer be now a great ring of man ; and in the 
 midst of the ring stand Redesman , fiddle and bow in hand , and with 
 he be four damsel wondrously array ; for the first be clothe in a 
 smock so craftily work with thread of green and many colour , 
 that it seem like a piece of the green field beset with primrose 
 and cowslip and harebell and windflower , rather than a garment 
 weave and sew ; and in her hand she bear a naked sword , with golden 
 hilt and gleaming blade . but the second bore on her rose do in 
 like manner , both blossom and green leaf , wherewith her body be 
 cover decently , which else have be naked . the third be clothe as 
 though she be wad the wheat - field to the waist , and above be 
 wrap in the leaf and bunch of the wine - tree . and the fourth 
 be clothe in a scarlet gown fleck with white wool to set forth the 
 winter 's snow , and broider over with the burn brand of the Holy 
 Hearth ; and she bear on her head a garland of mistletoe . and these 
 four damsel be clearly see to image the four season of the year- 
 -spring , Summer , Autumn , and winter . but amidst they stand a 
 fountain or conduit of gild work cunningly wrought , and full of the 
 good wine of the Dale , and gild cup and beaker hang about it . 

 so now Redesman fall to caress his fiddle with the bow till it 
 begin to make sweet music , and therewith the heart of all dance 
 with it ; and presently word come into his mouth , and he fall to 
 sing ; and the damsel answer he : 


 earth - wielder , that fashion the Dale - dweller ' treasure , 
  Soft be ye by seem , yet hardy of heart ! 
 no warrior amongst we withstandeth your pleasure ; 
  no man from his meadow may thrust you apart . 

 fresh and fair be your body , but far beyond tell 
  be the year of your life , and the craft ye have store . 
 come give we a word , then , concern our dwelling , 
  and the day to befall we , the fruit of the sword . 

 Winter saith : 

 when last in the feast - hall the Yule - fire flicker , 
  the foot of no foeman fare over the snow , 
 and nought but the wind with the ash - branch bicker : 
  Next Yule ye may deem it a long time ago . 

 Autumn saith : 

 Loud laugh ye last year in the wheat - field a - smiting ; 
  and ye laugh as your back drave the beam of the press . 
 when the edge of the war - sword the acre be light 
  look up to the Banner and laugh ye no less . 

 Summer saith : 

 Ye call and I come , and how good be the greeting , 
  when ye wrap I in rose both bosom and side ! 
 here yet shall I long , and be fain of our meeting , 
  as hide from battle your come I bide . 

 Spring saith : 

 I be here for your comfort , and lo ! what I carry ; 
  the blade with the bright edge bar to the sun . 
 to the field , to the work then , that e'en I may tarry 
  for the end of the tale in my first day begin ! 


 Therewith the throng open , and a young man step lightly into the 
 ring , clothe in very fair armour , with a gild helm on his head ; and 
 he take the sword from the hand of the Maiden of Spring , and wave it 
 in the air till the westere sun flash back from it . then each of 
 the four damsel go up to the swain and kiss his mouth ; and 
 Redesman draw the bow across the string , and the four damsel sing 
 together , stand round about the young warrior : 


 it be but a while since for earth 's sake we tremble , 
  lest the increase our life - day have win for the Dale , 
 all the wealth that the moon and the year have assemble , 
  should be but a mock for the day of your bale . 

 but now we behold the sun smite on the token 
  in the hand of the Champion , the heart of a man ; 
 we look down the long year and see they unbroken ; 
  Forth fareth the Folk by the way it begin . 

 so bid ye these chapman in autumn return , 
  to bring iron for ploughshare and steel for the scythe , 
 and the over - sea oil that hath feel the sun 's burning , 
  and fair webs for your woman soft - spoken and blithe ; 

 and pledge ye your word in the market to meet they , 
  as many a man and as many a maid , 
 as eager as ever , as guest - fain to greet they , 
  and bide till the booth from the waggon be make . 

 come , guest of our lover ! for we , the year - wielder , 
  bid each man and all to come hither and take 
 a cup from our hand midst the peace of our shielder , 
  and drink to the day of the Dale that we make . 


 then go the damsel to that wine - fountain , and draw thence cup of 
 the good and bright wine of the Dale , and go round about the 
 ring , and give drink to whomsoever would , both of the chapman and the 
 other ; while the weapone youth stand in the midst bear aloft his 
 sword and shield like an image in a holy place , and Redesman 's bow 
 still go up and down the string , and draw forth a sweet and merry 
 tune . 

 great game it be now to see the stark Burgdale carle drag the 
 Men of the plain , little loth , up to the front of the ring , that they 
 might stretch out their hand for a cup , and how many a one , as he 
 take it , take as much as he might of the damsel 's hand withal . as 
 for the damsel , they play the Holy Play very daintily , neither 
 redden nor laugh , but fare so solemnly , and withal so sweetly 
 and bright - faced , that it might well have be deem that they be 
 in very sooth Maidens of the God of Earth send from the ever - endure 
 Hall to cheer the heart of man . 

 so simply and blithely do the Men of Burgdale disport they after the 
 manner of their father , trust in their valour and behold the 
 good day to be . 

 so wear the evening , and when night be come , man feast throughout 
 the Burg from house to house , and every hall be full . but the 
 Guests from Shadowy Vale feast in the Hall of the Face in all glee 
 and goodwill ; and with they be the chief of the chapman and two 
 other ; but the rest of they have be lay hold of by goodman of the 
 Burg , and drag into their feast - hall , for they be fain of those 
 guest and their tale . one of the chapman in the House of the Face 
 know Folk - might , and hail he by the name he have bear in the 
 Cities , regulus to wit ; indeed , the chief chapman know he , and even 
 somewhat over - well , for he have be hold to ransom by Folk - might in 
 those past day , and even yet fear he , because he , the chapman , 
 have play somewhat of a dastard 's part to he . but the other be an 
 open - hearted and merry fellow , and no weakling ; and folk - might be 
 fain of his talk concern times bygone , and the field they have 
 foughten in , and other adventure that have befall they , both good 
 and evil . 

 as for face - of - god , he go about the Hall soberly , and spake no more 
 than behove he , so as not to seem a mar - feast ; for the image of the 
 slaughter to be yet abode with he , and his heart forebode the 
 after - grief of the battle . he have no speech with the Sun - beam till 
 man be sunder after the feast , and then he come close to she 
 amidst of the turmoil , and say : 

 ' time press on I these day ; but if thou would speak with I 
 to - morrow as I would with thee , then might thou go on the Bridge 
 of the Burg about sunrise , and I will be there , and we two only . ' 

 her face , which have be somewhat sad that evening   for she have be 
 watch his , brighten at that word , and she take his hand as folk 
 come throng round about they , and say : 

 ' yea , friend , I shall be there , and fain of thee . ' and therewithal 
 they sunder for that night . 

 and all man go to sleep throughout the Burg : howbeit they set a 
 watch at the Burg - Gate ; and hall - face , when he be come back from 
 the woodland ward about sunset , fall in with Redcoat of Waterless and 
 four score man on the Portway come to meet he and take his place . 
 all which be clean contrary to the will not of the Burgdalers , who at 
 most while hold no watch and ward , not even in fair - time . 



 CHAPTER XXXV . FACE - of - GOD talketh with the SUN - BEAM 



 face - of - God be at the Bridge on the morrow before sun - rise , and as 
 he turn about at the Bridge - foot he see the Sun - beam come down 
 the street ; and his heart rise to his mouth at the sight of she , and 
 he go to meet she and take she by the hand ; and there be no word 
 between they till they have kiss and caress each other , for there 
 be no one stir about they . so they go over the Bridge into 
 the meadow , and eastward of the beat path thereover . 

 the grass be grow thick and strong , and it be full of flower , 
 as the cowslip and the oxlip , and the chequered daffodil , and the 
 wild tulip : the black - thorn be well - nigh do blooming , but the 
 hawthorn be in bud , and in some place grow white . it be a fair 
 morning , warm and cloudless , but the night have be misty , and the 
 haze still hang about the meadow of the Dale where they be 
 wet , and the grass and its flower be heavy with dew , so that 
 the Sun - beam go barefoot in the meadow . she have a dark cloak cast 
 over her kirtle , and have leave she glitter gown behind she in the 
 House . 

 they go along hand in hand exceed fain of each other , and the 
 sun rise as they go , and the long beam of gold shine through the 
 top of the tall tree across the grass they trod , and a light wind 
 rise up in the north , as face - of - god stay a moment and turn 
 toward the Face of the Sun and pray to he , while the Sun - beam 's 
 hand leave the war - leader 's hand and steal up to his golden lock and 
 lay amongst they . 

 presently they go on , and the foot of face - of - god lead he unwitte 
 toward the chestnut grove by the old dyke where he have meet the Bride 
 such a little while ago , till he bethink whither he be go and 
 stop short and redden ; and the Sun - beam note it , but spake not ; 
 but he say : ' Hereby be a fair place for we to sit and talk till the 
 day 's work beginneth . ' 

 so then he turn aside , and soon they come to a hawthorn brake out 
 of which arise a great tall - stemmed oak , show no green as yet save 
 a little on its low twig ; and anigh it , yet with room for its 
 bough to grow freely , be a great bird - cherry tree , all cover now 
 with sweet - smell white blossom . there they sit down on the trunk 
 of a tree fell last year , and she cast off her cloak , and take his 
 face between her two hand and kiss he long and fondly , and for a 
 while their joy have no word . but when speech come to they , it be 
 she that spake first and say : 

 ' gold - mane , my dear , sorely I wonder at thee and at I , how we be 
 change since that day last autumn when I first see thee . while I 
 think , didst thou not laugh when thou wert by thyself that day , and 
 mock at I privily , that I must need take such wisdom on myself , and 
 lesson thee stand like a stripling before I . dost thou not call 
 it all to mind and make merry over it , now that thou art become a 
 great chieftain and a wise warrior , and I be yet what I always be , a 
 young maiden of the kindre ; save that now I abide no long for my 
 love ? ' 

 her face be exceed bright and ripple with joyous smile , and he 
 look at she and deem that her heart be overflow with 
 happiness , and he wonder at she indeed that she be so glad of he , 
 and he say : 

 ' yea , indeed , oft do I see that morning in the woodland hall and thee 
 and I therein , as one looketh on a picture ; yea verily , and I laugh , 
 yet be it for very bliss ; neither do I mock at all . do I not deem 
 thee a God then ? and be I not most happy now when I can call it thus 
 to mind ? and as to thee , thou wert wise then , and yet art thou wise 
 now . yea , I think thee a God ; and if we be change , be it not 
 rather that thou hast lift I up to thee , and not come down to I ? ' 

 yet therewithal he knit his brow somewhat and say : 

 ' yet thou hast not to tell I that all thy love for thy Folk , and thy 
 yearn hope for its recoverance , be but a paint show . else why 
 shouldst thou love I the well now that I be become a chieftain , 
 and therefore be more meet to understand thy hope and thy sorrow ? 
 do I not behold thee as we stand before the Wolf of the Hall of 
 Shadowy Vale , how the tear stand in thine eye as thou beheldest 
 he , and thine hand in mine quiver and clung to I , and thou wert 
 all change in a moment of time ? be all this then but a seeming and 
 a beguilement ? ' 

 ' o young man , ' she say , ' hast thou not say it , that we stand there 
 close together , and my hand in thine and desire grow up in I ? 
 dost thou not know how this also quickeneth the story of our Folk , 
 and our goodwill towards the living , and remembrance of the dead ? 
 shall they have live and desire , and we deny desire and life ? or 
 tell I : what be it make thee so chieftain - like in the Hall 
 yesterday , so that thou wert the master of all our will , for as 
 self - willed as some of we be ? be it not that I , whom thou deemest 
 lovely , be thereby watch thee and rejoice in thee ? do not the 
 sweetness of thy love quicken thee ? yet because of that be thy 
 warrior 's wisdom and thy foresight an empty show ? heed thou 
 nought the Folk of the Dale ? would thou sunder from the child 
 of the Fathers , and dwell amongst stranger ? ' 

 he kiss she and smile on she and say : ' do I not say of thee 
 that thou wert wise than the daughter of man ? see how wise thou 
 hast make I ! ' 

 she spake again : ' nay , nay , there be no feigning in my love for my 
 people . how could thou think it , when the Fathers and the kindre 
 have make this body that thou lov , and the voice of their song be 
 in the speech thou deemest sweet ? ' 

 he say : ' sweet friend , I deem not that there be feign in 
 thee : I be but wonder what I be and how I be fashion , that I 
 should make thee so glad that thou couldst for a while forget thy 
 hope of the day before we meet . ' 

 she say : ' o how glad , how glad ! yet be I nought hapless . in 
 despite of all trouble I have no down - weigh grief , and I have the 
 hope of my people before I . good be my day ; but I know not till 
 now how glad a child of man may be . ' 

 their word be hush for a while amidst their caress . then she 
 say : 

 ' gold - mane , my friend , I mock not my past self because I deem that 
 I be a fool then , but because I see now that all that my wisdom 
 could do , would have come about without my wisdom ; and that thou , 
 deem thyself something less than wise , didst accomplish the thing 
 I crave , and that which thou didst crave also ; and withal wisdom 
 embrace thee , along with love . ' 

 Therewith she cast her arm about he and say : 

 ' o friend , I mock myself of this : that erst thou deemedst I a God 
 and fearedst I , but now thou seemest to I to be a God , and I fear 
 thee . yea , though I have long so sore to be with thee since the 
 day of Shadowy Vale , and though I have weary of the slow wearing of 
 the day , and it hath torment I ; yet now that I be with thee , I 
 bless the torment of my longing ; for it be but my longing that 
 compelleth I to cast away my fear of thee and caress thee , because I 
 have learn how sweet it be to love thee thus . ' 

 he wind his arm about she , and sweet be their longing than mere 
 joy ; and though their love be beyond measure , yet be therein no 
 shame to aught , not even to the lovely Dale and that fair season of 
 spring , so goodly they be among the child of man . 

 in a while they arise and turn homeward , and go over the open 
 meadow , and it be yet early , and the dew be as heavy on the grass 
 as before , though the wide sunlight be now upon it , glitter on 
 the wet blade , and shin through the bell of the chequer 
 daffodil till they look like gout of blood . 

 ' look , ' say Sun - beam , as they go along by the same way whereas 
 they come , ' deem thou not that other speech - friend besides we 
 have be abroad to talk together apart on this morning of the eve of 
 battle . it be nought unwonted , that we do , even though we forget the 
 trouble of the people to think of our own joy for a while . ' 

 the smile die out of her face as she speak , and she say : 

 ' o friend , this much may I say for myself in all sooth , that indeed I 
 would die for the kindred and its good day , nor falter therein ; but 
 if I be to die , might I but die in thine arm ! ' 

 he look very lovingly on she , and put his arm about she and kiss 
 she and say : ' what ail we to stand in the doom - ring and bear 
 witness against ourselves before the kindred ? now I will say , that 
 whatsoever the kindre may or can call upon I to do , that will I do , 
 nor grudge the deed : I be sackless before they . but that be true 
 which I spake to thee when we come together up out of Shadowy Vale , 
 to wit , that I be no strifeful man , but a peaceful ; and I look to it 
 to win through this war , and find on the other side either death , or 
 life amongst a happy folk ; and I deem that this be mostly the mind of 
 our people . ' 

 she say : ' thou shalt not die , thou shalt not die ! ' 

 ' mayhappen not , ' he say ; ' yet yesterday I could not but look into 
 the slaughter to come , and it seem to I a grim thing , and darken 
 the day for I ; and I grow acold as a man walk with the dead . but 
 tell I : thou sayest I shall not die ; dost thou say this only 
 because I be become dear to thee , or dost thou speak it out of thy 
 foresight of thing to come ? ' 

 she stop and look silently a while over the meadow towards the 
 house of the Thorp : they be stand now on the border of a 
 shallow brook that run down toward the Weltering Water ; it have a 
 little strand of fine sand like the sea - shore , drive close together , 
 and all moist , because that brook be use to flood the meadow for 
 the feeding of the grass ; and the last evening the hatch which hold 
 up the water have be draw , so that much have ebb away and leave the 
 strand aforesaid . 

 after a while the Sun - beam turn to face - of - god , and she be become 
 somewhat pale ; she say : 

 ' Nay , I have strive to see , and can see nought save the picture of 
 hope and fear that I make for myself . so it oft befalleth foresee 
 woman , that the love of a man cloudeth their vision . be content , 
 dear friend ; it be for life or death ; but whichso it be , the same for 
 I and thee together ? ' 

 ' yea , ' he say , ' and well content I be ; so now let each of we trust 
 in the other to be both good and dear , even as I trust in thee the 
 first hour that I look on thee . ' 

 ' it be well , ' she say ; ' it be well . how fair thou art ; and how fair 
 be the morn , and this our Dale in the goodly season ; and all this 
 abideth we when the battle be over . ' 

 once more her voice become sweet and wheedling , and the smile light up 
 her face again , and she point down to the sand with her finger , and 
 say : 

 ' see thou ! here indeed have other lover pass by across the brook . 
 shall we wish they good luck ? ' 

 he laugh and look down on the sand , and say : 

 ' thou art in haste to make a story up . indeed I see that these first 
 footprint be of a woman , for no carle of the Dale have a foot as 
 small ; for we be tall fellow ; and these other withal be a man 's 
 footprint ; and if they show that they have be walk side by 
 side , simple have be thy tale ; but so it be not . I can not say that 
 these two pair of foot go over the brook within five minute of 
 each other ; but sure it be that they could not have be fare side 
 by side . well , belike they be lover bicker , and we may wish 
 they luck out of that . truly it be well see that Bow - may hath do 
 thine hunting for thee , dear friend ; or else would thou have 
 lack venison ; for thou hast no hunter 's eye . ' 

 ' well , ' she say , ' but wish they luck , and give I thine hand upon 
 it . ' 

 he take her hand , and fondle it , and say : ' by this hand of my 
 speech - friend , I wish these twain all luck , in love and in leisure , 
 in fare and fighting , in sowing and samming , in get and give . 
 be it well enough wish ? if so it be , then come thy way , dear 
 friend ; for the day 's work be at hand . ' 

 ' it be well wish , ' she say . ' now hearken : by the valiant hand of 
 the war - leader , by the hand that shall unloose my girdle , I wish 
 these twain to be as happy as we be . ' 

 he make as if to draw she away , but she hang aback to set the print 
 of her foot beside the woman 's foot , and then they go on together , 
 and soon cross the Bridge , and come home to the House of the Face . 

 when they have break their fast , face - of - god would straight get to 
 his business of order matter for the warfare , and be wishful to 
 speak with Folk - might ; but find he not , either in the House or the 
 street . but a man say : 

 ' I see the tall Guest come abroad from the House and go toward the 
 Bridge very early in the morning . ' 

 the Sun - beam , who be anigh when that be speak , hear it and 
 smile , and say : ' gold - mane , deemest thou that it be my brother 
 whom we bless ? ' 

 ' I wot not , ' he say ; ' but I would he be here , for this gear must 
 speedily be look to . ' 

 nevertheless it be nigh an hour before Folk - might come home to the 
 House . he stride in lightly and gaily , and shake the crest of his 
 war - helm as he go . he look friendly on face - of - god , and say to 
 he : 

 ' Thou hast be seek I , war - leader ; but grudge it not that I have 
 cause thee to tarry . for as thing have go , I be twice the man 
 for thine help that I be yester - eve ; and thou art so ready and 
 deft , that all will be do in due time . ' 

 he look as if he would have have face - of - god ask of he what make 
 he so fain , but face - of - god say only : 

 ' I be glad of thy gladness ; but now let we dally no long , for I 
 have many folk to see to - day and much to set a - going . ' 

 so therewith they spake together a while , and then go their way 
 together toward Carlstead and the Woodlanders . 



 CHAPTER XXXVI . folk - might SPEAKETH with the BRIDE 



 it must be tell that those footprint which face - of - god and the Sun- 
 beam have bless betwixt jest and earnest have more to do with they 
 than they wotte of . for folk - might , who have have many thought and 
 longing since he have see the Bride again , rise up early about 
 sunrise , and go out - a - door , and wander about the Burg , let 
 his eye stray over the goodly stone house and their trim garden , 
 yet note they little , since the Bride be not there . 

 at last he come to where there be an open place , straight - sided , 
 long than it be wide , with a wall on each side of it , over which 
 show the blossom bough of pear and cherry and plum - tree : on 
 either hand before the wall be a row of great linden , now show 
 their first tender green , especially on their low twig , where they 
 be shelter by the wall . at the nether end of this place folk- 
 might see a grey stone house , and he go towards it betwixt the 
 linden , for it seem right great , and presently be but a score of 
 pace from its door , and as yet there be no man , carle or queen , 
 stir about it . 

 it be a long low house with a very steep roof ; but belike the hall 
 be build over some undercroft , for many step go up to the door on 
 either hand ; and the doorway be low , with a straight lintel under 
 its arch . this house , like the House of the Face , seem ancient and 
 somewhat strange , and Folk - might could not choose but take note of 
 it . the front be all of good ashlar work , but it be carven all 
 over , without heed be pay to the joint of the stone , into one 
 picture of a flowery meadow , with tall tree and bush in it , and 
 fowl perch in the tree and run through the grass , and sheep 
 and kine and oxen and horse feed down the meadow ; and over the 
 door at the top of the stair be work a great steer big than 
 all the other neat , whose head be turn toward the sun - rise and 
 uplifted with open mouth , as though he be low aloud . exceeding 
 fair seem that house to folk - might , and as though it be the 
 dwelling of some great kindre . 

 but he have scarce go over it with his eye , and be just about to 
 draw nigh yet to it , when the door at the top of those step 
 open , and a woman come out of the house clothe in a green kirtle and 
 a gown of brazil , with a golden - hilte sword girt to her side . folk- 
 might see at once that it be the Bride , and draw aback behind one of 
 the tree so that she might not see he , if she have not already see 
 he , as it seem not that she have , for she stay but for a moment 
 on the top of the stair , look out down the tree - row , and then 
 come down the stair and go soberly along the road , pass so close 
 to folk - might that he could see the fashion of her beauty closely , as 
 one look into the work of some deft artificer . then it come 
 suddenly into his head that he would follow she and see whither she 
 be wend . ' at least , ' say he to himself , ' if I come not to 
 speech with she , I shall be nigh unto she , and shall see somewhat of 
 her beauty . ' 

 so he come out quietly from behind the tree , and follow she softly ; 
 and he be clothe in no garment save his kirtle , and bare no weapon to 
 clash and jingle , though he have his helm on his head for lack of a 
 soft hat . he keep she well in sight , and she go straight onward 
 and look not back . she go by the way whereas he have come , till 
 they be in the main street , wherein as yet be no one afoot ; she 
 make her way to the Bridge , and pass over it into the meadow ; but 
 when she have go but a few step , she stay a little and look on 
 the ground , and as she do so turn a little toward folk - might , who 
 have draw back into the last of the refuge over the up - stream 
 buttress . he see that there be a half - smile on her face , but he 
 could not tell whether she be glad or sorry . a light wind be 
 begin to blow , that stir her raiment and raise a lock of hair 
 that have stray from the golden fillet round about her head , and she 
 look most marvellous fair . 

 now she look along the grass that glitter under the beam of the 
 newly - rise sun , and note belike how heavy the dew lie on it ; and 
 the grass be high already , for the spring have be hot , and haysel 
 would be early in the Dale . so she put off her shoe , that be of 
 deerskin and broider with golden thread , and turn somewhat from 
 the way , and hang they up amidst the new green leaf of a hawthorn 
 bush that stand nearby , and so go thwart the meadow somewhat 
 eastward straight from that bush , and her foot shine out like pearl 
 amidst the deep green grass . 

 Folk - might follow presently , and she stay not again , nor turn , 
 nor beheld he ; he recke not if she have , for then would he have come 
 up with she and hail she , and he know that she be no foolish 
 maiden to start at the sight of a man who be the friend of her Folk . 

 so they go their way till she come to the strand of the water- 
 meadow brook aforesaid , and she go through the little ripple of 
 the shallow without stay , and on through the tall deep grass of 
 the meadow beyond , to where they meet the brook again ; for it sweep 
 round the meadow in a wide curve , and turn back toward itself ; so 
 it be some half furlong over from water to water . 

 she stand a while on the brink of the brook here , which be brim - full 
 and nigh run into the grass , because there be a dam just below 
 the place ; and folk - might drew nigh to she under cover of the 
 thorn - bush , and look at the place about she and beyond she . the 
 meadow beyond stream be very fair and flowery , but not right great ; 
 for it be bound by a grove of ancient chestnut tree , that go on 
 and on toward the southern cliff of the Dale : in front of the 
 chestnut wood stand a broken row of black - thorn bush , now grow 
 green and lose their blossom , and he could see betwixt they that 
 there be a grassy bank run along , as if there have once be a 
 turf - wall and ditch round about the chestnut tree . for indeed this 
 be the old place of tryst between gold - mane and the Bride , whereof 
 the tale hath tell before . 

 the Bride stay scarce long than give he time to note all this ; 
 but he deem that she be weep , though he could not rightly see 
 her face ; for her shoulder heave , and she hang her face adown and 
 put up her hand to it . but now she go a little high up the 
 stream , where the water be shallow , and wad the stream and go 
 up over the meadow , still weep , as he deem , and go between the 
 black - thorn bush , and sit she down on the grassy bank with her back 
 to the chestnut tree . 

 Folk - might be ashamed to have see her weeping , and be half - minded 
 to turn he back again at once ; but love constrain he , and he say 
 to himself , ' where shall I see she again privily if I pass by this 
 time and place ? ' so he wait a little till he deem she might have 
 master the passion of tear , and then come forth from his bush , and 
 go down to the water and cross it , and go quietly over the 
 meadow straight towards she . but he be not half - way across , when 
 she lift up her face from between her hand and beheld the man 
 come . she neither start nor rise up ; but straighten herself as 
 she sit , and look right into Folk - might 's eye as he draw near , 
 though the tear be not dry on her cheek . 

 now he stand before she , and say : ' hail to the daughter of a mighty 
 House ! Mayst thou live happy ! ' 

 she answer : ' hail to thee also , guest of our Folk ! hast thou be 
 wander about our meadow , and happen on I perchance ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' he say ; ' I see thee come forth from the House of the Steer , 
 and I follow thee hither . ' 

 she redden a little , and knit her brow , and say : 

 ' thou wilt have something to say to I ? ' 

 ' I have much to say to thee , ' he say ; ' yet it be sweet to I to 
 behold thee , even if I might not speak with thee . ' 

 she look on he with her deep simple eye , and neither redden 
 again , nor seem wroth ; then she say : 

 ' speak what thou hast in thine heart , and I will hearken without 
 anger whatsoever it may be ; even if thou hast but to tell I of the 
 pass folly of a mighty man , which in a month or two he will not 
 remember for sorrow or for joy . sit here beside I , and tell I thy 
 thought . ' 

 so he sit he adown and say : ' yea , I have much to say to thee , but 
 it be hard to I to say it . but this I will say : to - day and 
 yesterday make the third time I have see thee . the first time thou 
 wert happy and calm , and no shadow of trouble be on thee ; the second 
 time thine happy day be wan , though thou scarce knewest it ; but 
 to - day and yesterday thou art constrain by the bond of grief , and 
 would loosen they if thou mightest . ' 

 she say : ' what mean thou ? how know thou this ? how may a 
 stranger partake in my joy and my sorrow ? ' 

 he say : ' as for yesterday , all the people might see thy grief and 
 know it . but when I behold thee the first time , I see thee that thou 
 wert more fair and lovely than all other woman ; and when I be away 
 from thee , the thought of thee and thine image be with I , and I 
 might not put they away ; and oft at such and such a time I wonder 
 and say to myself , what be she do now ? though god wot I be 
 deal with tangle and trouble and rough deed enough . but the 
 second time I behold thee , when I have look to have great joy in the 
 sight of thee , my heart be smite with a pang of grief ; for I see 
 thee hang on the word and the look of another man , who be 
 light - minded toward thee , and that thou wert trouble with the 
 anguish of doubt and fear . and he know it not , nor see it , though I 
 see it . ' 

 her face grow troubled , and the tearful passion stir within she . 
 but she hold it aback , and say , as anyone might have say it : 

 ' how wert thou in the Dale , mighty man ? we see thee not . ' 

 he say : ' I come hither hide in other semblance than mine own . 
 but meddle not therewith ; it availeth nought . let I say this , and 
 do thou hearken to it . I see thee yesterday in the street , and thou 
 wert as the ghost of thine old gladness ; although belike thou hast 
 striven with sorrow ; for I see thee with a sword by thy side , and we 
 have be tell that thou , o fairest of woman , hast give thyself to 
 the Warrior to be his damsel . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' that be sooth . ' 

 he go on : ' but the face which thou bearedst yesterday against thy 
 will , amidst all the people , that be because thou hadst see my 
 sister the Sun - beam for the first time , and face - of - god with she , 
 hand cling to hand , lip longing for lip , desire unsatisfie , but 
 glad with all hope . ' 

 she lay hand upon hand in the lap of her gown , and look down , and 
 her voice tremble as she say : 

 ' Doth it avail to talk of this ? ' 

 he say : ' I know not : it may avail ; for I be grieve , and shall be 
 whilst thou art grieve ; and it be my will not to strive with my grief 
 till I amend they . ' 

 she turn to he with kind eye and say : 

 ' o mighty man , canst thou clear away the tangle which besetteth the 
 soul of she whose hope hath bewray she ? Canst thou make hope grow 
 up in her heart ? friend , I will tell thee that when I we d , I shall 
 we d for the sake of the kindred , hop for no joy therein . yea , or 
 if by some chance the desire of man come again into my heart , I 
 should strive with it to rid myself of it , for I should know of it 
 that it be but a wasting folly , that should but beguile I , and 
 wound I , and depart , leave I empty of joy and heedless of life . ' 

 he shake his head and say : ' even so thou deem now ; but one day 
 it shall be otherwise . or dost thou love thy sorrow ? I tell thee , 
 as it wear thee and wear thee , thou shalt hate it , and strive to 
 shake it off . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' she say ; ' I love it not ; for not only it grieveth I , 
 but also it beateth I down and belittleth I . ' 

 ' good be that , ' say he . ' I know how strong thine heart be . now , 
 wilt thou take mine hand , which be verily the hand of thy friend , and 
 remember what I have tell thee of my grief which can not be sunder 
 from thine ? shall we not talk more concern this ? for surely I 
 shall soon see thee again , and often ; since the Warrior , who loveth 
 I belike , leadeth thee into fellowship with I . yea , I tell thee , O 
 friend , that in that fellowship shalt thou find both the seed of 
 hope , and the sun of desire that shall quicken it . ' 

 Therewith he arise and stand before she , and hold out to she his hand 
 all harden with the sword - hilt , and she take it , and stand up 
 face he , and say : 

 ' this much will I tell thee , o friend ; that what I have say to thee 
 this hour , I think not to have say to any man ; or to talk with a 
 man of the grief that weareth I , or to suffer he to see my tear ; 
 and marvellous I deem it of thee , for all thy might , that thou hast 
 draw this speech from out of I , and leave I neither angry nor 
 ashame , in spite of these tear ; and thou whom I have know not , 
 though thou knewest I ! 

 ' but now it be good that thou depart , and get thee home to the 
 House of the Face , where I be once so frequent ; for I wot that thou 
 hast much to do ; and as thou sayest , it will be in warfare that I 
 shall see thee . now I thank thee for thy word and the thought thou 
 hast have of I , and the pain which thou hast take to heal my hurt : 
 I thank thee , I thank thee , for as grievous as it be to show one 's 
 hurt even to a friend . ' 

 he say : ' o Bride , I thank thee for hearken to my tale ; and one 
 day shall I thank thee much more . Mayest thou fare well in the Field 
 and amidst the Folk ! ' 

 Therewith he kiss her hand , and turn away , and go across the 
 meadow and the stream , glad at heart and blithe with everyone ; for 
 kindness grow in he as gladness grow . 



 CHAPTER XXXVII . of the FOLK - mote of the DALESMEN , the SHEPHERD - FOLK , 
 and the WOODLAND CARLES : the banner of the WOLF DISPLAYED 



 now come the day of the Great Folk - mote , and there be much throng 
 from everywhere to the mote - stead , but most from Burgstead itself , 
 whereas few of the Dale - dweller who have be at the fair have go 
 back home . albeit some of the Shepherds and of the Dalesmen of the 
 westernmost Dale have bring light tent , and tilt themselves in in 
 the night before the Mote down in the meadow below the mote - stead . 
 from early morning there have be a stream of folk on the Portway 
 set westward ; and many come thus early that they might hold 
 converse with friend and well - wisher ; and some that they might 
 disport they in the wood . man go in no ordered band , as the 
 Burgstead man at least have do on the day of the Weapon - show , save 
 that a few of they who be array the brave gather about the 
 banner , and go with they to the mote - stead ; for all the banner 
 must need be there . 

 the Folk - mote be to be hallow - in three hour before noon , as all 
 man know ; therefore an hour before that time be all man of the Dale 
 and the Shepherds assemble that might be look for , save the 
 Alderman and the chieftain with the banner of the Burg , and these 
 be not like to come many minute before the Hallowing . folk be 
 gather on the field in such wise , that the man - at - arm make a great 
 ring round about the doom - ring ,   albeit there be many old man 
 there , girt with sword that they should never heave up again in 
 battle , so that without that ring there be nought save woman and 
 child . but when all the other Houses be assemble , man look 
 around , and behold the place of the Woodlanders that it be empty ; 
 and they marvel that they be thus belate . for now all be 
 ready , and a watcher have go up to the Tower on the height , and have 
 with he the great Horn of Warning , which could be hear past the 
 mote - stead and a great way down the Dale : and if he see foe come 
 from the East he should blow one blast ; if from the South , two ; if 
 from the West , three ; if from the North , four . 

 so half an hour from the appoint time of Hallowing rise the rumour 
 that the Alderman be on the road , and presently they of the woman 
 who be on the outside of the throng , by draw nigh to the edge of 
 the sheer rock , could behold the Banner of the Burg on the Portway , 
 and soon after could see the wain , do about with green bough , 
 wherein sit the chieftain in their glitter war - gear . speedily 
 they spread the tiding , and a confused shout go up into the air ; 
 and in a little while the wain stay on Wildlake 's way at the bottom 
 of the steep slope that go up to the mote - stead , and the banner of 
 the Burg come on proudly up the hill . soon all man behold it , and 
 see that the tall Hall - face bear it in front of his brother face - of- 
 god , who come on gleam in war - gear well than most man have see ; 
 which be indeed of his father 's fashioning , and his father 's gift to 
 he that morning . 

 after face - of - god come the Alderman , and with he Folk - might lead 
 the Sun - beam by the hand , and then stone - face and the elder of the 
 Dale - warden ; and then the six burg - warden : as to the other dale- 
 warden , they be in their place on the Field . 

 so now those who have be stand up turn their face toward the 
 Altar of the Gods , and those who have be sit down sprang to 
 their foot , and the confused rumour of the throng rise into a clear 
 shout as the chieftain go to their place , and sit they down on 
 the turf - seat amidst the doom - ring face the Speech - hill and the 
 Altar of the Gods . amidmost sit the Alderman , on his right hand 
 face - of - god , and out from he Hall - face , and then stone - face and 
 three of the Wardens ; but on his left hand sit first the two Guests , 
 then the elder of the Dale - warden , and then the other three Burg- 
 warden ; as for the Banner of the Burg , its staff be stick into the 
 earth behind they , and the Banner raise itself in the morning wind 
 and flap and ripple over their head . 

 there then they sit , and folk abide , and it still lack some 
 minute of the due time , as the Alderman wotte by the shadow of the 
 great stand - stone betwixt he and the Altar . Therewithal come the 
 sound of a great horn from out of the wood on the north side , and man 
 know it for the horn of the Woodland Carles , and be glad ; for they 
 could not think why they should be belate ; and now man stand up a- 
 tiptoe and on other 's shoulder to look over the head of the woman 
 and child to behold their coming ; but their empty place be at the 
 southwest corner of the ring of man . 

 so presently man behold they march toward their place , cleave 
 the throng of the woman and child , a great company ; for besides 
 that they have with they two score more of man under weapon than on 
 the day of the Weapon - show , all their little one and woman and 
 outworn elder be with they , some on foot , some rid on oxen and 
 ass . in their forefront go the two sign of the battle - shaft and 
 the War - spear . but moreover , in front of all be bear a great staff 
 with the cloth of a banner wrap round about it , and tie up with a 
 hempen yarn that it might not be see . 

 Stark and mighty man they look ; tall and lean , broad - shoulder , 
 dark - faced . as they come amongst the throng the voice of their horn 
 die out , and for a few moment they fare on with no sound save the 
 tramp of their foot ; then all at once the man who bare the hide 
 banner lift up one hand , and straightway they fall to singing , and 
 with that song they come to their place . and this be some of what 
 they sing : 


 o white , white Sun , what thing of wonder 
  Hast thou beheld from thy wall of the sky ! 
 all the Roofs of the Rich and the grief thereunder , 
  as the fear of the Earl - folk flitteth by ! 

 Thou hast see the Flame steal forth from the Forest 
  to slay the slumber of the land , 
 as the Dusky Lord whom thou abhorrest 
  Clomb up to thy Burg unbuilt with hand . 

 thou lookest down from thy door the golden , 
  nor batest thy wide - shin mirth , 
 as the rampart fall , and the roof - tree olden 
  lie smoulder low on the burn earth . 

 when flitteth the half - dark night of summer 
  from the face of the murder great and grim , 
 ' tis thou thyself and no new - comer 
  Shines golden - bright on the deed undim . 

 art thou our friend , o day - dawn 's Lover ? 
  full oft thine hand hath send aslant 
 Bright beam athwart the Wood - bear 's cover , 
  where the feeble folk and the nameless haunt . 

 Thou hast see we quail , thou hast see us cower , 
  Thou hast see we crouch in the Green Abode , 
 while for we wert thou slay slow hour by hour , 
  and smooth down the war - rough road . 

 Yea , the rock of the Waste be thy dawn upheaving , 
  to let the day of the year go through ; 
 and thy Noons the tangled brake be cleave 
  the slow - foot season ' deed to do . 

 then gaze adown on this gift of our giving , 
  for the wolf come wend frith and ford , 
 and the Folk fare forth from the dead to the living , 
  for the love of the Lief by the light of the Sword . 


 then cease the song , and the whole band of the Woodlanders come 
 pour tumultuously into the space allot they , like the water 
 pour over a river - dam , their white sword wave aloft in the 
 morning sunlight ; and wild and strange cry rise up from amidst 
 they , with sob and weeping of joy . but soon their troubled front 
 sink back into order rank , their bright blade stand upright in 
 their hand before they , and folk look on their company , and deem 
 it the very Terror of battle and Render of the rank of war . right 
 well be they arm ; for though many of their weapon be ancient 
 and somewhat worn , yet be they the work of good smith of old day ; 
 and moreover , if any of they lack good war - gear of his own , that 
 have the Alderman and his son make good to they . 

 but before the hedge of steel stand the two tall man who hold in 
 their hand the war - token of the battle - shaft and the War - spear , and 
 betwixt they stand one who be indeed the tall man of the whole 
 assembly , who hold the great staff of the hidden banner . and now he 
 reach up his hand , and pluck at the yarn that bind it , which of 
 set purpose be but feeble , and tear it off , and then shake the staff 
 aloft with both hand , and shout , and lo ! the Banner of the Wolf 
 with the Sun - burst behind he , glitter - bright , new - weave by the 
 woman of the kindred , run out in the fresh wind , and flap and 
 ripple before his warrior there assemble . 

 then from all over the mote - stead arise an exceeding great shout , and 
 all man wave aloft their weapon ; but the man of Shadowy Vale who 
 be stand amidst the man of the face know not how to demean 
 themselves , and some of they run forth into the field and leapt for 
 joy , toss their sword into the air , and catch they by the 
 hilt as they fall : and amidst it all the Woodlanders now stand 
 silent , unmoving , as man abide the word of onset . 

 as for that brother and sister : the Sun - beam flush red all over 
 her face , and press her hand to her bosom , and then the passion of 
 tear over - master she , and her breast heave , and the tear gush 
 out of her eye , and her body be shake with weeping . but folk- 
 might sit still , look straight before he , his eye glitter , 
 his tooth set , his right hand clutch hard at the hilt of his 
 sword , which lie naked across his knee . and the Bride , who stand 
 clothe in her begemmed and glitter war - array in the forefront of the 
 Men of the Steer , nigh unto the seat of the chieftain , beheld folk- 
 might , and her face flush and brighten , and still she look upon 
 he . the Alderman 's face be as of one pleased and proud ; yet be 
 its joy shadow as it be by a cloud of compassion . face - of - god 
 sit like the very image of the War - god , and stir not , nor look 
 toward the Sun - beam ; for still the thought of the after - grief of 
 battle , and the death of friend and folk that love he , lie heavy 
 on his heart , for all that it beat wildly at the shouting of the man . 



 CHAPTER XXXVIII . of the GREAT FOLK - MOTE : atonement give , and MEN 
 make sackles 



 amidst the clamour uprose the Alderman ; for it be clear to all man 
 that the Folk - mote should be holden at once , and the matter of the 
 War , and the Fellowship , and the choosing of the war - leader , speedily 
 deal with . so the Alderman fall to hallow in the Folk - mote : he 
 go up to the Altar of the Gods , and take the gold - ring off it , and 
 do it on his arm ; then he draw his sword and wave it toward the 
 four airt , and spake ; and the noise and shouting fall , and there be 
 silence but for he : 

 ' herewith I hallow in this Folk - mote of the Men of the Dale and the 
 Sheepcotes and the Woodland , in the name of the Warrior and the 
 Earth - god and the Fathers of the kindred . now let not the peace of 
 the Mote be break . let not man rise against man , or bear blade or 
 hand , or stick or stone against any . if any man break the Peace of 
 the Holy Mote , let he be a man accurse , a wild - beast in the Holy 
 Places ; an outcast from home and hearth , from bed and board , from 
 mead and acre ; not to be holpen with bread , nor flesh , nor wine ; nor 
 flax , nor wool , nor any cloth ; nor with sword , nor shield , nor axe , 
 nor plough - share ; nor with horse , nor ox , nor ass ; with no saddle- 
 beast nor draught - beast ; nor with wain , nor boat , nor way - lead ; 
 nor with fire nor water ; nor with any world 's wealth . thus let he 
 who hath cast out man be cast out by man . now be hallow - in the 
 Folk - mote of the Men of the Dale and the Sheepcotes and the 
 Woodlands . ' 

 Therewith he wave his sword again toward the four airt , and go 
 and sit down in his place . but presently he arise again , and say : 

 ' now if man hath aught to say against man , and claimeth boot of any , 
 or would lay guilt on any man 's head , let he come forth and declare 
 it ; and the judge shall be name , and the case shall be try this 
 afternoon or to - morrow . yet first I shall tell you that I , the 
 Alderman of the Dalesmen , doom one Iron - face of the House of the 
 Face to pay a double fine , for that he draw a sword at the Gate - thing 
 of Burgstead with the intent to break the peace thereof . Thou , 
 green - sleeve , bring forth the peace - breaker 's fine , that iron - face 
 may lay the same on the Altar . ' 

 then come forth a man from the man of the face bear a bag , and he 
 bring it to iron - face , who go up to the Altar and pour forth 
 weigh gold from the bag thereon , and say : 

 ' Warden of the Dale , come thou and weigh it ! ' 

 ' nay , ' quoth the Warden , ' it needeth not , no man here doubteth thee , 
 Alderman Iron - face . ' 

 a murmur of yeasay go up , and none have a word to say against the 
 Alderman , but they praise he rather : also man be eager to hear 
 of the war , and the fellowship , and to be do with these petty 
 matter . then the Alderman rise again and say : 

 ' hath any man a grief against any other of the Kindreds of the Dale , 
 or the Sheepcotes , or the Woodlands ? ' 

 none answer or stir ; so after he have wait a while , he say : 

 ' be there any who hath any guilt to lay against a Stranger , an 
 Outlander , be such a man as he deem we can come at ? ' 

 Thereat be a stir amongst the Men of the Fleece of the Shepherds , 
 and their rank open , and there come forth an ill - favour lean old 
 man , long - nebbe , blear - eye , and bent , girt with a rusty old sword , 
 but not otherwise armed . and all man know Penny - thumb , who have be 
 ransack last autumn . as he come forth , it seem as if his 
 neighbour have be try to hold he back ; but a stout , broad- 
 shoulder man , black - haired and red - bearded , make way for the old 
 man , and lead he out of the throng , and stand by he ; and this man 
 be well armed at all point , and look a doughty carle . he stand 
 side by side with Penny - thumb , right in front of the man of his 
 house , and look about he at first somewhat uneasily , as though he 
 be ashamed of his fellow ; but though many smile , none laugh 
 aloud ; and they forbore , partly because they know the man to be a 
 good man , partly because of the solemn tide of the Folk - mote , and 
 partly in sooth because they wish all this to be over , and be as 
 man who have no time for empty mirth . 

 then say the Alderman : ' what would thou , Penny - thumb , and thou , 
 Bristler , son of Brightling ? ' 

 then penny - thumb begin to speak in a high squeaky voice : 

 ' Alderman , and Lord of the Folk ! ' but therewithal Bristle , pull 
 he back , and say : 

 ' I be the man who hath take this quarrel upon I , and have swear 
 upon the Holy Boar to carry this feud through ; and we deem , Alderman , 
 that if they who slay Rusty and ransack Penny - thumb be not know 
 now , yet they soon may be . ' 

 as he spake , come forth those three man of the Shepherds and the two 
 Dalesmen who have swear with he on the Holy Boar . then up stand 
 folk - might , and come forth into the field , and say : 

 ' Bristler , son of Brightling , and ye other good man and true , it be 
 but sooth that the ransacker and the slayer may soon be know ; and 
 here I declare they unto you : I it be and none other who slay 
 Rusty ; and I be the leader of those who ransack Penny - thumb , and 
 cow Harts - bane of Greentofts . as for the slaying of Rusty , I slay 
 he because he chase I , and would not forbear , so that I must 
 either slay or be slay , as hath befall I erewhile , and will 
 befall again , methink . as for the ransacking of Penny - thumb , I 
 need the good that I take , and he need they not , since he 
 neither use they , nor give they away , and , they be go , he hath 
 live no worse than aforetime . now I say , that if ye will take the 
 outlawry off I , which , as I hear , ye lay upon I , not know I , 
 then will I handsel self - doom to thee , Bristler , if thou wilt bear 
 thy grief to purse , and I will pay thee what thou wilt out of hand ; 
 or if perchance thou wilt call I to Holm , thither will I go , if thou 
 and I come unslain out of this war . as to the ransack and cowing 
 of Harts - bane , I say that I be sackless therein , because the man be 
 but a ruffler and a man of violence , and hath cow many man of the 
 Dale ; and if he gainsay I , then do I call he to the Holm after this 
 war be over ; either he or any man who will take his place before my 
 sword . ' 

 then he hold his peace , and man spake to man , and a murmur arose , as 
 they say for the more part that it be a fair and manly offer . but 
 Bristler call his fellow and penny - thumb to he , and they spake 
 together ; and sometimes Penny - thumb 's shrill squeak be hear above 
 the deep - voice talk of the other ; for he be a man that harbour 
 malice . but at last Bristler spake out and say : 

 ' tall man , we know that thou art a chieftain and of good will to the 
 man of the Dale and their friend , and that want drave thee to the 
 ransacking , and need to the manslaying , and neither the living nor 
 the dead to whom thou art guilty be to be call good man ; therefore 
 will I bring the matter to purse , if thou wilt handsel I self - doom . ' 

 ' yea , even so let it be , ' quoth Folk - might ; and step forward and 
 take Bristler by the hand , and handsel he self - doom . then say 
 Bristler : 

 ' though Rusty be no good man , and though he follow thee to slay 
 thee , yet be he in his right therein , since he be follow up his 
 goodman 's gear ; therefore shalt thou pay a full blood - wite for he , 
 that be to say , the worth of three hundred in weed - stuff in whatso 
 good thou wilt . as for the ransacking of Penny - thumb , he shall deem 
 himself well pay if thou give he our hundred in weed - stuff for 
 that which thou didst borrow of he . ' 

 then penny - thumb set up his squeak again , but no man hearken to 
 he , and each man say to his neighbour that it be well doomed of 
 Bristler , and neither too much nor too little . but folk - might bade 
 Wood - wont to bring thither to he that which he have bear to the 
 Mote ; and he bring forth a big sack , and folk - might empty it on 
 the earth , and lo ! the silver ring of the slain felon , and they lay 
 in a heap on the green field , and they be the good of silver . then 
 the elder of the Dale - warden weigh out from the heap the blood- 
 wite for Rusty , accord to the due measure of the hundred in weed- 
 stuff , and deliver it unto Bristler . and Folk - might say : 

 ' draw nigh now , Penny - thumb , and take what thou wilt of this gear , 
 which I need not , and grudge not at I henceforward . ' 

 but Penny - thumb be afraid , and abode where he be ; and Bristler 
 laugh , and say : ' take it , goodman , take it ; spare not other man 's 
 good as thou dost thine own . ' 

 and folk - might stand by , smile faintly : so penny - thumb pluck up 
 a heart , and draw nigh trembling , and take what he durst from that 
 heap ; and all that stand by say that he have get a full double of 
 what have be award to he . but as for he , he go his way 
 straight from the mote - stead , and make no stay till he have get he 
 home , and lay the silver up in a strong coffer ; and thereafter he 
 bewail he sorely that he have not take the double of that which he 
 take , since none would have say he nay . 

 when he be go , the Alderman arise and say : 

 ' now , since the fine have be pay duly and freely , accord to 
 the dooming of Bristler , take we off the outlawry from Folk - might and 
 his fellow , and account they to be sackless before we . ' 

 then he call for other case ; but no man have aught more to bring 
 forward against any man , either of the kindred or the Strangers . 



 CHAPTER XXXIX . of the GREAT FOLK - MOTE : MEN take REDE of the war- 
 FARING , the fellowship , and the WAR - LEADER . folk - might TELLETH 
 whence his PEOPLE come . the FOLK - MOTE sunder 



 now a great silence fall upon the throng , and they stand as man 
 abide some new matter . unto they arise the Alderman , and say : 

 ' man of the Dale , and ye Shepherds and Woodlanders ; it be well know 
 to you that we have foeman in the wood and beyond it ; and now have we 
 get sure tiding , that they will not abide at home or in the wood , 
 but be minded to fall upon we at home . now therefore I will not ask 
 you whether ye will have peace or war ; for with these foeman ye may 
 have peace no otherwise save by war . but if ye think with I , three 
 thing have ye to determine : first , whether ye will abide your foe 
 in your own house , or will go meet they at theirs ; next , whether ye 
 will take to you as fellow in arm a valiant folk of the child of 
 the Gods , who be foeman to our foeman ; and lastly , what man ye will 
 have to be your war - leader . now , I bid all those here assemble , to 
 speak hereof , any man of they that will , either what they may have 
 conceive in their own mind , or what their kindre may have put into 
 their mouth to speak . ' 

 Therewith he sit down , and in a little while come forth old Hall - ward 
 of the House of the Steer , and stand before the Alderman , and say : 
 ' o Alderman , all we say : since war be awake we will not tarry , but 
 will go meet our foe while it be yet time . the valiant man of whom 
 thou tell shall be our fellow , be there but three of they . we 
 know no well war - leader than face - of - god of the House of the Face . 
 let he lead we . ' 

 Therewith he go his way ; and next come forth War - well , and say : 
 ' the House of the Bridge would have face - of - god for war - leader , these 
 tall man for fellow , and the short way to meet the foe . ' and he 
 go back to his place . 

 next come Fox of Upton , and say : ' time press , or much might be 
 speak . thus saith the House of the Bull : let we go meet the foe , 
 and take these valiant stranger for way - leader , and face - of - god for 
 war - leader . ' and he also go back again . 

 then come forth two man together , an old man and a young , and the old 
 man spake as soon as he stand still : ' the Men of the Vine bid I say 
 their will : they will not stay at home to have their house burn 
 over their head , themselves slay on their own hearth , and their 
 wife hale off to thralldom . they will take any man for their 
 fellow in arm who will smite stark stroke on their side . they know 
 face - of - god , and be liefer of he for war - leader than any other , 
 and they will follow he wheresoever he leadeth . thus my kindre 
 biddeth I say , and I hight Fork - beard of Lea . if I live through 
 this war , I shall have live through five . ' 

 Therewith he go back to his place ; but the young man lift up his 
 voice and say : ' to all this I say yea , and so be I bid by the 
 kindre of the Sickle . I be Red - beard of the Knolls , the son of my 
 father . ' and he go to his place again . 

 then come forth stone - face , and say : ' the House of the Face saith : 
 lead we through the wood , o face - of - god , thou War - leader , and ye 
 warrior of the Wolf . I be stone - face , as man know , and this word 
 hath be give to I by the kindred . ' and he take his place again . 

 then come forth together the three chief of the Shepherds , to wit 
 Hound - under - Greenbury , Strongitharm , and the Hyllier ; and 
 Strongitharm spake for all three , and say : 

 ' the Men of Greenbury , and they of the Fleece and the Thorn , be of 
 one accord , and bid we say that they be well pleased to have Face- 
 of - god for war - leader ; and that they will follow he and the warrior 
 of the Wolf to live or die with they ; and that they be ready to go 
 meet the foe at once , and will not skulk behind the wall of 
 Greenbury . ' 

 Therewith the three go back again to their place . 

 then come forth that tall man that bare the Banner of the Wolf , when 
 he have give the staff into the hand of he who stand next . he come 
 and stand over against the seat of the chieftain ; and for a while he 
 could say no word , but stand struggle with the strong passion of 
 his joy ; but at last he lift his hand aloft , and cry out in a 
 loud voice : 

 ' o war , war ! o death ! o wounding and grief ! o loss of friend and 
 kindre ! let all this be rather than the drawing back of meeting 
 hand and the sundering of yearn heart ! ' and he go back hastily 
 to his place . but from the rank of the Woodlanders run forth a 
 young man , and cry out : 

 ' as be the word of Red - wolf , so be my word , Bears - bane of Carlstead ; 
 and this be the word which our little folk hath put into our mouth ; 
 and O ! that our hand may show the meaning of our mouth ; for nought 
 else can . ' 

 then indeed go up a great shout , though many forebore to cry out ; 
 for now be they too much move for word or sound . and in special 
 be face - of - god move ; and he scarce know which way to look , lest he 
 should break out into sob and weeping ; for of late he have be much 
 among the Woodlanders , and love they much . 

 then all the noise and clamour fall , and it be to man as if they who 
 have come thither a folk , have now become an host of war . 

 but once again the Alderman rise up and spake : 

 ' now have ye yeasaid three thing : that we take face - of - god of the 
 House of the Face for our war - leader ; that we fare under weapon at 
 once against they who would murder we ; and that we take the valiant 
 Folk of the Wolf for our fellow in arm . ' 

 Therewith he stay his speech , and this time the shout arise clear 
 and most mighty , with the tossing up of sword and the clashing of 
 weapon on shield . 

 then he say : ' now , if any man will speak , here be the war - leader , 
 and here be the chief of our new friend , to answer to whatso any of 
 the kindred would have answer . ' 

 Thereon come forth the Fiddle from amongst the Men of the Sickle , and 
 draw somewhat nigh to the Alderman , and say : 

 ' Alderman , we would ask of the war - leader if he hath devise the 
 manner of our assembling , and the way of our war - fare , and the day 
 of our hosting . More than this I will not ask of he , because we wot 
 that in so great an assembly it may be that the foe may have some spy 
 of whom we wot not ; and though this be not likely , yet some folk may 
 babble ; therefore it be good for the wise to be wise everywhere and 
 always . therefore my rede it be , that no man ask any more concern 
 this , but let it lie with the war - leader to bring we face to face 
 with the foe as speedily as he may . ' 

 all man say that this be well counselled . but face - of - god arise 
 and say : ' Ye Men of the Dale , ye Shepherds and Woodlanders , 
 meseemeth the Fiddle hath speak wisely . now therefore I answer he 
 and say , that I have so order everything since the Gate - thing be 
 holden at Burgstead , that we may come face to face with the foeman by 
 the short of road . every man shall be duly summon to the 
 Hosting , and if any man fail , let it be account a shame to he for 
 ever . ' 

 a great shout follow on his word , and he sit down again . but Fox 
 of Upton come forth and say : 

 ' o Alderman , we have yeasaid the fellowship of the valiant man who 
 have come to we from out of the waste ; but this we have do , not 
 because we have know they , otherwise than by what our kinsman face- 
 of - god hath tell we concern they , but because we have see clearly 
 that they will be of much avail to we in our warfare . now , 
 therefore , if the tall chieftain who sitteth beside thee be to do 
 we to wit what he be , and whence he and his be come , it be well , 
 and fain be we thereof ; but if he listeth not to tell we , that also 
 shall be well . ' 

 then arise Folk - might in his place ; but or ever he could open his 
 mouth to speak , the tall Red - wolf strode forward bear with he the 
 Banner of the Wolf and the Sun - burst , and come and stand beside he ; 
 and the wind run through the fold of the banner , and ripple it out 
 above the head of those twain . then folk - might spake and say : 


 ' o men of the Dale and the Sheepcotes , I will do as ye bid I do ; 
 and fain be ye of the story if every deal ye know . 
 but long , long be its telling , be I to tell it all : 
 let it bide till the Cup of Deliverance ye drink from hall to hall . 

 ' like you we be of the kindred , of the Sons of the Gods we come , 
 Midst the Mid - earth 's mighty Woodland of old we have our home ; 
 but of old time we abide ' neath the mountain of the Earth , 
 o'er which the Sun ariseth to waken woe and mirth . 

 Great be we then and many ; but the long day wear we thin , 
 and war , wherein the winner hath weary work to win . 
 and the woodland wall behind we e'en like ourselves be wear , 
 and the tramp of the host of the foeman adown its glade be bear 
 on the wind that bent our wheat - field . so in the morn we rise , 
 and leave behind the stubble and the autumn - fruit close , 
 and go our way to the westward , nor turn aback to see 
 the glare of our burn house rise over brake and tree . 
 but the foe be fierce and speedy , nor long they tarry there , 
 and through the wood of battle our laden wain must fare ; 
 and the Sons of the Wolf be minishe , and the maid of the Wolf 
 wax few , 
 as amidst the victory - singing we fare the wild - wood through . 

 ' so saith the ancient story , that west and west we go , 
 and many a day of battle we have in brake , on bent ; 
 Whilst here a while we tarry , and there we hasten on , 
 and still the battle - harvest from many a folk we win . 

 ' of the tale of the day who wotteth ? of the year what man can 
 tell , 
 while the Sons of the Wolf be wander , and know not where to 
 dwell ? 
 but at last we clomb the mountain , and mickle be our toil , 
 as high the spear - wood clamber of the driver of the spoil ; 
 and tangle be the pass and the beacon flare behind , 
 and the horn of gathering onset come up upon the wind . 
 so saith the ancient story , that we stand in a mountain - cleft , 
 where the way and the valley sunder to the right hand and the 
 left . 
 there in the place of sunder all woeful be the rede ; 
 we know no land before we , and behind be heavy need . 
 as the sword cleave through the byrny , so there the mountain flank 
 Cleft through the God - kin 's people ; and ne'er again we drank 
 the wine of war together , or feast side by side 
 in the Feast - hall of the Warrior on the fruit of the battle - tide . 
 for there we turn and sunder ; unto the North we go 
 and up along the water , and the clattering stony bent ; 
 and unto the South and the Sheepcotes down go our sister 's son ; 
 and o for the year pass over since we see those valiant one ! ' 


 he cease , and lay his right hand on the banner - staff a little below 
 the left hand of Red - wolf ; and man be so keen to hear each word 
 that he spake , that there be no cry nor sound of voice when he have 
 do , only the sound of the ripple banner of the Wolf over the 
 head of those twain . the Sun - beam bow her head now , and weep 
 silently . but the Bride , she have draw her sword , and hold it 
 upright in her hand before she , and the sun smote fire from out of 
 it . 

 then it be but a little while before Red - wolf lift up his voice , 
 and sing : 


 ' hearken a wonder , o folk of the Field , 
 how they that do sunder stand shield beside shield ! 

 Lo ! the old will not and manner by fearless folk make , 
 on the Bole of the Banner the brother ' hand lay . 

 Lo ! here the token of what hath betid ! 
 grow whole be the break , find that which be hide . 

 now one way we follow whate'er shall befall ; 
 as seeketh the swallow his yesteryear 's hall . 

 seldom folk few to fight - stead hath fare ; 
 Ne'er have man truer the battle - reed bar . 

 Grey lock now I carry , and old be I grow , 
 nor look I to tarry to meet with mine own . 

 for we who remember the deed of old day 
 be nought but the ember of battle ablaze . 

 for what man might aid we ? what deed and what day 
 should come where Weird lay we aloof from the way ? 

 what man save that other of Twain rent apart , 
 our war - friend , our Brother , the piece of our heart . 

 then hearken the wonder how shield beside shield 
 the twain that do sunder wend down to the Field ! ' 


 now when he have make an end , man could no long forebear the shout ; 
 and it go up into the heaven , and be bear by the west - wind down 
 the Dale to the ear of the stay - at - home woman and man unmeet to go 
 abroad , and it quicken their blood and the spirit within they as 
 they hear it , and they smile and be fain ; for they know that 
 their kinsfolk be glad . 

 but when there be quiet on the mote - field again , Folk - might spake 
 again and say ; 


 ' it be sooth that my Brother sayeth , and that now again we wend , 
 all the Sons of the Wolf together , till the trouble hath an end . 
 but as for that tale of the ancient , it saith that we who go 
 to the northward , climb and stumble o'er many a stony bent , 
 till we happe on that isle of the waste - land , and the grass of 
 Shadowy Vale , 
 where we dwelt till we throve a little , and feel our might avail . 
 then we fare abroad from the shadow and the little - light hold , 
 and the increase fall to the valiant , and the spoil to the battle- 
 bold , 
 and never a man gainsay we with the weapon in our hand ; 
 and in Silver - dale the happy we gat us life and land . 

 ' so wear the year o'er - wealthy ; and meseemeth that ye know 
 how we sow and reap destruction , and the Day of the overthrow : 
 how we lean on the staff we have break , and put our life in the 
 hand 
 of those whom we have vanquish and the feeble of the land ; 
 and these be the stone of stumbling , and the burden not to be 
 bear , 
 when the battle - blast fall on we and our day be over - worn . 
 thus then do our wealth bewray we , and leave we wise and sad ; 
 and to you , bold man , it falleth once more to make we glad , 
 if so your heart be bid , and ye deem the deed of worth . 
 such be we ; what we shall be , ' tis yours to say henceforth . ' 


 he say furthermore : ' how great we have be I have tell you 
 already ; and ye shall see for yourself how little we be now . be it 
 enough , and will ye have we for friend and brother ? how say ye ? ' 

 they answer with shout upon shout , so that all the place and the 
 wild - wood round about be full of the voice of their crying ; but when 
 the clamour fall , then spake the Alderman and say : 

 ' Friend , and chieftain of the Wolf , thou mayst hear by this shouting 
 of the people that we have no mind to naysay our yea - say . and know 
 that it be not our use and manner to seek the strong for friend , and 
 to thrust aside the weak ; but rather to choose for our friend they 
 who be of like mind to we , man in whom we put our trust . from 
 henceforth then there be brotherhood between we ; we be your , and ye 
 be ours ; and let this endure for ever ! ' 

 then be all man full of joy ; and now at last the battle seem at 
 hand , and the peace beyond the battle . 

 then man bring the hallowed beast all garland with flower into 
 the doom - ring , and there be they slay and offer up unto the 
 Gods , to wit the Warrior , the Earth - god , and the Fathers ; and 
 thereafter be solemn feast holden on the field of the Folk - mote , and 
 all man be fain and merry . nevertheless , not all man abode there 
 the feast through ; for or ever the afternoon be well worn , be many 
 man wend along the Portway eastward toward the Upper Dale , each 
 man in his war - gear and with a scrip hang about he ; and these be 
 they who be bind for the trysting - place and the journey over the 
 waste . 

 so the Folk - mote be sunder ; and man go to their house , and 
 there abode in peace the time of their summoning ; since they wotte 
 well that the Hosting be afoot . 

 but as for the Woodlanders , who be at the Mote - stead with all their 
 folk , woman , child , and old man , they go not back again to 
 Carlstead ; but pray the neighbour of the Middle Dale to suffer 
 they to abide there awhile , which they yeasaid with a good will . so 
 the Woodlanders tilt themselves in , the more part of they , down in 
 the meadow below the mote - stead , along either side of Wildlake 's 
 Way ; but their ancient folk , and some of the woman and child , the 
 neighbour would have into their house , and the rest they furnish 
 with victual and all that they need without price , look upon 
 they as their very guest . for indeed they deem that they could 
 see that these man would never return to Carlstead , but would abide 
 with the Men of the Wolf in silver - dale , once it be win . and this 
 they deem but meet and right , yet be they sorry thereof ; for the 
 Woodlanders be well beloved of all the Dalesmen ; and now that they 
 have get to know that they be come of so noble a kindre , they 
 be well beloved yet , and more look upon . 



 CHAPTER XL . of the HOSTING in SHADOWY VALE 



 it be on the evening of the fourth day after the Folk - mote that 
 there come through the Waste to the rocky edge of Shadowy Vale a band 
 of some fifteen score of man - at - arm , and with they a multitude of 
 woman and child and old man , some afoot , some rid on ass and 
 bullock ; and with they be sumpter ass and neat laden with 
 household good , and a few goat and kine . and this be the whole 
 folk of the Woodlanders come to the Hosting in Shadowy Vale and the 
 Home of the child of the Wolf . their leader of the way be 
 Wood - father and Wood - wont and two other carle of Shadowy Vale ; and 
 Red - wolf the tall , and Bears - bane and war - grove be the captain and 
 chieftain of their company . 

 thus then they enter into the narrow pass aforesaid , which be the 
 ingate to the Vale from the Waste , and little by little its dimness 
 swallow up their long line . as they go by the place where the 
 lowering of the rock - wall give a glimpse of the valley , they look 
 down into it as face - of - god have do , but much change be there in 
 little time . there be the black wall of crag on the other side 
 stretch down to the ghyll of the great Force ; there run the deep 
 green water of the Shivering Flood ; but the grass which face - of - god 
 have see naked of everything but a few kine , thereon now the tent of 
 man stand thick . their heart swell within they as they behold it , 
 but they forebore the shout and the cry till they should be well 
 within the Vale , and so go down silently into the darkness . but as 
 their eye catch that dim image of the Wolf on the wall of the pass , 
 man point it out to man , and not a few turn and kiss it 
 hurriedly ; and to they it seem that many a kiss have be lay on 
 that dear token since the day of old , and that the hard stone have 
 be wear away by the fervent lip of man , and that the air of the 
 mirk place yet quiver with the vow swear over the sword - blade . 

 but down through the dark they go , and so come on to the stony 
 scree at the end of the pass and into the Vale ; and the whole Folk 
 save the three chieftain flow over it and stand about it down on 
 the level grass of the Vale . but those three stand yet on the top of 
 the scree , bear the war - sign of the Shaft and the Spear , and 
 betwixt they the banner of the Wolf and the Sunburst newly display 
 to the wind of Shadowy Vale . 

 up and down the Vale they look , and see before the tent of man the 
 old familiar banner of Burgdale rise and fall in the evening 
 wind . but amidst of the doom - ring be pitch a great banner , 
 whereon be do the image of the Wolf with red gap jaw on a 
 field of green ; and about he stand other banner , to wit , the silver 
 Arm on a red field , the Red Hand on a white field , and on green 
 field both , the Golden Bushel and the Ragged Sword . 

 all about the plain shone glitter war - gear of man as they move 
 hither and thither , and a stream of folk begin at once to draw toward 
 the scree to look on those new - comer ; and amidst the helmed 
 Burgdalers and the white - coat Shepherds go the tall man of the 
 Wolf , bare - head and unarmed save for their sword , mingle with the 
 fair strong woman of the kindre , treading barefoot the soft grass of 
 their own Vale . 

 presently there be a great throng gather round about the 
 Woodlanders , and each man as he join it wave hand or weapon toward 
 they , and the joy of their welcome send a confused clamour through 
 the air . then forth from the throng step Folk - might , unarmed save 
 his sword , and behind he be face - of - god , in his war - gear save his 
 helm , hand in hand with the Sun - beam , who be clothe in her goodly 
 flower green kirtle , her foot naked like her sister of the 
 kindre . 

 then folk - might cry aloud : ' a full and free greeting to our 
 brother ! well be ye , o son of our Ancient Fathers ! and to - day be 
 ye the dearer to we because we see that ye have bring we a gift , to 
 wit , your wife and child , and your grandsire unmeet for war . by 
 this token we see how great be your trust in we , and that it be your 
 meaning never to sunder from we again . o well be ye ; well be ye ! ' 

 then spake Red - wolf , and say : ' Ye Sons of the Wolf , who part from 
 we of old time in that cleft of the mountain , it be our very self 
 that we give unto you ; and these be a part of ourselves ; how then 
 should we leave they behind we ? Bear witness , o man of Burgdale and 
 the Sheepcotes , that we have become one folk with the man of Shadowy 
 Vale , never to be sunder again ! ' 

 then all that multitude shout with a loud voice ; and when the shout 
 have die away , Folk - might spake again : 

 ' o warrior of the sundering , here shall your wife and child 
 abide , while we go a little journey to rejoice our heart with the 
 hard handplay , and take to we that which we have miss : and to- 
 morrow morn be appoint for this same journey , unless ye be over 
 foot - weary with the way of the Waste . ' 

 Red - wolf smile as he answer : ' this ye say in jest , brother ; for 
 ye may see that our day 's journey hath not be over - much for our old 
 man ; how then should it weary those who may yet bear sword ? we be 
 ready for the road and eager for the handplay . ' 

 ' this be well , ' say folk - might , ' and what be to be look for . 
 therefore , brother , do ye and your counsel - mate come straightway to 
 the Hall of the Wolf ; wherein , after ye have eat and drunken , shall 
 we take counsel with our brother of Burgdale and the Sheepcotes , so 
 that all may be order for battle ! ' 

 say Red - wolf : ' Good be that , if we must need abide till to - morrow ; 
 for verily we come not hither to eat and drink and rest our body ; 
 but it must be as ye will have it . ' 

 then the Sun - beam leave the hand of face - of - god and come forward , and 
 hold out both her palm to the Woodland - folk , and spake in a voice 
 that be hear afar , though it be a woman 's , so clear and sweet it 
 be ; and she say : 

 ' o warrior of the Sundering , ye who be not need in the Hall , and 
 ye our sister with your little one and your father , come now to we 
 and down to the tent which we have array for you , and there think 
 for a little that we be all at our very home that we long for and 
 have yet to win , and be ye merry with we and make we merry . ' 

 Therewith she step forward daintily and enter into their throng , 
 and take an old man of the Woodlanders by the hand , and kiss his 
 cheek and lead he away , and the come rest seem sweet to he . and 
 then come other woman of the Vale , kind and fair and smile , and lead 
 away , some an old mother of the Wood - lander , some a young wife , some 
 a pair of lad ; and not a few forsooth kiss and embrace the stark 
 warrior , and go away with they toward the tent , which stand along 
 the side of the Shivering Flood where it be at its quiet ; for 
 there be the grass the soft and most abundant . there on the 
 green grass be table array , and lamp be hang above they on 
 spear , to be litten when the daylight should fail . and the good of 
 the victual which the Vale could give be spread on the board , along 
 with wine and dainty , buy in silver - dale , or on the edge of the 
 Westland with sword - stroke and arrow - flight . 

 there then they feast and be merry ; and the Sun - beam and Bow - may 
 and the other woman of the Vale serve they at table , and be very 
 blithe with they , caress they with soft word , and with clipping 
 and kissing , as folk who be grow exceed dear to they ; so that 
 that eve of battle be soft and sweet to they than any hour of 
 their life . with these feaster be God - swain and Spear - fist of the 
 deliver thrall of silver - dale as glad as glad might be ; but wolf- 
 stone their eld be go with Dallach to the Council in the Hall . 

 the man of Burgdale and the Shepherds feast otherwhere in all 
 content , nor lack folk of the Vale to serve they . amongst the man 
 of the Face be the ten deliver thrall who have heart to meet 
 their master in arm : seven of they be of Rose - dale and three of 
 silver - dale . 

 the Bride be with she kindre of the Steer , with whom be many man 
 of Shadowy Vale , and she serve her friend and fellow clothe in her 
 war - gear , save helm and hauberk , bear herself as one who be 
 serve dear guest . and man equal she for her beauty to the Gods 
 of the High Place and the chooser of the Slain ; and they who have not 
 beheld she before marvel at she , and her loveliness hold all man 's 
 heart in a net of desire , so that they forebore their meat to gaze 
 upon she ; and if perchance her hand touch some young man , or her 
 cheek or sweet - breathe mouth come nigh to his face , he become 
 bewildered and wist not where he be , nor what to do . yet be she as 
 lowly and simple of speech and demeanour as if she be a gooseherd 
 of fourteen winter . 

 in the Hall be a goodly company , and all the leader of the Folk 
 be therein , and folk - might and the war - leader sit in the midst 
 of those stone seat on the day . there then they agree on the 
 whole ordering of the battle and the wending of the host , as shall be 
 tell later on ; and this matter be long a - doing , and when it be 
 do , man go to their place to sleep , for the night be well worn . 

 but when man have depart and all be still , folk - might , light - clad 
 and without a weapon , leave the Hall and walk briskly toward the 
 nether end of the Vale . he pass by all the tent , the last whereof 
 be of the House of the Steer , and come to a place where be a great 
 rock rise straight up from the plain like sheaf of black stave 
 stand close together ; and it be call Staff - stone , and tale of 
 the elf have be tell concern it , so that stone - face have behold 
 it gladly the day before . 

 the moon be just shin into Shadowy Vale , and the grass be bright 
 wheresoever the shadow of the high cliff be not , and the face of 
 Staff - stone shine bright grey as Folk - might come within sight of it , 
 and he behold someone sit at the base of the rock , and as he draw 
 nigh he see that it be a woman , and know she for the Bride ; for he 
 have pray she to abide he there that night , because it be nigh to 
 the tent of the House of the Steer ; and his heart be glad as he 
 draw nigh to she . 

 she sit quietly on a fragment of the black rock , clothe as she have be 
 all day , in her glitter kirtle , but without hauberk or helm , a 
 wreath of wind - flower about her head , her foot cross over each 
 other , her hand lay palm uppermost in her lap . she move not as he 
 draw nigh , but say in a gentle voice when he be close to she : 

 ' Chief of the Wolf , great warrior , thou would speak with I ; and 
 good it be that friend should talk together on the eve of battle , 
 when they may never meet alive again . ' 

 he say : ' my talk shall not be long ; for thou and I both must sleep 
 to - night , since there be work to hand to - morrow . now since , as thou 
 sayest , o fairest of woman , we may never meet again alive , I ask thee 
 now at this hour , when we both live and be near to one another , to 
 suffer I to speak to thee of my love of thee and desire for thee . 
 surely thou , who art the sweetest of all thing the Gods and the 
 kindred have make , wilt not gainsay I this ? ' 

 she say very sweetly , yet smile : ' brother of my father 's son , 
 how can I gainsay thee thy speech ? Nay , hast thou not say it ? what 
 more canst thou add to it that will have fresh meaning to mine ear ? ' 

 he say : ' thou say sooth : might I then but kiss thine hand ? ' 

 she say , no long smile : ' yea surely , even so may all man do who 
 can be call my friend - and thou art much my friend . ' 

 he take her hand and kiss it , and hold it thereafter ; nor do she 
 draw it away . the moon shine brightly on they ; but by its light he 
 could not see if she redden , but he deem that her face be 
 troubled . then he say : ' it be well for I if I might kiss thy 
 face , and take thee in mine arm . ' 

 then say she : ' this only shall a man do with I when I long to do 
 the like with he . and since thou art so much my friend , I will tell 
 thee that as for this longing , I have it not . bethink thee what a 
 little while it be since the lack of another man 's love grieve I 
 sorely . ' 

 ' the time be short , ' say folk - might , ' if we tell up the hour 
 thereof ; but in that short space have a many thing betid . ' 

 she say : ' dost thou know , canst thou guess , how sorely ashamed I 
 go amongst my people ? I durst look no man in the face for the 
 aching of mine heart , which methought all might see through my face . ' 

 ' I know it well , ' he say ; ' yet of I wert thou not ashamed but a 
 little while ago , when thou didst tell I of thy grief . ' 

 she say : ' true it be ; and thou wert kind to I . Thou didst become 
 a dear friend to I , methought . ' 

 ' and wilt thou hurt a dear friend ? ' say he . 

 ' o no , ' she say , ' if I might do otherwise . yet how if I might not 
 choose ? shall there be no forgiveness for I then ? ' 

 he answer nothing ; and still he hold her hand that strove not to be 
 go from his , and she cast down her eye . then he spake in a while : 

 ' my friend , I have be think of thee and of I ; and now hearken : 
 if thou wilt declare that thou feel no sweetness embrace thine 
 heart when I say that I desire thee sorely , as now I say it ; or when 
 I kiss thine hand , as now I kiss it ; or when I pray thee to suffer I 
 to cast mine arm about thee and kiss thy face , as now I pray it : if 
 thou wilt say this , then will I take thee by the hand straightway , 
 and lead thee to the tent of the House of the Steer , and say 
 farewell to thee till the battle be over . Canst thou say this out of 
 the truth of thine heart ? ' 

 she say : ' what then if I can not say this word ? what then ? ' 

 but he answer nothing ; and she sit still a little while , and then 
 arise and stand before he , look he in the eye , and say : 

 ' I can not say it . ' 

 then he catch she in his arm and strain she to he , and then 
 kiss her lip and her face again and again , and she strove not with 
 he . but at last she say : 

 ' yet after all this shalt thou lead I back to my folk straight - way ; 
 and when the battle be do , if both we be live , then shall we 
 speak more thereof . ' 

 so he take her hand and lead she on toward the tent of the Steer , and 
 for a while he spake nought ; for he doubt himself , what he should 
 say ; but at last he spake : 

 ' now be this well for I than if it have not be , whether I live or 
 whether I die . yet thou hast not say that thou lov I and 
 desir I . ' 

 ' Wilt thou compel I ? ' she say . ' to - night I may not say it . who 
 shall say what word my lip shall fashion when we stand together 
 victorious in silver - dale ; then indeed may the time seem long from 
 now . ' 

 he say : ' yea , true be that ; yet once again I say that so measured 
 long and long be the time since first I see thee in Burgdale before 
 thou knewest I . yet now I will not bicker with thee , for be sure 
 that I be glad at heart . and lo you ! our foot have bring we to the 
 tent of thy people . all good go with thee ! ' 

 ' and with thee , sweet friend , ' she say . then she linger a little , 
 turn her head toward the tent , and then turn her face toward 
 he and lay her hand on his neck , and draw his head adown to she and 
 kiss his cheek , and therewith swiftly and lightly depart from 
 he . 

 now the night wear and the morning come ; and face - of - god be abroad 
 very early in the morning , as his custom be ; and he wash the night 
 from off he in the Carles ' Bath of the Shivering Flood , and then 
 go round through the encampment of the host , and see none stir 
 save here and there the last watchman of the night . he spake with 
 one or two of these , and then go up to the head of the Vale , where 
 be the pass that lead to silver - dale ; and there he see the watch , and 
 spake with they , and they tell he that none have as yet come forth 
 from the pass , and he bid they to blow the horn of warn to rouse 
 up the host as soon as the messenger come thence . for forerunner 
 have be send up the pass , and have be set to hold watch at diver 
 place therein to pass on the word from place to place . 

 Thence go face - of - god back toward the Hall ; but when he be yet 
 some way from it , he see a slender glitter warrior come forth from 
 the door thereof , who stand for a moment look round about , and 
 then come lightly and swiftly toward he ; and lo ! it be the sun- 
 beam , with a long hauberk over her kirtle fall below her knee , a 
 helm on her head and plat shoe on her foot . she come up to he , 
 and lay her hand to his cheek and the golden lock of his head   for 
 he be bare - headed , and say to he , smile : 

 ' gold - mane ! thou badest I bear arm , and Folk - might also constrain 
 I thereto . Lo thou ! ' 

 say face - of - god : ' folk - might be wise then , even as I be ; and 
 forsooth as thou art . for bethink thee if the bow draw at a venture 
 should speed the eyeless shaft against thy breast , and send I forth 
 a wanderer from my Folk ! for how could I bear the sight of the fair 
 Dale , and no hope to see thee again therein ? ' 

 she say : ' the heart be light within I to - day . Deemest thou that 
 this be strange ? or dost thou call to mind that which thou spak 
 the other day , that it be of no avail to stand in the doom - ring of 
 the Folk and bear witness against ourselves ? this will I not . this 
 be no light - mindedness that thou beholdest in I , but the valiancy 
 that the Fathers have set in mine heart . deem not , O gold - mane , fear 
 not , that we shall die before they dight the bride - bed for we . ' 

 he would have kiss her mouth , but she put he away with her hand , 
 and doff her helm and lay it on the grass , and say : 

 ' this be not the last time that thou shalt kiss I , gold - mane , my 
 dear ; and yet I long for it as if it be , so high as the father 
 have raise I up this morn above fear and sadness . ' 

 he say nought , but draw she to he , and wonder so move he , that he 
 look long and closely at her face before he kiss she ; and 
 forsooth he could find no blemish in it : it be as if it be but 
 new come from the smithy of the Gods , and exceed longing take hold 
 of he . but even as their lip meet , from the head of the Vale come 
 the voice of the great horn ; and it be answer straightway by the 
 watcher all down the tent ; and presently arise the shout of man 
 and the clash of weapon as folk arm themselves , and laughter 
 therewith , for most man be battle - merry , and the cry of woman 
 shrilly - clear as they hasten about , busy over the morning meal 
 before the departure of the Host . but face - of - god say softly , still 
 caress the Sun - beam , and she he : 

 ' thus then we depart from this Valley of the Shadows , but as thou 
 saidst when first we meet therein , there shall be no sundering of thee 
 and I , but thou shalt go down with I to the battle . ' 

 and he lead she by the hand into the Hall of the Wolf , and there they 
 eat a morsel , and thereafter face - of - god tarry not , but busy 
 himself along with Folk - might and the other chieftain in array 
 the Host for departure . 



 CHAPTER XLI . the host DEPARTETH from SHADOWY VALE : the first DAY 'S 
 JOURNEY 



 it be about three hour before noon that the Host begin to enter 
 into the pass out of Shadowy Vale by the river - side ; and the woman 
 and child , and man unfightworthy , stand on the high ground at 
 the foot of the cliff to see the Host wend on the way . of these a 
 many be of the Woodlanders , who be now one folk with they of 
 Shadowy Vale . and all these have choose to abide tiding in the Vale , 
 deeming that there be little danger therein , since that last 
 slaughter which folk - might have make of the Dusky Men ; albeit face - of- 
 god have offer to send they all to Burgstead with two score and ten 
 man - at - arm to guard they by the way and to eke out the warder of 
 the Burg . 

 now the fighting - man of Shadowy Vale be two long hundred lack 
 five ; of whom two score and ten be woman , and three score and ten 
 lad under twenty winter ; but the woman , though you might scarce see 
 fairer of face and body , be doughty in arm , all good shooter in 
 the bow ; and the swain be eager and light - foot , cragsman of the 
 good , will not to scale the cliff of the Vale in search of the nest 
 of gerfalcon and such - like fowl , and swim the strong stream of 
 the Shivering Flood ; tough body and wiry , strong than most grow 
 man , and as fearless as the good . 

 the order of the departure of the Host be this : 

 the Woodlanders go first into the pass , and with they be two 
 score of the ripe warrior of the Wolf . then come of the kindred of 
 Burgdale , the Men of the Steer , the Bridge , and the Bull ; then the 
 Men of the Vine and the Sickle ; then the Shepherd - folk ; and lastly , 
 the Men of the face lead by stone - face and hall - face . with these go 
 another two score of the dweller in Shadowy Vale , and the rest be 
 scatter up and down the band of the Host to guide they into the 
 good path and to make the way easy to they . face - of - god be 
 sunder from his kindred , and go along with Folk - might in the 
 forefront of the Host , while his father the Alderman go as a simple 
 man - at - arm with his House in the rearward . the Sun - beam follow 
 her brother and face - of - god amidst the warrior of the Wolf , and with 
 she be Bow - may clothe in the Alderman 's gift , and Wood - father and his 
 child . Bow - may have cause she to doff her hauberk for that day , 
 whereon they look to fall in with no foeman . as for the Bride , she 
 go with she kindre in all her war - gear ; and the morning sun shine 
 in the gem of her apparel , and her jewel foot fall like flower 
 upon the deep grass of the upper Vale , and shine strange and bright 
 amongst the black stone of the pass . she bear a quiver at she back 
 and a shin yew bow in her hand , and go amongst the bowman , for 
 she be a very deft archer . 

 so fare they into the pass , leave peace behind they , with all 
 their banner display , and the banner of the Red - mouthed Wolf go 
 with the Wolf and the Sun - burst in the forefront of their battle next 
 after the two captain . 

 as for their road , the grassy space between the rock - wall and the 
 water be wide and smooth at first , and the cliff rise up like 
 bundle of spear - shafts high and clear from the green grass with no 
 confused litter of fall stone ; so that the man stride on briskly , 
 their heart high - raise and full of hope . and as they go , the 
 sweetness of song stir in their soul , and at last Bow - may fall to 
 sing in a loud clear voice , and her cousin wood - wise answer she , 
 and all the warrior of the Wolf who be in their band fall into the 
 song at the ending , and the sound of their melody go down the water 
 and reach the ear of those that be enter the pass , and of 
 those who be abide till the way should be clear of they : and 
 this be some of what they sing : 


 Bow - may singeth : 

 hear ye never a voice come cry 
  out from the waste where the wind fare wide ? 
 ' son of the Wolf , the day be die , 
  and where in the cleft of the rock do ye hide ? 

 ' into your hand hath the Sword be give , 
  Hard be the palm with the kiss of the hilt ; 
 through the trackless waste hath the road be rive 
  for the blade to seek to the heart of the guilt . 

 ' and yet ye bide and yet ye tarry ; 
  dear deem ye the sleep ' twixt hearth and board , 
 and sweet the maiden mouth ye marry , 
  and bright the blade of the bloodless sword . ' 

 wood - wise singeth : 

 Yea , here we dwell in the arm of our mother 
  the Shadowy Queen , and the hope of the Waste ; 
 here first we come , when never another 
  adown the rocky stair make haste . 

 Far be the foe , and no sword beholdeth 
  what deed we work and whither we wend ; 
 Dear be the day , and the Year enfoldeth 
  the love of our life from end to end . 

 Voice of our father , why will ye move we , 
  and call up the sun our sword to behold ? 
 why will ye cry on the foeman to prove we ? 
  why will ye stir up the heart of the bold ? 

 Bow - may singeth : 

 purblind be I , the voice of the chiding ; 
  then tell I what be the thing ye bear ? 
 what be the gift that your hand be hide , 
  the gold - adorn , the dread and dear ? 

 wood - wise singeth : 

 Dark in the sheath lie the Anvil 's Brother , 
  Hid be the hammered Death of Men . 
 would ye look on the gift of the green - clothe Mother ? 
  how then shall ye ask for a gift again ? 

 the warrior sing : 

 show we the Sunlight the Gift of the Mother , 
  as foot follow foot to the foeman 's den ! 
 Gleam Sun , breathe Wind , on the Anvil 's Brother , 
  for bare be the hammered Death of Men . 


 Therewith they shake their naked sword in the air , and fare on 
 eagerly , and as swiftly as the pass would have they fare . but so it 
 be , that when the rearward of the Host be enter the first of the 
 pass , and be go on the wide smooth sward , the vanward be get 
 to where there be but a narrow space clear betwixt water and cliff ; 
 for otherwhere be a litter of great rock and small , hard to be 
 thread even by those who know the pass well ; so that man have to 
 tread along the very verge of the Shivering Flood , and wary must they 
 be , for the water run swift and deep betwixt bank of sheer rock half 
 a fathom below their very foot - sol , which have but bare space to go 
 on the narrow a way . so it hold on for a while , and then get safe , 
 and there be more space for go betwixt cliff and flood ; albeit it 
 be toilsome enough , since for some way yet there be a drift of 
 stone to cumber their foot , some big and some little , and some very 
 big . after a while the way grow well , though here and there , where 
 the cliff lower , be wide scree of loose stone that they must 
 need climb up and down . thereafter for a space be there an end of 
 the stony cumber , but the way betwixt the river and the cliff 
 narrow again , and the black crag grow high , and at last so 
 exceed high , and the way so narrow , that the sky overhead be to 
 they as though they be at the bottom of a well , and man deem that 
 thence they could see the star at noontide . for some time withal 
 have the way be mount up and up , though the cliff grow high 
 over it ; till at last they be but go on a narrow shelf , the 
 Shivering Flood swirl and rattle far below they betwixt sheer 
 rock - wall grow exceed high ; and above they the cliff go up 
 towards the heaven as black as a moonless starless night of winter . 
 and as the flood thunder below , so above they roar the ceaseless 
 thunder of the wind of the pass , that blow exceed fierce down that 
 strait place ; so that the skirt of their garment be wrap about 
 their knee by it , and their foot be well - nigh stay at while as 
 they breast the push thereof . 

 but as they mount higher and high yet , the noise of the water 
 swell into a huge roar that drown the bellowing of the prisone 
 wind , and down the pass come drift a fine rain that fall not from 
 the sky , for between the cloud of that drift could folk see the 
 heaven bright and blue above they . this rain be but the spray of 
 the great force up to whose step they be climb . 

 now the way get rough as they mount ; but this toil be cause by 
 their gain ; for the rock - wall , which thrust out a buttress there as 
 if it would have go to the very edge of the gap where - through the 
 flood run , and so have cut the way off utterly , be here somewhat 
 break down , and its stone scatter down the steep bent , so that 
 there be a passage , though a toilsome one . 

 thus then through the wind - bear drift of the great force , through 
 which man could see the white water toss down below , amidst the 
 clattering thunder of the Shivering Flood and the rumble of the wind 
 of the gap , that tear through their garment and hair as if it would 
 rend all to rag and bear it away , the banner of the Wolf win their 
 way to the crest of the midmost height of the pass , and the long line 
 of the Host come clamber after they ; and each band of warrior as 
 it reach the top cast an unheard shout from amidst the tangled fury 
 of wind and water . 

 a little far on and all that turmoil be behind they ; the sun , 
 now grow low , smote the waver column of spray from the force at 
 their back , till the rainbow lay bright across it ; and the sunshine 
 lie wide over a little valley that slop somewhat steeply to the 
 west right up from the edge of the river ; and beyond these western 
 slope could man see a low peak spread down on all side to the 
 plain , till it be like to a bossed shield , and the name of it be 
 Shield - broad . dark grey be the valley everywhere , save that by the 
 side of the water be a space of bright green - sward hedge about 
 toward the mountain by a wall of rock toss up into wild shape of 
 spire and jagged point . the river itself be spread out wide and 
 shallow , and go rattle about great grey rock scatter here and 
 there amidst it , till it gather itself together to tumble headlong 
 over three slant step into the mighty gap below . 

 from the height in the pass those grey slope seem easy to 
 traverse ; but the warrior of the Wolf know that it be far 
 otherwise , for they be but the molten rock - sea that in time long 
 past have flow forth from Shield - broad and fill up the whole 
 valley endlong and overthwart , cool as it flow , and the tumble 
 hedge of rock round about the green plain by the river be where the 
 say rock - sea have be stay by meet with soft ground , and have 
 heap itself up round about the green - sward . and that great rock- 
 flood as it cool split in diver fashion ; and the rain and weather 
 have be busy on it for age , so that it be wear into a maze of 
 narrow path , most of which , after a little , bring the wayfarer to 
 a dead stop , or else lead he back again to the place whence he have 
 start ; so that only those who know the pass throughly could 
 thread that maze without immeasurable labour . 

 now when the man of the Host look from the high place whereon they 
 stand toward the green plain by the river , they see on the top of 
 that rock - wall a red pennon wave on a spear , and beside it three or 
 four weapone man gleam bright in the evening sun ; and they wave 
 their sword to the Host , and make lightning of the sunbeam , and the 
 man of the Host wave sword to they in turn . for these be the 
 outguard of the Host ; and the place whereon they be be at while 
 dwelt in by those who would drive the spoil in silver - dale , and 
 midmost of the green - sward be a booth build of rough stone and 
 turf , a refuge for a score of man in rough weather . 

 so the man of the vanward gat they down the hill , and make the good 
 of their way toward the grassy plain through that rocky maze which 
 have once be as a lake of molten glass ; and as short as the way 
 look from above , it be two hour or ever they come out of it on to 
 the smooth turf , and it be moonlight and night ere the House of the 
 Face have get on to the green - sward . 

 there then the Host abode for that night , and after they have eat 
 lie down on the green grass and sleep as they might . Bow - may would 
 have bring the Sun - beam into the booth with some other of the 
 woman , but she would not enter it , because she deem that otherwise 
 the Bride would abide without ; and the Bride , when she come up , along 
 with the House of the Steer , beheld the Sun - beam , that Wood - father 's 
 child have make a lair for she without like a hare 's form ; and 
 forsooth many a time have she lain under the naked heaven in Shadowy 
 Vale and the waste about it , even as the Bride have in the meadow of 
 Burgdale . so when the Bride be bid thereto , she go meekly into 
 the booth , and lie there with other of the damsel - at - arm . 



 CHAPTER XLII . the HOST COMETH to the edges of SILVER - DALE 



 so wear the night , and when the dawn be come be the two captain 
 afoot , and they go from band to band to see that all be ready , and 
 all man be astir betime , and by the time that the sun smite the 
 eastern side of Shield - broad ruddy , they have break their fast and 
 be dight for departure . then the horn blow up beside the banner , 
 and rejoice the heart of man . but by the command of the captain 
 this be the last time that they should sound till they blow for 
 onset in silver - dale , because now would they be draw nigh and 
 nigh to the foeman , and they wotte not but that wander band of 
 they might be hard on the lip of the pass , and might hear the horn ' 
 voice , and turn to see what be toward . 

 Forth then go the banner of the Wolf , and the man of the vanward 
 fall to thread the rock - maze toward the north , and in two hour ' 
 time be clear of the Dale under Shield - broad . all go in the same 
 order as yesterday ; but on this day the Sun - beam would bear her 
 hauberk , and have a sword girt to her side , and her heart be high and 
 her speech merry . 

 when they leave the Dale under Shield - broad the way be easy and wide 
 for a good way , the river flow betwixt low bank , and the pass 
 be more like a string of little valley than a mere gap , as it have 
 be on the other side of the Dale . but when one third of the day 
 be past , the way begin to narrow on they again , and to rise up 
 little by little ; and at last the rock - wall draw close to the river , 
 and when man look toward the north they see no way , and nought but 
 a wall . for the gap of the Shivering Flood turn now to the east , 
 and the Flood come down from the east in many fall , as it be over 
 a fearful stair , through a gap where there be no path between the 
 cliff and the water , nought but the boiling flood and its turmoil ; 
 so that they who know not the road wonder what they should do . 

 but folk - might lead the banner to where a great buttress of the 
 cliff thrust itself into the way , come well - nigh down to the 
 water , just at the corner where the river turn eastward , and they 
 get they about it as they might , and on the other side thereof lo ! 
 another gap exceed strait , scarce twenty foot over , wall - side , 
 rugge beyond measure , go up steeply from the great valley : a 
 little water run through it , mostly fill up the floor of it from 
 side to side ; but it be but shallow . this be now the battle - road 
 of the Host , and the vanward enter it at once , turn their back 
 upon the Shivering Flood . 

 full toilsome and dreary be that strait way ; often great stone hung 
 above their head , bridge the gap and hide the sky from they ; nor 
 be there any path for they save the stream itself ; so that while 
 be they wad its water to the knee or high , and while be 
 they stride from stone to stone amidst the rattle of the water , 
 and while be they step warily along the ledge of rock above 
 the deep pool , and in all wise labour in overcome the rugged 
 road amidst the twilight of the gap . 

 thus they toil till the afternoon be well worn , and so at last 
 they come to where the rock - wall be somewhat break down on the 
 north side , and great rock have fall across the gap , and dam up 
 the water , which fall scantily over the dam from stone to stone into 
 a pool at the bottom of it . up this breach , then , below the force 
 they scramble and struggle , for rough indeed be the road for they ; 
 and so come they up out of the gap on to the open hill - side , a great 
 shoulder of the heath slop down from the north , and litter over 
 with big stone , bear thither belike by some ice - river of the 
 early day ; and one great rock be in special as great as the hall 
 of a wealthy goodman , and shapen like to a hall with hipped gable , 
 which same the man of the Wolf call House - stone . 

 there then the noise and clatter of the vanward rise up on the face 
 of the heath , and man be exceed joyous that they have come so far 
 without mishap . Therewith come weapone man out from under House- 
 stone , and they come toward the man of the vanward , and they be a 
 half - score of the forerunner of the Wolf ; therefore folk - might and 
 face - of - god fall at once into speech with they , and have their 
 tiding ; and when they have hear they , they see nought to hinder the 
 host from go on their road to silver - dale forthright ; and there 
 be still three hour of daylight before they . so the vanward of 
 the host tarry not , and the captain leave word with the man from 
 under House - stone that the rest of the Host should fare on after they 
 speedily , and that they should give this word to each company , as man 
 come up from out the gap . then they fare speedily up the hillside , 
 and in an hour 's wearing have come to the crest thereof , and to where 
 the ground fall steadily toward the north , and hereabout the 
 scatter stone cease , and on the other side of the crest the heath 
 begin to be soft and boggy , and at last so soft , that if they have not 
 be wisely lead , they have be bemire oftentime . at last they come 
 to where the flow that trickle through the mire draw together into 
 a stream , so that man could see it run ; and thereon some of the 
 Woodlanders cry out joyously that the water be run north ; 
 and then all know that they be draw nigh to silver - dale . 

 no man they meet on the road , nor do they of Shadowy Vale look to 
 meet any ; because the Dusky Men be not great hunter for the more 
 part , except it be of man , and especially of woman ; and , moreover , 
 these hill - slope of the mountain - neck lead no - whither and be 
 utterly waste and dreary , and there be nought to be see there but 
 snipe and bittern and whimbrel and plover , and here and there a 
 hill - fox , or the great erne hang over the heath on his way to the 
 mountain . 

 when sunset come , they be get clear of the miry ground , and the 
 stream which they have come across amidst of the mire have get clear 
 and great , and rattle down between wide stony side over the 
 heath ; and here and there it deepen as it cleave its way through 
 little knoll that rise out of the face of the mountain - neck . as the 
 Host climb one of these and be come to its topmost   it be low 
 enough not to turn the stream , face - of - god look and beheld dark- 
 blue mountain rise up far off before he , and high than these , 
 but away to the east , the snowy peak of the world - mountain . then 
 he call to mind what he have see from the Burg of the Runaways , and 
 he take folk - might by the arm , and point toward those far - off 
 mountain . 

 ' yea , ' say folk - might , ' so it be , war - leader . silver - dale lieth 
 between we and yonder blue ridge , and it be far nigh to we than to 
 they . ' 

 but the Sun - beam come close to those twain , and take face - of - god by 
 the hand and say : ' o gold - mane , dost thou see ? ' and he turn about 
 and behold she , and see how her cheek flame and her eye glitter , 
 and he say in a low voice : ' to - morrow for mirth or silence , for 
 life or death . ' 

 but the whole vanward as they come up stay to behold the sight of 
 the mountain on the other side of silver - dale , and the banner of 
 the Folk hang over their head , move but little in the soft air of 
 the evening : so go they on their way . 

 the sun sink , and dusk come on they as they follow down the stream , 
 and night come , and be clear and starlit , though the moon be not 
 yet rise . now be the ground firm and the grass sweet and flowery , 
 and wind - wear bush be scatter round about they , as they begin 
 to go down into the ghyll that cleft the wall of silver - dale , and the 
 night - wind blow in their face from the very Dale and place of the 
 Battle to be . the path down be steep at first , but the ghyll be 
 wide , and the side of it no long straight wall , as in the gap of 
 their early journey , but break , slop back , and   as they might 
 see on the morrow   partly of big stone and shaly grit , partly grow 
 over with bush and rough grass , with here and there a little stream 
 trickle down their side . as they go , the ghyll widen out , 
 till at last they be in a valley go down to the plain , in place 
 steep , in place flat and smooth , the stream ever rattle down the 
 midst of it , and they on the west side thereof . the vale be well 
 grassed , and oak - tree and ash and holly and hazel grow here and 
 there about it ; and at last the Host have before it a wood which 
 fill the vale from side to side , not much tangle with undergrowth , 
 and quite clear of it nigh to the stream - side . Thereinto the vanward 
 enter , but go no long way ere the leader call a halt and bade 
 pitch the banner , for that there should they abide the daylight . 
 thus it have be determine at the Council of the Hall of the Wolf ; 
 for Folk - might have say : ' with an host as great as ours , and mostly 
 of man come into a land of which they know nought at all , an 
 onslaught by night be perilous : yea , and our foe should be over- 
 much scatter , and we should have to wander about seek they . let 
 we rather abide in the wood of wood - dale till the morning , and then 
 display our banner on the hill - side above silver - dale , so that they 
 may gather together to fall upon we : in no case shall they keep we 
 out of the Dale . ' 

 there then they stay , and as each company come up to the wood , they 
 be marshal into their due place , so that they might set the 
 battle in array on the edge of silver - dale , 



 CHAPTER XLIII . FACE - of - GOD LOOKETH on SILVER - DALE : the BOWMEN 'S 
 battle 



 there then they rest , as folk weary with the toilsome journey , 
 when they have set sure watch round about their campment ; and they 
 eat quietly what meat they have with they , and so gat they to sleep in 
 the wood on the eve of battle . 

 but not all sleep ; for the two captain go about amongst the 
 company , Folk - might to the east , face - of - god to the west , to look 
 to the watch , and to see that all be order duly . also the Sun- 
 beam sleep not , but she lie beside Bow - may at the foot of an oak- 
 tree ; she watch face - of - god as he go away amidst the man of the 
 Host , and watch and wake abide his return footstep . 

 the night be well wear by then he come back to his place in the 
 vanward , and on his way back he pass through the folk of the Steer 
 lay along on the grass , all save those of the watch , and the light 
 of the moon high aloft be mingle with the light of the early 
 dawn ; and as it happe he look down , and lo ! close to his foot the 
 face of the Bride as she lie beside her grand - sire , her head pillow 
 on a bundle of bracken . she be sleep soundly like a child who 
 have be play all day , and whose sleep have come to he unsought 
 and happily . her hand be lay together by her side ; her cheek be 
 as fair and clear as it be will not to be at she good ; her face look 
 calm and happy , and a lock of her dark - red hair stray from she 
 uncovered head over her breast and lie across her wrist , so 
 peacefully she sleep . 

 face - of - god turn his eye from she at once , and go by swiftly , 
 and come to his own company . the Sun - beam see he come , and rise 
 straightway to her foot from beside Bow - may , who lie fast asleep , and 
 she hold out her hand to he ; and he take they and kiss they , and 
 he cast his arm about she and kiss her mouth and her face , and she 
 his in likewise ; and she say : 

 ' o gold - mane , if this be but the morrow of to - morrow ! yet shall 
 all be well ; shall it not ? ' 

 her voice be low , but it wake Bow - may , who sit up at once broad 
 awake , after the manner of a hunter of the waste ever ready for the 
 next thing to betide , and moreover the Sun - beam have be in her 
 thought these two day , and she fear for she , lest she should be 
 slay or maim . now she smile on the Sun - beam and say : 

 ' what be it ? do thy mind forebode evil ? that needeth not . I tell 
 thee it be not so ill for we of the sword to be in silver - dale . 
 Thrice have I be there since the Overthrow , and never more than a 
 half - score in company , and yet be I whole to - day . ' 

 ' yea , sister , ' say face - of - god , ' but in past time ye do your deed 
 and then flee away ; but now we come to abide here , and this night be 
 the last of lurk . ' 

 ' ah , ' she say , ' a little way from this I see such thing that we have 
 good will to abide here long , few as we be , but that we fear to 
 be take alive . ' 

 ' what thing be these ? ' say face - of - god . 

 ' Nay , ' she say , ' I will not tell thee now ; but mayhap in the light 
 winter feast - hall , when the kindre be so nigh we and about we that 
 they seem to we as if they be all the world , I may tell it thee ; or 
 mayhap I never shall . ' 

 say the Sun - beam , smile : ' thou wilt ever be talk , Bow - may . 
 now let the war - leader depart , for he will have much to do . ' 

 and she be well at ease that she have see face - of - god again ; but he 
 say : 

 ' Nay , not so much ; all be well - nigh do ; in an hour it will be broad 
 day , and two hour thereafter shall the Banner be display on the 
 edge of silver - dale . ' 

 the cheek of the Sun - beam flush , and pal again , as she say : 
 ' yea , we shall stand even as our Fathers stand on the day when , 
 come from off the waste , they behold it , and know it would be 
 theirs . ah I ! how have I long for this morn . but now - tell I , 
 gold - mane , dost thou deem that I be afraid ? and I whom thou hast 
 deem to be a God . ' 

 Quoth Bow - may : ' Thou shalt deem she twice a God ere noon - tide , 
 brother Gold - mane . but come now ! the hour of deadly battle be at 
 hand , and we may not laugh that away ; and therefore I bid thee 
 remember , gold - mane , how thou didst promise to kiss I once more on 
 the verge of deadly battle . ' 

 Therewith she stand up before he , and he tarry not , but kind and 
 smiling take her face between his two hand and kiss her lip , and 
 she cast her arm about he and kiss he , and then sink down on the 
 grass again , and turn from he , and lay her face amongst the grass 
 and the bracken , and they could see that she be weep , and her 
 body be shake with sob . but the Sun - beam knelt down to she , and 
 caress she with her hand , and spake kind word to she softly , while 
 face - of - god go his way to meet folk - might . 

 now be the dawn fade into full daylight ; and between dawn and 
 sunrise be all man stir ; for the watch have wake the hundred- 
 leader , and they the leader of score and half - score , and they the 
 whole folk ; and they sit quietly in the wood and make no noise . 

 in the night the watch of the Sickle have fall in with a thrall who 
 have steal up from the Dale to set gin for hare , and now in the 
 early morning they bring he to the war - leader . he be even such a 
 man as those with whom face - of - god have fall in before , neither 
 well nor bad than most of they : he be sore afraid at first , but 
 by then he be come to the captain he understand that he have 
 happen upon friend ; but he be dull of comprehension and slow of 
 speech . albeit Folk - might gather from he that the Dusky Men have 
 some inkling of the onslaught ; for he say that they have be 
 gather together in the marketplace of silver - stead , and would do 
 so again soon . moreover , the captain deem from his speech that 
 those new tribe have come to hand soon than be look for , and 
 be even now in the Dale . folk - might smile as one who be not good 
 pleased when he hear these tiding ; but face - of - god be glad to hear 
 thereof ; for what he loathe most be that the war should drag out in 
 hunting of scatter band of the foe . Herewith come Dallach to they 
 as they talk   for face - of - god have send for he , and he fall to 
 question the man far ; by whose answer it seem that many man 
 also have come into the Dale from Rose - dale , so that they of the 
 kindred be like to have their hand full . lastly Dallach draw 
 from the thrall that it be on that very morning that the great folk- 
 mote of the Dusky Men should be holden in the market - place of the 
 Stead , which be right great , and about it be the big of the 
 house wherein the man of the kindred have once dwelt . 

 so when they have make an end of question the thrall , and have give 
 he meat and drink , they ask he if he would take weapon in his 
 hand and lead they on the way into the Dale , bid he look about 
 the wood and note how great and mighty an host they be . and the 
 carle yeasaid this , after star about he a while , and they give 
 him spear and shield , and he go with the vanward as a way - leader . 

 again presently come a watch of the Shepherds , and they have find a 
 man and a woman dead and stark naked hang to the bough of a great 
 oak - tree deep in the wood . this man know for some vengeance of the 
 Dusky Men , for it be clear to see that these poor people have be 
 sorely torment before they be slay . also the same watch have 
 stumble on the dead body of an old woman , clothe in rag , lie 
 amongst the rank grass about a little flow ; she be exceed lean 
 and hunger - starve , and in her hand be a frog which she have half 
 eat . and Dallach , when he hear of this , say that it be the will not 
 of the Dusky Men to slay their thrall when they be past work , or 
 to drive they into the wilderness to die . 

 lastly come a watch from the man of the face , have with they two 
 more thrall , lusty young man ; these they have come upon in company of 
 their master , who have bring they up into the wood to shoot he a 
 buck , and therefore they bare bow and arrow . the watch have slay 
 the master straightway while the thrall stand look on . they be 
 much afraid of the weapone man , but answer to the questioning much 
 ready than the first man ; for they be household thrall , and 
 well feed and clothe than he , who be but a toiler in the field . 
 they yeasaid all his tale , and say moreover that the Folk - mote of 
 the Dusky Men should be holden in the market - place that forenoon , and 
 that most of the warrior should be there , both the new - comer and 
 the rose - dale lord , and that without doubt they should be under 
 arm . 

 to these man also they give a good sword and a helm each , and bade 
 they be brisk with their bow , and they say yea to march with the 
 Host ; and indeed they fear nothing so much as be leave behind ; 
 for if they fall into the hand of the Dusky Men , and their master 
 miss , they should first be question with torment , and then 
 slay in the evill manner . 

 now whereas thing have thus betid , and that they know thus much of 
 their foeman , face - of - god call all the chieftain together , and 
 they sit on the green grass and hold counsel amongst they , and to one 
 and all it seem good that they should suffer the Dusky Men to 
 gather together before they meddle with they , and then fall upon 
 they in such order and such time as should seem good to the captain 
 watch how thing go ; and this would be easy , whereas they be 
 all lie in the wood in the same order as they would stand in 
 battle - array if they be all draw up together on the brow of the 
 hill . albeit face - of - god deem it good , after he have hear all that 
 they who have be in the Stead could tell he thereof , that the 
 Shepherd - Folk , who be more than three long hundred , and they of 
 the Steer , the Bridge , and the Bull , four hundred in all , should 
 take their place eastward of the Woodlanders who have lead the 
 vanward . 

 Straightway the word be bear to these man , and the shift be make : 
 so that presently the Woodlanders be amidmost of the Host , and have 
 with they on their right hand the Men of the Steer , the Bridge , and 
 the Bull , and beyond they the Shepherd - Folk . but on their left hand 
 lie the Men of the Vine , then they of the Sickle , and lastly the man 
 of the face , and these three kindred be over five hundred of 
 warrior : as for the Men of the Wolf , they abode at first with those 
 company which they have lead through the waste , though this be 
 change afterwards . 

 all this be do , face - of - god give out that all man should break 
 their fast in peace and leisure ; and while man be at their meat , 
 folk - might spake to face - of - god and say : ' come , brother , for I 
 would show thee a goodly thing ; and thou , Dallach , come with we . ' 

 then he bring they by path in the wood till face - of - god see the 
 sky shine white between the tree - bole , and in a little while they 
 be come well - nigh out of the thicket , and then they go warily ; 
 for before they be nought but the slope of Wood - dale , go down 
 steeply into silver - dale , with nought to hinder the sight of it , save 
 here and there bush or scatter tree ; and so fair and lovely it 
 be that face - of - god could scarce forbear to cry out . he see that it 
 be only at the upper or eastern end , where the mountain of the 
 Waste go round about it , that the Dale be narrow ; it soon widen 
 out toward the west , and for the most part be encompass by no such 
 straight - side a wall as be Burgdale , but by slop hill and 
 bent , mostly indeed somewhat high and steep than the pass 
 wherein they be , but such as man could well climb if they have a 
 mind to , and there be any end to their journey . the Dale go due 
 west a good way , and then wind about to the southwest , and so be 
 hide from they thereaway by the bent that lie on their left hand . 
 as it be wide , so it be not so plain a ground as be burgdale , but 
 rise in knoll and little hill here and there . a river great than 
 the Weltering Water wind about amongst the say mound ; and along 
 the side of it out in the open dale be many goodly house and 
 homestead of stone . the knoll be mostly cover over with vine , 
 and there be goodly and great tree in grove and clump , chiefly 
 oak and sweet chestnut and linden ; many be the orchard , now in 
 blossom , about the homestead ; the pasture of the neat and horse 
 spread out bright green up from the water - side , and deep green 
 show the acre of the wheat on the low slope of the knoll , and 
 in wide field away from the river . 

 just below the pitch of the hill whereon they be , lie silver - stead , 
 the town of the Dale . Hitherto it have be an unfenced place ; but 
 Folk - might point to where on the western side a new white wall be 
 rise , and on which , young as the day yet be , man be busy lay 
 the stone and spread the mortar . Fair seem that town to face- 
 of - god : the house be all build of stone , and some of the 
 big be roof with lead , which also as well as silver be dig 
 out of the mountain at the eastern end of the Dale . the market- 
 place be clear to see from where they stand , though there be 
 house on all side of it , so wide it be . from their standing - place 
 it be but three furlong to this heart of silver - dale ; and face - of- 
 god could see brightly - clothe man move about in it already . high 
 above their head he behold two great clot of scarlet and yellow 
 raise on pole and pitch in front of a great stone - build hall 
 roof with lead , which stand amidmost of the west end of the Place , 
 and betwixt those pole he see on a mound with long slope at its 
 side somewhat of white stone , and amidmost of the whole Place a 
 great stack of faggot - wood build up four - square . those red and 
 yellow thing on the pole he deem would be the banner of the 
 murder - carle ; and folk - might tell he that even so it be , and that 
 they be but big bunch of strip of woollen cloth , much like to 
 great ragmop , save that the rag be large and long : no other 
 token of war , say Folk - might , do those folk carry , save a 
 crookblade sword , smear with man 's blood , and big than any man 
 might wield in battle . 

 ' art thou far - see , war - leader ? ' quoth he . ' what canst thou see in 
 the market - place ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' far - seeing be I above most man , and I see in the 
 Place a man in scarlet standing by the banner , which be pitch in 
 front of the great stone hall , near to the mound with the white stone 
 on it ; and meseemeth he beareth a great horn in his hand . ' 

 say folk - might : ' yea , and that stone hall be our Mote - house when 
 we be lord of the Dale , and thence it be that they who be now 
 thrall of the Dusky Men send to they their message and token of 
 yield . and as for that white stone , it be the altar of their god ; 
 for they have but one , and he be that same crook - blade sword . and 
 now that I look , I see a great stack of wood amidmost the market- 
 place , and well I know what that betokeneth . ' 

 ' lo you ! ' say face - of - god , ' the man with the horn be go up on to 
 the altar - mound , and meseemeth he be set the little end of the 
 horn to his mouth . ' 

 ' Hearken then ! ' say folk - might . and in a moment come the hoarse 
 tuneless sound of the horn down the wind towards they ; and folk - might 
 say : 

 ' I deem I should know what that blast meaneth ; and now be it time 
 that the Host draw nigh to set they in array behind these very 
 tree . but if ye will , war - leader , we will abide here and watch the 
 way of the foeman , and send Dallach with the word to the Host ; also 
 I would have thee suffer I to bid hither at once two score and ten 
 of the good of the bowman of our folk and the Woodlanders , and Wood- 
 wise to lead they , for he knoweth well the land hereabout , and what 
 be good to do . ' 

 ' it be good , ' say face - of - god . ' be speedy , Dallach ! ' 

 so Dallach depart , run lightly , and the two chief abode there ; 
 and the horn in silver - stead blew at while for a little , and then 
 stay ; and folk - might say : 

 ' lo you ! they come flockmeal to the mote - stead ; the Place will be 
 fill ere long . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' will they make offering to their god at the 
 hallowing in of their folk - mote ? where then be the slaughter- 
 beast ? ' 

 ' they shall not long be lack , ' say Folk - might . ' see you it be 
 get throng about the altar and the Mote - house . ' 

 now there be four way into the market - place of silver - stead turn 
 toward the four airt , and the midmost of the kindred ' battle look 
 right down the southern one , which go up to the wood , but stop 
 there in a mere woodland path , and the more part of the town lay 
 north and west of this way , albeit there be a way from the east 
 also . but the hill - side just below the two captain lie two furlong 
 west of this southern way ; and it go down softly till it be get 
 quite near to the back of the house on the south side of the 
 market - place , and be sprinkle scantly with bush and tree as 
 aforesaid ; but at last be there more bush , which well - nigh make a 
 hedge across it , reach from the side of the southern way ; and a 
 foot or two beyond these bush the ground fall by a steep and broken 
 bent down to the level of the market - place , and betwixt that fringe 
 of bush and the back of the house on the south side of the Place 
 be less it maybe than a full furlong : but the southern road 
 aforesaid go down softly into the market - place , since it have be 
 fashion so by man . 

 now the two chief hear a loud blast of horn come up from the town , 
 and lo ! a great crowd of man wend their way down the road from 
 the north , and they come into the market - place with spear and other 
 weapon tossing in the air , and amidst of these man , who seem to be 
 all of the warrior , they see as they draw nigh some two score and 
 ten of man clothe in long raiment of yellow and scarlet , with tall 
 spiring hat of strange fashion on their head , and in their hand 
 long stave with great blade like scythe do on to they ; and 
 again , in the midst of these yellow and red glaive - bearer , in the 
 very heart of the throng be some score of naked folk , they deem 
 both man and woman , but be not sure , so close be the throng ; nor 
 could they see if they be utterly naked . 

 ' lo you , brother ! ' quoth Folk - might , ' say I not that the beast for 
 the hewing should not tarry ? yonder naked folk be even they : and 
 ye may well deem that they be the thrall of the Dusky Men ; and 
 meseemeth by the whiteness of their skin they be of the good of 
 they . for these felon , it be like , look to win great plenty of 
 thrall in Burgdale , and so set the less store on they they have , and 
 may expend they freely . ' 

 as he spake they hear the sound of man march in the wood behind 
 they , and they turn about and see that there be come wood - wise , 
 and with he upwards of two score and ten of the bowman of the 
 Woodlanders and the Wolf - huntsman , cragsman , and scourer of the 
 Waste ; man who could shoot the chaffinch on the twig a hundred yard 
 aloof ; who could make a hiding - place of the bennet of the wayside 
 grass , or the stem of the slender birch - tree . with these must need 
 be Bow - may , who be the close shooter of all the kindred . 

 so then wood - wise tell the war - leader that Dallach have give the word 
 to the Host , and that all man be astir and would be there presently 
 in their ordered company ; and face - of - god spake to Folk - might , and 
 say : ' Chief of the Wolf , wilt thou not give command to these 
 bowman , and set they to the work ; for thou wott thereof . ' 

 ' Yea , that will I , ' say folk - might , and turn to wood - wise , and 
 say : ' wood - wise , get ye down the slope , and loose on these felon , 
 who have a murder on hand , if so be ye have a chance to do it wisely . 
 but in any case come ye all back ; for all shall be need yet to - day . 
 so flee if they pursue , for ye shall have we to flee to . now be ye 
 wary , nor let the curse of the Wolf and the Face lie on your 
 slothfulness . ' 

 wood - wise do but nod his head and lift his hand to his fellow , who 
 set off after he down the slope without more tarrying . they go 
 very warily , as if they be hunt a quarry which would flee from 
 they ; and they creep amongst the grass and stone from bush to bush 
 like serpent , and so , unseen by the Dusky Men , who indeed be 
 busy over their own matter , they come to the fringe of bush 
 above the broken ground aforesaid , and there they take their stand , 
 and before they below those steep bank be but the space at the back 
 of the house . as to the house , as aforesaid , they be not so high 
 as elsewhere about the market - place ; and at the end of a long low 
 hall there be a gap between its gable and the next house , whereby 
 they have a clear sight of the Place about the god 's altar and the 
 banner , and the great hall of silver - dale , with the double stair 
 that go up to the door thereof . 

 there then they make they ready , and wood - wise set man to watch that 
 none should come sidelong on they unawares ; their bow be bent and 
 their quiver open , and they be eager for the fray . 

 thus they behold the market - place from their cover , and see that 
 those folk who be to be hew to the god be now stand face 
 the altar in a half - ring , and behind they in another half - ring the 
 glaive - bearer who have bring they thither stand glaive in hand 
 ready to hew they down when the token should be give ; and these be 
 indeed the priest of the god . 

 there be clear space round about these poor slaughter - thrall , so 
 that the bowman could see they well , and they tell up a score of 
 they , half man , half woman , and they be all stark naked save for 
 wreath of flower about their middle and their neck ; and they have 
 shackle of lead about their wrist ; which same lead should be take 
 out of the fire wherein they should be burn , and from the shape it 
 should take after it have pass through the fire would the priest 
 foretell the luck of the deed to be do . 

 it be clear to be see from thence that folk - might be right when he 
 say that these slaughter - thrall be of the good of the house- 
 thrall and bed - mate of the Dusky Men , and that these felon be 
 open - handed to their god , and would not cheat he , or withhold from 
 he the good and most delicate of all they have . 

 now spake Wood - wise to those about he : ' it be sure that folk - might 
 would have we give these poor thrall a chance , and that we must 
 loose upon the felon who would hew they down ; and if we be to come 
 back again , we can go no nigh . what sayest thou , Bow - may ? be it 
 nigh enough ? can aught be do ? ' 

 ' yea , yea , ' she say , ' nigh enough it be ; but let gold - ring be with 
 I and half a score of the very good , whether they be of our folk or 
 the Woodlanders , man who can not miss such a mark ; and when we have 
 loose , then let all loose , and stay not till our shot be spend . 
 Haste , now haste ! time presseth ; for if the Host showeth on the brow 
 of the hill , these felon will hew down their slaughter - beast before 
 they turn on their foeman . let the grey - goose wing speed trouble and 
 confusion amongst they . ' 

 but ere she have do her word wood - wise have get to speak quietly 
 with the Woodlanders ; and Bears - bane , who be amidst they , choose out 
 eight of the good of his folk , man who doubt nothing of hit 
 whatever they could see in the market - place ; and they take their 
 stand for shooting , and with they besides Bow - may be two woman and 
 four man of the Wolf , and gold - ring withal , a carle of fifty winter , 
 long , lean , and wiry , a fell shooter if ever anyone be . 

 so all these notch their shaft and lay they on the yew , and each 
 have between the two last finger of the shaft - hand another shaft 
 ready , and a half score more stuck into the ground before he . 

 now giveth wood - wise the word to these sixteen as to which of the 
 felon with the glaive they shall each one aim at ; and he saith 
 withal in a soft voice : ' help cometh from the Hill ; soon shall 
 battle be join in silver - dale . ' 

 thus stand they watch Bow - may and gold - ring till they draw home 
 the notch ; and amidst their wait the glaive - bear felon fall 
 a - sing a harsh and ugly hymn to their crooked - sword god , and the 
 market - stead be throng endlong and overthwart with the tribe of 
 the Dusky Men . 

 there now standeth Bow - may far - sighted and keen - eye , her face as 
 pale as a linen sleeve , an awful smile on her glitter eye and 
 close - set lip , and she feel the twisted string of the red yew and 
 the polished side of the notch , while the yelling song of the Dusky 
 priest quaver now and end with a wild shrill cry , and she noteth 
 the midmost of the priest begin to handle his weapon : then 
 swift and steady she draweth home the notch , while the yew bow 
 standeth still as the oak - bole ere the summer storm ariseth , and the 
 twang of the sixteen string maketh but one fall sound as the 
 feather bane of man goeth on its way . 

 there be silence for a moment of time in the Market of silver - stead , 
 as if the bolt of the Gods have fall there ; and then arise a huge 
 wordless yell from those about the altar , and one of the priest who 
 be leave hove up his glaive two - handed to smite the naked slaughter- 
 thrall ; but or ever the stroke fall , Bow - may 's second shaft be 
 through his throat , and he roll over amidst his dead fellow ; and 
 the other fifteen have loose with she , and then even as they could 
 wood - wise and the other of their company ; and all they notch and 
 loose without tarrying , and no shout , no word come from their lip , 
 only the twang string spake for they ; for they deem the minute 
 that hurry by be worth much joy of their life to be . and few 
 indeed be the pass minute ere the dead man lie in heap about 
 the Altar of the Crooked Sword , and the wounded man wallow amidst 
 they . 



 CHAPTER XLIV . of the onslaught of the MEN of the STEER , the BRIDGE , 
 and the bull 



 Wild be the turmoil and confusion in the market - stead ; for the more 
 part of the man therein know not what have befall about the altar , 
 though some clomb up to the top of that stack of faggot build for 
 the burning of the thrall , and when they see what be toward fall to 
 yelling and curse ; and their fellow on the plain Place could not 
 hear their story for the clamour , and they also fall to howl as if 
 a wood full of wild dog be there . 

 and still the shaft rain down on that throng from the Bent of the 
 Bowmen , for another two score man of the Woodlanders have creep down 
 the hill to they , and shafts fail they not . but the Dusky Men 
 about the altar , for all their terror , or even maybe because of it , 
 now begin to turn upon the scarce - see foeman , and to press up wildly 
 toward the hill - side , though as it be without any order or aim . 
 every man of they have his weapon , and those no mere gilded toy , but 
 their very tool of battle ; and some , but no great number , have their 
 bow with they and a few shaft ; and these begin to shoot at 
 whatsoever they could see on the hill - side , but at first so wildly 
 and hurriedly that they do no harm . 

 it must be say of they that at first only those about the altar fall 
 on toward the hill ; for those about the road that lead southward know 
 not what have betide nor whither to turn . so that at this beginning 
 of the battle , of all the thousand in the great Place it be but a 
 few hundred that set on the Bent of the Bowmen , and at these the 
 bowman of the kindred shoot so close and so wholly together that they 
 fall one over another in the narrow way between the house whereby 
 they must need go to gather on the plain ground betwixt the back of 
 the house and the break of the hill - side . but little by little the 
 archer of the Dusky Men gather behind the corps of the slain , 
 and fall to shoot at what they could see of the man of the 
 kindred , which at that while be not much , for as bold as they be , 
 they fight like wary hunter of the Wood and the Waste . 

 but now at last throughout all that throng of Felons in the market- 
 place the tale begin to spread of foeman come into the Dale and 
 shoot from the Bents , and all they turn their face to the hill , 
 and the whole set of the throng be thitherward ; though they fare 
 but slowly , so evil be the order of they , each man hinder his 
 neighbour as he go . and not only do the Dusky Men come flockmeal 
 toward the Bent of the Bowmen , but also they jostle along toward the 
 road that lead southward . that beheld wood - wise from the Bent , and he 
 be minded to get he and his aback , now that they have make so great 
 a slaughter of the foeman ; and two or three of his fellow have be 
 hurt by arrow , and Bow - may , she would have be slay thrice over 
 but for the hammer - work of the Alderman . and no marvel be that ; for 
 now she stand on a little mound not half cover by a thin thorn- 
 bush , and notch and loose at whatever be most notable , as though 
 she be shoot at the mark on a summer evening in Shadowy Vale . 
 but as wood - wise be at point to give the word to depart , from behind 
 they ring out the merry sound of the Burgdale horn , and he turn to 
 look at the wood - side , and lo ! thereunder be the hill bright and 
 dark with man - at - arm , and over they float the Banners of the Wolf , 
 and the Banners of the Steer , the Bridge , and the Bull . then give 
 forth the bowman of the kindred their first shout , and they make no 
 stay in their shooting ; but shoot the eagerer , for they deem that 
 help would come without their turn about to draw it to they : and 
 even so it be . for straightway down the bent come stride face - of- 
 god betwixt the two Banners of the Wolf , and beside he be Red - wolf 
 the tall and war - grove , and therewithal wood - wont and wood - wicked , 
 and many other man of the Wolf ; for now that the man of the kindred 
 have be bring face to face with the foe , and there be less need 
 of they for way - leader , the more part of they be liefer to fight 
 under their own banner along with the Woodlanders ; so that the 
 company of those who go under the wolf be more than three long 
 hundred and a half ; and the bowman on the edge of the bent shout 
 again and merrily , when they feel that their brother be amongst 
 they , and presently be the arrow - storm at its fiercest , and the 
 twanging of bow - string and the whistle of the shaft be as the wind 
 among the cleft of the mountain ; for all the new - comer be bowman 
 of the good . 

 but the kindred of the Steer , the Bridge , and the Bull , they hang 
 yet a while long on the hill ' brow , their banner float over 
 they and their horn blow ; and the Dusky Felons in the market- 
 place beheld they , and fear and rage at once fill their heart , and 
 a fierce and dreadful yell brake out from they , and joyously do the 
 Men of Burgdale answer they , and song arise amongst they even such as 
 this : 


 the Men of the Bridge sing : 

 why stand ye together , why bear ye the shield , 
 now the calf straineth tether at edge of the field ? 

 now the lamb bleateth strong and water run clear , 
 and the day groweth long and glad be the year ? 

 now the mead - flower jostle so thick as they stand , 
 and singeth the throstle all over the land ? 

 the Men of the Steer sing : 

 no cloud the day darken , no thunder we hear , 
 but the horn ' speech we hearken as man unafeare . 

 Yea , so merry it sound , we turn from the Dale , 
 where all wealth abound , to wot of its tale . 

 the Men of the Bridge sing : 

 what white bole then bear ye , what wealth of the wood ? 
 what chafferer hear ye bid loud for your good ? 

 the Men of the Bull sing : 

 o the bright beam we carry be stem of the steel ; 
 nor long shall we tarry across they to deal . 

 Hark the man of the cheaping , how loudly they cry 
 on the hook for the reaping of man doom to die ! 

 they all sing : 

 Heave spear up ! fare forward , o man of the Dale ! 
 for the Warrior , our war - ward , shall hearken the tale . 


 Therewith they cease a moment , and then give a great and hearty 
 shout all together , and all their horn blow , and they move on down 
 the hill as one man , slowly and with no jostling , the spear - man 
 first , and then they of the axe and the sword ; and on their flank 
 the deft archer loose on the stumbling jostle throng of the Dusky 
 Men , who for their part come on drift and surge up the road to 
 the hill . 

 but when those big spearman of the Dale have go a little way the 
 horn ' voice die out , and their great - stave spear rise up from 
 their shoulder into the air , and stand so a moment , and then slowly 
 fall forward , as the oar of the longship fall into the row - lock , 
 and then over the shoulder of the foremost man show the steel of 
 the five rank behind they , and their own spear cast long bar of 
 shadow on the whiteness of the sunny road . no sound come from they 
 now save the rattle of their armour and the tramp of their steady 
 foot ; but from the Dusky Men rise up hideous confused yelling , and 
 those that could free themselves from the tangle of the throng rush 
 desperately against the on - roll hedge of steel , and the whole 
 throng shove on behind they . then meet steel and man ; here and there 
 an ash - stave break ; here and there a Dusky Felon roll himself 
 unhurt under the ash - stave , and hew the knee of the Dalesmen , and 
 a tall man come totter down ; but what man or wood - wight could 
 endure the push of spear of those mighty husbandman ? the Dusky Ones 
 shrink back yelling , or turn their back and rush at their own 
 folk with such fierce agony that they enter into the throng , till 
 the terror of the spear reach to the midmost of it and sway they 
 back on the hindermost ; for neither be there outgate for the felon 
 on the flank of the spearman , since there the feather death beset 
 they , and the bowman   and the Bride amongst the foremost   shoot wholly 
 together , and no shaft fly idly . but the wise leader of the 
 Dalesmen would not that they should thrust in too far amongst the 
 howl throng of the Dusky Men , lest they should be hem in by 
 they ; for they be but a handful in regard to they : so there they 
 stay , bar the way to the Dusky Men , and the bowman still loose 
 from the flank of they , or aim deftly from betwixt the rank of 
 the spearman . 

 and now be there a space of ten stride or more betwixt the dalesman 
 and their foe , over which the spear hang terribly , nor durst the 
 Dusky Men adventure there ; and thereon be nought but man dead or 
 sorely hurt . then suddenly a horn rang thrice shrilly over all the 
 noise and clamour of the throng , and the rank of the spearman 
 open , and forth into that space stride two score of the swordsman 
 and axe - wielder of the Dale , their weapon raise in their hand , 
 and he who lead they be iron - hand of the House of the Bull : tall he 
 be , wide - shoulder , exceed strong , but beardless and fair - faced . 
 he bear aloft a two - edge sword , broad - bladed , exceed heavy , so 
 that few man could wield it in battle , but not right long ; it be an 
 ancient weapon , and his father before he have call it the Barley- 
 scythe . with he be some of the good of the kindred , as Wolf of 
 Whitegarth , long - hand of Oakholt , Hart of Highcliff , and War - well the 
 captain of the Bridge . these make no tarrying on that space of the 
 dead , but cry aloud their cry : ' for the Burg and the Steer ! for 
 the Dale and the Bridge ! for the Dale and the Bull ! ' and so fall at 
 once on the Felons ; who flee not , nor have room to flee ; and also they 
 fear not the edge - weapon so sorely as they fear those huge 
 spear . so they turn fiercely on the swordsman , and chiefly on 
 Iron - hand , as he enter in amongst they the first of all , hew to 
 the right hand and the left , and many a man fall before the Barley- 
 scythe ; for they be but little before he . yet as one fall another 
 take his place , and hew at he with the steel axe and the crooked 
 sword ; and with many stroke they clave his shield and brake his helm 
 and rent his byrny , while he heed little save smite with the 
 Barley - scythe , and the blood run from his arm and his shoulder and 
 his thigh . 

 but War - well have enter in among the foe on his left hand , and 
 unshielded hove up a great broad - bladed axe , that clave the iron 
 helm of the Dusky Men , and rent their horn - scale byrnie . he be 
 not very tall , but his shoulder be huge and his arm long , and 
 nought could abide his stroke . he clear a ring round Iron - hand , 
 whose eye be grow dim as the blood flow from he , and hew 
 three stroke before he ; then turn and draw the champion out of 
 the throng , and give he into the arm of his fellow to stanch the 
 blood that drain away the might of his limb ; and then with a great 
 wordless roar leap back again on the Dusky Men as the lion leapeth 
 on the herd of swine ; and they shrink away before he ; and all the 
 swordsman shout , ' for the Bridge , for the Bridge ! ' and press on 
 the hard , smite down all before they . on his left hand now be 
 Hart of Highcliff wield a good sword hight chip - driver , wherewith 
 he have slay and hurt a many , fight wisely with sword and shield , 
 and drive the point home through the joint of the armour . but 
 even therewith , as he drave a great stroke at a lord of the Dusky 
 Ones , a cast - spear come fly and smite he on the breast , so that 
 he stagger , and the stroke fall flatling on the shield - boss of his 
 foe , and chip - driver brake atwain nigh the hilt ; but Hart close 
 with he , and smite he on the face with the pommel , and tear his axe 
 from his hand and clave his skull therewith , and slay he with his 
 own weapon , and fight on valiantly beside War - well . 

 now War - well have fight so fiercely that he have rent his own hauberk 
 with the might of his stroke , and as he raise his arm to smite a 
 huge stroke , a deft man of the Felons thrust the spike of his war - axe 
 up under his arm ; and when War - well feel the smart of the steel , he 
 turn on that man , and , let his axe fall down to his wrist and 
 hang there by its loop , he catch the foeman up by the neck and the 
 breech , and drave he against the other Dusky Ones before he , so 
 that their weapon pierce and rent their own friend and fellow . 
 then he put forth the might of his arm and the pith of his body , and 
 hove up that felon and cast he on to the head of his fellow murder- 
 carle , so that he rent they and be rent by they . then war - well 
 fall on again with the axe , and all the champion of the Dale shout 
 and fall on with he , and the foe shrink away ; and the dalesman 
 clear a space five fathom ' length before they , and the spearman 
 draw onward and stand on the space whereon the first onslaught have 
 be . 

 then draw those hewer of the Dale together , and forth from the 
 company come the man that bare the Banner of the Bridget and the 
 champion gather round he , and they order their rank and strode 
 with the Banner before they three time to and fro across the road 
 athwart the front of the spearman , and then with a great shout draw 
 back within the spear - hedge . albeit five of the champion of the 
 Dale have be slay outright there , and the more part of they hurt 
 more or less . 

 but when all be well within the rank , once again blow the horn , 
 and all the spear sink to the rest , and the kindred drave the 
 spear - furrow , and a space be sweep clear before they , and the cry 
 and yell of the Dusky Men be so fierce and wild that the rough 
 voice of the Dalesmen be drown amidst they . 

 forth then come every bowman of the kindre that be there and loose 
 on the Dusky Men ; and they forsooth have some bowman amongst they , but 
 coope up and jostle as they be they shoot but wildly ; whereas each 
 shaft of the Dale go home truly . 

 but amongst the bowman forth come the Bride in her glitter war- 
 gear , and step lightly to the front of the spearman . her own yew 
 bow have be smite by a shaft and break in her hand : so she have 
 catch up a short horn bow and a quiver from one of the slain of the 
 Dusky Men ; and now she kneel on one knee under the shadow of the 
 spear nigh to her grandsire Hall - ward , and with a pale face and 
 knit brow notch and loose , and notch and loose on the throng 
 of foeman , as if she be some daintily fashioned engine of war . 

 so fare the battle on the road that go from the south into the 
 market - stead . valiantly have the kindre fight there , and no man of 
 they have blench , and much have they win ; but the way be perilous 
 before they , for the foe be many and many . 



 CHAPTER XLV . of FACE - of - GOD 's ONSLAUGHT 



 now the banner of the Wolf flap and ripple over the head of the 
 Woodlanders and the Men of the Wolf ; and the man shoot all they might , 
 nor take heed now to cover themselves against the shaft of the Dusky 
 man . as for these , for all they be so many , their arrow - shot be 
 no great matter , for they be in very evil order , as have be say ; 
 and moreover , their rage be so great to come to handy stroke with 
 these foeman , that some of they fling away their bow to brandish the 
 axe or the sword . nevertheless be some among the kindre hurt or 
 slay by their arrow . 

 now stand face - of - god with the foremost ; and from where he stand he 
 could see somewhat of the battle of the Dalesmen , and he wotte that 
 it be thrive ; therefore he look before he and close around he , 
 and note what be toward there . the space betwixt the house and 
 the break of the bent be crowd with the fury of the Dusky Men 
 toss their weapon aloft , cry to each other and at the kindred , 
 and here and there loose a bow - string on they ; but whatever be 
 their rage they might not come a many together past a line within ten 
 fathom of the bent 's end ; for three hundred of the good of bowman 
 be shoot at they so ceaselessly that no Dusky man be safe of 
 any bare place of his body , and they fall over one another in that 
 penfold of slaughter , and for all their madness do but little . 

 yet be the heart of the war - leader trouble ; for he wotte that it 
 might not last for ever , and there seem no end to the throng of 
 murder - carle ; and the time would come when the arrowshot would be 
 spend , and they must need come to handy stroke , and that with so 
 many . 

 now a voice spake to he as he gaze with knit brow and careful 
 heart on that turmoil of battle : 

 ' what now hast thou do with the Sun - beam , and where be her brother ? 
 be the Chief of the Wolf skulking when our work be so heavy ? and 
 thou meseemeth art overlate on the field : the mowing of this meadow 
 be no sluggard 's work . ' 

 he turn and beheld Bow - may , and gaze on her face for a moment , and 
 see her eye how they glitter , and how the pommel of her cheek 
 be burn red and her lip dry and grey ; but before he answer he 
 look all round about to see what be to note ; and he touch bow- 
 may on the shoulder and point to down below where a man of the 
 Felons have just come out of the court of one of the house : a man 
 tall than most , very gaily array , with gild scale all over 
 he , so that , with his dark face and blue eye , he look like some 
 strange dragon . Bow - may spake not , but stamp her foot with anger . 
 yet if her heart be hot , her hand be steady ; for she notch a 
 shaft , and just as the Dusky Chief raise his axe and brandish it 
 aloft , she loose , and the shaft fly and smite the felon in the 
 armpit and the default of the armour , and he fall to earth . but even 
 as she loose , face - of - god cry out in a loud voice : 

 ' o lad of battle ! shoot close and all together . Tarry not , tarry 
 not ! for we need a little time ere sword meet sword , and the other 
 of the kindred be at work ! ' 

 but Bow - may turn round to he and say : ' wilt thou not answer I ? 
 where be thy kindness go ? ' 

 even as she be speak she have notch and loose another shaft , 
 speak as folk do who turn from busy work at loom or bench . 

 then say face - of - god : ' shoot on , sister Bow - may ! the Sun - beam be 
 go with her brother , and he be with the Men of the face . ' 

 he break off here , for a man fall beside he hurt in the neck , and 
 face - of - god take his bow from his hand and shoot a shaft , while one 
 of the woman who have be hurt also tend the newly - wound man . 
 then face - of - god go on speak : 

 ' she be unwilling to go , but folk - might and I constrain she ; for 
 we know that this be the most perilous place of the battle - hah ! see 
 those three felon , Bow - may ! they be aim hither . ' 

 and again he loose and Bow - may also , but a shaft rattle on his helm 
 withal and another smote a woodlander beside he , and pierce through 
 the calf of his leg , as he turn and stoop to take fresh arrow 
 from a sheaf that lie there ; but the carle take it by the notch and 
 the point , and brake it and draw it out , and then stand up and go 
 on shooting . and face - of - god spake again : 

 ' folk - might skulketh not ; nor the Men of the Vine , and the Sickle , 
 and the Face , nor the Shepherd - Folk : soon shall they be make our 
 work easy to we , if we can hold our own till then . they be on the 
 other road that lead into the square . now suffer I , and shoot on ! ' 

 Therewith he look round about he , and he see on the left hand that 
 all be quiet ; and before he be the confused throng of the Dusky 
 Men trample their own dead and wound , and not able as yet to 
 cross that death - line of the arrow so near to they . but on his right 
 hand he see how they of the kindred hold they firm on the way . then 
 for a moment of time he consider and think , till he - seem he 
 could see the whole battle yet to be foughten ; and his face flush , 
 and he say sharply : ' bow - may , abide here and shoot , and show the 
 other where to shoot , while the arrow hold out ; but we will go 
 far for a while , and ye shall follow when we have make the rent 
 great enough . ' 

 she turn to he and say : ' why art thou not more joyous ? thou art 
 like an host without music or banner . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' heed not I , but my bidding ! ' 

 she say hastily : ' I think I shall die here ; since for all we have 
 shoot we minish they nowise . now kiss I this once amidst the battle , 
 and say farewell . ' 

 he say : ' Nay , nay ; it shall not go thus . abide a little while , and 
 thou shalt see all this tangle open , as the sun cleaveth the cloud 
 on the autumn morning . yet lo thou ! since thou wilt have it so . ' 

 and he bent forward and kiss her face , and now the tear run over 
 it , and she say smile somewhat : ' now be this more than I look 
 for , whatso may betide . ' 

 but while she be yet speak he cry in a great voice : 

 ' ye who have spend your shot , or have nigh spend it , to axe and 
 sword , and follow I to clear the ground ' twixt the bent and the 
 hall . let each help each , but throng not each other . shoot wisely , 
 ye bowman , and keep our back clear of the foe . on , on ! for the Burg 
 and the Face , for the Burg and the face ! ' 

 Therewith he leapt down the steep of the hill , bound like the 
 hart , with Dale - warden naked in his hand ; and they that follow be 
 two score and ten ; and the arrow of their bowman rain over their 
 head on the Dusky Men , as they smite down the first of the foeman , 
 and the other shriek and shrank from they , or turn on they 
 smite wildly and desperately . 

 but face - of - god sweep round the great sword and plunge into that sea 
 of turmoil and noise and evil sight and savour , and even therewith 
 he hear clearly a voice that say : ' goldre , I be hurt ; take my 
 bow a while ! ' and know it for Bow - may 's ; but it come to his ear like 
 the song of a bird without meaning ; for it be as if his life be 
 change at once ; and in a minute or two he have cut thrice with the 
 edge and thrust twice with the point , eager , but clear - eyed and deft ; 
 and he see as in a picture the foe before he , and the grey roof of 
 silver - stead , and through the gap in they the top of the blue ridge 
 far aloof . and now have three fall before he , and they fear he , 
 and turn on he , and smite so many together that their stroke 
 cross each other , and one ward he from the other ; and he laugh 
 aloud and shield himself , and drave the point of Dale - warden amidst 
 the tangle of weapon through the open mouth of a captain of the 
 Felons , and slash a cheek with a back - stroke , and sweep round the 
 edge to his right hand and smote off a blue - eyed snub - nosed head ; and 
 therewith a pole - axe smite he on the left side of his helm , so that 
 he totter ; but he swing himself round , and stand stark and upright , 
 and give a short hack with the edge , keep Dale - warden well in 
 hand , and a gold - clothe felon , a champion of they , and their tall on 
 the ground , fall aback , his throat gap more than the mouth of he . 

 then face - of - god shout and wave Dale - warden aloft to the Banner of 
 the Wolf that float behind and above he , and he cry out : ' as I 
 have promise so have I do ! ' and he look about , and behold how 
 valiantly his fellow have be do ; for before he now be a space 
 of earth with no man stand on his foot thereon , like the swathe of 
 the mower of June ; and beyond that be the crowd of the Dusky Men 
 wavering like the tall grass abide the scythe . 

 but a minute , and they fall to cast at face - of - god and his fellow 
 spear and knife and shield and whatsoever would fly ; and a spear 
 smite he on the breast , but enter not ; and a bossed shield fall 
 over his face withal , and a plummet of sling - lead smite his helm , and 
 he fall to earth ; but leapt up again straightway , and hear as he 
 arise a great shout close to he , and a shrill cry , and lo ! at his 
 leave side Bow - may , her sword in her hand , and the hand red with blood 
 from a shaft - graze on her wrist , and a white cloth stain with blood 
 about her neck ; and on his right side wood - wise bear the banner 
 and cry the Wolf - whoop ; for the whole company be come down from 
 the slope and stand around he . 

 then for a little while be there such a stilling of the tumult about 
 he there , that he hear great and glad cry from the Road of the 
 South of ' the Burg and the Steer ! the Dale and the Bridge ! the Dale 
 and the Bull ! ' and thereafter a terrible great shrieking cry , and a 
 huge voice that cry : ' death , death , death to the Dusky Men ! ' and 
 thereafter again fierce cry and great tumult of the battle . 

 then face - of - god shake Dale - warden in the air , and stride forward 
 fiercely , but not speedily , and the whole company go foot for foot 
 along with he ; and as he go , would he or would he not , song come 
 into his mouth , a song of the meadow of the Dale , even such as this : 


 the wheat be do blooming and rust 's on the sickle , 
  and green be the meadow grow after the scythe . 
 come , hand for the dance ! for the toil hath be mickle , 
  and ' twixt haysel and harvest ' tis time to be blithe . 

 and what shall the tale be now dance be over , 
  and kind on the meadow sit maiden by man , 
 and the old man bethink he of day of the lover , 
  and the warrior remember the field that he wan ? 

 shall we tell of the dear day wherein we be dwell , 
  the good day of our Mother , the cherish Dale , 
 when all round about we the summer be tell , 
  to ear that may hearken , the heart of the tale ? 

 shall we sing of these hand and these lip that caress we , 
  and the limb that sun - dapple lie light here beside , 
 when still in the morning they rise but to bless we , 
  and oft in the midnight our footstep abide ? 

 o nay , but to tell of the father be well , 
  and of how we be fashion from out of the earth ; 
 of how the once lowly spurn strong at the fetter ; 
  of the day of the deed and beginning of mirth . 

 and then when the feast - tide be do in the morning , 
  shall we whet the grey sickle that bideth the wheat , 
 till wan grow the edge , and gleam forth a warning 
  of the field and the fallow where edge shall meet . 

 and when cometh the harvest , and hook upon shoulder 
  we enter the red wheat from out of the road , 
 we shall sing , as we wend , of the bold and the bold , 
  and the Burg of their building , the beauteous abode . 

 as smiteth the sickle amid the sun 's burning 
  we shall sing how the sun see the token unfurl , 
 when forth fare the Folk , with no thought of return , 
  in the day when the Banner go wide in the world . 


 many see that he be sing , but hear not the word of his mouth , 
 for great be the noise and clamour . but he hear Bow - may , how she 
 laugh by his side , and cry out : 

 ' gold - mane , dear - heart , now art thou merry indeed ; and glad be I , 
 though they tell I that I be hurt . - ah ! now beware , beware ! ' 

 for indeed the Dusky Men , see the wall of steel roll down on 
 they , and coope up by the house , so that they scarce know how to 
 flee , turn in the face of death , the foremost of they , and rush 
 furiously on the array of the Woodlanders , and all those behind 
 press on they like the big wave of the ebb sea when the gust of 
 the wind driveth it landward . 

 the Woodlanders meet they , shout out : ' the Greenwood and the Wolf , 
 the Greenwood and the Wolf ! ' but not a few of they fall there , 
 though they give not back a foot ; for so fierce now be the Dusky 
 Men , that hewing and thrust at they avail nought , unless they 
 be slay outright or stunned ; and even if they fall they roll 
 themselves up against their tall foe - man , heed not death or wound 
 if they might but slay or wound . there then fall war - grove and ten 
 other of the Woodlanders , and four man of the Wolf , but none before 
 he have slay his foeman ; and as each man fall or be hurt grievously , 
 another take his place . 

 now a felon leapt up and catch gold - ring by the neck and draw he 
 down , while another strove to smite his head off ; but the stout carle 
 drave a wood - knife into the side of the first felon , and draw it out 
 speedily and smote the other , the smiter , in the face with the same 
 knife , and therewith they all three roll together on the earth 
 amongst the foot of man . even so do another felon by Bow - may , and 
 drag she down to the ground , and smite she with a long knife as 
 she tumble down ; and this be a feat of theirs , for they be long- 
 armed like ape . 

 but as to this felon , Dale - warden 's edge split his skull , and face- 
 of - god gather his might together and bestrode Bow - may , till he have 
 hew a space round about he with great two - handed stroke ; and yet 
 the blade brake not . then he catch up Bow - may from the earth , and 
 the felon 's knife have not pierce her hauberk , but she be astonied , 
 and might not stand upon her foot ; and face - of - god turn aside a 
 little with she , and half bear she , half thrust she through the 
 throng to the rearward of his folk , and leave she there with two 
 carline of the Wolf who follow the host for leechcraft 's sake , and 
 then turn back shout : ' for the face , for the face ! ' and there 
 follow he back to the battle , a band of those who be fresh as 
 yet , and their blade unbloodie , the young man of the Woodlands . 

 the weary fighter make way for they as they come on shout , and 
 face - of - god be ahead of they all , and leapt at the foeman as a man 
 unwearied and strike his first stroke , so wondrous hale he be ; and 
 they drave a wedge amidst of the Dusky Men , and then turn about and 
 stand back to back hewing at all that drift on they . but as face- 
 of - god clear a space about he , lo ! almost within reach of his 
 sword - point up rise a grim shape from the earth , tall , grey - haire , 
 and bloody - face , who utter the Wolf - whoop from amidst the terror 
 of his visage , and turn and swing round his head an axe of the 
 Dusky Men , and fall to smite they with their own weapon . the Dusky 
 Men shriek in answer to his whoop , and all shrink from he and 
 face - of - god ; but a cry of joy go up from the kindred , for they know 
 gold - ring , whom they deem have be slay . so they all press on 
 together , smite down the foe before they , and the Dusky Men , some 
 turn their back and drave those behind they , till they too turn 
 and be strain through the passage and court of the house , and 
 some be overthrow and trodden down as they strove to hold face to 
 the Woodlanders , and some be hew down where they stand ; but the 
 whole throng of those that be on their foot drift toward the 
 market - place , the Woodlanders follow they ever with point and 
 edge , till betwixt the bent and the house no foeman stand up against 
 they . 

 then they stand together , and raise the whoop of victory , and blow 
 their horn long and loud in token of their joy , and the Woodland man 
 lift up their voice and sing : 


  now far , far aloof 
  Standeth lintel and roof , 
  the dwelling of day 
  of the Woodland way : 
  now nought wendeth there 
  save the wolf and the bear , 
  and the fox of the waste 
  faring soft without haste . 
 no carle the axe whetteth on oak - laden hill ; 
 no shaft the hart letteth to wend at his will ; 
 none heedeth the thunder - clap over the glade , 
 and the wind - storm thereunder make no man afraid . 
 be it thus then that endeth man 's day on Mid - earth , 
 for no man there wendeth in sorrow or mirth ? 

  Nay , look down on the road 
  from the ancient abode ! 
  Betwixt acre and field 
  Shineth helm , shineth shield . 
  and high over the heath 
  fare the bane in his sheath ; 
  for the wise man and bold 
  go their way o'er the wold . 
 now the Warrior hath give they heart and fair day , 
 Unbidden , undriven , they fare to the fray . 
 by the rock and the river the banner they bear , 
 and their battle - stave quiver ' neath halbert and spear ; 
 on the hill 's brow they gather , and hang o'er the Dale 
 as the cloud of the Father hang , laden with bale . 

  down shineth the sun 
  on the war - deed half do ; 
  all the fore - doom to die , 
  in the pale dust they lie . 
  there they leapt , there they fall , 
  and their tale shall we tell ; 
  but we , e'en in the gate 
  of the war - garth we wait , 
 till the drift of war - weather shall whistle we on , 
 and we tread all together the way to be win , 
 to the dear land , the dwelling for whose sake we come 
 to do deed for the telling of song - becrowne fame . 
 settle helm on the head then ! heave sword for the Dale ! 
 nor be mock of the dead man for deedless and pale . 



 CHAPTER XLVI . MEN meet in the market of SILVER - stead 



 so sing they ; but face - of - god go with Red - wolf , who be hurt 
 sorely , but not deadly , and lead he back toward the place just under 
 the break of the bent ; and there he find Bow - may in the hand of the 
 woman who be tend her hurt . she smile on he from a pale face 
 as he draw nigh , and he look kindly at she , but he might not abide 
 there , for haste be in his foot . he leave Red - wolf to the tending of 
 the woman , and clomb the bent hastily , and when he deem he be high 
 enough , he look about he ; and somewhat more than half an hour have 
 wear since Bow - may have speed the first shaft against the Dusky Men . 

 he look down into the market - stead , and deem he could see that 
 nigh the Mote - house the Dusky Men be gather into some well 
 order ; but they be no long drift toward the southern bent , 
 but be stand round about the altar as man abide somewhat ; and 
 he deem that they have get more bowshot than before , and that 
 most of they bare bow . though so many have be slay in the battle 
 of the southern bent , yet be the market - stead full of they , so to 
 say , for other have come thereto in place of those that have fall . 

 but now as he look arise mighty clamour amongst they ; and a little 
 west of the Altar be a stir and a hurrying onward and around as in 
 the eddy of a swift stream . face - of - god wotte not what be 
 betide there , but he deem that they be now ware of the onfall 
 of Folk - might and Hall - face and the man of Burgdale , for their face 
 be all turn to where that be to be look for . 

 so he turn and look on the road to the east of he , where have 
 be the battle of the Steer , but now it be all go down toward the 
 market - place , and he could but hear the clamour of it ; but nought he 
 see thereof , because of the house that hide it . 

 then he cast his eye on the road that enter the market - stead from 
 the north , and he see thereon many man gather ; and he wotte not 
 what they be ; for though there be weapon amongst they , yet be 
 they not all weapone , as far as he could see . 

 now as he look this way and that , and deem that he must tarry no 
 long , but must enter into the court of the house before he and 
 make his way into the market - stead , lo ! a change in the throng of 
 Dusky Warriors nigh the Mote - house , and the order band about the 
 Altar fall to drift toward the western way with one accord , with 
 great noise and hurry and fierce cry of wrath . then make face - of- 
 god no delay , but run down the bent at once , and at the break of it 
 come upon Bow - may stand upright and sword in hand ; and as he 
 pass , she join herself to he , and say : ' what new tiding now , 
 gold - mane ? ' 

 ' tiding of battle ! ' he cry ; ' tiding of victory ! folk - might hath 
 fall on , and the Dusky Men run hastily to meet he . Hark , hark ! ' 

 for as he speak come a great noise of horn , and Bow - may say : ' what 
 horn be that blow ? ' 

 he stay not , but shout aloud : ' for the face , for the Face ! now 
 will we fall upon their back ! ' 

 Therewith be he come to his company , and he cry out to they : 
 ' hear ye the horn , hear ye the horn ? now follow I into the 
 market - place ; much be yet to do ! ' 

 even therewith come the sound of other horn , and all man be silent 
 a moment , and then shout all together , for the Wood - lander know it 
 for the horn of the Shepherds come on by the eastward way . 

 but face - of - god wave his sword aloft and set on at once , and they 
 follow and gat they through the court of the house and their 
 passage into the market - place . there they find more room than they 
 look to find ; for the foeman have draw away on the left hand toward 
 the battle of Folk - might , and on the right hand toward the battle of 
 the Steer ; and great be the noise and cry that come thence . 

 now stand face - of - god under the two banner of the Wolf in the 
 market - place of silver - stead , and scarce have he time to be high- 
 hearted , for need must he ponder in his mind what thing be good to 
 do . for on the left hand he deem the foe be the strong and 
 well order ; but there also be the kindred the doughty , and it 
 be little like that the felon should overcome the spear - caster of 
 the Face and the glaive - bearer of the Sickle , and the bowman of the 
 Vine : there also be the wise leader , as the stark eld stone- 
 face , and the tall Hall - face , and his father of the unshaken heart , 
 and above all folk - might , fierce in his wrath , but his anger burn 
 steady and clear , like the oaken butt on the hearth of the hall . 

 then as his mind picture he amongst the foe , it make therewith 
 another picture of the slender warrior Sun - beam catch in the tangle 
 of battle , and long for he and call for he amidst the hard 
 hand - play . and thereat his face flush , and all his body wax hot , 
 and he be on the very point of lead the onset against the foe on 
 the left . but therewith he bethink he of the bold man of the 
 Steer and the Bridge and the Bull weary with much fighting ; and he 
 remember also that the Bride be amongst they and fight , it 
 might be , amidst the foremost , and if she be slay how should he 
 ever hold up his head again . he bethink he also that the 
 Shepherds , who have fall on by the eastern road , valiant as they 
 be , be scarce so well armed or so well lead as the other . 
 Therewithal he bethink he   and again it come like a picture into 
 his mind   of fall on the foeman by whom the southern battle be 
 beset , and then the twain of they meet the Shepherds , and lastly , 
 all those three company join together clear the market - place , 
 and meet the man under Folk - might in the midst thereof . 

 therefore , scant have he be ponder these thing in his mind for a 
 minute ere he cry out : ' blow up horn , blow up ! forward banner , 
 and follow I , o valiant man ! to the helping of the Steer , the 
 Bridge , and the Bull ; deep have they thrust into the Dusky Throng , 
 and belike be hard pressed . Hark how the clamour ariseth from their 
 besetter ! on now , on ! ' 

 Therewith hang a star of sunlight on his sword as he raise it aloft , 
 and the Wolf - whoop ring out terribly in the market - place , for now have 
 the Woodlanders also learn it , and the heart of the foeman sink as 
 they hear the might and the mass thereof . then the battle of the 
 Woodlanders sweep round and fall upon the flank of they who be 
 beset the kindred , as an iron bar smiteth the soft fir - wood ; and 
 they of the kindred hear their cry , but faintly and confusedly , so 
 great be the turmoil of battle about they . 

 now once more be Bow - may by the side of face - of - god ; and if she have 
 not the might of the mighty , yet have she the deftness of the 
 deftest . and now be she calm and cool , shield herself with a 
 copper - boss target , and drive home the point of her sharp sword ; 
 white be her face , and her eye glitter amidst it , and she seem 
 to man like to those on whose head the Warrior hath lay the Holy 
 Bread . 

 as to wood - wise , he have give the Banner of the red - jawed Wolf to 
 Stone - wolf , a huge and dreadful warrior some forty winter old , who 
 have fight in the Great Overthrow , and now hew down the Dusky Men , 
 wield a heavy short - sword left - handed . but Wood - wise himself 
 fight with a great sword , give great stroke to the right hand and 
 the left , and be no more hasty than be the hewer in the winter wood . 

 face - of - god fight wisely and coldly now , and look more to ward 
 his friend than destroy his foe , and both to Bow - may and Wood- 
 wise his sword be a shield ; for oft he take the life from the edge 
 of the upraised axe , and stay the point of the foeman in mid - air . 

 even so wisely fight the whole band of the Woodlanders and the 
 wolf , who get within smite space of the foe ; for they have no will 
 to cast away their life when assure victory be so nigh to they . 
 Sooth to say , the hand - play be not so hard to they as it have be 
 betwixt the bent and the house ; for the Dusky Men be intent on 
 deal with the man of the kindred from the southern road , who 
 stand war - weary before they ; and they be hew and cast at 
 they , and bay and yell like dog ; and though they turn about 
 to meet the storm of the Woodlanders , yet their heart fail they 
 withal , and they strove to edge away from betwixt those two fearful 
 scythe of war , fight as man flee , not as man in onset . but 
 still the Woodlanders and the Wolves come on , hewing and thrusting , 
 smite down the foeman in heap , till the Dusky Throng grow thin , 
 and the stave of the Dalesmen and their bright banner in the 
 morning sun be clear to see , and at last their very face , kindly 
 and familiar , worn and strain with the stress of battle , or 
 laugh wildly , or pale with the fury of the fight . then rise up to 
 the heavens the blend shout of the Woodlanders and the Dalesmen , 
 and now there be nought of foeman betwixt they save the dead and the 
 wound . 

 then face - of - god thrust his sword into its sheath all bloody as it 
 be , and stride over the dead man to where Hall - ward stand under the 
 banner of the Steer , and cast his arm about the old carle , and 
 kiss he for joy of the victory . but Hall - ward thrust he aback 
 and look he in the face , and his cheek be pale and his lip 
 clench , and his eye haggard and star , and he say in a harsh 
 voice : 

 ' o young man , she be dead ! I see her fall . the Bride be dead , and 
 thou hast lose thy troth - plight maiden . o death , death to the Dusky 
 Men ! ' 

 then grow face - of - god as pale as a linen sleeve , and all the new- 
 comer groan and cry out . but a bystander say : ' Nay , nay , it 
 be nought so bad as that ; she be hurt , and sorely ; but she liveth 
 yet . ' 

 face - of - god hear he not . he forget Dale - warden lying in his 
 sheath , and he see that the last speaker have a great wood - axe broad 
 and heavy in his hand , so he cry : ' man , man , thine axe ! ' and 
 snatch it from he , and turn about to the foe again , and thrust 
 through the rank , suffer none to stay he till all his friend 
 be behind and all his foe before he . and as he burst forth from 
 the rank wave his axe aloft , bare - head now , his yellow hair 
 fly abroad , his mouth cry out , ' death , death , death to the 
 Dusky Men ! ' fear of he smote their heart , and they howl and flee 
 before he as they might ; for they say that the Dalesmen have pray 
 their Gods into the battle . but not so fast could they flee but he 
 be presently amidst they , smite down all about he , and they so 
 terror - stricken that scarce might they raise a hand against he . all 
 that blended host follow he mad with wrath and victory , and as 
 they press on , they hear behind they the horn and war - cry of 
 the Shepherds fall on from the east . Nought they heed that now , 
 but drave on a fearful storm of war , and terrible be the slaughter 
 of the Felons . 

 it be but a few minute ere they have drive they up against that 
 great stack of faggot that have be dight for the burn - offering of 
 man , and many of the felon have mount up on to it , and now in their 
 anguish of fear be shoot arrow and cast spear on all about 
 they , heed little if they be friend or foe . now be the man of 
 the kindred at point to climb this twiggen burg ; but by this time 
 the fury of face - of - god have run clear , and he know where he be and 
 what he be do ; so he stay his folk , and cry out to they : 
 ' forbear , climb not ! let the torch help the sword ! ' and therewith he 
 look about and see the fire - pot which have be set down there for 
 the kindling of the bale - fire , and the coal be yet red in it ; so 
 he snatch up a dry brand and light it thereat , and so do diver 
 other , and they thrust they among the faggot , and the fire catch 
 at once , and the tongue of flame begin to leap from faggot to faggot 
 till all be in a light low ; for the wood have be lay for that very 
 end , and smear with grease and oil so that the burning to the god 
 might be speedy . 

 but the fierceness of the kindred heed not the fire , nor overmuch 
 the man who leapt down from the stack before it , but they leave all 
 behind they , fare straight toward the western outgate from the 
 market - stead ; and face - of - god still lead they on ; though by now he be 
 wholly come to his right mind again , albeit the burden of sorrow yet 
 lie heavy on his heart . he have break his axe , and have once more 
 draw Dale - warden from his sheath , and many feel his point and edge . 

 but now , as they chase , come a rush of man upon they again , as 
 though a new onset be at hand . that see face - of - god and Hall - ward 
 and War - well , and other wise leader of man , and they bid their folk 
 forbear the chase , and lock their rank to meet the onfall of this 
 new wave of foeman . and they do so , and stand fast as a wall ; but 
 lo ! the onrush that drave up against they be but a flee shrieking 
 throng , and no long an array of warrior , for many have cast away 
 their weapon , and be rush they know not whither ; for they be 
 be thrust on the bitter edge of face - of - god 's company by the 
 terror of the fleer from the onset of the man of the Face , the 
 Sickle , and the Vine , whom hall - face and stone - face be lead , 
 along with Folk - might . then once again the man of face - of - god give 
 forth the whoop of victory , and press forward again , hew their 
 way through the throng of fleer , but turn not to chase to the 
 right or the left ; while at their back come on the Shepherd - folk , 
 who have sweep down all that withstand they ; for now indeed be the 
 market - stead get thin of live man . 

 so lead the war - leader his ordered rank , till at last over the 
 tangle crowd of runaway he see the banner of the Burg and the face 
 flash against the sun , and hear the roar of the kindred as they 
 drave the chase towards they . then he lift up his sword , and stand 
 still , and all the host behind he stay and cast a huge shout up to 
 the heaven , and there they abode the coming of the other dalesman . 

 but the war - leader send a message to hound - under - Greenbury , bid 
 he lead the Shepherds to the chase of the Dusky Men , who be now 
 all flee toward the northern outgate of the market . Howbeit he 
 call to mind the throng he have see on the northern road before 
 they be come into the market - stead , and deem that way also death 
 await the foeman , even if the man of the kindred forbear they . 

 but presently the space betwixt the Woodlanders and the man of the 
 Face be clear of all but the dead , so that friend see the face of 
 friend ; and it could be see that the warrior of the face be ruddy 
 and smile for joy , because the battle have be easy to they , and 
 but few of they have fall ; for the Dusky Men who have leave the 
 market - stead to fall on they , have have room for flee behind they , 
 and have speedily turn their back before the spear - casting of the 
 man of the Face and the onrush of the swordsman . 

 there then stand these victorious man face one another , and the 
 banner - bearer on either side come through the throng , and bring 
 the banner together between the two host ; and the Wolf kiss the 
 Face , and the Sickle and the Vine meet the Steer and the Bridge and 
 the Bull : but the Shepherds be yet chase the fleer . 

 there in the forefront stand Hall - face the tall , with the joy of 
 battle in his eye . and stone - face , the wise carle in war , stand 
 solemn and stark beside he ; and there be the goodly body and the 
 fair and kindly visage of the Alderman smile on the face of his 
 friend . but as for folk - might , his face be yet white and aweful 
 with anger , and he look restlessly up and down the front of the 
 kindred , though he spake no word . 

 then face - of - god could no long forbear , but he thrust Dale - warden 
 into his sheath , and run forward and cast his arm about his father 's 
 neck and kiss he ; and the blood of himself and of the foeman be 
 on he , for he have be hurt in diver place , but not sorely , 
 because of the good hammer - work of the Alderman . 

 then he kiss his brother and stone - face , and he take folk - might by 
 the hand , and be on the point of speak some word to he , when the 
 rank of the face open , and lo ! the Sun - beam in her bright war- 
 gear , and the sword girt to her side , and she unhurt and unsullied . 

 then be it to he as when he meet she first in Shadowy Vale , and he 
 think of little else than she ; but she step lightly up to he , 
 and unashamed before the whole host she kiss he on the mouth , and 
 he cast his mail arm about she , and joy make he forget many 
 thing and what be next to do , though even at that moment come 
 afresh a great clamour of shriek and cry from the northern outgate 
 of the market - stead : and the burn pile behind they cast a great 
 waver flame into the air , contend with the bright sun of that 
 fair day , now come hard on noontide . but ere he draw away his face 
 from the Sun - beam 's , come memory to he , and a sharp pang shot 
 through his heart , as he hear Folk - might say : ' where then be the 
 Shield - may of Burgstead ? where be the Bride ? ' 

 and face - of - god say under his breath : ' she be dead , she be dead ! ' 
 and then he star out straight before he and wait till someone 
 else should say it aloud . but Bow - may step forward and say : 
 ' Chief of the Wolf , be of good cheer ; our kinswoman be hurt , but not 
 deadly . ' 

 the Alderman 's face change , and he say : ' Hast thou see she , bow- 
 may ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' she say . ' how should I leave the battle ? but other have 
 tell I who have see she . ' 

 folk - might star into the rank of man before he , but say nothing . 
 say the Alderman : ' be she well tend ? ' 

 ' yea , surely , ' say Bow - may , ' since she be amongst friend , and there 
 be no foeman behind we . ' 

 then come a voice from Folk - might which say : ' now be it good to 
 send good man and deft in arm , and who know silver - dale , from house 
 to house , to search for foeman who may be lurk there . ' 

 the Alderman look kindly and sadly on he and say : 

 ' Kinsman Stone - face , and Hall - face my son , the brunt of the battle be 
 now over , and I be but a simple man amongst you ; therefore , if ye 
 will give I leave , I will go see this poor kinswoman of ours , and 
 comfort she . ' 

 they bid he go : so he sheathe his sword , and go through the 
 press with two man of the Steer toward the southern road ; for the 
 Bride have be bring into a house nigh the corner of the market- 
 place . 

 but face - of - god look after his father as he go , and remembrance 
 of past day come upon he , and such a storm of grief sweep over he , 
 as he think of the Bride lie pale and bleed and bring anigh 
 to her death , that he put his hand to his face and weep as a child 
 that will not be comfort ; nor have he any shame of all those 
 bystander , who in sooth be man good and kindly , and have no shame 
 of his grief or marvel at it , for indeed their own heart be 
 sore for their lovely kinswoman , and many of they also weep with 
 face - of - god . but the Sun - beam stand by and look on her betrothed , 
 and she think many thing of the Bride , and be sorry , albeit no 
 tear come into her eye ; then she look askance at Folk - might and 
 tremble ; but he say coldly , and in a loud voice : 

 ' need must we search the house for the lurk felon , or many a 
 man will yet be murder . let wood - wicked lead a band of man at once 
 from house to house . ' 

 then say a man of the Wolf hight Hardgrip : ' wood - wicked be slay 
 betwixt the bent and the house . ' 

 say folk - might : ' let it be wood - wise then . ' 

 but Bow - may say : ' wood - wise be even now hurt in the leg by a 
 wound felon , and may not go afoot . ' 

 then say folk - might : ' be Crow the Shaft - speeder anigh ? ' 

 ' yea , here be I , ' quoth a tall man of fifty winter , come from out 
 the rank where stand the wolf . 

 say folk - might : ' Kinsman Crow , do thou take two score and ten of 
 doughty man who be not too hot - headed , and search every house about 
 the market - place ; but if ye come on any house that make a stout 
 defence , send ye word thereof to the Mote - house , where we will 
 presently be , and we shall send you help . slay every felon that ye 
 fall in with ; but if ye find in the house any of the poor folk 
 crouch and afraid , comfort their heart all ye may , and tell they 
 that now be life come to they . ' 

 so Crow fall to get his band together , and presently depart 
 with they on his errand . 



 CHAPTER XLVII . the KINDREDS WIN the MOTE - HOUSE 



 the din and tumult still come from the north side of the market- 
 place , so that all the air be full of noise ; and face - of - god deem 
 that the thrall have get weapon into their hand and be slay 
 their master . 

 now he lift up his face , and put his hand on Folk - might 's shoulder , 
 and say in a loud voice : 

 ' Kinsmen , it be well if our brother be to bid the banner into 
 the mote - house of the Wolf , and let all the Host set itself in array 
 before the say house , and abide till the chaser of the foe come to 
 we thither ; for I perceive that they be now become many , and be 
 more than those of our kindre . ' 

 then folk - might look at he with kind eye , and say : 

 ' thou sayest well , brother ; even so let it be ! ' 

 and he lift up his sword , and face - of - god cry out in a loud 
 voice : ' forward , banner ! blow up horn ! fare we forth with 
 victory ! ' 

 so the Host draw its rank together in good order , and they all set 
 forward , and old Stone - face take the Sun - beam by the hand and lead on 
 behind Folk - might and the war - leader . but when they come to the 
 Hall , then see they how the step that lead up to the door be high 
 and double , go up from each side without any railing or fool- 
 guard ; and crowd the stair and the platform thereof be a band of 
 the Dusky Men , as many as could stand thereon , who shoot arrow at the 
 host of the kindred , howl like dog , and chatter like ape ; 
 and arrow and spear come from the window of the Hall ; yea , and on 
 the very roof a score of these felon be rid the ridge and 
 mocking like the troll of old day . 

 now when they see this they stay a while , and man shield they 
 against the shaft ; but the leader draw together in front of the 
 Host , and Folk - might fall to speech ; and his face be very pale and 
 stern ; for now he have have time to think of the case of the Bride , and 
 fierce wrath , and grief unholpen fill his soul . so he say : 

 ' brother , this be my business to deal with ; for I see before I the 
 stair that leadeth to the Mote - house of my people , and now would I 
 sit there whereas my father sit , when peace be on the Dale , as once 
 more it shall be to - morrow . therefore up this stair will I go , and 
 none shall hinder I ; and let no man of the host follow I till I 
 have enter into the Hall , unless perchance I fall dead by the way ; 
 but stand ye still and look on . ' 

 ' Nay , ' say face - of - god , ' this be partly the business of the War- 
 leader . there be two stair . be content to take the southern one , 
 and I will take the northern . we shall meet on the plain stone at 
 the top . ' 

 but Hall - face say : ' war - leader , may I speak ? ' 

 ' speak , brother , ' say face - of - god . 

 say Hall - face : ' I have do but little to - day , war - leader . I would 
 stand by thee on the northern stair ; so shall folk - might be content , 
 if he doeth two man 's work who be not little - hearted . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' the doom of the War - leader be that folk - might 
 shall fall on by the southern stair to slake his grief and increase 
 his glory , and face - of - god and Hall - face by the northern . Haste to 
 the work , o brother ! ' 

 and he and Hall - face go to their place , while all look on . but 
 the Sun - beam , with her hand still in Stone - face 's , she turn white 
 to the lip , and star with wild eye before she , not know where 
 she be ; for she have deem that the battle be over , and face - of - god 
 save from it . 

 but folk - might toss up his head and laugh , and cry out , ' at 
 last , at last ! ' and his sword be in his hand , the sleep - thorn to 
 wit , a blade of ancient fame ; so now he let it fall and hang to his 
 wrist by the leash , while he clap his hand together and utter 
 the Wolf - whoop mightily , and all the man of the Wolf that be in the 
 host , and the Woodlanders withal , utter it with he . then he put 
 his shield over his head and stand before the first of the step , and 
 the Dusky Men laugh to see one man come against they , though there 
 be death in their heart . but he laugh back at they in triumph , 
 and set his foot on the step , and let Sleep - thorn 's point go into the 
 throat of a Dusky lord , and thrust amongst they , hew right and 
 left , and tumble man over the edge of the stair , which be to they 
 as the narrow path along the cliff - side that hangeth over the 
 unfathomed sea . they hew and thrust at he in turn ; but so close 
 be they pack that their weapon cross about he , and one 
 shield he from the other , and they sway staggering on that 
 fearful verge , while the sleep - thorn crept here and there amongst 
 they , lull their hot fury . for , as desperate as they be , and 
 fight for death and not for life , they have a horror of he and of 
 the sea of hatred below they , and fear where to set their foot , and 
 he fear nought at all , but from foot to sword - point be but an 
 engine of slaughter , while the heart within he throb with fury 
 long hold back as he think upon the Bride and her wounding , and all 
 the wrong of his people since their Great Undoing . 

 so he smite and thrust , till he - seem the throng of foe thin 
 before he : with his sword - pommel he smite a lord of the Dusky Ones 
 in the face , so that he fall over the edge amongst the spear of the 
 kindre ; then he thrust the point of sleep - thorn towards the hall- 
 door through the breast of another , and then it seem to he that he 
 have but one before he ; so he hove up the edge to cleave he down , 
 but ere the stroke fall , close to his ear exceed loud rang out 
 the cry , ' for the Burg and the Face ! for the Face , for the face ! ' and 
 he draw aback a little , and his eye clear , and lo ! it be hall- 
 face the tall , his long sword all reddened with battle ; and beside 
 he stand face - of - god , silent and panting , his face pale with the 
 fierce anger of the fight , and the weariness which be now at last 
 gain upon he . there stand those three with no other living man 
 upon the plain of the stair . 

 then face - of - god turn shout to the Folk , and cry : 

 ' forth now with the banner ! for now be the Wolf come home . on into 
 the Hall , O Kindred of the Gods ! ' 

 then pour the Folk up over the stair and into the Hall of the 
 Wolf , the banner flap over their head ; and first go the War- 
 leader and Folk - might and Hall - face , and then the three deliver 
 thrall , Wolf - stone , God - swain , and Spear - fist , and Dallach with 
 they , though both he and Wolf - stone have be hurt in the battle ; and 
 then come blend together the Men of the Face along with they of the 
 Wolf who have enter the market - stead with they , and with these be 
 stone - face and wood - wont and Bow - may , lead the Sun - beam betwixt 
 they ; and now be she come to herself again , though her face be yet 
 pale , and her eye gleam as she step across the threshold of the 
 Hall . 

 but when a many be get in , and the first - comer have have time to 
 handle their weapon and look about they , a cry of the utmost wrath 
 break from Folk - might and those other who remember the Hall from 
 of old . for wretched and befoul be that well - build house : the 
 hanging rent away ; the goodly paint wall daub and smear with 
 wicked token of the Alien murderer : the floor , once bright with 
 polished stone of the mountain , and strew with sweet - smell 
 flower , be now as foul as the den of the man - devour troll of the 
 heath . from the fair - carven roof of oak and chestnut - beam hung 
 ugly knot of rag and shapeless image of the sorcery of the Dusky 
 man . and furthermore , and above all , from the last tie - beam of the 
 roof over the dais dangle four shape of man - at - arm , whom the old 
 man of the Wolf know at once for the embalmed body of their four 
 great chieftain , who have be slay on the day of the great Undoing ; 
 and they cry out with horror and rage as they see they hang 
 there in their weapon as they have live . 

 there be the Hostage of the Earth , his shield paint with the green 
 world circle with the worm of the sea . there be the old Folk- 
 might , the uncle of the live man , bear a shield with an oak and 
 a lion do thereon . there be wealth - eker , on whose shield be do 
 a golden sheaf of wheat . there be he who bear a name great from of 
 old , Folk - wolf to wit , bear on his shield the axe of the hewer . 
 there they hung , dusty , befoul , with sightless eye and grinning 
 mouth , in the dim sunlight of the Hall , before the eye of that 
 victorious Host , stricken silent at the sight of they . 

 underneath they on the dais stand the last remnant of the battle of 
 the Dusky Men ; and they , as man mad with come death , shake their 
 weapon , and with shrieking laughter mock at the overcomer , and 
 point to the long - dead chief , and call on they in the tongue of 
 the kindred to come down and lead their dear kinsman to the high- 
 seat ; and then they cry out to the live warrior of the Wolf , and 
 bade they well their deed of slaying , and set to work to make alive 
 again , and cause their kinsman to live merry on the earth . 

 with that last mock they handle their weapon and rush howl on 
 the warrior to meet their death ; nor be it long deny they ; for 
 the sword of the Wolf , the axe of the Woodland , and the spear of the 
 Dale soon make an end of the dreadful life of these destroyer of 
 the Folks . 



 CHAPTER XLVIII . man sing in the MOTE - HOUSE 



 then stride the warrior of the Wolf over the body of the slain on 
 to the dais of their own Hall ; and folk - might lead the Sun - beam by the 
 hand , and now be his sword in its sheath , and his face be grow 
 calm , though it be stern and sad . but even as he trod the dais 
 come a slim swain of the wolf twist himself through the throng , 
 and so maketh way to folk - might , and saith to he : 

 ' Chieftain , the Alderman of Burgdale sendeth I hither to say a word 
 to thee ; even this , which I be to tell to thee and the war - leader 
 both : it be most true that our kinswoman the Bride will not die , but 
 live . so help I , the Warrior and the face ! this be the word of the 
 Alderman . ' 

 when folk - might hear this , his face change and he hang his head ; 
 and face - of - god , who be stand close by , behold he and deem 
 that tear be fall from his eye on to the hall - floor . as for 
 he , he grow exceed glad , and he turn to the Sun - beam and meet 
 her eye , and see that she could scarce refrain her longing for he ; 
 and he be abash for the sweetness of his love . but she draw close 
 up to he , and spake to he softly and say : 

 ' this be the day that maketh amend ; and yet I long for another day . 
 when I see thee come to I that first day in Shadowy Vale , I 
 think thee so goodly a warrior that my heart be in my mouth . but 
 now how goodly thou art ! for the battle be over , and we shall live . ' 

 ' yea , ' say face - of - god , ' and none shall begrudge we our love . 
 Behold thy brother , the hard - heart , the warrior ; he weepeth because 
 he hath hear that the Bride shall live . be sure then that she shall 
 not gainsay he . o fair shall the world be to - morrow ! ' 

 but she say : ' o gold - mane , I have no word . be there no minstrelsy 
 amongst we ? ' 

 now by this time be many of the man of the Wolf and the Woodlanders 
 gather on the dais of the Hall ; and the Dalesmen note this , and 
 wotte that these man be now in their own Mote - house , withdraw 
 they as they might for the press toward the nether end thereof . that 
 the Sun - beam note , and that all those about her save the war - leader 
 be of the kindred of the Wolf and the Woodland , and , still 
 speak softly , she say to face - of - god : 

 ' gold - mane , meseemeth I be now in my wrong place ; for now the Wolf 
 raiseth up his head , but I be depart from he . surely I should 
 now be stand amongst my people of the Face , whereto I be go ere 
 long . ' 

 he say : ' beloved , I be now become thy kindred and thine home , and 
 it be meet for thee to stand beside I . ' 

 she cast her eye adown and answer not ; and she fall a - pondering of 
 how sorely she have desire that fair dale , and now she would leave 
 it , and be content and more than content . 

 but now the kindred have sunder , they upon the dais rank 
 themselves together there in the House which their father have 
 build ; and when they see themselves so meetly order , their heart 
 be full with the sweetness of hope accomplish and the joy of 
 deliverance from death , song arise amongst they , and they fall to 
 sing together ; and this be somewhat of their singing : 


  now raise we the lay 
  of the long - come day ! 
  bright , white be the sun 
  when we see it begin : 
  o'er its noon now we live ; 
  it hath cease not to give ; 
  it shall give , and give more 
  from the wealth of its store . 
 o fair be the yesterday ! kindly and good 
 be the wasteland our guester , and kind be the wood ; 
 though below we for reap lie under our hand 
 the harvest of weeping , the grief of the land ; 
 Dumb cower the sorrow , nought dare to cry 
 on the help of to - morrow , the deed draw nigh . 

  all increase throve 
  in the Dale of our love ; 
  there the ox and the steed 
  Fed down the mead ; 
  the grape hang high 
  ' Twixt earth and sky , 
  and the apple fall 
  Round the orchard well . 
 yet drear be the land there , and all be for nought ; 
 none put forth a hand there for what the year work , 
 and raise it o'erflowe with gift of the earth . 
 for man 's grief be grow beside of the mirth 
 of the spring and the summer that waste their wealth ; 
 and the bird , the new - comer , make merry by stealth . 

  yet here of old 
  Abode the bold ; 
  nor have they wail 
  though the wheat have fail , 
  and the vine no more 
  give forth her store . 
  Yea , they find the waste good 
  for the fearless of mood . 
 then to these , that be dwell aloof from the Dale , 
 fare the wild - wind a - tell the bad of the tale ; 
 as man bath in the morning they see in the pool 
 the image of scorning , the throne of the fool . 
 the picture be gleam in helm and in sword , 
 and shine forth its seem from cup of the board . 

  forth then they come 
  with the battle - flame ; 
  from the Wood and the Waste 
  and the Dale do they haste : 
  they see the storm rise , 
  and with untroubled eye 
  the war - storm they meet ; 
  and the rain ruddy - wet . 
 o'er the Dale then be litten the Candle of Day , 
 night - sorrow be smite , and gloom flee away . 
 how the grief - shackle sunder ! how many to morn 
 shall awaken and wonder how gladness be bear ! 
 o will not unto sorrow , how sweet unto you 
 shall be ponder to - morrow what deed be to do ! 

  fall many a man 
  ' Neath the edge wan , 
  in the heat of the play 
  that fashion the day . 
  praise all ye then 
  the death of man , 
  and the gift of the aid 
  of the unafraid ! 
 o strong be the live man mighty to save , 
 and good be their giving , and gift that we have ! 
 but the dead , they that give we once , never again ; 
 long and long shall they save we sore trouble and pain . 
 o banner above we , o God of the strong , 
 love they as ye love we that bear down our wrong ! 


 so they sing in the Hall ; and there be many a man weep , as the song 
 end , for those that should never see the good day of the Dale , and 
 all the joy that be to be ; and man swear , by all that they love , 
 that they would never forget those that have fall in the winning of 
 silver - dale ; and that when each year the Cups of Memory go round , 
 they should be no mere name to they , but the very man whom they have 
 know and love . 



 CHAPTER XLIX . DALLACH FARETH to ROSE - DALE : CROW TELLETH of his 
 ERRAND : the KINDREDS eat their meat in SILVER - DALE 



 Now Dallach , who have go away for a while , come back again into the 
 Hall ; and at his back be a half score of man who bear ladder with 
 they : they be stout man , clothe in scanty and ragged raiment , but 
 girt with sword and bear axis , those of they who be not 
 handle the ladder . man look on they curiously , because they see 
 they to be of the roughest of the thrall . they be sullen and 
 fierce - eyed to behold , and their hand and bare arm be fleck 
 with blood ; and it be easy to see that they have be chase the 
 fleer , and make they pay for their many torment of past day . 

 but when face - of - god beheld this he cry out : ' Ho , Dallach ! be it 
 so that thou hast bethink thee to bring in hither man to fall to 
 the cleansing of the Hall , and to do away the defiling of the Dusky 
 Men ? ' 

 ' even so , war - leader , ' say Dallach ; ' also ye shall know that all 
 battle be over in silver - stead ; for the thrall fall in number not 
 to be endure on the Dusky Men who have turn their back to we , and 
 hinder they from flee north . but though they have slay many , 
 they have not slay all , and the remnant have flee by diver way 
 westaway , that they may gain the wood and the way to rose - dale ; and 
 the stout of the thrall be at their heel , and ever as they go 
 fresh man from the field join in the chase with great joy . I have 
 gather together of the good of they two hundred and a half well- 
 arm ; and if thou wilt give I leave , I will get to I yet more , and 
 follow hard on the fleer , and so get I home to Rose - dale ; for 
 thither will these runaway to meet whatso of their kind may be leave 
 there . also I would fain be there to set some order amongst the poor 
 folk of mine own people , whom this day 's work hath deliver from 
 torment . and if thou wilt suffer a few man of the Dalesmen to come 
 along with I , then shall all thing be well do there . ' 

 ' luck go with thine hand ! ' say face - of - god . ' take whomso thou wilt 
 of the Burgdalers that have a mind to fare with thee to the number of 
 five score ; and send word of thy thrive to folk - might , the 
 chieftain of the Dale ; as for we , meseemeth that we shall abide here 
 no long while . how sayest thou , folk - might , shall Dallach go ? ' 

 then folk - might , who stand close beside he , look up and redden 
 somewhat , as a man catch heedless when he should be heedful ; but he 
 look kindly on face - of - god , and say : 

 ' war - leader , so long as thou art in the Dale which ye kindred have 
 win back for we , thou art the chieftain , and no other , and I bid thee 
 do as thou wilt in this matter , and in all thing ; and I hereby give 
 command to all my kindre to do accord to thy will everywhere and 
 always , as they love I ; and indeed I deem that thy will shall be 
 theirs ; since it be only fool who know not their well - wisher . how 
 say ye , kinsman ? ' 

 then those about cry out : ' hail to face - of - god ! hail to the 
 Dalesmen ! hail to our friend ! ' 

 but folk - might go up to face - of - god , and throw his arm about he 
 and kiss he , and he say therewithal , so that most man hear he : 

 ' herewith I kiss not only thee , thou goodly and glorious warrior ! but 
 this kiss and embrace be for all the man of the kindred of the Dale 
 and the Shepherds ; since I deem that never have man more valiant 
 dwelt upon the earth . ' 

 Therewith all man shout for joy of he , and be exceed glad ; 
 but folk - might spake apart to face - of - god and say : 

 ' brother , I suppose that thou wilt deem it good to abide in this Hall 
 or anigh it ; for hereabout now be the heart of the Host . but as for 
 I , I would have leave to depart for a little ; since I have an 
 errand , whereof thou may wot . ' 

 then face - of - god smile on he , and say : ' go , and all good go with 
 thee ; and tell my father that I would have tiding , since I may not 
 be there . ' so he spake ; yet in his heart be he glad that he might 
 not go to behold the Bride lie sick and sorry . but folk - might 
 depart without more word ; and in the door of the Hall he meet Crow 
 the Shaft - speeder , who would have speak to he , and give he the 
 tiding ; but folk - might say to he : ' do thine errand to the War- 
 leader , who be within the Hall . ' and so go on his way . 

 then come Crow up the Hall , and stand before face - of - god and say : 
 ' war - leader , we have do that which be to be do , and have clear 
 all the house about the market - stead . moreover , by the rede of 
 Dallach we have set certain man of the poor folk of the Dale , who be 
 well look to by the other , to the burying of the slain felon ; and 
 they be dig trench in the field on the north side of the 
 market - stead , and carry the carcass thither as they may . but the 
 slain whom they find of the kindred do they array out yonder before 
 this Hall . in all wise be these man tame and biddable , save that 
 they rage against the Dusky Men , though they fear they yet . as for 
 we , they deem we Gods come down from heaven to help they . so much 
 for what be good : now have I an ill word to say ; to wit , that in the 
 house whereas we have find many thrall alive , yet also have we 
 find many dead ; for amongst these murder - carle be some of an evil 
 sort , who , when they see that the battle would go against they , 
 rush into the house hew down all before they - man , woman , and 
 child ; so that many of the hall and chamber we see run blood 
 like to shamble . to be short : of they whom they be go to hew 
 to the Gods , we have find thirteen living and three dead , of which 
 latter be one woman ; and of the living , seven woman ; and all these , 
 living and dead , with the leaden shackle yet on they wherein they 
 should be burn . to all these and other whom we have find , we 
 have do what of service we could in the way of victual and clothe , 
 so that they scarce believe that they be on this low earth . 
 moreover , I have with I two score of they , who be man of some wit , 
 and who know of the store of victual and other ware which the 
 felon have , and these will fetch and carry for you as much as ye 
 will . be all do rightly , war - leader ? ' 

 ' right well , ' say face - of - god , ' and we give thee our thank 
 therefor . and now it be well if these thy folk be to dight our 
 dinner for we in some green field the nighest that may be , and 
 thither shall all the Host be bid by sound of horn . meantime , let 
 we void this Hall till it be cleanse of the filth of the Dusky Ones ; 
 but hereafter shall we come again to it , and light a fire on the Holy 
 Hearth , and bid the Gods and the Fathers come back and behold their 
 child sit glad in the ancient Hall . ' 

 then man shout and be exceed joyous ; but face - of - god say once 
 more : ' bear ye a bench out into the market - place over against the 
 door of this Hall : thereon will I sit with other chieftain of the 
 kindred , that whoso will may have recourse to we . ' 

 so therewith all the man of the kindred make their way out of the 
 Hall and into the market - stead , which be by this time much clear 
 of the slaughter felon ; and the bale for the burn - offering be 
 now but smoulder , and a thin column of blue smoke be go up 
 waver amidst the light air of the afternoon . man be somewhat 
 silent now ; for they be stiff and weary with the morning 's battle ; 
 and a many have be hurt withal ; and on many there yet rest the 
 after - grief of battle , and sorrow for the loss of friend and well- 
 wisher . 

 for in the battle have fall one long hundred and two of the man of 
 the Host ; and of these be two score and five of the kindred of the 
 Steer , the Bull , and the Bridge , who have make such valiant onslaught 
 by the southern road . of the Shepherds die one score save three ; 
 for though they scatter the foe at once , yet they fall on with such 
 headlong valour , rather than wisely , that many be trap in the 
 throng of the Dusky Men . of the Woodlanders be slay one score and 
 nine ; for hard have be the fight about they , and no man of they 
 spar himself one whit . of the man of the Wolf , who be but a few , 
 fall sixteen man , and all save two of these in face - of - god 's battle . 
 of the burgdale man whom folk - might lead , to wit , they of the Face , 
 the Vine , and the Sickle , be but seven man slay outright . in this 
 tale be tell all those who die of their hurt after the day of 
 battle . therewithal many other be sorely hurt who mend , and 
 go about afterwards hale and hearty . 

 so as the folk abode in the market - place , somewhat faint and weary , 
 they hear horn blow up merrily , and Crow the Shaft - speeder come 
 forth and stand on the mound of the altar , and bade man fare to 
 dinner , and therewith he lead the way , bear in his hand the banner 
 of the Golden Bushel , of which House he be ; and they follow he 
 into a fair and great mead on the southwest of silver - stead , 
 besprinkle about with ancient tree of sweet chestnut . there they 
 find the board spread for they with the good of victual which the 
 poor down - trodden folk know how to dight for they ; and especially be 
 there great plenty of good wine of the sun - smite bent . 

 so they fall to their meat , and the poor folk , both man and woman , 
 serve they gladly , though they be somewhat afeard of these fierce 
 sword - wielder , the Gods who have deliver they . the say thrall 
 be mostly not of those who have fall so bitterly on their flee 
 master , but be man and woman of the household , not so roughly 
 treat as the other , that be to say , those who have be will not to 
 toil under the lash in the field and the silver - mine , and be as 
 wild as they durst be . 

 as for these waiting - thrall , the man of the kindred be gentle and 
 blithe with they , and often as they serve they would they stay their 
 hand   and especially if they be woman , and would draw down their 
 head to put a morsel in their mouth , or set the wine - cup to their 
 lip ; and they would stroke they and caress they , and treat they in 
 all wise as their dear friend . moreover , when any man be full , he 
 would arise and take hold of one of the thrall , and set he in his 
 place , and serve he with meat and drink , and talk with he kindly , 
 so that the poor folk be much bewildered with joy . and the first 
 that arise from table be the Sun - beam and Bow - may and Hall - face , 
 with many of the swain and the woman of the Woodlanders ; and they 
 go from table to table serve the other . 

 the Sun - beam have do off her armour , and go about exceed fair 
 and lovely in her kirtle ; but Bow - may yet bear her hauberk , for she 
 love it , and indeed it be so fine and well - wrought that it be no 
 great burden . albeit she have go down with the Sun - beam and other 
 woman to a fair stream thereby , and there have they bath and wash 
 themselves ; and Bow - may 's hurt , which be not great , have be 
 look to and bind up afresh , and she have come to table unhelmed , 
 with a wreath of wind - flower round her head . 

 there then they feast ; and their heart be strengthen by the 
 meat and drink ; and if sorrow be blend with their joy , yet be 
 they high - hearted through both joy and sorrow , look forward to the 
 good day to be in the Dales at the root of the Mountains , and the 
 love and fellowship of Folks and of Houses . 

 but as for face - of - god , he go not to the meadow , but abode sit 
 on the bench in the market - place , where be none else now of the 
 kindred save the appoint warder . they have bring he a morsel 
 and a cup of wine , and he have eat and drunk ; and now he sit there 
 with Dale - warden lying sheathe across his knee , and seem to gaze 
 on the thrall of silver - dale busy in carry away the body of 
 the slain felon , after they have strip they of their raiment and 
 weapon . yet indeed all this be before his eye as a picture which 
 he note not . rather he sit ponder many thing ; wonder at his 
 be there in silver - dale in the hour of victory ; long for the 
 peace of Burgdale and the bride - chamber of the Sun - beam . then go 
 his thought out toward his old playmate lying hurt in silver - dale ; 
 and his heart be grieve because of she , yet not for long , though 
 his thought still dwelt on she ; since he deem that she would live 
 and presently be happy - and happy thenceforward for many year . so 
 ponder face - of - god in the market - place of silver - dale . 



 CHAPTER L. FOLK - might seeth the BRIDE and SPEAKETH with she 



 now tell the tale of Folk - might , that he go his way from the Hall 
 to the house where the Bride lay ; and the swain who have bring the 
 message go along with he , and he be proud of walk beside so 
 mighty a warrior , and he talk to Folk - might as they go ; and the 
 sound of his voice be irksome to the chieftain , but he make as 
 though he hearken . yet when they come to the door of the house , 
 which be just out of the Place on the southern road   for thereby have 
 the Bride fall to earth , he could withhold his grief no long , 
 but turn on the threshold and lay his head on the door - jamb , and 
 sob and weep till the tear fall down like rain . and the boy 
 stand by wonder , and wish that Folk - might would forbear 
 weeping , but durst not speak to he . 

 in a while Folk - might leave weep and go in , and find a fair hall 
 sore befoul by the felon , and in the corner on a bed cover with 
 fur the wounded woman ; and at first sight he deem she not so pale 
 as he look to see she , as she lie with her long dark - red hair 
 strew over the pillow , her head move about wearily . a linen 
 cloth be throw over her body , but her arm lie out of it before 
 she . beside she sit the Alderman , his face sober enough , but not as 
 one in heavy sorrow ; and anigh he be another chair as if someone 
 have but just get up from it . there be no one else in the hall save 
 two woman of the Woodlanders , one of whom be cook some potion on 
 the hearth , and another be sweep the floor anigh of bran or some 
 such stuff , which have be throw down to sop up the blood . 

 so folk - might go up to the Bride , sorely dread the image of 
 death which she have grow to be , and sorely love the woman she be 
 and would be . 

 he kneel down by the bedside , heed iron - face little , though he 
 nod friendly to he , and he hold his face close to her ; but she 
 have her eye shut and do not open they till he have be there a 
 little while ; and then they open and fix themselves on his 
 without surprise or change . then she lift she right hand   for it 
 be in her left shoulder and side that she have be hurt   and slowly 
 lay it on his head , and draw his face to hers and kiss it fondly , 
 as she both smile and let the tear run over from her eye . then 
 she spake in a weak voice : 

 ' thou seest , chieftain and dear friend , that I may not stand by thy 
 victorious side to - day . and now , though I be fain if thou wouldst 
 never leave I , yet need must thou go about thy work , since thou art 
 become the Alderman of the Folk of silver - dale . yea , and even if 
 thou wert not to go from I , yet in a manner should I go from thee . 
 for I be grievously hurt , and I know by myself , and also the leech 
 have tell I , that the fever be a - come on I ; so that presently I 
 shall not know thee , but may deem thee to be a woman , or a hound , or 
 the very Wolf that be the image of the Father of thy kindred ; or 
 even , it may be , someone else - that I have play with time agone . ' 

 her voice falter and fade out here , and she be silent a while ; 
 then she say : 

 ' so depart , kind friend and dear love , bear this word with thee , 
 that should I die , I call on Iron - face my kinsman to bear witness 
 that I bid thee carry I to bale in silver - dale , and lie mine ash 
 with the ash of thy Fathers , with whom thine own shall mingle at 
 the last , since I have be of the warrior who have help to bring 
 thee aback to the land of thy folk . ' 

 then she smile and shut her eye and say : ' and if I live , as 
 indeed I hope , and how glad and glad I shall be to live , then shalt 
 thou bring I to thy house and thy bed , that I may not depart from 
 thee while both our life last . ' 

 and she open her eye and look at he ; and he might not speak for 
 a while , so ravish as he be betwixt joy and sorrow . but the 
 Alderman arise and take a gold ring from off his arm , and spake : 

 ' this be the gold ring of the God of the face , and I bear it on mine 
 arm betwixt the Folk and the God in all man - mote , and I bear it 
 through the battle to - day ; and it be as holy a ring as may be ; and 
 since ye be plight troth , and I be the witness thereof , it be 
 good that ye hold this ring together and call the God to witness , 
 who be akin to the God of the Earth , as we all be . take the ring , 
 folk - might , for I trust thee ; and of all woman now alive would I have 
 this woman happy . ' 

 so folk - might take the ring and thrust his hand through it , and take 
 her hand , and say : 

 ' Ye Fathers , thou God of the Face , thou Earth - god , thou Warrior , bear 
 witness that my life and my body be plight to this woman , the 
 Bride of the House of the Steer ! ' 

 his face be flushed and bright as he speak , but as his word cease 
 he note how feebly her hand lie in his , and his face fall , and he 
 gaze on her timidly . but she lie quiet , and say softly and slowly : 

 ' o father of my kindre ! o Warrior and God of the Earth ! bear 
 witness that I plight my troth to this man , to lie in his grave if I 
 die , and in his bed if I live . ' 

 and she smile on he again , and then close her eye ; but open 
 they presently once more , and say : 

 ' dear friend , how fare it with gold - mane to - day ? ' 

 say folk - might : ' so well he do , that none might have do well . 
 he fare in the fight as if he have be our Father the Warrior : he 
 be a great chieftain . ' 

 she say : ' wilt thou give he this message from I , that in no wise 
 he forget the oath which he swear upon the finger - ring as it lie on 
 the sundial of the Garden of the face ? and say , moreover , that I be 
 sorry that we shall part , and have between we such breadth of wild- 
 wood and mountain - neck . ' 

 ' yea , surely will I give thy message , ' say folk - might ; and in his 
 heart he rejoice , because he hear she speak as if she be sure of 
 life . then she say faintly : 

 ' it be now thy work to depart from I , and to do as it behoveth a 
 chieftain of the people and the Alderman of Silver - dale . Depart , 
 lest the leech chide I : farewell , my dear ! ' 

 so he lay his face to hers and kiss she , and rise up and embrace 
 iron - face , and go his way without look back . 

 but just over the threshold he meet old Hall - ward of the House of the 
 Steer , who be at point to enter , and he greet he kindly . the old 
 man look on he steadily , and say : ' to - morrow or the day after I 
 will utter a word to thee , o Chief of the Wolf . ' 

 ' in a good hour , ' say folk - might , ' for all thy word be true . ' 
 Therewith he gat he away from the house , and come to face - of - god , 
 where he sit before the altar of the Crooked Sword ; and now be the 
 chief come back from their meat , and be sit with he ; there 
 also be Wood - father and Wood - wont ; but Bow - may be with the sun- 
 beam , who be rest softly in the fair meadow after all the 
 turmoil . 

 so man make place for Folk - might beside the war - leader , who look 
 upon his face , and see that it be sober and unsmiling , but not heavy 
 or moody with grief . so he deem that all be as well as it might 
 be with the Bride , and with a good heart fall to take counsel with 
 the other ; and kindly and friendly be the rede which they hold 
 there , with no gainsaying of man by man , for the whole folk be glad 
 at heart . 

 so there they order all matter duly for that present time , and by 
 then they have make an end , it be past sunset , and man be lodge in 
 the chief house about the market - stead . 

 albeit , though they eat their meat with all joy of heart , and be 
 merry in converse one with the other , the man of the Wolf would by no 
 mean feast in their Hall again till it have be cleanse and 
 hallow anew . 



 CHAPTER LI . the dead BORNE to BALE : the MOTE - HOUSE RE - HALLOWED 



 on the morrow they bear to bale their slain man , and there withal 
 what be leave of the body of the four chieftain of the Great 
 Undoing . they bring they into a most fair meadow to the west of 
 silver - stead , where they have pile up a very great bale for the 
 burning . in that meadow be the doom - ring and thing - stead of the 
 Folk of the Wolf , and they have hallow it when they have first 
 conquer silver - dale , and it be deem far holy than the Mote- 
 house aforesaid , wherein the man of the kindre might hold no due 
 court ; but rather it be a Feast - hall , and a house where man have 
 converse together , and wherein precious thing and token of the 
 Fathers be store up . 

 the thing - stead in the meadow be flowery and well - grass , and a 
 little stream wind about thereby nearly cast a ring around it ; and 
 beyond the stream be a full fair grove of oak - tree , very tall and 
 ancient . there then they burn the dead of the Host , wrap about 
 in exceed fair raiment . and when the ash be gather , the man 
 of Burgdale and the Shepherds leave those of their folk for the 
 kindre to bury there in silver - dale ; for they say that they have a 
 right to claim such gueste for they that have help to win back the 
 Dale . 

 but when the burning be do and the bale quench , and the ash 
 gather and bury   and that be on the morrow , then man bear forth 
 the Banners of the jaw of the Wolf , and the Red Hand , and the silver 
 Arm , and the Golden Bushel , and the Ragged Sword , and the Wolf of the 
 Woodland ; and with great joy and triumph they bring they into the 
 Mote - house and hang they up over the dais ; and they kindle fire on 
 the Holy Hearth by hold up a disk of bright glass to the sun ; and 
 then they sing before the banner . and this be somewhat of the song 
 that they sing before they : 


 why be ye wending ? o whence and whither ? 
  what shineth over the fallow sword ? 
 what be the joy that ye bear in hither ? 
  what be the tale of your blend word ? 

 no whither we wend , but here have we stay we , 
  here by the ancient Holy Hearth ; 
 long have the moon and the year delay we , 
  but here be we come from the heart of the dearth . 

 we be the man of joy belate ; 
  we be the wanderer over the waste ; 
 we be but they that sit and wait , 
  watch the empty wind make haste . 

 long , long we sit and know no other , 
  save alien folk and the foe of the road ; 
 till late and at last we meet our brother , 
  and need must we to the old abode . 

 for once on a day they pray for gueste ; 
  and how be we then their bede to do ? 
 Wild be the waste for the people 's resting , 
  and deep the wealth of the Dale we know . 

 here be the board that we must spread they 
  down in the fruitful Dale and dear ; 
 here be the hall where we would bed they : 
  and how should we tarry otherwhere ? 

 over the waste we come together : 
  there be the tangle athwart the way ; 
 there be the wind - storm and the weather ; 
  the red rain darken down the day . 

 but that day of the day what grief should let we , 
  when we see through the cloud the dale - glad sun ? 
 we tear at the tangle that beset we , 
  and stand at peace when the day be do . 

 Hall of the Happy , take our greeting ! 
  bid thou the Fathers come and see 
 the folk - sign on thy wall a - meeting , 
  and deem to - day what man we be . 

 look on the Holy Hearth new - litten , 
  how the spark fly twinkle up aloof ! 
 how the waver smoke by the sunlight smitten , 
  curl up around the beam - rich roof ! 

 for here once more be the Wolf abiding , 
  nor ever more from the Dale shall wend , 
 and never again his head be hide , 
  till all day be dark and the world have end . 



 CHAPTER LII . of the new beginning of good day in SILVER - DALE 



 on the third day there be high - tide and great joy amongst all man 
 from end to end of the Dale ; and the deliver thrall be feast 
 and make much of by the kindred , so that they scarce know how to 
 believe their own five sens that tell they the good tiding . 

 for none strove to grieve they and torment they ; what they would , 
 that do they , and they have all thing plenteously ; since for all be 
 there enough and to spare of good store up for the Dusky Men , as 
 corn and wine and oil and spice , and raiment and silver . horse 
 be there also , and neat and sheep and swine in abundance . Withal 
 there be the good and dear land ; the wax corn on the acre ; the 
 blossoming vine on the hillside ; and about the orchard and 
 alongside the way , the plum - tree and cherry - tree and pear - tree 
 that have cast their blossom and be overhung with little young 
 fruit ; and the fair apple - tree a - blossoming , and the chestnut 
 spread their bough from their twisted trunk over the green 
 grass . and there be the goodly pasture for the horse and the neat , 
 and the thymy hill - grass for the sheep ; and beyond it all , the 
 thicket of the great wood , with its unfailing store of goodly timber 
 of ash and oak and holly and yoke - elm . there need no man lack unless 
 man compel he , and all be rich enough and wide enough for the 
 waxing of a very great folk . 

 now , therefore , man betook they to what be their own before the 
 coming of the Dusky Men ; and though at first many of the deliver 
 thrall - folk feast somewhat above measure , and though there be 
 some of they who be not very brisk at work on the earth for 
 their livelihood ; yet be the most part of they quick of wit and 
 deft of hand , and they mostly fall to presently at their cunning , 
 both of husbandry and handicraft . moreover , they have great love of 
 the kindred , and especially of the Woodlanders , and strove to do all 
 thing that might pleasure they . and as for those who be dull and 
 listless because of their many torment of the last ten year , they 
 would at least fetch and carry willingly for they of the kindred ; 
 and these last grudge they not meat and raiment and house - room , even 
 if they work but little for it , because they call to mind the 
 evil day of their thralldom , and bethink they how few be man 's 
 day upon the earth . 

 thus all thing throve in silver - dale , and the day wear on toward 
 the summer , and the Yule - tide rest beyond it , and the year beyond 
 and far beyond the winning of silver - dale . 



 CHAPTER LIII . of the word which HALL - WARD of the steer have for folk- 
 might 



 but of the time then pass , it be to be say that the whole host 
 abode in Silver - dale in great mirth and good liking , till they should 
 hear tiding of Dallach and his company , who have follow hot - foot on 
 the fleer of the Dusky Men . and on the tenth day after the battle , 
 iron - face and his two son and stone - face be sit about sunset 
 under a great oak - tree by that stream - side which run through the 
 mote - stead ; there also be folk - might , somewhat distraught because of 
 his love for the Bride , who be now mend of her hurt . as they 
 sit there in all content they see folk come toward they , three in 
 number , and as they draw nigh they see that it be old Hall - ward of 
 the Steer , and the Sun - beam and Bow - may follow he hand in hand . 

 when they come to the brook Bow - may run up to the elder to help he 
 over the step - stone ; which she do as one who love he , as the 
 old man be stark enough to have wad the water waist - deep . she be 
 no long in her war - gear , but be clothe after she will not of Shadowy 
 Vale , in nought but a white woollen kirtle . so she stand in the 
 stream beside the stone , and let the swift water ripple up over her 
 ankle , while the elder lean on her shoulder and look down upon 
 she kindly . the Sun - beam follow after they , step daintily from 
 stone to stone , so that she be a fair sight to see ; her face be 
 smile and happy , and as she step forth on to the green grass the 
 colour flush up in it , but she cast her eye adown as one somewhat 
 shameface . 

 so the chieftain rise up before the leader of the Steer , and folk- 
 might go up to he , and greet he , and take his hand and kiss 
 he on the cheek . and Hall - ward say : 

 ' hail to the chief of the kindred , and my earthly friend ! ' 

 then folk - might bade he sit down by he , and all the man sit down 
 again ; but the Sun - beam lean she back against a sapling ash hard 
 by , her foot set close together ; and Bow - may go to and fro in short 
 turn , keep well within ear - shot . 

 then say Hall - ward : ' folk - might , I have pray thy kinswoman Bow- 
 may to lead I to thee , that I might speak with thee ; and it be good 
 that I find my kinsman of the Face in thy company ; for I would say a 
 word to thee that concern they somewhat . ' 

 say folk - might : ' guest , and warrior of the Steer , thy word be 
 ever good ; and if this time thou com to ask aught of I , then 
 shall they be well than good . ' 

 say Hall - ward : ' tell I , folk - might , hast thou see my daughter the 
 Bride to - day ? ' 

 ' yea , ' say folk - might , redden . 

 ' what didst thou deem of her state ? ' say Hall - ward . 

 say folk - might : ' Thou know thyself that the fever hath leave she , 
 and that she be mend . ' 

 Hall - ward say : ' in a few day belike we shall be wend home to 
 Burgdale : when deem thou that the Bride may travel , if it be 
 but on a litter ? ' 

 folk - might be silent , and Hall - ward smile on he and say : 

 ' wouldst thou have her tarry , o chief of the Wolf ? ' 

 ' so it be , ' say folk - might , ' that it might be labour lose for she to 
 journey to Burgdale at present . ' 

 ' thinkest thou ? ' say Hall - ward ; ' hast thou a mind then that if she 
 goeth she shall speedily come back hither ? ' 

 ' it have be in my mind , ' say folk - might , ' that I should we d she . 
 Wilt thou gainsay it ? I pray thee , Iron - face my friend , and ye 
 stone - face and hall - face , and thou , face - of - god , my brother , to lay 
 thy word to mine in this matter . ' 

 then say Hall - ward stroke his beard : ' there will be a seat 
 miss in the Hall of the Steer , and a sore lack in the heart of 
 many a man in Burgdale if the Bride come back to we no more . we 
 look not to lose the maiden by her wedding ; for it be no long way 
 betwixt the House of the Steer and the House of the Face . but now , 
 when I arise in the morning and miss she , I shall take my staff and 
 walk down the street of Burgstead ; for I shall say , the Maiden hath 
 go to see Iron - face my friend ; she be well in the House of the 
 Face . and then shall I remember how that the wood and the waste lie 
 between we . how sayest thou , Alderman ? ' 

 ' a sore lack it will be , ' say Iron - face ; ' but all good go with she ! 
 though while shall I go hatless down Burgstead street , and say , now 
 will I go fetch my daughter the Bride from the House of the Steer ; 
 while many a day 's journey shall lie betwixt we . ' 

 say Hall - ward : ' I will not beat about the bush , Folk - might ; what 
 gift wilt thou give we for the maiden ? ' 

 say folk - might : ' whatever be mine shall be thine ; and whatsoever of 
 the Dale the kindre and the poor folk begrudge thee not , that shalt 
 thou have ; and deem thou that they will begrudge thee aught ? be 
 it enough ? ' 

 Hall - ward say : ' I wot not , chieftain ; see thou to it ! Bow - may , my 
 friend , bring hither that which I would have from silver - dale for the 
 House of the Steer in payment for our maiden . ' 

 then Bow - may come forward speedily , and go up to the Sun - beam , and 
 lead she by the hand in front of Folk - might and Hall - ward and the 
 other chieftain . then folk - might start , and leapt up from the 
 ground ; for , sooth to say , he have be think so wholly of the 
 Bride , that his sister be not in his mind , and he have have no deeming 
 of whither Hall - ward be come , though the other guess well 
 enough , and now smile on he merrily , when they see how wild Folk- 
 might stared . as for the Sun - beam , she stand there blush like a 
 rise in June , but look her brother straight in the face , as Hall- 
 ward say : 

 ' folk - might , chief of the Wolf , since thou wouldst take our maiden 
 the Bride away from we , I ask thee to make good her place with this 
 maiden ; so that the House of the Steer may not lack , when they who 
 be will not to we d therein come to we and pray we for a bedfellow for 
 the good of their kindre . ' 

 then become folk - might smile and merry like unto the other , and he 
 say : ' Chief of the Steer , this gift be thine , together with aught 
 else which thou mayst desire of we . ' 

 then he kiss the Sun - beam , and say : ' sister , we look for this 
 to befall in some fashion . yet we deem that he that should lead 
 thee away might abide with we for a moon or two . but now let all 
 this be , since if thou art not to bear child to the kindred of 
 silver - dale , yet shalt thou bear they to their friend and fellow . 
 and now choose what gift thou wilt have of we to keep we in thy 
 memory . ' 

 she say : ' the memory of my people shall not fade from I ; yet 
 indeed I ask thee for a gift , to wit , Bow - may , and the two son of 
 Wood - father that be leave since Wood - wicked be slay ; and belike the 
 elder and his wife will be fain to go with their son , and ye will 
 not hinder they . ' 

 ' even so shall it be do , ' say folk - might , and he be silent a 
 while , ponder ; and then he say : 

 ' lo you , friend ! doth it not seem strange to you that peace 
 sundereth as well as war ? indeed I deem it grievou that ye shall 
 have to miss your well - beloved kinswoman . and for I , I be now grow 
 so used to this woman my sister , though at while she hath be 
 masterful with I , that I shall often turn about and think to speak 
 to she , when there lie long day of wood and waste betwixt her voice 
 and mine . 

 the Sun - beam laugh in his face , though the tear stand in her eye , 
 as she say : ' keep up thine heart , brother ; for at least the way be 
 shorter betwixt Burgdale and silver - dale than betwixt life and death ; 
 and the road we shall learn belike . ' 

 say Hall - face : ' so it be that my brother be no ill woodman , as ye 
 learn last autumn . ' 

 iron - face smile , but somewhat sadly ; for he behold face - of - god , who 
 have no eye for anyone save the Sun - beam ; and no marvel be that , for 
 never have she look fairer . and forsooth the war - leader be not 
 utterly well - pleased ; for he be deeming that there would be delay 
 of his wedding , now that the Sun - beam be to become a maid of the 
 Steer ; and in his mind he half deem that it would be well if he 
 be to take she by the hand and lead her home through the wild - wood , 
 he and she alone ; and she look on he shyly , as though she have a 
 deeming of his thought . albeit he know it might not be , that he , the 
 choose war - leader , should trouble the peace of the kindre ; for he 
 wotte that all this be do for peace ' sake . 

 so Hall - ward stand forth and take the Sun - beam 's right hand in his , 
 and say : 

 ' now do I take this maiden , Sun - beam of the kindre of the Wolf , and 
 lead she into the House of the Steer , to be in all way one of the 
 maiden of our House , and to we d in the blood wherein we have be 
 will not to we d. neither from henceforth let anyone say that this woman 
 be not of the blood of the Steer ; for we have give she our blood , 
 and she be of we duly and truly . ' 

 thereafter they talk together merrily for a little , and then turn 
 toward the house , for the sun be now down ; and as they go Iron- 
 face spake to his son , and say : 

 ' gold - mane , wilt thou verily keep thine oath to we d the fair woman 
 in the world ? by how much be this one fair than my dear daughter 
 who shall no more dwell in mine house ? ' 

 say face - of - god : ' yea , father , I shall keep mine oath ; for the 
 Gods , who know much , know that when I swear last Yule I be think 
 of the fair woman go yonder beside Hall - ward , and of none other . ' 

 ' ah , son ! ' say Iron - face , ' why didst thou beguile we ? hadst thou 
 but tell we the truth then ! ' 

 ' Yea , Alderman , ' say face - of - god smile , ' and how thou would 
 have rag against I then , when thou hast scarce forgive I now ! 
 in sooth , father , I fear to tell you all : I be young ; I be one 
 against the world . yea , yea ; and even that be sweet to I , so 
 sorely as I love she - Hast thou forget , father ? ' 

 iron - face smile , and answer not ; and so come they to the house 
 wherein they be gueste . 



 CHAPTER LIV . tiding of dallach : a FOLK - MOTE in SILVER - DALE 



 three day thereafter come two swift runner from Rose - dale with 
 tiding of Dallach . in all wise have he thriven , and have slay many 
 of the runaway , and have come happily to rose - dale : therein by the 
 mere shaking of their sword have they all their will ; for there be 
 but a few of the Dusky Warriors in the Dale , since the more part have 
 fare to the slaughter in silver - stead . now therefore have Dallach 
 be make Alderman of Rose - dale ; and the Burgdalers who have go with 
 he should abide the come thither of the rest of the Burgdale Host , 
 and meantime of their come should uphold the new Alderman in Rose- 
 dale . Howbeit Dallach send word that it be not to be doubt but 
 that many of the Dusky Men have escape to the wood , and should yet 
 be the death of many a mother 's son , unless it be well look to . 

 and now the more part of the burgdale man and the Shepherds begin to 
 look toward home , albeit some amongst they have not be ill - pleased 
 to abide there yet a while ; for life be exceed soft to they 
 there , though they help the poor folk gladly in their husbandry . 
 for especially the woman of the Dale , of whom many be very goodly , 
 hanker after the fair - faced tall Burgdalers , and be as kind to 
 they as might be . Forsooth not a few , both carle and queen , of the 
 old thrall - folk pray they of Burgdale to take they home thither , 
 that they might see new thing and forget their old torment once for 
 all , yea , even in dream . the Burgdalers would not gainsay they , and 
 there be no one else to hinder ; so that there go with the burgdale 
 man at their departure hard on five score of the silver - dale folk who 
 be not of the kindred . 

 and now be a great Folk - mote holden in silver - dale , whereto the 
 burgdale man and the Shepherds be bid ; and thereat the War- 
 leader give out the morrow of the morrow for the day of the departure 
 of the Host . there also be the matter of silver - dale duly 
 order : the Men of the Wolf would have have the Woodlanders dwell 
 with they in the fair - build stead , and take to they of the goodly 
 stone house there what they would ; but this they naysaid , choose 
 rather to dwell in scattered house , which they build for themselves 
 at the utmost limit of the tillage . 

 indeed , the most abode not even there a long while ; for they love 
 the wood and its deed . so they go forth into the wood , and 
 clear they space to dwell in , and build they hall such as they 
 love , and fall to their old woodland craft of charcoal - burning and 
 hunting , wherein they throve well . and good for silver - dale be 
 their abide there , since they become a sure defence and stout 
 outpost against all foeman . for the rest , wheresoever they dwelt , 
 they be guest - cherishing and blithe , and be well belove by all 
 people ; and they wed with the other Houses of the child of the 
 Wolf . 

 as to the other matter whereof they take rede at this Folk - mote , 
 they have mostly to do with the warding of the Dale , and the learning 
 of the deliver thrall to handle weapon duly . for man deem it 
 most like that they would have to meet other man of the kindred of 
 the Felons ; which indeed fall out as the year wear . 

 moreover , Folk - might   by the rede of Stone - face   send messenger to 
 the Plain and the Cities , unto man whom he know there , do they to 
 wit of the tiding of silver - dale , and how that a peaceful and guest- 
 love people , have good store of ware , now dwelt therein , so that 
 chapman might have recourse thither . 

 lastly spake Folk - might and say : 

 ' guest and brother - in - arm , we have be look about our new 
 house , which be our old one , and therein we find great store of 
 ware which we need not , and which we can but use if ye use they . of 
 your kindness therefore we pray you to take of those thing what ye 
 can easily carry . and if ye say the way be long , as indeed it be , 
 since ye be bent on go through the wood to rose - dale , and so on 
 to Burgdale , yet shall we furnish you with beast to bear your good , 
 and with such wain as may pass through the woodland way . ' 

 then rise up Fox of Upton and say : ' o folk - might , and ye man of the 
 Wolf , be it know unto you , that if we have do anything for your 
 help in the winning of silver - dale , we have thus do that we might 
 help ourselves also , so that we might live in peace henceforward , and 
 that we might have your friendship and fellowship therewithal , so 
 that here in Silver - dale might wax a mighty folk who join unto we 
 should be strong enough to face the whole world . such be the rede 
 of wise man when they go a - warring . but we have no will to go back 
 home again make rich with your wealth ; this hath be far from our 
 thought in this matter . ' 

 and there go up a murmur from all the Burgdalers yeasaye his 
 word . 

 but folk - might take up the word again and spake : 

 ' Men of Burgdale and the Sheepcotes , what ye say be both manly and 
 friendly ; yet , since we look to see a road make plain through the 
 woodland betwixt Burgdale and silver - dale , and that often ye shall 
 face we in the feast - hall , and while stand beside we in the fray , we 
 must need pray you not to shame we by depart empty - handed ; for 
 how then may we look upon your face again ? stone - face , my friend , 
 thou art old and wise ; therefore I bid thee to help we herein , and 
 speak for we to thy kindred , that they naysay we not in this matter . ' 

 then stand up stone - face and say : ' Forsooth , friend , Folk - might be 
 in the right herein ; for he may look for anger from the wight that 
 come and go betwixt his kindre and the Gods , if they see we fare 
 back giftless through the wood . moreover , now that ye have see 
 silver - dale , ye may wot how rich a land it be of all good thing , and 
 able to bring forth enough and to spare . and now meseemeth the god 
 love this folk that shall dwell here ; and they shall become a mighty 
 Folk , and a part of our very self . therefore let we take the gift 
 of our friend , and thank they blithely . for surely , as saith folk- 
 might , henceforth the wood shall become a road betwixt we , and the 
 thicket a halting - place for friend bear goodwill in their hand . ' 

 when he have speak , man yeasaid his word and forbore the gift no 
 long ; and the Folk - mote sunder in all love - kindness . 



 CHAPTER LV . departure from SILVER - DALE 



 on morrow of the morrow be the burgdale man and they of the 
 Shepherds gather together in the market - stead early in the morning , 
 and they be all ready for departure ; and the man of the Wolf and 
 the Woodlanders , and of the deliver thrall a great many , stand 
 round about they grieve that they must go . there be much talk 
 between the folk of the Dale and the Guests , and many promise be 
 give and take to come and go betwixt the two Dales . there also 
 be the man of the thrall - folk who be to wend home with the 
 Burgdalers ; and they have be stuff with good thing by the man of 
 the kindred , and be as fain as might be . 

 as for the Sun - beam , she be somewhat out of herself at first , be 
 eager and restless beyond she will not , and yet at while weeping - ripe 
 when she call to mind that she be now leave all those thing , 
 the gain whereof have be a dream to she both wake and sleep for 
 these year past . but at last , as she stand in the door of the Mote- 
 house , and behold all the throng of folk happy and friendly , it come 
 over she that she herself have do her full share to bring all this 
 about , and that all those pleasant place of silver - dale now full of 
 the goodly life of man would be there even as she have strive for 
 they , and that they would be a part of she leave behind , though she 
 be dwell otherwhere . 

 Therewithal she say to herself that it be now her part to wield the 
 life of man in Burgdale , and begin once more her day of a chieftain 
 and a swayer of the Folk , and the life of a stir woman , which the 
 edge of the sword and the need of the hard hand - play have take out of 
 her hand for a while , make she as a child in the hand of the 
 strong wielder of the blade . 

 so now she become calm once more , and her face be clothe again with 
 the full measure of that majesty of beauty which have once overawe 
 face - of - god amidst his love of she ; and folk behold she and marvel 
 at her fairness , and say : ' she hath an inward sorrow at leave the 
 fair Dale wherein her father dwelt , and where her mother 's ash lie 
 in earth . ' albeit now be her sorrow but little , and much be her 
 hope , and her foresight of day to be ; though all the Dale , yea , 
 every leaf and twig of it whereby her foot have ever pass , and each 
 stone of the fair house , be to she as a picture that she could look 
 on from henceforth for ever . 

 of the Bride it be to be say that she be now much mend , and she 
 cause man bear she on a litter out into the Marketplace , that she 
 might look on the departure of her folk . she have see face - of - god 
 once and again since the Day of Battle , and each time have be kind 
 and blithe with he ; and for Iron - face , she love he so well that 
 she be ever loth to let he depart from she , save when folk - might 
 be with she . 

 and now be the Alderman stand beside she , and she say to he : 
 ' Friend and kinsman , this be the day of departure , and though I must 
 need abide behind , and be content to abide , yet doth mine heart ache 
 with the sundering ; for to - morrow when I wake in the morning there 
 will be no more sending of a messenger to fetch thee to I . indeed , 
 great hath be the love between I and my people , and nought hath 
 come between we to mar it . now , kinsman , I would see gold - mane , my 
 cousin , that I may bid he farewell ; for who knoweth if I shall see 
 he again hereafter ? ' 

 then go iron - face and find face - of - god where he be speak with 
 Folk - might and the chieftain , and say to he : 

 ' come quickly , for thy cousin the Bride would speak with thee . ' 

 face - of - god redden , and pal afterwards , but he go along with 
 his father silently ; and his heart beat as he come and stand before 
 the litter whereas the Bride lay , clothe all in white and prop up on 
 fair cushion of red silk . she be frail to look on , and wear and 
 pale yet ; but he deem that she be very happy . 

 she smile on he , and reach out her hand and say : 

 ' welcome once more , cousin ! ' and he hold her hand and kiss it , and 
 be nigh weeping , so sore be he beset by a throng of memory 
 concern she and he in the day when they be little ; and he 
 bethink he of her love - kindness of past day , beyond that of 
 most child , beyond that of most maiden ; and how there be nothing 
 in his life but she have a share in it , till the day when he find the 
 Hall on the Mountain . 

 so he say to she : ' Kinswoman , be it well with thee ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' I be now nigh whole of my hurt . ' 

 he be silent a while ; then he say : 

 ' and otherwise art thou merry at heart ? ' 

 ' yea , indeed , ' say she ; ' yet thou wilt not find it hard to deem that 
 I be sorry of the sundering betwixt I and Burgdale . ' 

 again be he silent , and say in a while : ' dost thou deem that I 
 work that sunder ? ' 

 she smile kindly on he and say : ' gold - mane , my playmate , thou art 
 become a mighty warrior and a great chief ; but thou art not so mighty 
 as that . many thing lie behind the sundering which be neither 
 thou nor I. ' 

 ' yet , ' say he , ' it be but such a little time agone that all thing 
 seem so sure ; and we - to both of we be the outlook happy . ' 

 ' let it be happy still , ' she say , ' now begrudge be go . Belike 
 the sundering come because we be so sure , and have no defence 
 against the wearing of the day ; even as it fareth with a folk that 
 hath no foe . ' 

 he smile and say : ' even as it hath befall THY folk , o Bride , a 
 while ago . ' 

 she redden , and reach her hand to he , and he take it and hold 
 it , and say : ' shall I see thee again as the day wear ? ' 

 say she : ' o chieftain of the Folk , thou shalt have much to do in 
 Burgdale , and the way be long . yet would I have thee see my 
 child . forget not the token on my hand which thou holdest . but 
 now get thee to thy folk with no more word ; for after all , playmate , 
 the sundering be grievous to I , and I would not spin out the time 
 thereof . farewell ! ' 

 he say no more , but stoop down and kiss her lip , and then 
 turn from she , and take his way to the head of the Host , and fall 
 to ask and answering , and bidding and arraying ; and in a little 
 time be his heart dance with joy to think of the day that lay 
 before he , wherein now all seem happy . 

 so be all array for departure when it lack three hour of noon . 
 as Folk - might have promise , there be certain light wain draw by 
 bullock abide the departure of the Host , and of sumpter bullock 
 and horse no few ; and all these be laden with fair gift of the 
 Dale , as silver , and raiment , and weapon . there be many thing 
 fair - wrought in the time of the Sorrow , that henceforth should see 
 but little sorrow . moreover , there be plenty of provision for the 
 way , both meal and wine , and sheep and neat ; and all thing as fair 
 as might be , and well - arrayed . 

 it be the Shepherds who be to lead the way ; and after they be 
 array the man of the Vine and the Sickle ; then they of the Steer , 
 the Bridge , and the Bull ; and lastly the House of the Face , with old 
 stone - face lead they . the Sun - beam be to journey along with the 
 House of the Steer , which have take she in as a maiden of their 
 blood ; and though she have so much liefer have fare with the House of 
 the Face , yet she go meekly as she be bid , as one who have 
 get a great thing , and will make no stir about a small one . 

 along with she be Wood - father and Wood - mother , and Wood - wise , now 
 whole of his hurt , and wood - wont , and Bow - may . Save Bow - may , they 
 be not very joyous ; for they be fain of silver - dale , and it irk 
 they to leave it ; moreover , they also have liefer have go along with 
 the House of the war - leader . 

 last of all go those people of the once thrall of the Dusky Men 
 who have cast in their lot with the Burgdalers , and they be 
 exceed merry ; and especially the woman of they , they be 
 chatter like the stare in the autumn evening , when they gather 
 from the field in the tall elm - tree before they go to roost . 

 now all the man of the Dale , both of the kindred and of the thrall- 
 folk , make way for the Host and its having , that they might go their 
 way down the Dale ; albeit the Woodlanders clung close to the line of 
 their ancient friend , and with they , as man who be sorry for the 
 sundering , be Wolf - stone and God - swain and Spear - fist . but the 
 chief , they draw around Folk - might a little beside the way . 

 now red - coat of Waterless , who have be hurt , and be now whole 
 again , cast his arm about Folk - might and kiss he , and say : 

 ' all the way hence to Burgdale will I sow with good wish for thee 
 and thine , and especially for my dear friend God - swain of the Silver 
 Arm ; and I would wish and long that they might turn into spell to 
 draw thy foot to usward ; for we love thee well . ' 

 in like wise spake other of the Burgdalers ; and folk - might be kind 
 and blithe with they , and he say : 

 ' friend , forget ye not that the way be no long from you to we than 
 it be from we to you . one half of this matter it be for you to deal 
 with . ' 

 ' true be that , ' say Red - beard of the Knolls , ' but look you , folk- 
 might , we be but simple husbandman , and may not often stir from our 
 meadow and acre ; even now I bethink I that may be amidst we , and I 
 be begin to be draw by the thought of the haysel . whereas thou- 
 - '   and therewith he redden   ' I doubt that thou hast little to do 
 save the work of chieftain , and we know that such work be but little 
 miss if it be undo . ' 

 Thereat Folk - might laugh ; and when the other see that he laugh , 
 they laugh also , else have they foreborne for courtesy 's sake . 

 but folk - might answer : ' nay , chief of the Sickle , I be not 
 altogether a chieftain , now we have get we peace ; and somewhat of 
 a husbandman shall I be . moreover , doubt ye not that I shall do my 
 utmost to behold the fair Dale again ; for it be but mountain that 
 meet not . ' 

 now spake face - of - god to folk - might , smile and somewhat softly , and 
 say : ' be all forgive now , since the day when we first feel each 
 other 's arm ? ' 

 ' yea , all , ' say folk - might ; ' now hath befall what I foretold thee 
 in Shadowy Vale , that thou might pay for all that have come and 
 go , if thou would but look to it . indeed thou wert angry with 
 I for that say on that eve of Shadowy Vale ; but see thou , in 
 those day I be an old man than thou , and might admonish thee 
 somewhat ; but now , though but few day have go over thine head , yet 
 many deed have abide in thine hand , and thou art much aged . anger 
 hath leave thee , and wisdom hath wax in thee . as for I , I may now 
 say this word : may the Folk of Burgdale love the Folk of silver - dale 
 as well as I love thee ; then shall all be well . ' 

 then face - of - god cast his arm about he and kiss he , and turn 
 away toward stone - face and Hall - face his brother , where they stand at 
 the head of the array of the face ; and even therewith come up the 
 Alderman somewhat sad and sober of countenance , and he push by the 
 War - leader roughly and would not speak with he . 

 and now blow up the horn of the Shepherds , and they begin to move on 
 amidst the shouting of the man of silver - dale ; yet be there amongst 
 the Woodlanders those who weep when they see their friend verily 
 depart from they . 

 but when they of the foremost of the Host be get so far forward 
 that the man of the face could begin to move , lo ! there be redesman 
 with his fiddle amongst the leader ; and he have do a man 's work in 
 the day of battle , and all look kindly on he . about he on this 
 morn be some who have learn the craft of sing well together , 
 and know his minstrelsy , and he turn to these and nod as their 
 array move on , and he draw his bow across the string , and 
 straightway they fall a - singing , even as it might be thus : 


 back again to the dear Dale where bear be the kindre , 
  here wend we all live , and liveth our mirth . 
 here afoot fare our joyance , whatever man hindre , 
  through all wrath of the heaven , all storm of the earth . 

 o true , we have leave here a part of our treasure , 
  the ash of stout one , the stem of the shield ; 
 but the bold life they spend have sow we new pleasure , 
  fair tale for the telling in fold and on field . 

 for as oft as we sing of their edge ' upheaving , 
  when the yellow window shine forth o'er the night , 
 their name unforgotten with song interweave 
  shall draw forth dear drop from the depth of delight . 

 or when down by our foot the grey sickle be lie , 
  and behind we be curl the supper - tide smoke , 
 no whit shall they grudge we the joyance undye , 
  remembrance of man that put from we the yoke . 

 when the huddle of ewe from the fell we have drive , 
  and we see down the Dale the grey reach of the roof , 
 we shall tell of the gift in the battle - joy give , 
  all the fierceness of friend that drave sorrow aloof . 

 once then we lament , and mourn they depart ; 
  once only , no oftener . henceforth shall we fle 
 their name up aloft , when the merry hearte 
  to the Fathers unseen of our life - day we sing . 


 then be there silence in the rank of man ; and many murmur the 
 name of the fall as they fare on their way from out the market- 
 place of silver - stead . then once more Redesman and his mate take up 
 the song : 


 come tell I , o friend , for whom bideth the maiden 
  wet - foot from the river - ford down in the Dale ? 
 for whom hath the goodwife the ox - waggon laden 
  with the babble of child , brown - handed and hale ? 

 come tell I for what be the woman abide , 
  till each on the other aweary they lean ? 
 be it loiter of evil that thus they be chide , 
  the slow - footed bearer of sorrow unseen ? 

 Nay , yet be they toil if sorrow have wear they , 
  or hush have they bid with lip parch and wan . 
 the bird of the air other tiding have bear they - 
  how glad through the wood goeth man beside man . 

 then fare forth , o valiant , and loiter no long 
  than the cry of the cuckoo when May be at hand ; 
 late waxeth the spring - tide , and daylight grow long , 
  and nightly the star - street hang high o'er the land . 

 many life , many day for the Dale do ye carry ; 
  when the Host breaketh out from the thicket unshorn , 
 it shall be as the sun that refuseth to tarry 
  on the crown of all morning , the Midsummer morn . 


 again the song fall down till they be well on the western way down 
 silver - dale ; and then Redesman handle his fiddle once more , and 
 again the song rise up , and such - like be the word which be bear 
 back into the market - place of silver - stead : 


 and yet what be this , and why fare ye so slowly , 
  while our echo hall of our voice be dumb , 
 and abideth unlitten the hearth - brand the holy , 
  and the foot of the kind fare afield till we come ? 

 for not yet through the wood and its tangle ye wander ; 
  now skirt we no thicket , no path by the mere ; 
 far aloof for our foot lead the Dale - road out yonder ; 
  full fair be the morning , its doing all clear . 

 there be nought now our foot on the highway delaying 
  save the friend 's love - kindness , the sundering of speech ; 
 the well - willer 's word that end word with the saying , 
  the loth to depart while each looketh on each . 

 fare on then , for nought be ye laden with sorrow ; 
  the love of this land do ye bear with you still . 
 in two Dales of the earth for to - day and to - morrow 
  be wax the oak - tree of peace and good - will . 


 thus then they depart from Silver - dale , even as man who be a 
 portion thereof , and have not utterly leave it behind . and that night 
 they lie in the wild - wood not very far from the Dale 's end ; for they 
 go softly , fare amongst so many friend . 



 CHAPTER LVI . talk UPON the WILD - WOOD WAY 



 on the morrow morning when they be on their way again face - of - god 
 leave his own folk to go with the House of the Steer a while ; and 
 amongst they he fall in with the Sun - beam go along with Bow - may . 
 so they greet he kindly , and face - of - god fall into talk with the 
 Sun - beam as they go side by side through a great oak - wood , where 
 for a space be plain green - sward bare of all underwood . 

 so in their talk he say to she : ' what deem thou , my speech- 
 friend , concern our come back to guest in silver - dale one day ? ' 

 ' the way be long , ' she say . 

 ' that may hinder we but not stay we , ' say face - of - god . 

 ' that be sooth , ' say the Sun - beam . 

 say face - of - god : ' what thing shall stay we ? or deemest thou that 
 we shall never see silver - dale again ? ' 

 she smile : ' even so I think thou deemest , gold - mane . but many 
 thing shall hinder we besides the long road . ' 

 say he : ' yea , and what thing ? ' 

 ' thinkest thou , ' say the Sun - beam , ' that the winning of silver - stead 
 be the last battle which thou shalt see ? ' 

 ' Nay , ' say he , ' nay . ' 

 ' shall thy Dale - our Dale - be free from all trouble within itself 
 henceforward ? be there a wall build round it to keep out for ever 
 storm , pestilence , and famine , and the waywardness of its own folk ? ' 

 ' so it be as thou sayest , ' quoth face - of - god , ' and to meet such 
 trouble and overcome they , or to die in strife with they , this be a 
 great part of a man 's life . ' 

 ' yea , ' she say , ' and hast thou forget that thou art now a great 
 chieftain , and that the folk shall look to thee to use thee many day 
 in the year ? ' 

 he laugh and say : ' so it be . how many day have go by since I 
 wander in the wood last autumn , that the world should have change 
 so much ! ' 

 ' many deed shall now be in thy day , ' she say , ' and each deed as 
 the corn of wheat from which cometh many corn ; and a man 's day on 
 the earth be not over many . ' 

 ' then farewell , silver - dale ! ' say he , wave his hand toward the 
 north . ' war and trouble may bring I back to thee , but it maybe 
 nought else shall . farewell ! ' 

 she look on he fondly but unsmile , as he go beside her strong 
 and warrior - like . three pace from he go Bow - may , barefoot , in 
 her white kirtle , but bear her bow in her hand ; a leash of arrow 
 be in her girdle , her quiver hang at she back , and she be gird with 
 a sword . on the other side go wood - wont and Wood - wise , lightly 
 clothe but weapone . wood - mother be rid in an ox - wain just behind 
 they , and Wood - father go beside her bear an axe . scatter all 
 about they be the man of the Steer , gaily clothe , bear weapon , so 
 that the oak - wood be bright with they , and the glade merry with 
 their talk and singing and laughter , and before they down the glade 
 go the banner of the Steer , and the White Beast lead they the 
 near way to Burgdale . 



 CHAPTER LVII . how the host come HOME again 



 it be fourteen day before they come to Rose - dale ; for they have much 
 baggage with they , and they have no mind to weary themselves , and the 
 wood be nothing loathsome to they , whereas the weather be fair and 
 bright for the more part . they fall in with no mishap by the way . 
 but a score and three of runaway join themselves to the Host , 
 have watch their going and wotte that they be not foeman . 
 of these , some have hear of the overthrow of the Dusky Men in Silver- 
 dale , and other not . the Burgdalers receive they all , for it 
 seem to they no great matter for a score or so of new - comer to the 
 Dale . 

 but when the Host be come to Rose - dale , they find it fair arid 
 lovely ; and there they meet with those of their folk who have go with 
 Dallach . but Dallach welcome the kindred with great joy , and bade 
 they abide ; for he say that they have the less need to hasten , since 
 he have send messenger into Burgdale to tell man there of the 
 tiding . albeit they be mostly loth to tarry ; yet when he lie hard 
 on they not to depart as man on the morrow of a gild - feast , they 
 abode there three day , and be as well gueste as might be , and on 
 their departure they be laden with gift from the wealth of Rose- 
 dale by Dallach and his folk . 

 before they go their way Dallach spake with face - of - god and the 
 chief of the Dalesmen , and say : 

 ' ye have give I much from the time when ye find I in the wood a 
 naked wastrel ; yet now I would ask you a gift to lay on the top of 
 all that ye have give I . ' 

 say face - of - god : ' name the gift , and thou shalt have it ; for we 
 deem thee our friend . ' 

 ' I be no less , ' say Dallach , ' as in time to come I may perchance be 
 able to show you . but now I be ask you to suffer a score or two 
 of your man to abide here with I this summer , till I see how this 
 folk new - bear again be like to deal with I . for pleasure and a fair 
 life have become so strange to they , that they scarce know what to do 
 with they , or how to live ; and unless all be to go awry , I must need 
 command and forbid ; and though belike they love I , yet they fear I 
 not ; so that when my commandment pleaseth they , they do as I bid , and 
 when it pleaseth they not , they do contrary to my bidding ; for it 
 hath get into their mind that I shall in no case lift a hand against 
 they , which indeed be the very sooth . but your folk they fear as 
 warrior of the world , who have slay the Dusky Men in the market- 
 place of silver - stead ; and they be of alien blood to they , man who 
 will do as their friend biddeth   think our folk   against they who be 
 neither friend or foe . with such help I shall be well holpen . ' 

 in such wise spake Dallach ; and face - of - god and the chief say that 
 so it should be , if man could be find willing to abide in Rose - dale 
 for a while . and when the matter be put abroad , there be no lack 
 of such man amongst the young warrior , who have note that the dale 
 be fair amongst dale and its woman fair yet amongst woman . 

 so two score and ten of the burgdale man abode in Rose - dale , no one 
 of whom be of more than twenty and five winter . Forsooth diver of 
 they set up house in Rose - dale , and never come back to Burgdale , save 
 as guest . for a half score be wed in Rose - dale before the 
 year 's ending ; and seven more , who have also take to they wife of 
 the goodly of the rose - dale woman , betook they the next spring to 
 the Burg of the Runaways , and there build they a stead , and draw a 
 garth about it , and dig and sow the bank of the river , which they 
 call Inglebourne . and as year pass , this same stead throve 
 exceedingly , and man resort thither both from Rose - dale and 
 Burgdale ; for it be a pleasant place ; and the land , when it be 
 cure , be sweet and good , and the wood thereabout be full of deer 
 of all kind . so their stead be call Inglebourne after the 
 stream ; and in latter day it become a very goodly habitation of man . 

 moreover , some of the once - enthral folk of Rose - dale , when they 
 know that man of their kindre from Silver - dale be go home with 
 the man of Burgdale to dwell in the Dale , pray hard to go along 
 with they ; for they look on the Burgdalers as if they be new Gods 
 of the Earth . the Burgdale chief would not gainsay these man 
 either , but take with they three score and ten from Rose - dale , man 
 and woman , and promise they dwelling and livelihood in Burgdale . 

 so now with good heart the Host of Burgdale turn their face 
 toward their well - beloved Dale ; and they make good diligence , so that 
 in three day ' time they be come anigh the edge of the woodland 
 wilderness . Thither in the even - tide , as they be make ready for 
 their last supper and bed in the wood , come three man and two woman 
 of their folk , who have be abide their come ever since they have 
 have the tiding of silver - dale and the battle from Dallach . great 
 be the joy of these messenger as they go from company to company 
 of the warrior , and see the familiar face of their friend , and 
 hear their wonte voice tell all the story of battle and 
 slaughter . and for their part the man of the Host feast these 
 stay - at - home , and make much of they . but one of they , a man of the 
 House of the Face , leave the host a little after nightfall , and bore 
 back to Burgstead at once the tiding of the come home of the Host . 
 albeit since Dallach 's tiding of victory have come to the Dale , the 
 dweller in the stead of the country - side have leave Burgstead and 
 go home to their own house ; so that there be no great multitude 
 abide in the Thorp . 

 so early on the morrow be the Host astir ; but ere they come to 
 Wildlake 's Way , the Shepherd - folk turn aside westward to go home , 
 after they have bid farewell to their friend and fellow of the 
 Dale ; for their soul long for the sheepcote in the wind 
 valley under the long grey down ; and the garth where the last 
 year 's rick shoulder up against the old stone gable , and where 
 the daw be busy in the tall unfrequent ash - tree ; and the green 
 flowery meadow adown along the bright stream , where the crowfoot 
 and the paigle be bloom now , and the harebell be in flower 
 about the thorn - bush at the down 's foot , whence go the savour of 
 their blossom over sheep - walk and water - meadow . 

 so these go their way with many kind word ; and two hour 
 afterwards all the rest of the Host stand on the level ground of the 
 Portway ; but presently be the rank of war disorder and break up 
 by the joy of the woman and child , as they fall to draw goodman 
 or brother or lover out of the throng to the way that lead speediest 
 to their homestead and hall . for the war - leader would not hold the 
 host together any long , but suffer each man to go to his home , 
 deeming that the man of Burgstead , and chiefly they of the Face and 
 the Steer , would suffice for a company if any need be , and they 
 would be easily gather to meet any hap . 

 so now the man of the Middle and Lower Dale make for their house by 
 the road and the lane and the meadow , and the man of the Upper Dale 
 and Burgstead go their way along the Portway toward their hall , 
 with the throng of woman and child that have come out to meet they . 
 and now man come home when it be yet early , and the long day lie 
 before they ; and it be , as it be , make giddy and cumber with the 
 exceed joy of return , and the thought of the day when the fear of 
 death and sundering have be ever in their heart . for these new 
 hour be full of the kissing and embracing of lover , and the 
 sweetness of renew delight in behold the fair body so sorely 
 desire , and hearken the soft wheedling of long - for voice . 
 there be the cup of friend beneath the chestnut tree , and the 
 talk of the deed of the fighting - man , and of the heavy day of the 
 home - abider ; many a tale tell oft and o'er again . there be the 
 singing of old song and of new , and the behold the well - love 
 nook of the pleasant place , which death might well have make nought 
 for they ; and they be sweet with the fear of that which be past , 
 and in their pleasantness be fresh promise for the day to come . 

 so amid their joyance come evening and nightfall ; and though folk 
 be weary with the fulness of delight , yet now for many their 
 weariness lead they to the chamber of love before the rest of deep 
 night come to they to make they strong for the happy life to be begin 
 again on the morrow . 

 House by house they feast , and few be the lover that sit not 
 together that even . but face - of - god and the Sun - beam part at the 
 door of the House of the Face ; for need must she go with her new 
 folk to the House of the Steer , and need must face - of - god be amongst 
 his own folk in that hour of high - tide , and sit beside his father 
 beneath the image of the God with the ray - begirt head . 



 CHAPTER LVIII . how the MAIDEN WARD be hold in BURGDALE 



 now May be well wear when the Host come home to Burgdale ; and on the 
 very morrow of man 's home - come they begin to talk eagerly of the 
 Midsummer Weddings , and how the Maiden Ward would be the great and 
 fairest of all yet see , whereas battle and the deliverance from 
 battle stir up the longing and love both of man and maiden ; much 
 also man spake of the wedding of face - of - god and the Sun - beam ; and 
 need must their wedding abide to the time of the Maiden Ward at 
 Midsummer , and need also must the Sun - beam go on the Ward with the 
 other bride of the Folk . so then must face - of - god keep his soul in 
 patience till those few day be over , do what work come to hand ; 
 and he hold his head high among the people , and be well look to of 
 every man . 

 in all matter the Sun - beam help he , both in do and in 
 forbearing ; and now so wonderful and rare be her beauty , that folk 
 look on she with somewhat of fear , as though she come from the very 
 folk of the Gods . 

 indeed she seem somewhat change from what she have be of late ; 
 she be sober of demeanour during these last day of her maidenhood , 
 and sit amongst the kindre as one communing with herself : of few 
 word she be and little laughter ; but her face clear , not overcast 
 by any gloom or shake by passion : soft and kind be she in converse 
 with other , and sweet be the smile that come into her face if 
 other ' face seem to crave for they . for it must be say that as 
 some folk eat out their heart with fear of the come evil , even so 
 be she feed her soul with the joy of the day to be , whatever 
 trouble might fall upon they , whereof belike she forebode some . 

 so wear the day toward Midsummer , when the wheat be get past 
 the blossoming , and the grass in the mown field be grow deep 
 green again after the shearing of the scythe ; when the leaf be 
 most and big ; when the rose be begin to fall ; when the 
 apple be redden , and the skin of the grape - berry gathering 
 bloom . high aloft float the light cloud over the Dale ; deep blue 
 show the distant fell below the ice - mountain ; the water 
 dwindle ; all thing seek the shadow by daytime , and the twilight 
 of even and the twilight of dawn be but sunder by three hour of 
 half - dark night . 

 so in the bright forenoon be seventeen bride assemble in the Gate 
 of Burgstead   but of the rest of the Dale be twenty and three 
 look for , and with these be the Sun - beam , her face as calm as the 
 mountain lake under a summer sunset , while of the other many be 
 restless , and babble like April throstle ; and not a few talk to 
 she eagerly , and in their restless love of she drag she about 
 hither and thither . 

 no man be to be see that morning ; for such be the custom , that 
 the carle either depart to the field and the acre , or abode 
 within door on the morn of the day of the Maiden Ward ; but there be 
 a throng of woman about the Gate and down the street of Burgstead , 
 and it may well be deem that they keep not silence that hour . 

 so fare the bride of Burgstead to the place of the Maiden Ward on 
 the causeway , whereto be come already the other bride from stead 
 up and down the Dale , or be even then close at hand on the way ; and 
 among they be long - coat and her two fellow , with whom face - of - god 
 have hold converse on that morning whereon he have follow his fate to 
 the Mountain . 

 there then be they gather under the cliff - wall of the Portway ; 
 and by the road - side have their groom build they up bower of green 
 bough to shelter they from the sun 's burning , which be thatch 
 with bulrush , and deck with garland of the fair flower of 
 the meadow and the garden . 

 Forsooth they be a lovely sight to look on , for no fair woman 
 might be see in the world ; and the eld of they be scant of five 
 and twenty winter . every maiden be clothe in as goodly raiment as 
 she might compass ; their sleeve and gown - hem and girdle , yea , 
 their very shoe and sandal be embroider so fairly and closely , 
 that as they shift in the sun they change colour like the king- 
 fisher shooting from shadow to sunshine . accord to due custom 
 every maiden bear some weapon . a few have bow in their hand and 
 quiver at their back ; some have nought but a sword girt to their 
 side ; some bore slender - shaft spear , so as not to overburden 
 their shapely hand ; but to some it seem a merry game to carry long 
 and heavy thrust - spear , or to bear great war - axis over their 
 shoulder . Most have their flow hair coif with bright helm ; 
 some have burden their arm with shield ; some bore steel hauberk 
 over their linen smock : almost all have some piece of war - gear on 
 their body ; and one , to wit , Steed - linden of the Sickle , a tall and 
 fair damsel , be so arrayed that no garment could be see on she but 
 bright steel war - gear . 

 as for the Sun - beam , she be clothe in a white kirtle embroider from 
 throat to hem with work of green bough and flower of the goodly 
 fashion , and a garland of rose on her head . Dale - warden himself be 
 girt to her side by a girdle fair - wrought of golden wire , and she 
 bear no other weapon or war - gear ; and she let he lie quiet in his 
 scabbard , nor touch the hilt once ; whereas some of the other 
 damsel would be ever draw their sword out and thrust they 
 back . but all note that goodly weapon , the yoke - fellow of so many 
 great deed . 

 there then on the Portway , between the water and the rock - wall , rise 
 up plenteous and gleeful talk of clear voice shrill and soft ; and 
 while the maidens sang , and while they tell tale of old day , and 
 while they join hand and dance together on the sweet summer dust 
 of the highway . then they mostly grow aweary , and sit down on the 
 bank of the road or under their leafy bower . 

 noon come , and therewithal goodwife of the neighbouring Dale , who 
 bring they meat and drink , and fruit and fresh flower from the 
 teem garden ; and thereafter for a while they nurse their joy in 
 their bosom , and spake but little and softly while the day be at 
 its hot in the early afternoon . 

 then come out of Burgstead man make semblance of chapman with a 
 wain bear ware , and they make as though they be wend down 
 the Portway westward to go out of the Dale . then arise the weapone 
 maiden and bar the way to they , and turn they back amidst 
 fresh - spring merriment . 

 again in a while , when the sun be westere and the shadow grow 
 long , come herdsman from down the Dale driving neat , and make as 
 though they would pass by into Burgstead , but to they also do the 
 maidens gainsay the road , so that need must they turn back amidst 
 laughter and mockery , they themselves also laugh and mocking . 

 and so at last , when the maiden have be all alone a while , and it 
 be now hard on sunset , they draw together and stand in a ring , and 
 fall to singing ; and one gold - may of the House of the Bridge , a most 
 sweet singer , stand amidst their ring and lead they . and this be 
 somewhat of the meaning of their word : 


 the sun will not tarry ; now changeth the light , 
 fail the colour that marry the day to the Night . 

 amid the sun 's burn bright weapon we bore , 
 for this eve of our earning come once and no more . 

 for to - day hath no brother in yesterday 's tide , 
 and to - morrow no other alike it doth hide . 

 this day be the token of oath and behest 
 that ne'er shall be break through ill day and well . 

 here the troth hath be give , the oath hath be do , 
 to the folk that hath thriven well under the sun . 

 and the gift of its give our troth - day shall win 
 be the Dale for our living and dear day therein . 

 o Sun , now thou wanest ! yet come back and see 
 amidst all that thou gainest how gainful be we . 

 o witness of sorrow wide over the earth , 
 rise up on the morrow to look on our mirth ! 

 Thy bloom art thou bring back ever for man , 
 and thy bird be a - singing each summer again . 

 but to man little - hearted what winter be bad 
 than thy summer depart that bear they the curse ? 

 and e'en such art thou know where thriveth the year , 
 and good be all grow save thralldom and fear . 

 Nought such be our lover ' heart draw anigh , 
 while yet thy light hover aloft in the sky . 

 lo the seeker , the finder of Death in the Blade ! 
 what lip shall be kind on lip of mine lay ? 

 La he that hath drive back tribe of the South ! 
 Sweet - breathed be thine even , but sweeter his mouth . 

 come back from the sea then , o sun ! come aback , 
 look adown , look on I then , and ask what I lack ! 

 come many a morrow to gaze on the Dale , 
 and if e'er thou se sorrow remember its tale ! 

 for ' twill be of a story to tell how man die 
 in the garnering of glory that no man may hide . 

 o sun sink under ! o fragrance of earth ! 
 o heart ! o the wonder whence longing have birth ! 


 so they sing , and the sun sink indeed ; and amidst their singing the 
 eve be still about they , though there come a happy murmur from the 
 face of the meadow and the house of the Thorp aloof . but as their 
 song fall they hear the sound of footstep a many on the road ; so 
 they turn and stand with beat heart in such order as when a 
 band of the valiant draw together to meet many foe come on they 
 from all side , and they stand back to back to face all comer . and 
 even therewith , their raiment gleam amidst the gathering dusk , 
 come on they the young man of the Dale newly deliver from the grief 
 of war . 

 then in very deed the fierce mouth of the raiser of the war - shout 
 be kind on the face of tender maiden . then go spear and axe 
 and helm and shield clattering to the earth , as the arm of the new- 
 comer go round about the body of the Brides , weary with the long 
 day of sunshine , and glee and love speech , and the maiden suffer 
 the young man to lead they whither they would , and twilight begin to 
 draw round about they as the Maiden Band be sunder . 

 some , they be lead away westward down the Portway to the homestead 
 thereabout ; and for diver of these the way be long to their hall , 
 and they would have to wend over long stretch of dewy meadow , and 
 hear the night - wind whisper in many a tree , and see the east begin to 
 lighten with the dawn before they come to the lighted feast that 
 await they . but some turn up the Portway straight towards 
 Burgstead ; and short be their road to the hall where even now the 
 light be be kindle for their greeting . 

 as for the Sun - beam , she have be very quiet the day long , speak 
 as little as she might do , laugh not at all , and smile for 
 kindness ' sake rather than for merriment ; and when the groom come 
 seek their maiden , she withdraw herself from the band , and stand 
 alone amidst the road nigh to Burgstead than they ; and her heart 
 beat hard , and her breath come short and quick , as though fear have 
 catch she in its grip ; and indeed for one moment of time she fear 
 that he be not come to she . for he have go with the other groom 
 to that gather band , and have pass from one to the other , not 
 find she , till he have get he through the whole company , and 
 behold she await he . then indeed he bound toward she , and 
 catch she by the hand , and then by the shoulder , and draw she to 
 he , and she nothing loth ; and in that while he say to she : 

 ' come then , my friend ; lo thou ! they go each their own way toward the 
 hall of their house ; and for thee have I choose a way - a way over 
 the foot - bridge yonder , and over the dewy meadow on this good even 
 of the year . ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' she say , ' it may not be . surely the Burgstead groom 
 look to thee to lead they to the gate ; and surely in the House of the 
 face they look to see thee before any other . Nay , Gold - mane , my 
 dear , we must need go by the Portway . ' 

 he say : ' we shall be home but a very little while after the first , 
 for the way I tell of be as short as the Portway . but hearken , my 
 sweet ! when we be in the meadow we shall sit down for a minute on 
 a bank under the chestnut tree , and thence watch the moon come up 
 over the southern cliff . and I shall behold thee in the summer 
 night , and deem that I see all thy beauty ; which yet shall make I 
 dumb with wonder when I see it indeed in the house amongst the 
 candle . ' 

 ' o nay , ' she say , ' by the Portway shall we go ; the torch - bearer 
 shall be abide thee at the gate . ' 

 Spake face - of - god : ' then shall we rise up and wend first through a 
 wide treeless meadow , wherein amidst the night we shall behold the 
 kine move about like odorous shadow ; and through the greyness of 
 the moonlight thou shalt deem that thou se the pink colour of the 
 eglantine blossom , so fragrant they be . ' 

 ' o nay , ' she say , ' but it be meet that we go by the Portway . ' 

 but he say : ' then from the wide meadow come we into a close of 
 corn , and then into an orchard - close beyond it . there in the ancient 
 walnut - tree the owl sitteth breathe hard in the night - time ; but 
 thou shalt not hear he for the joy of the nightingale sing from 
 the apple - tree of the close . then from out of the shadowed orchard 
 shall we come into the open town - meadow , and over its daisy shall 
 the moonlight be lie in a grey flood of brightness . 

 ' Short be the way across it to the brim of the Weltering Water , and 
 across the water lieth the fair garden of the face ; and I have dight 
 for thee there a little boat to waft we across the night - dark water , 
 that shall be like waver flame of white fire where the moon 
 smite they , and like the void of all thing where the shadow hang 
 over they . there then shall we be in the garden , behold how the 
 hall - window be yellow , and hearken the sound of the hall - glee 
 bear across the flower and blend with the voice of the 
 nightingale in the tree . there then shall we go along the grass 
 path whereby the pink and the clove and the lavender be send 
 forth their fragrance , to cheer we , who faint at the scent of the 
 over - wear rose , and the honey - sweetness of the lily . 

 ' all this be for thee , and for nought but for thee this even ; and 
 many a blossom whereof thou know nought shall grieve if thy foot 
 tread not thereby to - night ; if the path of thy wedding which I have 
 make , be void of thee , on the even of the Chamber of Love . 

 ' but lo ! at last at the garden 's end be the yew - walk arch over for 
 thee , and thou canst not see whereby to enter it ; but I , I know it , 
 and I lead thee into and along the dark tunnel through the moonlight , 
 and thine hand be not weary of mine as we go . but at the end shall 
 we come to a wicket , which shall bring we out by the gable - end of the 
 Hall of the face . turn we about its corner then , and there be we 
 blink on the torch of the torch - bearer , and the candle through 
 the open door , and the hall ablaze with light and full of joyous 
 clamour , like the bale - fire in the dark night kindle on a ness above 
 the sea by fisher - folk remember the Gods . ' 

 ' o nay , ' she say , ' but by the Portway must we go ; the straight 
 way to the Gate of Burgstead . ' 

 in vain she spake , and know not what she say ; for even as he be 
 speak he lead she away , and her foot go as she will go , rather 
 than her word ; and even as she say that last word she set her foot 
 on the first board of the foot - bridge ; and she turn aback one 
 moment , and see the long line of the rock - wall yet glow with the 
 last of the sunset of midsummer , while as she turn again , lo ! 
 before she the moon just begin to lift himself above the edge of 
 the southern cliff , and betwixt she and he all Burgdale , and face- 
 of - god moreover . 

 thus then they cross the bridge into the green meadow , and through 
 the close and into the garden of the Face and unto the Hall - door ; 
 and other bride and groom be there before they   for six groom 
 have bring home bride to the House of the Face ; but none deem it 
 amiss in the war - leader of the folk and the love that have lead he . 
 and old Stone - face say : ' too many be the row of bee - skep in the 
 garden of the Dale that we should begrudge wayward lover an hour 's 
 waste of candle - light . ' 

 so at last those twain go up the sun - bright Hall hand in hand in 
 all their loveliness , and up on to the dai , and stand together by 
 the middle seat ; and the tumult of the joy of the kindred be hush 
 for a while as they see that there be speech in the mouth of the 
 War - leader . 

 then he spread his hand abroad before they all and cry out : ' how 
 then have I keep mine oath , whereas I swear on the Holy Boar to we d 
 the fair woman of the world ? ' 

 a mighty shout go rattle about the timber of the roof in answer 
 to his word ; and they that look up to the gable of the Hall say 
 that they see the ray - ring image of the God smile with joy over the 
 gather folk . 

 but spake Iron - face unheard amidst the clamour of the Hall : ' how 
 fare it now with my darling and my daughter , who dwelleth amongst 
 stranger in the land beyond the wild - wood ? ' 



 CHAPTER LIX . the BEHEST of FACE - of - GOD to the BRIDE ACCOMPLISHED : a 
 MOTE - stead appoint for the three folk , to WIT , the MEN of 
 BURGDALE , the SHEPHERDS , and the child of the WOLF 



 three year and two month thereafter , three hour after noon in the 
 day of early autumn , come a wain tilt over with precious webs of 
 cloth , and draw by eight white oxen , into the market - place of 
 silver - stead : two score and ten of spearman of the tall , clothe in 
 goodly war - gear , go beside it , and much people of silver - dale 
 throng about they . the wain stay at the foot of the stair that 
 lead up to the door of the Mote - house , and there light down 
 therefrom a woman goodly of fashion , with wide grey eye , and face 
 and hand brown with the sun 's burning . she have a helm on her head 
 and a sword girt to her side , and in her arm she bear a yearling 
 child . 

 and there be come Bow - may with the second man - child bear to face - of- 
 god . 

 she stay not amidst the wonder folk , but hasten up the stair , 
 which she have once see run with the blood of man : the door be 
 open , and she go in and walk straight - way , with the babe in her 
 arm , up the great Hall to the dais . 

 there be man on the dai : amidmost sit folk - might , little change 
 since the last day she have see he , yet fair , she deem , than of 
 old time ; and her heart go forth to meet the Chieftain of her Folk , 
 and the glad tear start in her eye and run down her cheek as she 
 draw near to he . 

 by his side sit the Bride , and her also bow - may deem to have wax 
 goodly . both she and folk - might know Bow - may ere she have go half 
 the length of the hall ; and the Bride rise up in her place and cry 
 out Bow - may 's name joyously . 

 with these be sit the elder of the Wolf and the Woodlanders , 
 the more part of whom Bow - may know well . 

 on the dais also stand aside a score of man weapone , and look as 
 if they be await the word which should send they forth on some 
 errand . 

 now stand up Folk - might and say : ' fair greeting and love to my 
 friend and the daughter of my Folk ! how far thou , Bow - may , good 
 of all friendly woman ? how fareth my sister , and face - of - god my 
 brother ? and how be it with our friend and helper in the goodly 
 Dale ? ' 

 say Bow - may : ' it be well both with all those and with I ; and my 
 heart laugh to see thee , Folk - might , and to look on the elder of 
 the valiant , and our lovely sister the Bride . but I have a message 
 for thee from face - of - god : wilt thou that I deliver it here ? ' 

 ' yea surely , ' say folk - might , and come forth . and take her hand , and 
 kiss her cheek and her mouth . the Bride also come forth and cast 
 her arm about she , and kiss she ; and they lead she between they to 
 a seat on the dais beside Folk - might . 

 but all man look on the child in her arm and wonder what it be . 
 but Bow - may take the babe , which be both fair and great , and set it 
 on the knee of the Bride , and say : 

 ' thus saith face - of - god : " friend and kinswoman , well - belove 
 playmate , the gift which thou badest of I in sorrow do thou now take 
 in joy , and do all the good thou would to the son of thy friend . 
 the ring which I give thee once in the garden of the face , give thou 
 to Bow - may , my trusty and well - beloved , in token of the fulfilment of 
 my behest . " ' 

 then the Bride kiss Bow - may again , and fall to fondling of the 
 child , which be loth to leave Bow - may . 

 but she spake again : ' to thee also , folk - might , I have a message 
 from face - of - god , who saith : " mighty warrior , friend and fellow , all 
 thing thrive with we , and we be happy . yet be there a hollow place 
 in our heart which grieveth we , and only thou and thine may amend 
 it . though while we hear tell of thee , yet we see thee not , and 
 fain be we , might we see thee , and wot if the say tale be true . 
 Wilt thou help we somewhat herein , or wilt thou leave we all the 
 labour ? for sure we be that thou wilt not say that thou rememberest 
 we no more , and that thy love for we be depart . " this be his 
 message , folk - might , and he would have an answer from thee . ' 

 then laugh Folk - might and say : ' Sister Bow - may , seest thou these 
 weapone man hereby ? ' 

 ' yea , ' she say . 

 say he : ' these man bear a message with they to face - of - god my 
 brother . crow the Shaft - speeder , stand forth and tell thy friend 
 Bow - may the message I have set in thy mouth , every word of it . ' 

 then Crow stand forth and greet Bow - may friendly , and say : 
 ' Friend Bow - may , this be the message of our Alderman : " friend and 
 helper , in the Dale which thou hast give to we do all thing thrive ; 
 neither be we grow old in three year ' wear , nor be our 
 memory worsen . we long sore to see you and give you gueste in 
 silver - dale , and one day that shall befall . meanwhile , know this : 
 that we of the Wolf and the Woodland , mindful of the earth that bear 
 we , and the pit whence we be digge , have a mind to go see Shadowy 
 Vale once in every three year , and there to hold high - tide in the 
 ancient Hall of the Wolf , and sit in the doom - ring of our father . 
 but since ye have join yourself to we in battle , and have give 
 we this Dale , our health and wealth , without price and without 
 reward , we deem you our very brother , and small shall be our hall- 
 glee , and barren shall our doom - ring seem to we , unless ye sit there 
 beside we . come then , that we may rejoice each other by the sight of 
 face and sound of voice ; that we may speak together of matter that 
 concern our welfare ; so that we three Kindreds may become one folk . 
 and if this seem good to you , know that we shall be in Shadowy Vale 
 in a half - month 's wearing . grieve we not by forbear to come . " 
 Lo , Bow - may , this be the message , and I have learn it well , for 
 well it pleaseth I to bear it . ' 

 then say folk - might : ' what say'st thou to the message , Bow - may ? ' 

 ' it be good in all way , ' say she , ' but be it timely ? may our folk 
 have the message and get to Shadowy Vale , so as to meet you there ? ' 

 ' yea surely , ' say folk - might , ' for our kinsman here shall take the 
 road through Shadowy Vale , and in four day ' time they shall be in 
 Burgdale , and as thou wottest , it be scant a two day ' journey thence 
 to Shadowy Vale . ' 

 Therewith he turn to those man again , and say : ' Kinsman Crow , 
 depart now , and use all diligence with thy message . ' 

 so the messenger begin to stir ; but Bow - may cry out : ' ho ! folk- 
 might , my friend , I perceive thou art little change from the man I 
 know in Shadowy Vale , who would have his dinner before the fowl be 
 pluck . for shall I not go back with these thy messenger , so that 
 I also may get all ready to wend to the Mote - house of Shadowy Vale ? ' 

 but the Bride look kindly on she , and laugh and say : ' sister 
 Bow - may , his meaning be that thou shouldest abide here in silver - dale 
 till we depart for the folk - thing , and then go thither with we ; and 
 this I also pray thee to do , that thou mayst rejoice the heart of 
 thine old friend ; and also that thou mayst teach I all that I 
 should know concern this fair child of my brother and my sister . ' 

 and she look on she so kindly as she caress the babe , that Bow- 
 may 's heart melt , and she cry out : 

 ' would that I might never depart from the house wherein thou 
 dwell , o Bride of my Kinsman ! and this that thou bidd I be 
 easy and pleasant for I to do . but afterwards I must get I back to 
 Burgdale ; for I seem to have leave much there that calleth for I . ' 

 ' yea , ' say folk - might , ' and art thou wed , Bow - may ? shalt thou 
 never bend the yew in battle again ? ' 

 say Bow - may soberly : ' who knoweth , chieftain ? yea , I be wed now 
 these two year ; and nought I look for less when I follow those 
 twain through the wild - wood to Burgdale . ' 

 she sigh therewith , and say : ' in all the Dale there be no well 
 man of his hand than my man , nor any goodly to look on , and he be 
 even that Hart of Highcliff whom thou know well , o Bride ! ' 

 say the Bride : ' thou say sooth , there be no well man in the 
 Dale . ' 

 say Bow - may : ' sun - beam bade I we d he when he press hard upon 
 I . ' she stay awhile , and then say : ' face - of - god also deem I 
 should not naysay the man ; and now my son by he be of like age to 
 this little one . ' 

 ' good be thy story , ' say folk - might ; ' or deem thou , Bow - may , that 
 such strong and goodly woman as thou , and woman so kind and friendly , 
 should forbear the wedding and the bringing forth of child ? yea , 
 and we who may even yet have to gather to another field before we 
 die , and fight for life and the good of life . ' 

 ' thou sayest well , ' she say ; ' all that hath befall I be good 
 since the day whereon I loose shaft from the break of the bent over 
 yonder . ' 

 Therewith she fall a - musing , and make as though she be hearken 
 to the soft voice of the Bride caress the new - come baby ; but in 
 sooth neither hear nor see what be go on about she , for her 
 thought be in bygone day . Howbeit presently she come to herself 
 again , and fall to ask many question concern silver - dale and 
 the kindred , and those who have once be thrall of the Dusky Men ; 
 and they answer all duly , and tell she the whole story of the Dale 
 since the Day of the victory . 

 so Bow - may and the carle who have come with her abode for that half- 
 month in silver - dale , gueste in all love by the folk thereof , both 
 the kindred and the poor folk . and Bow - may deem that the Bride 
 love face - of - god 's child little less than her own , whereof she have 
 two , a man and a woman ; and thereat be she full of joy , since she 
 know that face - of - god and the Sun - beam would be fain thereof . 

 thereafter , when the time be come , fare Folk - might and the Bride , 
 and many of the elder and warrior of the Wolf and the Woodland , to 
 Shadowy Vale ; and Dallach and the good of Rose - dale go with they , 
 be so bidden ; and Bow - may and she follow , accord to the word 
 of the Bride . and in Shadowy Vale they meet face - of - god and Alderman 
 Iron - face , and the chief of Burgdale and the Shepherds , and many 
 other ; and great joy there be at the meeting . and the Sun - beam 
 remember the word which she speak to face - of - god when first he come 
 to Shadowy Vale , that she would be wishful to see again the dwelling 
 wherein she have pass through so much joy and sorrow of her young 
 day . but if anyone be fain of this meeting , the Alderman be glad 
 above all , when he take the Bride once more in his arm , and caress 
 she whom he have deem should be a very daughter of his House . 

 now telleth the tale of all these kindred , to wit , the Men of 
 Burgdale and the Sheepcotes ; and the child of the Wolf , and the 
 Woodlanders , and the Men of Rose - dale , that they be friend 
 henceforth , and become as one Folk , for well or bad , in peace and 
 in war , in wan and waxing ; and that whatsoever befell they , they 
 ever hold Shadowy Vale a holy place , and for long and long after they 
 meet there in mid - autumn , and hold converse and counsel together . 

 no MORE as now TELLETH the tale of these KINDREDS and FOLKS , but 
 MAKETH an ending .