THE water of the WONDROUS ISLES 




 the first PART : of the HOUSE of CAPTIVITY 




 CHAPTER I. CATCH AT UTTERHAY 



 Whilom , as tell the tale , be a walled cheaping - town hight Utterhay , 
 which be build in a bight of the land a little off the great 
 highway which go from over the mountain to the sea . 

 the say town be hard on the border of a wood , which man hold to be 
 mighty great , or maybe measureless ; though few indeed have enter it , 
 and they that have , bring back tale wild and confused thereof . 

 therein be neither highway nor byway , nor wood - reeve nor way - warden ; 
 never come chapman thence into Utterhay ; no man of Utterhay be so 
 poor or so bold that he durst raise the hunt therein ; no outlaw durst 
 flee thereto ; no man of God have such trust in the saint that he 
 durst build he a cell in that wood . 

 for all man deem it more than perilous ; and some say that there 
 walk the bad of the dead ; othersome that the Goddesses of the 
 Gentiles haunt there ; other again that it be the faery rather , 
 but they full of malice and guile . but most commonly it be deem 
 that the devil swarm amidst of its thicket , and that wheresoever 
 a man seek to , who be once environ by it , ever it be the Gate 
 of Hell whereto he come . and the say wood be call Evilshaw . 

 nevertheless the cheape - town throve not ill ; for whatso evil thing 
 haunt Evilshaw , never come they into Utterhay in such guise that 
 man know they , neither wotte they of any hurt that they have of the 
 Devils of Evilshaw . 

 now in the said cheaping - town , on a day , it be market and high noon , 
 and in the market - place be much people throng ; and amidst of they 
 go a woman , tall , and strong of aspect , of some thirty winter by 
 seem , black - haired , hook - nosed and hawk - eye , not so fair to look 
 on as masterful and proud . she lead a great grey ass betwixt two 
 pannier , wherein she lade her marketing . but now she have do she 
 chaffer , and be look about she as if to note the folk for her 
 disport ; but when she come across a child , whether it be bear in 
 arm or lead by its kinswoman , or be go alone , as be some , she 
 seem more heedful of it , and eye it more closely than aught else . 

 so she stroll about till she be come to the outskirt of the 
 throng , and there she happen on a babe of some two winter , which 
 be crawl about on its hand and knee , with scarce a rag upon its 
 little body . she watch it , and look whereto it be go , and 
 see a woman sit on a stone , with none anigh she , her face bow 
 over her knee as if she be weary or sorry . unto she creep the 
 little one , murmur and merry , and put its arm about the woman 's 
 leg , and bury its face in the fold of her gown : she look up 
 therewith , and show a face which have once be full fair , but be 
 now grow bony and haggard , though she be scarce past five and 
 twenty year . she take the child and strain it to her bosom , and 
 kiss it , face and hand , and make it great cheer , but ever 
 woefully . the tall stranger stand look down on she , and note how 
 evilly she be clothe , and how she seem to have nought to do with 
 that throng of thriving cheapener , and she smile somewhat sourly . 

 at last she spake , and her voice be not so harsh as might have be 
 look for from her face : Dame , she say , thou seemest to be less 
 busy than most folk here ; might I crave of thee to tell an alien who 
 have but some hour to dwell in this good town where she may find she a 
 chamber wherein to rest and eat a morsel , and be untroubled of 
 ribald and ill company ? say the poor - wife : short shall be my 
 tale ; I be over poor to know of hostelry and ale - house that I may 
 tell thee aught thereof . say the other : maybe some neighbour of 
 thine would take I in for thy sake ? say the mother : what 
 neighbour have I since my man die ; and I die of hunger , and in 
 this town of thrift and abundance ? 

 the leader of the ass be silent a while , then she say : poor woman ! 
 I begin to have pity on thee ; and I tell thee that luck hath come to 
 thee to - day . 

 now the poor - wife have stand up with the babe in her arm and be 
 turn to go her way ; but the alien put forth a hand to she , and 
 say : stand a while and hearken good tiding . and she put her hand 
 to her girdle - pouch , and draw thereout a good golden piece , a noble , 
 and say : when I be sit down in thine house thou wilt have 
 earn this , and when I take my sol out thereof there will be three 
 more of like countenance , if I be content with thee meanwhile . 

 the woman look on the gold , and tear come into her eye ; but she 
 laugh and say : houseroom may I give thee for an hour truly , and 
 therewithal water of the well , and a mouse 's meal of bread . if thou 
 deem that worth three noble , how may I say thee nay , when they may 
 save the life of my little one . but what else wouldst thou of I ? 
 little enough , say the alien ; so lead I straight to thine house . 

 so go they forth of the market - place , and the woman lead they , the 
 alien and the ass , out of the street through the west gate of 
 Utterhay , that , to wit , which look on Evilshaw , and so into a 
 scatter street without the wall , the end of which near a corner 
 of the wood aforesaid : the house there be nought so evil of 
 fashion , but whereas they be so nigh unto the Devil 's Park , rich 
 man might no long away with they , and they be become ware for 
 poor folk . 

 now the townswoman lay her hand on the latch of the door that be 
 her , and throw the door open ; then she put forth her palm to the 
 other , and say : wilt thou give I the first gold now , since rest be 
 make sure for thee , as long as thou wilt ? the ass - leader put it into 
 her hand , and she take it and lay it on her baby 's cheek , and then 
 kiss both gold and child together ; then she turn to the alien and 
 say : as for thy way - beast , I have nought for he , neither hay nor 
 corn : thou wert well to leave he in the street . the stranger 
 nod a yeasay , and the three go in together , the mother , the 
 child , and the alien . 

 not right small be the chamber ; but there be little therein ; one 
 stool to wit , a yew - chair , a little table , and a coffer : there be 
 no fire on the hearth , nought save white ash of small wood ; but it 
 be June , so that be of no account . 

 the guest sit down in the yew - chair , and the poor - wife lay her child 
 down gently on the floor and come and stand before the stranger , as 
 if abide her bidding . 

 spake the alien : Nought so uncomely or strait be thy chamber ; and 
 thy child , which I see be a woman , and therefore belike shall long 
 abide with thee , be lovely of shape , and fair of flesh . now also 
 thou shalt have well day , as I deem , and I pray they on thine 
 head . 

 she spake in a kind wheedle voice , and the poor - wife 's face grow 
 soft , and presently tear fall down on to the table from she , but 
 she spake no word . the guest now draw forth , not three noble , but 
 four , and lay they on the table , and say : Lo , my friend , the three 
 noble which I behight thee ! now be they thine ; but this other thou 
 shalt take and spend for I . go up into the town , and buy for I 
 white bread of the good ; and right good flesh , or poulaine if it may 
 be , already cook and dight ; and , withal , the good wine that thou 
 mayst get , and sweetmeat for thy baby ; and when thou comest back , we 
 will sit together and dine here . and thereafter , when we be full of 
 meat and drink , we shall devise something more for thy good speed . 

 the woman kneel before her weeping , but might speak no word because 
 of the fullness of her heart . she kiss the guest 's hand , and take 
 the money , and then arise and catch up her child , and kiss she 
 bare flesh eagerly many time , and then hasten out of the house and 
 up the street and through the gate ; and the guest sit hearken to 
 the sound of her footstep till it die out , and there be nought to 
 be hear save the far - off murmur of the market , and the chirrup of 
 the little one on the floor . 

 then arise the guest and take up the child from the floor , who kick 
 and scream , and crave her mother as her broken speech might ; but 
 the alien spake softly to she , and say : Hush , dear one , and be 
 good , and we will go and find she ; and she give she therewith a 
 sugar - plum from out of her scrip . then she come out of door , and 
 spake sweetly to the little one : see now this pretty way - beast . we 
 will ride merrily on he to find thy mother . 

 then she lay the child in the pannier with a soft cushion under , and 
 a silk cloth over she , so that she lie there happily . then she take 
 her ass 's rein and go her way over the waste toward Evilshaw ; for , 
 as ye may deem , where the house and the street end , the beat way 
 end also . 

 quietly and speedily she go , and meet but three man on the way ; and 
 when these see she , and that she be make for Evilshaw , they turn 
 their head away , each one , and bless themselves , and go past 
 swiftly . not one seek to stay she , or hold any converse with she , 
 and no foot she hear follow after she . so in scarce more than 
 the saying of a low mass she be in amongst the tree , with her ass 
 and her ware and her prey . 

 no stay she make there , but hold forward at she good before the night 
 should fall upon she . and whatsoever might be tell concern the 
 creature that other folk have meet in Evilshaw , of she it must need 
 be say that therein she happen on nought worse than herself . 



 CHAPTER II . now shall be tell of the HOUSE by the WATER - SIDE 



 four day they wend the wood , and nought befell to tell of . the 
 witch - wife   for even such be she   feed the steal child well and 
 duly , and while caress she and spake sweetly unto she ; while also 
 she would take she out of the pannier , and set she on the ass 's back 
 and hold her thereon heedfully ; or , otherwhile , when they come upon 
 grassy and flowery place , she would set she down on the ground and 
 let she roam about , and pluck the flower and the strawberry . and 
 whoso might be sorry , the child be glad , so many thing new and fair 
 as she come upon . 

 at last , when the fifth day be wan , and they have be a long 
 while wend a wood set thick with tree , it begin to grow grey 
 betwixt the distant bole , and then from grey to white , and it be as 
 if a new world of light lie before they . Thitherward go they , and 
 in a little , and before the sun be set , come they to the shore of a 
 great water , and thence be no more land to be see before they than 
 if it have be the main sea itself , though this be a sweet water . 
 albeit , less than a half mile from the shore lie two eyot , as it 
 might have be on the salt sea ; but one of these sit low down on the 
 water , and be green and well bush , but the other , which lie east 
 of it , and be nigh to the shore , be high , rocky , and barren . 

 now the ending of the wood leave a fair green plain betwixt it and the 
 water , while more than a furlong across , while much less ; and 
 while the tree come down close to the water - side . but the place 
 whereas they come from out the wood be of the wide , and there it 
 be a broad bight of greensward of the fashion of the moon seven 
 night old , and a close hedge of thicket there be at the back of it ; 
 and the lake lie south , and the wood north . some deal of this 
 greensward be break by close of acre - land , and the tall green 
 wheat stand blossom therein ; but the most be sweet meadow , and 
 there as now be a gallant flock of goat feed down it ; five kine 
 withal , and a tethered bull . through the widest of this meadow run a 
 clear stream wind down to the lake , and on a little knoll beside a 
 lap of the say stream , two bow - shot from the water , be a knoll , 
 whereon stand , amidst of a potherb garden , a little house strongly 
 frame of timber . before it the steep bank of the lake break down 
 into a slowly - shelve beach , whose honey - colour sand thrust up a 
 tongue in amongst the grass of the mead . 

 go the witch - wife straight to the door of the say house as if she 
 be at home , as be sooth indeed . she throw the door open , and 
 unlade the ass of all his ware , and first of the youngling , whom 
 she shake awake , and bear into the house , and lay safely on the 
 floor of the chamber ; nor do she wait on her wailing , but set about 
 what be to be do to kindle fire , and milk a she - goat , and get meat 
 upon the board . that do she , and feed both herself and the child 
 plenteously : neither do she stint she of meat ever , from that time 
 forward , however else she deal with she . 



 CHAPTER III . of skin - change 



 one thing must here be tell : Whenas the say dame stand forth clothe 
 amidst of the chamber the next morning , the child run up to she to 
 greet she or what not , but straightway when she see she close , drew 
 aback , and stand gasp with affright ; for verily she deem this 
 be nowise she who have bring she last night into the fair chamber , 
 and give bread and milk to she and put she to bed , but someone else . 
 for this one have not dark hair , and hooked nose , and eyen hawk- 
 bright ; stark and tall be she indeed , as that other one , and by 
 seeming of the same - like age ; but there come to an end all her 
 likeness to last night 's housewife . this one have golden - red hair 
 flow down from her head ; eye of hazel colour , long and not well- 
 open , but narrow and sly . high of cheekbone she be , long - chin 
 and thin - lipped ; her skin be fine and white , but without ruddiness ; 
 flat - breasted she be , and narrow - hippe . 

 now she laugh at the babe 's terror , and say , but in her old voice 
 at least : thou foolish little beast ! I know what scar thee , to 
 wit , that thou deemest I change : now I tell thee that I be the one 
 who bring thee here last night , and feed thee ; neither be my 
 change a matter of thine , since at least I be the one who shall 
 keep thee from hunger and weather henceforward ; that be enough for 
 thee to know as now . now thou hast to eat and sleep and play and cry 
 out , that thou mayest the soon wax , and grow into the doing of my 
 will . 

 Therewith she lead she out into the sunshine , and tether she to an 
 ash sapling which grow anigh the door , that the child might be safe 
 the while she go about her work in acre and mead . 

 but as for that matter of change of aspect , the maiden come to know 
 thereafter that the witch durst not go into the wood in the same skin 
 as that which she wear at home , wherefore she have change it for the 
 journey to Utterhay , and change back again in the night - tide before 
 she arise . 



 CHAPTER IV . of the waxing of the STOLEN child 



 this little one , who be henceforth call Birdalone , though the witch 
 call she but seldom so , nor indeed by any name , dwelt there betwixt 
 the water and the wood , and see none save the say witch - wife , who , 
 as aforesaid , feed she well , but scarce meddle with she else for a 
 long while ; so she wander well - nigh as she have will , and much in 
 the wood ; for she have no fear thereof , nor indeed of aught else save 
 of the dame . she learn of the way and the will not of all the 
 creature round about she , and the very grass and flower be 
 friend to she , and she make tale of they in her mind ; and the wild 
 thing fear she in no wise , and the fowl would come to her hand , 
 and play with she and love she . a lovely child she be , rosy and 
 strong , and as merry as the bird on the bough ; and have she trouble , 
 for while she come across some ugly mood of the witch - wife , she bear 
 it all as lightly as they . 

 wear the year thus , till now she be grow tall and thin , and have 
 see twelve winter , and be far strong and handy than at first 
 sight she look to be . that find her mistress , and would not 
 forego the using of her deftness . for indeed the maiden know all 
 matter of wood and field full well , and somewhat of the water also 
  though no boat have she ever see there , for she learn herself 
 swimming , as the duck do belike . 

 but now her mistress would learn her swinking , and hard be the 
 lesson , for with twiggen rod and switch be she learn , and be 
 somewhat stubborn with this woman , who she deem love she not ; and , 
 however it be , there begin to grow in she an inkling that all be 
 not well with the dame , and howsoever she might fear she , she trust 
 she not , nor worship she ; otherwise she have learn her lesson 
 speedily ; for she be not slack nor a sluggard , and hat not the 
 toil , even when it pain and weary she , but against the anger and 
 malice she harden her heart . 

 it be to be say , that though there she dwelt alone with the witch- 
 wife , she have somehow get to know that they two be not alone in the 
 world , and she know of male and female , and young and old . thereof 
 doubtless the witch herself have learn she , would she , would she 
 not ; for though she be mostly few - speak , yet while the tongue of 
 she would loosen , and she would tell Birdalone tale of man and 
 woman , and king and warrior and thrall , and the folk of the world 
 beyond they , if it be but to scare the child . yea , and when she 
 rat Birdalone , or gird at she , word would come forth which the 
 maiden store up , and by lay two and two together gat wisdom howso 
 it be . moreover , she be of the race of Adam , and her heart 
 conceive of diverse matter from her mother 's milk and her father 's 
 blood , and her heart and her mind grow up along with her body . 
 Herein also be she wise , to wit , how to give wrath the go - by , so 
 that she oft find the wood a well home than the house : for now 
 she know that the witch - wife would enter it never ; wherefore she 
 love it much , and haunt it daily if she might . 

 amidst all this she live not unmerrily ; for the earth be her 
 friend , and solace she when she have suffer aught : withal she be 
 soon grow hardy as well as strong ; and evil she could thole , nor let 
 it burden she with misery . 



 CHAPTER V. of BIRDALONE , and how she be grow into maidenhood 



 wear the year and the year amidst such day as these , and now be 
 birdalone grow a dear maiden of seventeen summer ; and yet be her 
 life not unhappy ; though the mirth of her childhood be somewhat 
 chasten in she , and she walk the earth soberly and measurely , as 
 though deep thought be ever in her head : though , forsooth , it be 
 not all so sure that her serious face and solemn eye be but a part 
 of the beauty which be grow with the come forth of childhood 
 into youth and maidenhood . but this at least be sure , that about 
 this time those foreboding which have show she that she have no call 
 to love and honour her mistress take clear shape , and become a 
 burden on she , which she might never wholly shake off . for this she 
 see , that she be not her own , but a chattel and a tool of one who 
 not only use she as a thrall in the pass day , but have it in her 
 mind to make of she a thing accurse like to herself , and to bait the 
 trap with she for the taking of the son of Adam . Forsooth she see , 
 though dimly , that her mistress be indeed wicked , and that in the 
 bond of that wickedness be she bind . 

 one thing , moreover , have she note now this long while , that once and 
 again , it might be once every two moon , the witch - wife would arise 
 in the dead of night and go forth from the house , and be away for a 
 day , or two or three , or while more , and come back again weary and 
 fordone ; but never say she any word to Birdalone hereof . yet oft 
 when she arise to go this errand , before she leave the chamber would 
 she come to Birdalone 's truckle - bed , and stand over she to note if 
 she be asleep or not ; and ever at such time do Birdalone feign 
 slumber amidst of sicken dread . Forsooth in these latter day it 
 while enter the maiden 's head that when the dame be go she 
 would rise and follow she and see whither she go , and what she do ; 
 but terror constrain she that she go not . 

 now from amidst all these imagining arise a hope in she that she 
 might one day escape from her thralldom : and while , when she be 
 lonely and safe in the wood , to this hope she yield herself ; but 
 thereof come such tumult of her soul for joy of the hope , that she 
 might not master her passion ; the earth would seem to rise beneath 
 she , and the wood to whirl about before her eye , so that she might 
 not keep her foot , but would sink adown to earth , and lie there 
 weeping . then most oft would come the cold fit after the hot , and 
 the terror would take she that some day the witch would surprise the 
 joy of that hope in her eye , and would know what it mean , or that 
 some light word might bewray she ; and therewith come imagining of 
 what would then befall she , nor be that hard to picture , and it 
 would come before she over and over again till she become weary and 
 wear out therewith . 

 but though they abode ever with she , these troubling thought prick 
 not so oft at the keen , but be as the dull ache of little import 
 that come after pain overcome : for in sooth busy and toilsome day 
 do she wear , which irk she in nowise , since it ease she of the 
 torment of those hope and fear aforesaid , and bring her sound 
 sleep and sweet awaking . the kine and the goat must she milk , and 
 plough and sow and reap the acre - land accord to the season , and 
 lead the beast to the woodland pasture when their own be flood 
 or burn ; she must gather the fruit of the orchard , and the hazel 
 nut up the woodland , and beat the walnut - tree in September . she 
 must make the butter and the cheese , grind the wheat in the quern , 
 make and bake the bread , and in all way earn her livelihood hard 
 enough . moreover , the bowman 's craft have she learn , and at the 
 dame 's bidding must fare alone into the wood now and again to slay 
 big deer and little , and win venison : but neither do that irk she 
 at all , for rest and peace be in the wood for she . 

 true it be , that as she wend thicket or glade or wood - lawn , she 
 would at while grow timorous , and tread light and heedfully , lest 
 rustle leaf or crackling stick should arouse some strange 
 creature in human shape , devil , or god now damn , or woman of the 
 faery . but if such be there , either they be wise and would not 
 be see , or kind and have no will to scare the simple maiden ; or else 
 maybe there be none such in those day . anyhow , nought evil come 
 to she out of Evilshaw . 



 CHAPTER VI . HEREIN be tell of BIRDALONE 's RAIMENT 



 Lank and long be Birdalone the sweet , with leg that come forth bare 
 and brown from under her scant grey coat and scanty smock 
 beneath , which be all her raiment save when the time be bitter , and 
 then , forsooth , it be a cloak of goat - skin that eke her attire : 
 for the dame heed little the clothing of she ; nor do Birdalone 
 give so much heed thereto that she care to risk the anger of her 
 mistress by ask she for aught . 

 but on a day of this same spring , when the witch - wife be of sweet 
 temper than she will not be , and the day be very warm and kindly , 
 though it be but one of the last of February day , Birdalone , 
 blushing and shameface , crave timidly some more womanly attire . 
 but the dame turn gruffly on she and say : tush , child ! what 
 needeth it ? here be no man to behold thee . I shall see to it , that 
 when due time come thou shalt be whiten and sleek to the very 
 utmost . but look thou ! thou art a handy wench ; take the deer - skin 
 that hang up yonder and make thee brogue for thy foot , if so thou 
 wilt . 

 even so do Birdalone , and shape the skin to her foot ; but as she 
 be sew they a fancy come into her head ; for she have just come 
 across some thread of silk of diver colour ; so she take they and 
 her shoon and her needle up into the wood , and there sit down happily 
 under a great spread oak which much she haunt , and fall to 
 broider the kindly deer - skin . and she get to be long about it , 
 and come back to it the next day and the next , and many day , whenso 
 her servitude would suffer it , and yet the shoon be scarce do . 

 so on a morning the dame look on her foot as she move about the 
 chamber , and cry out at she : what ! art thou barefoot as an hen 
 yet ? Hast thou spoil the good deer - skin and art yet but shoeless ? 
 Nay , our lady , say Birdalone , but the shoon be not altogether do . 
 show they to I , say the dame . 

 birdalone go to her little coffer to fetch they , and bring they 
 somewhat timorously , for she know not how her mistress would take she 
 work on they so long , if perchance she would blame she , or it 
 might be chastise she , for even in those day the witch - wife 's hand 
 be while raise against she . but now when the dame take the shoe 
 and look on they , and see how there be oak - leaf do into they , 
 and flower , and coney , and squirrel , she but smile somewhat 
 grimly on Birdalone , and say : well , belike thou art a fool to waste 
 thy time and mine in such toy ; and to give thee thy due would be to 
 give thee stripe . but thou doest herein after the nature of earthly 
 woman , to adorn thy body , whatsoever else be toward . and well be 
 that , since I would have thee a woman so soon as may be ; and I will 
 help thy mind for finery , since thou art so deft with thy needle . 

 Therewith she go to the big coffer and draw forth thence a piece of 
 fine green cloth , and another of fine linen , and say to Birdalone : 
 this mayest thou take , and make thee a gown thereof and a new smock , 
 and make they if thou wilt as gay as thy new shoon be get to be ; 
 and here be wherewithal . and therewith she give she two handful of 
 silken thread and gold , and say : now I suppose that I must do the 
 more part of thy work , while thou art make thee these gaudy 
 garment . but maybe someone may be come this way ere long , who 
 will deem the bird the finer for her fine feather . now depart from 
 I ; for I would both work for thee and I , and ponder weighty 
 matter . 

 who be glad now but birdalone ; she grow red with new pleasure , and 
 kneel down and kiss the witch 's hand , and then go her way to the 
 wood with her precious lading , and work there under her oak - tree 
 day after day , and all day , either there , or in the house when the 
 weather be foul . that be in the middle of March , when all bird 
 be sing , and the young leaf show on the hawthorn , so that 
 there be pale green clouds , as it be , betwixt the great grey 
 bole of oak and sweet - chestnut ; and by the lake the meadow - saffron 
 new - thrust - up be open its blossom ; and March wear and April , and 
 still she be at work happily when now it be later May , and the 
 hare - bell be in full bloom down the bent before she . 

 all this while the witch have meddle little with Birdalone , and have 
 bid she to no work afield or in the stead which be anywise 
 grievous , but have do all herself ; yet be she few - speak with she , 
 and would oft behold she gloomily . and one evening when Birdalone 
 come in from the wood , the witch come close up to she and star she 
 in the face , and say suddenly : be it in thine heart to flee away 
 from I and leave I ? 

 a sharp pang of fear shoot through Birdalone 's heart at that word , and 
 she turn very red , and then pale to the lip , but stammer out : 
 no , lady , it be not in mine heart . the dame look grimly on she and 
 say : if thou try it and fail , thou shalt rue it once only , to wit , 
 lifelong ; and thou canst but fail . she be silent a while , and then 
 spake in a milder voice : be content here a while with I , and 
 thereafter thou shalt be more content , and that before long . 

 she say no more at that time ; but her word clave to Birdalone 's 
 heart , and for some time thereafter she be sorely oppress with a 
 burden of fear , and know not how to hold herself before the witch- 
 wife . but the day wear , and nought betid , and the maiden 's heart 
 grow light , and still she work on at her gown and her smock , and 
 it be well - nigh do . she have broider the say gown with rose 
 and lily , and a tall tree spring up from amidmost the hem of the 
 skirt , and a hart on either side thereof , face to face of each other . 
 and the smock she have sew daintily at the hem and the bosom with 
 fair knot and bud . it be now past the middle of June , hot and 
 bright weather . 



 CHAPTER VII . birdalone HATH an adventure in the wood 



 on a day she go to the wood , and sit down under her oak - tree , and 
 it be far and far out of sight of anyone stand in the meadow by 
 the lake ; and in the wood Birdalone look to see nought at all save 
 the rabbit and squirrel , who be , forsooth , familiar enough with 
 she , and fearless , so that they would come to her hand and sport with 
 she when she hail they . wherefore , as the day be exceed hot , 
 she put off from her her simple raiment , that she might feel all the 
 pleasure of the cool shadow and what air be stir , and the 
 kindness of the greensward upon her very body . so she sit sewing , 
 cover but by a lap of the green gown which her needle be paint . 

 but as she sit there intent on her work , and her head bend over it , 
 and it be now at the point of high noon , she hear as if some 
 creature be go anigh to she ; she heed it not , deem that it 
 would be but some wander hind . but even therewith she hear one 
 say her name in a soft voice , and she leapt up tremble , deeming at 
 first that it would be the witch come to fetch she : but yet more 
 scar she be , when she see stand before she the shape of a young 
 woman as naked as herself , save that she have an oak wreath round 
 about her loin . 

 the new - comer , who be now close to she , smile on she , and say in a 
 kind and sweet voice : fear nought , Birdalone , for I deem thou wilt 
 find I a friend , and it be not unlike that thou wilt need one ere 
 long . and furthermore , I will say it , say she smile , that since I 
 be not afraid of thee , thou needest not be afraid of I . say 
 Birdalone , she also smile : true it be that thou art nought 
 fearsome to look on . the new - comer laugh outright , and say : be 
 we not well meet then in the wildwood ? and we both as two child 
 whom the earth loveth . so play we at a game . at what game ? say 
 Birdalone . spake she of the oak - wreath : this ; thou shalt tell I 
 what I be like in thine eye first , because thou wert afraid of I ; 
 and then when thou art do , I will tell thee what thou seemest to 
 I . 

 Quoth birdalone : for I that will be hard ; for I have nought to 
 liken thee to , whereas save this sight of thee I have see nought 
 save she that dwelleth in the House by the Water , and whom I serve . 
 Nay , say the other , then will I begin , and tell thee first whatlike 
 thou art , so that thou wilt know the well how to frame thy word 
 concern I . but tell I , hast thou ever see thyself in a mirror ? 
 what thing be that ? say Birdalone . it be a polished round of steel 
 or some other white metal , say the wood - maiden , which giveth back in 
 all truth the image of whatso cometh before it . say Birdalone and 
 reddened therewith : we have at home a broad latten dish , which it be 
 my work , amongst other thing , to brighten and keep bright ; yet may I 
 not make it so bright that I may see much of mine image therein ; and 
 yet . what wouldst thou ? say the wood - woman . say birdalone : I 
 shall tell thee presently when thy part of the play be do . 

 laugh the new - comer , and say : it be well ; now be I to be thy 
 mirror . thus it be with thee : thou stand before I a tall and 
 slim maiden , somewhat thin , as befitteth thy seventeen summer ; where 
 thy flesh be bare of will not , as thy throat and thine arm and thy leg 
 from the middle down , it be tan a beauteous colour , but otherwhere 
 it be even as fair a white , wholesome and clean , and as if the golden 
 sunlight , which fulfilleth the promise of the earth , be play 
 therein . Fairer and rounder shall be thine arm and thy shoulder 
 when thou hast see five more summer , yet scarce more lovesome , so 
 strong and fine as now they be . Low be thy breast , as be meet for 
 so young a maiden , yet be there no lack in they ; nor ever shall they 
 be fair than now they be . in goodly fashion sit thine head upon 
 thy shoulder , uphold by a long and most well - work neck , that the 
 sun hath tan as aforesaid . the hair of thee be simple brown , yet 
 somewhat more golden than dark ; and ah ! now thou lett it loose it 
 waveth softly past thy fair smooth forehead and on to thy shoulder , 
 and be not stay by thy girdlestead , but hideth nought of thy knee , 
 and thy leg shapely thin , and thy strong and clean - wrought ankle 
 and foot , which be with thee as full of thine heart and thy soul and 
 as wise and deft as be thy wrist and thine hand , and their very 
 fellow . now as to thy face : under that smooth forehead be thy 
 nose , which be of measure , neither small nor great , straight , and 
 lovely carven at the nostril : thine eyen be as grey as a hawk 's , 
 but kind and serious , and nothing fierce nor shift . Nay , now thou 
 lett thine eyelid fall , it be as fair with thy face as if they 
 be open , so smooth and simple be they and with their long full 
 lash . but well be thine eyen set in thine head , wide apart , well 
 open , and so as none shall say thou mayst not look in the face of 
 they . Thy cheek shall one day be a snare for the unwary , yet be 
 they not fully round , as some would have they ; but not I , for most 
 pitiful kind be they forsooth . delicate and clear - make be the 
 little trench that goeth from thy nose to thy lip , and sweet it be , 
 and there be more might in it than in sweet word speak . Thy lip , 
 they be of the fine fashion , yet rather thin than full ; and some 
 would not have it so ; but I would , whereas I see therein a sign of 
 thy valiancy and friendliness . surely he who do thy carven chin have 
 a mind to a master - work and do no less . Great be the deftness of 
 thine imaginer , and he would have all folk that see thee wonder at 
 thy deep thinking and thy carefulness and thy kindness . ah maiden ! 
 be it so that thy thought be ever deep and solemn ? yet at least I 
 know it of thee that they be hale and true and sweet . 

 my friend , when thou hast a mirror , some of all this shalt thou see , 
 but not all ; and when thou hast a lover some deal wilt thou hear , but 
 not all . but now thy she - friend may tell it thee all , if she have 
 eye to see it , as have I ; whereas no man could say so much of thee 
 before the mere love should overtake he , and turn his speech into 
 the folly of love and the madness of desire . so now I have play 
 the play , and tell thee of thee ; tell I now of I , and play thy 
 play . 

 for a while stand Birdalone silent , blush and confuse , but while 
 cast shy glance at her own body , what she might see of it . at 
 last she spake : Fair friend , I would do thy will , but I be not deft 
 of speech ; for I speak but little , save with the fowl and wild 
 thing , and they may not learn I the speech of man . yet I will say 
 that I wonder to hear thee call I fair and beauteous ; for my dame 
 tell I that never , nor sayeth aught of my aspect save in her anger , 
 and then it be : rag ! and bag - of - bone ! and when wilt thou be a 
 woman , thou lank elf thou ? the new - comer laugh well - favouredly 
 hereat , and put forth a hand , and stroke her friend 's cheek . 
 birdalone look piteous kind on she and say : but now I must need 
 believe thy word , thou who art so kind to I , and withal thyself so 
 beauteous . and I will tell thee that it fill my heart with joy to 
 know that I be fair like to thee . for this moreover I will tell 
 thee , that I have see nought in field or woodland that be as lovely 
 to I as thou art ; nay , not the fritillary nodding at our brook 's 
 mouth , nor the willow - bough wave on Green Eyot ; nor the wild - cat 
 sporting on the little woodlawn , when she see I not ; nor the white 
 doe rise up from the grass to look to her fawn ; nor aught that 
 move and grow . yet there be another thing which I must tell thee , 
 to wit , that what thou hast say about the fashion of any part of I , 
 that same , set aside thy lovely word , which make the tear come 
 into the eye of I , would I say of thee . look thou ! I take thine 
 hair and lie the tress amongst mine , and thou mayst not tell which be 
 which ; and amidst the soft wave of it thy forehead be nestling 
 smooth as thou saidst of mine : hawk - grey and wide apart be thine 
 eyen , and deep thought and all tenderness be in they , as of I thou 
 sayest : fine be thy nose and of due measure ; and thy cheek a little 
 hollow , and somewhat thin thy lovely lip ; and thy round chin so 
 goodly carven , as it might not be well do . and of thy body else 
 I will say as thou sayst of mine , though I deem these hand have do 
 more work than thine . but see thou ! thy leg and mine as they stand 
 together ; and thine arm , as if it be of my body . slim and slender 
 thou art , or it may be lank ; and I deem our dame would call thee also 
 bag - of - bone . now be this strange . who art thou ? art thou my very 
 own sister ? I would thou wert . 

 Spake then to Birdalone that image of she , and say , smile kindly 
 on she : as to our likeness , thou hast it now ; so alike be we , as if 
 we be cast in one mould . but thy sister of blood I be not ; nay , I 
 will tell thee at once that I be not of the child of Adam . as to 
 what I be , that be a long story , and I may not tell it as now ; but 
 thou mayst call I Habundia , as I call thee Birdalone . now it be 
 true that to everyone I show not myself in this fair shape of thee ; 
 but be not aghast thereat , or deem I like unto thy mistress herein , 
 for as now I be , so ever shall I be unto thee . 

 Quoth Birdalone , look on her anxiously : yea , and I shall see thee 
 again , shall I not ? else should I grieve , and wish that I have never 
 see thee at all . yea , forsooth , say Habundia , for I myself be 
 most fain to see thee oft . but now must thou presently get thee back 
 home , for evil as now be the mood of thy mistress , and she be rue 
 the gift of the green gown , and hath in her mind to seek occasion to 
 chastise thee . 

 now be birdalone half weeping , as she do on her raiment while her 
 friend look on she kindly . she say presently : Habundia , thou 
 seest I be hard bestead ; give I some good rede thereto . 

 that will I , say the wood - wife . when thou goest home to the house , 
 be glad of countenance , and joyous that thy gown be nigh do ; and 
 therewith be exceed wary . for I deem it most like that she will 
 ask thee what thou hast see in the wood , and then if thou falter , or 
 thy face change , then she will have an inkling of what hath befall , 
 to wit , that thou hast see someone ; and then will she be minded to 
 question thy skin . but if thou keep countenance valiantly , then 
 presently will she doubt run off she , and she will cease grudging , 
 and will grow mild with thee and meddle not . this be the first rede , 
 and be for to - day ; and now for the second , which be for day yet 
 unborn . thou hast in thy mind to flee away from she ; and even so 
 shalt thou do one day , though it may be by way of Weeping Cross ; for 
 she be sly and wise and grim , though sooth it be that she hateth thee 
 not utterly . now thou must note that nowise she hindereth thee from 
 faring in this wood , and that be because she wotteth , as I do , that 
 by this way there be no outgoing for thee . wherefore look thou to it 
 that it be by the way of the water that thou shalt fare to the land 
 of man - folk . belike this may seem marvellous to thee ; but so it be ; 
 and belike I may tell thee more hereof when time serveth . now cometh 
 the last word of my rede . maybe if thou come often to the wood , we 
 shall while happen on each other ; but if thou have occasion for I , 
 and wouldst see I at once , come hither , and make fire , and burn a 
 hair of my head therein , and I will be with thee : here be for thee a 
 tress of mine hair ; now thou art clothe , thou mayst take a knife from 
 thy pouch and shear it from off I . 

 even so do Birdalone , and set the tress in her pouch ; and therewith 
 they kiss and embrace each other , and Birdalone go her way home 
 to the house , but Habundia go back into the wood as she have come . 



 CHAPTER VIII . of birdalone and the WITCH - WIFE 



 it go with Birdalone as Habundia have foretell , for she come home to 
 the house glad of semblance , flushed and light - foot , so that she be 
 lovely and graceful beyond she will not . the dame look on she 
 doubtfully and grimly a while , and then she say : what ail thee , my 
 servant , that thou look so masterful ? Nought ail I , lady , say 
 Birdalone , save that I be gay because of the summer season , and 
 chiefly because of thy kindness and thy gift , and that I have well- 
 nigh do my work thereon , and that soon now I shall feel these 
 dainty thing beat about my ankle . and she hold up and spread 
 abroad the skirt with her two hand , and it be indeed goodly to look 
 on . 

 the witch - wife snort scornfully and scowl on she , and say : 
 thine ankle forsooth ! Bag - o'-bones ! thou wisp ! forsooth , thou art 
 in love with thy look , though thou know not what like a fair 
 woman be . Forsooth , I begin to think that thou wilt never grow into 
 a woman at all , but will abide a skinny elf thy life long . belike I 
 do myself wrong to suffer thee to waste these three or four month 
 of thy thrall 's work , since for nought but thrall 's work shalt thou 
 ever be meet . 

 birdalone hang her head adown , and blush , but smile a little , and 
 sway her body gently , as a willow - bough be sway when a light air 
 arise in the morning . but the witch stand so scowl on she , and 
 with so sour a look , that Birdalone , glance at she , find her heart 
 sink so within she , that she scarce keep countenance ; yet she lose it 
 not . 

 then say the witch sharply : Wert thou in the wood to - day ? yea , 
 lady , say the maiden . then say the dame fiercely : and what saw 
 thou ? Quoth Birdalone , look up with an innocent face somewhat 
 scared : Lady , I see a bear , one of the big one , cross a glade . 
 and thou without bow and arrow or wood - knife , I warrant I , say the 
 witch . thou shalt be whip , to keep thee in mind that thy life be 
 mine and not thine . Nay , nay , I pray thee be not wroth ! say the 
 maid ; he be a long way down the glade , and would not have follow 
 I if he have see I : there be no peril therein . say the witch- 
 wife : didst thou see aught else ? Yea , say Birdalone , and be 
 weep somewhat now ; which forsooth be not hard for she to do , 
 over - wrought as she be betwixt hope and fear : yea , I see my white 
 doe and her fawn , and they pass close by I ; and two heron fly 
 over my head toward the water ; and . . . but the witch turn 
 sharply and say : Thrall ! hast thou see a woman to - day in the wood ? 
 a woman ? say Birdalone , and what woman , my lady , say Birdalone . 
 hath any woman come to the house , and pass forth into the wood ? 

 the dame look on she carefully , and remember how she have falter 
 and change countenance that other day , when she have charge she with 
 be minded to flee ; and now she see she with wonder face , and in 
 no wise confused or afraid of guilt , as it seem ; so she believe 
 her tale , and be the more at ease thereby , her wrath run off she , 
 and she spake altogether pleasantly to Birdalone , and say : now I 
 have have my gird at thee , my servant , I must tell thee that in sooth 
 it be not all for nothing that thou hast have these month of rest ; 
 for verily thou hast grow more of a woman thereby , and hast 
 sleekene and round much . albeit , the haysel will wait no long 
 for we , and the day after to - morrow we must fall to on it . but when 
 that be do , thou shalt be free to do thy green gown , or what thou 
 wilt , till wheat harvest be toward ; and thereafter we shall see to 
 it . or what sayest thou ? 

 birdalone wonder somewhat at this so gracious word , but not much ; 
 for in her heart now be some guile bear to meet the witch 's guile ; 
 so she kneel down and take the dame 's hand and kiss they , and 
 say : I say nought , lady , save that I thank thee over and over again 
 that thou art become so good to I ; and that I will full merrily work 
 for thee in the hay - field , or at whatsoever else thou wilt . 

 and indeed she be so light - hearted that she have so escape from the 
 hand of the witch for that time , and above all , that she have get a 
 friend so kind and dear as the wood - woman , that her heart go out 
 even toward her mistress , so that she go nigh to love she . 



 CHAPTER IX . of birdalone 's SWIMMING 



 full fair be the morrow morn , and Birdalone arise betime before the 
 sun be up , and she think she would make of this a holiday before 
 the swink afield begin again , since the witch be grow good toward 
 she . so she do on her fair shoe , and her new raiment , though the 
 green gown be not fully do , and say to herself that she would 
 consider what she would do with her holiday when she be amidst of 
 her bathing . 

 so she go down to the water - side , and when she be stand knee- 
 deep in the little sandy bight aforesaid , she look over to Green 
 eyot , and be minded to swim over thither , as oft she do . and it 
 be a windless dawn after a hot night , and a light mist lie upon the 
 face of the water , and above it rise the greenery of the eyot . 

 she push off into the deep and swam strongly through the still 
 water , and the sun rise while she be on the way , and by then she have 
 lay a hand on the willow - twig of the eyot , be send a long beam 
 across the water ; and her wet shoulder rise up into the path of it 
 and be turn into ruddy gold . she hoist herself up , and 
 climb the low bank , be stand amongst the meadow - sweet , and 
 dripping on to its fragrance . then she turn about to the green 
 plain and the house and the hedge of woodland beyond , and sigh , and 
 say softly : a pity of it , to leave it ! if it be no well 
 otherwhere , and not so fair ? 

 then she turn inward to the eyot , which have do her nought but 
 good , and which she love ; and she unbound her hair , and let it fall 
 till the end of the tress mingle with the head of the meadow- 
 sweet , and thereafter walk quietly up into the grassy middle of the 
 isle . 

 she be will not to go to a knoll there where the grass be fine , and 
 flowery at this time with white clover and dog violet , and lie down 
 under the shade of a big thorn with a much - twisted bole : but to - day 
 some thought come across she , and she turn before she come to the 
 thorn , and go straight over the eyot   which be but a furlong over 
 at that place   and down to the southward - look shore thereof . 
 there she let herself softly down into the water and thrust off 
 without more ado , and swam on and on till she have go a long way . 
 then she commune with herself , and find that she be think : if 
 I might only swim all the water and be free . 

 and still she swam on : and now a light wind have be draw up from 
 the west , and be drive a little ripple athwart the lake , and she 
 swam the swiftli for it awhile , but then turn over on her back 
 and float southward still . till on a sudden , as she lie look up 
 toward the far - away blue sky , and she so little and low on the face 
 of the water , and the lake so deep beneath she , and the wind come 
 ever fresher from the west , and the ripple rise higher against she , 
 a terror fall upon she , and she long for the green earth and its 
 well - work little blossom and leaf and grass ; then she turn 
 over again and swam straight for the eyot , which now be but a little 
 green heap far away before she . 

 long she be ere she make land there , and the sun be high in the 
 heaven when she come , all spend and weary , to the shadow of the 
 hawthorn - tree ; and she cast herself down there and fall asleep 
 straightway . Forsooth her swim be about as much as she have might 
 for . 

 when she awake it lack but an hour of noon - tide , and she feel the 
 life in she and be happy , but have no will to rise up for a while ; 
 for it be ajoy to she to turn her head this way and that to the dear 
 and dainty flower , that make the wide , grey , empty lake seem so far 
 away , and no more to be deal with than the very sky itself . 

 at last she arise , and when she have pluck and eat some handful 
 of the strawberry which grow plenteously on the sweet ground of the 
 eyot , she go down to the landward - look shore , and take the 
 water , and swam slowly across the warm ripple till she come once more 
 to the strand and her raiment . she clothe herself , and set her hand to 
 her pouch and draw forth bread , and sit eat it on the bank above 
 the smooth sand . then she look around , and stand up with her face 
 toward the house , to see if the dame would call to she . but she see 
 the witch come out of the porch and stand there look under the 
 sharp of her hand toward she , and thereafter she go back again into 
 the house without give any sign . Wherefore Birdalone deem that 
 she have leave that day , and that she might take yet more holiday ; so 
 she step lightly down from her place of vantage , turn her face 
 toward the east , and go quietly along the very lip of the water . 



 CHAPTER X. birdalone come on new tiding 



 soon she have cover up the house from she , for on that eastern end , 
 both a tongue of the woodland shove out west into the meadow , and , 
 withal , the whole body of the wood there draw down to the water , and 
 presently cut off all the greensward save a narrow strip along by the 
 lake , off the narrow whereof lie the rocky eyot aforesaid , nigh 
 unto the shore than lay Green Eyot . 

 now never have Birdalone go so far east as to be over against Rock 
 Eyot . in her childish day the witch have let she know that she might 
 go where she would , but therewith have tell she a tale of a huge 
 serpent which dwelt in the dark wood over against Rock Eyot , whose 
 will not it be to lap his fold round and round live thing that go 
 there , and devour they ; and many an evil dream have that evil serpent 
 bring to Birdalone . in after day belike she scarce trowe in the 
 tale , yet the terror of it abode with she . moreover the wildwood 
 toward that side , as it draw toward the water , be dark and dreary 
 and forbidding , run into black thicket stand amidst 
 quagmire , all unlike to the sweet , clean upland ridge , oak begrown 
 and greenswarde , of the part which lie toward the north , and which 
 she mostly haunt . 

 but this summer day , which be so bright and hot , Birdalone deem 
 she might harden her heart to try the adventure ; and she have a mind 
 to enter the wood thereby , and win her way up into the oakland 
 whereas she have meet Habundia , and perchance she might happen on she ; 
 for she would not dare to summon she so soon after their first 
 meeting . and if she meet she , there would be the holiday worthily 
 bring to an end ! 

 on go Birdalone , and be soon at the narrow of the greensward , 
 and have the wood black on her left hand , for the tree of it be 
 mostly alder . but when she be come just over against Rock Eyot , she 
 find a straight creek or inlet of the water across her way ; and the 
 say creek run right up into the alder thicket ; and , indeed , be much 
 overhung by huge ancient alder , gnarl , riven , mossy , and fall 
 low over the water . but close on the mouth of the creek , on 
 Birdalone 's side thereof , lie a thing float on the dull water , 
 which she know not how to call a boat , for such have she never see , 
 nor hear of , but which be indeed a boat , oarless and sailless . 

 she look on it all about , and wonder ; yet she see at once that it 
 be for wend the water , and she think , might she but have a long 
 pole , she might push it about the shallow part of the lake , and 
 belike take much fish . she try to shove it somewhat toward the 
 lake , but with her little might could make nothing of the work ; for 
 the craft be heavy , like a barge , if there be nothing else that 
 withstand she . 

 about this new thing she hang a long while , wonder that she have 
 never hear thereof , or be set to toil therewith . she note that 
 it be mostly pale grey of hue , as if it have be bleach by sun and 
 water , but at the stem and stern be smear of dark colour , as 
 though someone have be try the tint of stain there . 

 now so much do this new matter take up all her mind , that she 
 think no more of go up into the wood ; but though she have fain 
 abide there long to see whatever might be see , she deem it would 
 go ill with she do the witch happen on she there ; wherefore she 
 turn about , and go back the way she have come , go very slowly 
 and ponder the tiding . and ever she call to mind what Habundia 
 have say to she , that it be by water she must flee , and wonder if 
 she have send she this thing that she might escape therein ; so 
 different as her go would be thereby to swim the lake with her 
 wet body . then again she think , that before she might let herself 
 hope this , it be good , if she might , to find out from the witch 
 what be the thing , and if she know thereof . yet at last she call 
 to mind how little patient of question be her mistress , and that if 
 she be unheedful she might come to raise an evil storm about she . 
 wherefore she take this rede at the last , that she would keep all 
 hide in her own breast till she should see Habundia again ; and 
 meanwhile she might steal down thither from time to time to see if 
 the thing still abode there ; which she might the easy do by 
 swim if she choose her time heedfully , and go thither from Rock 
 Eyot , which now and again she visit . 



 CHAPTER XI . of BIRDALONE 's GUILT and the chastisement THEREOF 



 by this she be come back to the sandy bight , and the sun be 
 westere ; and she look up toward the house and see that it be the 
 time of their evening meal , for the blue smoke of the cooking fire 
 be go up into the air . so she go thither speedily , and enter 
 gay of seem . the witch look on she doubtfully , but presently 
 fall to speak with she graciously as yesterday , and Birdalone be 
 glad and easy of mind , and go about the serving of she ; for always 
 she eat after the dame ; and the mistress ask she of many matter 
 concern the house , and the gathering of stuff . 

 so come the talk on the fishing of the brook that run before their 
 door , and how the trout therein be but little , and not seldom none 
 at all ; and even therewith come these word into Birdalone 's mouth , 
 she scarce know how : my lady , why do we not fish the lake , whereas 
 there be shoal place betwixt we and the eyot where lie many and 
 great fish , as I have see when I have be swim thereover ? and 
 now in that same creek whereas the serpent use to lurk when I be 
 little , we have a thing come , which be make to swim on the water ; and 
 I , could I have a long pole to shove withal . 

 but no time she have to make an end , ere the witch - wife spring up and 
 turn on she with a snarl as of an evil dog , and her face change 
 horribly : her tooth show grinning , her eye goggle in her head , 
 her brow be all to - furrow , and her hand clench like iron 
 spring . 

 birdalone shudder back from she and cringe in mere terror , but have 
 no might to cry out . the witch haul she up by the hair , and 
 drag her head back so that her throat lie bare before she all 
 along . then draw the witch a sharp knife from her girdle , and raise 
 her hand over she , growling and snarl like a wolf . but suddenly 
 she drop the knife , her hand fall to her side , and she fall in a 
 heap on the floor and lie there hush . 

 birdalone stand gaze on she , and tremble in every limb ; too 
 confuse be she to think or do aught , though some image off light 
 through the open door pass before she : but her foot seem of 
 lead , and , as in an evil dream , she have no might to move her limb , 
 and the minute go by as she stand there half dead with fear . 

 at last ,   and belike it be no long while   the witch - wife come to 
 herself again , and sit up on the floor , and look all about the 
 chamber , and when her eye fall upon Birdalone , she say in a weak 
 voice , yet joyfully ; Hah ! thou art there still , my good servant ! 
 then she say : a sickness fall upon I suddenly , as while it be 
 will not ; but now be I myself again ; and presently I have a word for 
 thee . 

 Therewith she rise up slowly , Birdalone help she , and sit in her 
 big chair silent awhile , and then she spake : my servant , thou hast 
 for the more part serve I well : but this time thou hast do ill , 
 whereas thou hast be spy on my way ; whereof may come heavy 
 trouble but if we look to it . well be it for thee that thou hast 
 none unto whom thou might babble ; for then must I need have slay 
 thee here and now . but for this first time I pardon thee , and thou 
 hast escape the wrath . 

 her voice be soft and wheedling ; but for Birdalone the terror have 
 enter into her soul , and yet abode with she . 

 the witch - wife sit a while , and then arise and go about the 
 chamber , and come to a certain aumbry and open it , and draw forth a 
 little flasket of lead and a golden cup score over with strange 
 sign , and lay they on the board beside her chair , wherein she now 
 sit down again , and spake once more , still in the same soft and 
 wheedle voice : yet , my servant , thy guilt would be require of I , 
 if I let this pass as if to - day be the same as yesterday ; yea , and 
 of thee also would it be require ; therefore it be a part of the 
 pardon that thou be correct : and the correction must be terrible 
 to thee , that thou mayst remember never again to thrust thyself into 
 the jaw of death . and what may I do to correct thee ? it shall be 
 in a strange way , such as thou hast never dream of . yet the 
 anguish thereof shall go to thine heart 's root ; but this must thou 
 need bear , for my good and thine , so that both we may live and be 
 merry hereafter . go now , fill this cup with water from the spring 
 and come back with it . birdalone take the cup with a sink heart , 
 and fill it , and bring it back , and stand before the witch more 
 dead than alive . 

 then the witch - wife take up the flasket and pull out the stopple 
 and betook it to Birdalone , and say : drink of this now , a little 
 sip , no more . and the maiden do so , and the liquor be no soon 
 down her gullet than the witch - wife and the chamber , and all thing 
 about she , become somewhat dim to she ; but yet not so much so as that 
 she could not see they . but when she stretch out her arm she could 
 see it not at all , nor her limb nor any other part of she which her 
 eye might fall upon . then would she have utter a lamentable wail , 
 but the voice be seal up in she and no sound come from her voice . 
 then she hear the witch - wife how she say   and yet she hear it as 
 if her voice come from afar , Nay , thou canst not speak , and thou 
 canst not see thyself , nor may any other , save I , and I but dimly . 
 but this be but part of what I must lay upon thee ; for next I must 
 give thee a new shape , and that both thyself and all other may see . 
 but , before I do that , I must speak a word to thee , which thy new 
 shape would not suffer the sense thereof to reach to thine heart . 
 Hearken ! 



 CHAPTER XII . the word of the WITCH - WIFE to BIRDALONE 



 say the witch - wife : when thou comest to thyself   for it be not my 
 will that thou should never have thine own shape again , doubtless 
 the first thing which thou shalt do with thy new - gain voice and thy 
 new - gain wit shall be to curse I , and curse I again . do as thou 
 wilt herein ; but I charge thee , disobey I not , for that shall bring 
 thee to thy bane . for if thou do not my bidding , and if thou pry 
 into my matter , and lie bare that which I will have hide , then 
 will it be impute unto thee for guilt , and will I , will I not , I 
 must be avenge on thee even to slay : and then be undo all the 
 toil and pain I have have in rear thee into a deft and lovely 
 maiden . deem thou , then , this present anguish kind to thee , to keep 
 thee that thou come not to nought . 

 now since I have begin speak , I will go on ; for little heretofore 
 have I speak to thee what be in mine heart . well I wot that thou 
 think of I but as of an evil dream , whereof none can aught but 
 long to awake from it . yet I would have thee look to this at least ; 
 that I take thee from poverty and pinching , and have rear thee as 
 faithfully as ever mother do to child ; clem thee never , smite 
 thee not so oft , and but seldom cruelly . moreover , I have suffer 
 thee to go whereso thou would , and have compel thee to toil for 
 nought but what be needful for our two livelihood . and I have not 
 stay thy swimming in the lake , nor thy wandering in the wood , and 
 thou hast learn bowshot there , till thou art now a past - master in 
 the craft : and , moreover , thou art swift - foot as the good of the 
 deer , and mayest over - run any one of they whom thou wilt . 

 soothly a merry life hast thou have as a child , and merry now would be 
 thy life , save for thine hatred of I . into a lovely lily - lass hast 
 thou grow . that I tell thee now , though my will not have be to gird at 
 thee for the fashion of thy body ; that be but the word of the 
 mistress to the thrall . and now what awaiteth thee ? for thou mayst 
 say : I be lonely here , and there be no man to look on I . of what 
 avail , therefore , be my goodliness and shapeliness ? child , I answer 
 thee that the time be come when thou shalt see here a many of the 
 fairest of man , and then shalt thou be rather rise than lily , and 
 fully come to womanhood ; and all those shall love and worship thee , 
 and thou mayst gladden whom thou wilt , and whom thou wilt mayst 
 sadden ; and no lack soever shalt thou have of the sweetness of love , 
 or the glory of dominion . 

 think of it then ! all this be for thee if thou dwell here quietly 
 with I , do my will till thy womanhood hath blossom . wherefore 
 I beseech and pray thee put out of thy mind the thought of flee 
 from I . for if thou try it , one of two thing shall be : either I 
 shall bring thee back and slay thee , or make thee live in misery of 
 torment ; or else thou wilt escape , and then what will it be ? dost 
 thou know how it shall go with thee , come poor and nameless , an 
 outcast , into the world of man ? lust shalt thou draw unto thee , but 
 scarce love . I say an outcast shalt thou be , without worship or 
 dominion ; thy body shall be a prey to ribald , and when the fine 
 flower thereof hath fade , thou shalt find that the word of thy 
 lover be but mockery . that no man shall love thee , and no woman 
 aid thee . then shall Eld come to thee and find thee at home with 
 Hell ; and death shall come and mock thee for thy life cast away for 
 nought , for nought . this be my word to thee : and now I have nought 
 to do to thee save to change thee thy skin , and therein must thou do 
 as thou canst , but it shall be no ugly or evil shape at least . but 
 another time maybe I shall not be so kind as to give thee a new 
 shape , but shall let thee wander about see by none but I . then she 
 take the cup and take water in the hollow of her hand and cast it 
 into Birdalone 's face , and mutter word withal ; and presently she 
 see herself indeed , that she be become a milk - white hind ; and she 
 hear and see again , but not as she , the maiden , be will not to hear and 
 see ; for both her hearing and seeing and her thought be of a beast 
 and not of a maiden . 

 say the witch - wife : it be do now , till I give thee grace again ; 
 and now be off into the field ; but if thou stray more than half a 
 bowshot from the brook , it shall be the bad for thee . and now the 
 day be do and night be come . 



 CHAPTER XIII . birdalone meeteth the wood - woman again 



 it be fifteen day thereafter that birdalone awake lie in her bed 
 on a bright morning , as if all this have be but a dream . but the 
 witch - wife be stand over she and cry out : thou art late , 
 slug - a - bed , this fair - weather day , and the grass all spoil for 
 lack of the scythe . off ! and down to the meadow with thee . 

 birdalone wait not for more word , but spring out of bed , and have 
 her work - a - day raiment on in a twinkling , and stay but to wash she 
 in a pool of the brook , and then be amidst the tall grass with the 
 swathe fall before she . as she work she think , and could 
 scarce tell whether joy at her present deliverance , or terror of the 
 witch - wife , be the great . Sore be her longing to go see she 
 friend in the wood , but the haysel last more than a week , and when 
 that be do , whether it be of set purpose or no , the dame forgat 
 her other promise , to give Birdalone more holiday , and keep she close 
 to her work about meadow and acre . otherwise her mistress nowise 
 mishandle or threaten she , though she have go back to the 
 surliness and rail which be she will not . at last , on a morning when 
 the dame have bid she to nought of work , Birdalone take her bow in 
 her hand and cast she quiver on her back , and go her way into the 
 wood , and forgat not the tress of Habundia 's hair ; but she have no 
 need to use it , for when she be come to the Oak of Tryst , 
 straightway come Habundia forth from the thicket , and now so like to 
 birdalone that it be a wonder , for as her friend she bare bow and 
 quiver , and green gown truss up till her knee be naked . 

 so they kiss and embrace , and birdalone weep upon her friend 's 
 bosom , but be ashamed of the word which would have tell she of her 
 case . then Habundia set she down upon the greensward , and sit down 
 beside she , and caress she and soothe she ; then she smile on 
 Birdalone , and say : Thy tale be partly tell without word , and I 
 would weep for thee if I might shed tear . but thou mayest tell I 
 wherefore thou didst suffer this ; though forsooth I have an inkling 
 thereof . Hast thou happen on the witch 's ferry ? 

 even so it be , sister , quoth Birdalone . and therewith she pluck 
 up heart , and tell she all the tale of the vanishing of her body and 
 the skin - change . and Habundia answer : well then , there be this 
 to be say , that soon or later this must have happen , for thereby 
 lieth thy road of escape ; wherefore it be well soon than later . 
 but tell I again : be she fierce and rough in word with thee ? for 
 what she say to thee thou hast not yet tell I . say birdalone : in 
 her first fury , when she be like to have slay I , she have no word , 
 nought but wolfish cry . but thereafter she spake unto I 
 strangely , yet neither fiercely nor roughly ; nay , it seem to I as 
 if almost she love I . and more than almost she besought I rather 
 than command I not to flee from she . and wert thou beguile by 
 her soft speech ? say Habundia . Nowise to cast aside my hope of 
 escape , nay , not even in that hour , say Birdalone ; but amidst all 
 the confusion and terror somewhat be I move to compassion on she . 

 Spake Habundia , look anxiously on she : dost thou deem that thou 
 art somewhat cow by what she hath do to thee ? say Birdalone , 
 and flush very red : oh no , no ! nought save death or bond shall 
 come betwixt I and my utmost strive for escape . that be well 
 than well , say Habundia ; but again , canst thou have patience a 
 little , and be wary and wise the while ? so meseemeth , say the 
 maiden . say Habundia : again it be well . now be the summer 
 beginning to wane , and by my rede thou shalt not try the flight until 
 May be come again and well - nigh wear into June ; for thou wilt be 
 big then , little sister , and tiding be wax that shall get 
 matter ready for thy departure : moreover , thou must yet learn what 
 thou hast to do meanwhile , and thereof shall I tell thee somewhat as 
 now . for that boat , the thing which thou didst find , and for which 
 thou didst suffer , be call the Sending Boat , and therein thy 
 mistress fareth time and again , I deem to seek to some other of she 
 kind , but I know not unto whom , or whereto . Hast thou note of she 
 that while she goeth away privily by night and cloud ? yea , verily , 
 say Birdalone , and this be one of the thing which heretofore hath 
 make I most afraid . say Habundia : well now , that she wendeth 
 somewhither in this ferry I wot ; but as I wot not whither , so also I 
 know not what she doth with the Sending Boat to make it obey she ; 
 whereas , though I know all thing of the wood , I know but little of 
 the lake . wherefore , though there be peril to thee therein , follow 
 she twice or thrice when she riseth up for this faring , and note 
 closely what be her manner of deal with the say Sending Boat , so 
 that thou mayst do in like wise . wilt thou risk the smart and the 
 skin - change , or even if it be the stroke of the knife , to gather 
 this wisdom ? and thereafter thou shalt come hither and tell I how 
 thou hast speed . with a good heart will I , dear sister , say 
 Birdalone . 

 then Habundia kiss she and say : it be a joy to I to see thee so 
 valiant , but herein may I help thee somewhat ; here be a gold finger- 
 ring , see thou ! fashion as a serpent hold his tail in his mouth ; 
 whenso thou goest on this quest , set thou this same ring on the 
 middle finger of thy left hand , and say thou above thy breath at 
 least : 


 to leave and right , 
 before , behind , 
 of I be sight 
 as of the wind ! 


 and nought then shall be see of thee even by one who standeth close 
 beside . but wear not the ring openly save at such time , or let the 
 witch have sight thereof ever , or she will know that thou hast meet 
 I . dost thou understand , and canst thou remember ? 

 Laughed Birdalone , and take the ring and set it on her finger , and 
 spake aloud even as Habundia have give she the word . then quoth 
 Habundia , laugh : now have I lose my friend and sister , for thou 
 art go , Birdalone . take off the ring , sweetling , and get thee to 
 thine hunting , for if thou come home empty - handed there will be 
 flyting await thee , or bad . 

 so Birdalone take off the ring and come back to sight again laugh ; 
 then the wood - woman kiss she and turn her heel to she , and be 
 go ; but Birdalone string her bow , and get to her woodcraft , and 
 presently have a brace of hare , wherewith she go back home to the 
 dame ; who indeed gird at she for her sloth , and her little catch in 
 so long a while ; but there it end . 



 CHAPTER XIV . of BIRDALONE 's fishing 



 now be the day wear toward wheat - harvest , and nought befel to 
 tell of , save that on a morn the witch - wife call Birdalone to she , 
 and say : now be little to be do till the wheat be ready for the 
 hook , and thy day be idle ; or what be that word that fall from thee 
 that other day , that there be good swim for fish about the eyot ? 
 Canst thou swim across bear thine angle , and back again therewith , 
 and thy catch withal ? Yea , certe , say Birdalone gaily ; with one 
 hand I may swim gallantly , or with my leg alone , if I stir mine arm 
 ever so little . I will go straightway if thou wilt , lady ; but give 
 I a length of twine so that I may tie my catch about my middle when 
 I swim back again . 

 Therewith she go forth lightly to fetch her angle , which be in a 
 shed without ; but just as she take it in her hand , a sudden thought 
 come to she , so wary as she be grow . she undo the bosom of her 
 gown , and take forth her serpent - ring ; for she bear it next to her 
 skin , make fast to the bosom of her smock ; but now she hide it 
 carefully in the thickest of her brow - hair , which be very thick and 
 soft . withal the tress of Habundia 's hair she bear ever mingle with 
 her own . 

 no soon have she do it , but she be glad ; for she hear the dame 
 call she , who , when she come to the house - door , spake and say : 
 now shall I fare with thee down to the water , and look to thy 
 garment lest they be foul by some stray beast . and therewith 
 she look curiously on Birdalone , and knit her brow when she see 
 that the maiden change countenance in nowise . 

 down to the water go they , and the witch sit down close to where 
 birdalone should take the water , and watch she do off her raiment , 
 and eye she keenly when she be bare , but say nought . birdalone 
 turn her head as she stand knee - deep , and say : how long shall I 
 abide , lady , if I have luck ? as long as thou wilt , say the dame : 
 most like I shall be go by then thou comest back , even if thou be 
 away no long while . 

 Fell birdalone to swim then , and when she be more than half 
 over , the witch , stir no more than need be , get hold of her 
 raiment , which be but the old grey coat over a smock , and ransack 
 it , but find nought , as well ye may wot . and when she have do , she 
 sit down again in heavy mood as it seem , and watch Birdalone 
 swimming , and when she behold her body come forth out of the water , 
 and pass out of sight amongst the flower of the eyot , she arise and 
 go her way home . 

 birdalone look through the willow - bough , and see her turn away ; 
 then she fare to her fish with a smile , and soon have plenteous 
 catch from under the willow - bough . then , whereas the day be very 
 calm and fair , and the dame have give her holiday , she wander about 
 the eyot , and most in a little wood of berry - tree , as quicken and 
 whitebeam and dog - wood , and sport with the bird , who fear she 
 not , but come and sit on her shoulder , and creep about her foot . 
 she go also and stand a while on the southern shore , and look on 
 the wide water dim in the offing under the hot - weather haze , and 
 long to be go beyond it . then she turn away , and to the other 
 shore , and gat her fish and string they on the string , and make they 
 fast to her middle , and so take the water back again to the yellow 
 strand , where now be no one await she . but before she do on her 
 garment , she look on they , and see that they lay not as she have 
 leave they , whereby she know well that the witch - wife have handle 
 they . 

 amidst all this the day be wear to an end , and again she see the 
 smoke of the cooking - fire go up into the air from the chimney of 
 the house ; and she smile ruefully , think that the witch might yet 
 find an occasion for ransack her raiment . but she pluck up 
 heart , and come home with her catch , and the dame meet she with a glum 
 face , and neither praise she nor blame she , but take the fish 
 silently . such ending have that day . 



 CHAPTER XV . birdalone weareth her SERPENT - RING 



 after this she go once and again fish on to Green Eyot by the 
 bidding of the dame , who go not again to the shore with she . these 
 time she have half a mind to go see the Sending Boat , but durst not , 
 lest the thing itself might have life enough to tell of she . 

 and now be come the time of wheat - harvest , and Birdalone must wear 
 her day swinke in the acre - land , clothe but in smock and shoe ; and 
 the toil be hard , and brown her skin and harden her hand , but 
 it irk she not , for the witch let she work all alone , and it be 
 holiday unto the maiden if her mistress be not anigh , despite those 
 word which have somewhat touch her heart that other day . 

 but when wheat - getting be do , there be again rest for her body , 
 and swim withal and fish from the eyot by the witch 's leave . 
 and again by her own leave she go to seek Habundia in the wood , and 
 spend a happy hour with she , and come back with a fawn which she have 
 shoot , and so but barely save her skin from the twig - shower . then 
 yet again she go into the wood on the witch 's errand as well as she 
 own , and be pay by her friend 's sweet converse , and by nought else 
 save the grudging girding of her mistress . 

 but on a night when September be well in , and the sky be moonless 
 and overcast , somewhat before midnight the dame come and hang over 
 birdalone as she lie abed , and watch to see if she wake ; forsooth 
 the witch 's coming have wake she ; but even so she be wary , and lay 
 still , nor change her breathing . so the witch turn away , but even 
 therewith Birdalone make a shift to get a glimpse of she , and this 
 she see thereby , that the semblance of she be change , and that she 
 bear the self - same skin wherewith she have come to Utterhay , and which 
 she have wear twice or thrice afterwards when she have an errand 
 thither . 

 the witch now glide swiftly to the door , and out into the night . 
 birdalone lie still a little , lest she should fall into a trap , and 
 then arise very quietly and do on her smock , which lie ever under 
 her pillow with the ring sew thereto again , and so go out adoor 
 also , and deem she see the witch some way on ahead ; but it be 
 nothing for her light foot to overtake she . so she stay to take 
 the ring from her smock , and set it on her finger ; then in a low 
 voice she say : 


 to leave and right , 
 before , behind , 
 of I be sight 
 as of the wind ! 


 then boldly she speed on , and be soon close on the heel of the 
 witch , who make her way to the edge of the lake , and then turn 
 east , and go even as Birdalone have go when she come across the 
 Sending Boat . 

 so fare the witch - wife straight to the creek - side , and birdalone 
 must need stick close to she , or she have know nought , so black be 
 the night amongst the alder - bough . but the witch - wife fumble about 
 a while when she be stay by the creek , and presently draw somewhat 
 from under her cloak , and the maiden see that she be about strike 
 flint upon steel , and quake somewhat , lest her charm have play she 
 false . presently the tinder quicken , and the dame have light a 
 lantern , which she hold up , peer all about ; and full she look on 
 the place whereas be Birdalone , and make no show of see she , 
 though well - nigh the maiden look for it to see her drop the lantern 
 and spring on she . 

 now the witch , hold the lantern aloft , step over the gunwale of 
 the boat , and sit down on the thwart ; and it be a near thing but 
 that birdalone follow she into the boat , but she fear the getting 
 forth again , so she but hang over it as close as she might . then she 
 see the witch draw out of her girdle that sharp little knife which 
 Birdalone have see raise against her own throat ; and then the witch 
 bar her arm , and prick it till the blood spring from that barren 
 white skin ; thereat she stand up , and go to the bow of the craft 
 and hang over they , and draw her arm to and fro over the stem to 
 bloody it ; and go thereafter to the stern , and take blood into her 
 right hand and pass it over the place of the steerage   for there 
 be no rudder   and come back and sit down on the thwart again ; and , 
 so far as Birdalone might see , busy herself in staunch the 
 little wound on her arm . then deem Birdalone that she know what 
 manner of paint be that which have make the rusty smear which she 
 have see on the boat by daylight . 

 but now as the witch sit there , a harsh voice begin to stir in her 
 throat , and then word come out of she , and she sing in a crow 's 
 croak : 


 the red raven - wine now 
 Hast thou drunk , stern and bow ; 
 then wake and awake 
 and the wonte way take ! 
 the way of the Wender forth over the flood , 
 for the will of the Sender be blent with the blood . 


 Therewithal begin the boat to stir , and anon it glide forth out of 
 the creek into the water of the lake , and the light of the lantern 
 die , and it be but a minute ere Birdalone lose all sight of it . 
 she abode a little long , lest perchance boat and witch might come 
 back on her hand , and then turn and go swiftly back again . she 
 would have draw off her ring straightway , but the thought come on 
 she , that she have see the witch depart in her second semblance ; how 
 if she be abide she at home in her wonted skin ? so she come to 
 the house even as she be , and open the door , and look in , 
 quake ; but there be no image of a child of Adam therein , and no 
 living thing , save the cat drowse before the fire ; wherefore 
 birdalone take the ring from her finger and go to the hearth , and 
 stir up the cat with her foot till he arise and fall to rub 
 himself against her leg , and she be fain of he . 

 thereafter she make her ring fast to her smock again , and set the 
 smock under her pillow as she will not be , and betook herself to bed , 
 and fall asleep sweetly , leave all troublous thought for the 
 morrow ; and that the more as she be free of the witch - wife for that 
 night at least . 



 CHAPTER XVI . BIRDALONE meeteth habundia again ; and LEARNETH she 
 first wisdom of she 



 when morning be , Birdalone arise , and long sore to go into the 
 wood to seek Habundia again , but durst not , lest the witch - wife 
 should come to hand again early than might be look for . so she 
 abode quiet and do what be toward near about the house . all that 
 day the witch come not back , nor the next ; but the morrow thereafter , 
 when Birdalone arise , she find the wonte aspect of her mistress in 
 the wonted place , who , when she see the maiden , greet she , and be 
 somewhat blithe with she ; and Birdalone would have ask her leave to 
 go to the wood , but she trust little in her unwonted soft mood ; 
 which yet last so long that on the third day she herself bade 
 birdalone go take her pleasure in the wood , and bear back with she 
 what of venison she might . 

 Forthwith go Birdalone as glad as might be , and meet her friend at 
 the Oak of Tryst , and tell she closely how all have betid ; and 
 Habundia say : here , then , thou hast learn how to sail the lake . 
 but hast thou learn enough to try the adventure and not to fail ? 
 even so I deem , say Birdalone ; but this I would say , that meseemeth 
 it well that I follow the witch down to the boat one more time at 
 least ; for this first time it be dark ; and moreover shall I not be 
 surer of the spell if I hear it say oftener , lest it be not ever the 
 same word ? what sayest thou ? she say : thou art right herein , 
 and , since the adventure may not be try till next June be at hand , 
 there be time enough and to spare . and now for this hour that be we 
 need talk no more of it . only , my sweet , I beseech thee be wary ; and 
 above all suffer not the witch - wife to set eye or hand on the ring . 
 truly mine heart oft ache sorely for thy peril ; for therein the 
 image of thee abideth rather as of my daughter than my friend . yea , 
 now thou laugh , but kindly , so that the sound of thy laughter be 
 as sweet music . but know that though thou art but a young maiden , 
 and I in all wise like unto thee of aspect , yet have I dwelt many and 
 many a year upon the earth , and much wisdom have learn . trow 
 thou I ? 

 Yea , yea , say Birdalone , with all my heart . then she hang her head 
 a while and keep silence , and thereafter look up and spake : I 
 would ask thee a thing and crave somewhat of thee , as if thou wert 
 verily my mother ; wilt thou grant it I ? yea , surely , child , say 
 Habundia . say birdalone : this it be then , that thou wilt learn I 
 of thy wisdom . Habundia smile full kindly on she , and say : this 
 of all thing I would have have thee ask ; and this day and now shall 
 we begin to open the book of the earth before thee . for therein be 
 mine heritage and my dominion . sit by I , child , and hearken ! 

 so the maiden sit down by her likeness under the oak , and begin to 
 learn her lesson . Forsooth forget be the wisdom , though the tale 
 of its learn abideth , wherefore nought may we tell thereof . 

 when it be do , Birdalone kiss her wood - mother and say : this be 
 now the good day of my life , this and the day when first I see thee . 
 I will come hither now many time before the day of my departure . 
 yea , but , sweet child , say Habundia , beware of the witch and her 
 cruelty ; I fear I she shall yet be grim toward thee . so will I be 
 wary , say Birdalone , but I will venture some little peril of pain 
 but if thou forbid I , mother . and I pray thee by thy love to forbid 
 I not . and this I pray thee the more , because after one of these 
 grim time then mostly doth she meddle the less with I for a while , 
 wherefore I shall be the free to come hither . Habundia kiss she 
 and embrace she , and say : valiant art thou for a young maiden , my 
 child , and I would not refrain thee more than a father would refrain 
 his young son from the stroke of the tilt - yard . but I pray thee to 
 forget not my love , and my sorrow for thy grief . 

 Therewith they sunder , and it be draw toward evening . 
 birdalone seek catch , and bring home venison to the dame , who be 
 yet blithe with she , and spake that evening as she eye she : I 
 can not tell how it be , but thou seemest change unto I , and look 
 more towards thy womanhood than even yesterday . I mean the face of 
 thee , for wert thou strip , lean enough I should see thee , 
 doubtless . but now look to it , I beseech thee , to be both deft and 
 obedient , so that I may be as kind to thee as I would be , and kind 
 than I have be heretofore . 



 CHAPTER XVII . the passing of the year into WINTER 



 wear the day now , till on a night of October , toward the end 
 thereof , the witch go a - night - tide to the Sending Boat , and 
 birdalone follow she as erst . this time the night be wild and 
 windy , but the moon be high aloft and big , and all cloud save a few 
 fleck be blow from off the heaven ; so that the night be as light 
 as could be ; and even at the tree - hang creek it be easy to see all 
 that be do . and so it be that the witch do and spake in all 
 wise as she do before . 

 another time , when November be well - nigh out , the dame arise for her 
 lake - fare ; but this night the snow lie deep betwixt house and 
 water , and Birdalone think that it would scarce do to follow . 
 Forsooth she know not whether her foot would the less leave their 
 print in the snow because they be not to be see . when she ask 
 Habundia thereof , she laugh and say : once more thou hast be 
 wise , my child , for though it have be no hard to put this might 
 into thy ring , that whoso wear it should not touch the ground , yet it 
 hath not be do . 

 it must be tell , that in this while Birdalone go oft to the 
 Trysting Tree , and call on her mother   as now she call she   to 
 come to she , and ever more and more of wisdom she win thereby . 
 though the witch be oft surly with she , and spar not she gird , 
 yet , the needful work do , she meddle little with she . but on a 
 day she straightly ban she the wood , and Birdalone go 
 notwithstanding , and when she be there with the wood - mother nought 
 she tell she thereof , but be blithe and merry beyond she will not . she 
 come back home thereafter empty hand , and step into the chamber 
 proudly and with bright eye and flushed cheek , though she look 
 for nought save chastisement ; yea , it might be even the skin- 
 change . Forsooth the witch be sit crouch in her chair with 
 her hand on the elbow and her head thrust forward , like a wild 
 beast at point to spring ; but when her eye fall on Birdalone , she 
 falter and draw back into herself again , and mutter somewhat 
 unheard ; but to Birdalone spake nought of good or bad . 

 now be winter - tide upon they , when there be nought to do in field 
 and acre , and but a little in the byre . in year bygone , and even in 
 the last one , the witch have not spar Birdalone toil any the more , 
 but have make errand for she amidst the snow and bite wind , or 
 over the lake when it be lay with ice . but now she bid she to 
 nought save what she have a will to ; whereby she lose but little , 
 whereas birdalone be well willing to strive against wind and weather 
 and the roughness of the winter earth , and overcome if she might , so 
 that all be well do that have to be do about the stead . 

 still do the witch give her hard word and rail at she for the most 
 part , but from the tooth outward only , and because she be will not 
 thereto . inwardly indeed she begin to fear Birdalone , and deem 
 that she would one day have the mastery ; and this lead she into fierce 
 and restless mood ; so that she would sit star at the maiden 's 
 beauty handle her knife withal , and scarce able to forbear she . 
 and in such a mood she once make occasion to chastise she as she will not 
 have be erst , and look to see Birdalone rebel against she ; but it 
 fall out otherwise , for Birdalone submit herself to her meekly and 
 with a cheerful countenance . and this also be a terror to the 
 witch , who deem , as indeed it be , that the purpose be grow in 
 her thrall . so from that time she meddle with she no more . all 
 this while , as may be think , Birdalone go yet oftener to the Oak 
 of Tryst , despite frost and snow and wind , and gat much lore of her 
 wood - mother , and learn wisdom abundantly . and her day be happy . 



 CHAPTER XVIII . of SPRING - TIDE and the MIND of BIRDALONE 



 now be the winter go and the spring - tide come again , and with the 
 blossoming of the earth blossom Birdalone also . Nought sweet of 
 flesh might she be than erst , but there be now a new majesty grow 
 into her beauty ; her limb be rounded , her body fulfil , her skin 
 sleek and whiten ; and if any mother 's son have behold her foot as 
 they trod the meadow besprinkle with saffron and daffodil , ill have 
 it go with he be he gainsay the kiss of they , though for the 
 kissing have he fare the bad belike . 

 that spring - tide , amidst of April , she follow the witch - wife down 
 to the Sending Boat for the third time ; and there go everything as 
 erst , and she deem now that the lesson be well learn , and that 
 she be well - nigh as wise as the witch herself therein . 

 but the day after she go about somewhat pensive , as though a 
 troublous thought be on she ; and when , three day thereafter , she 
 meet the wood - mother , she spake to she even as they part , and say : 
 Mother , much wisdom hast thou learn I , and now this at the last 
 withal , that hitherto there have be shame in my life ; and now fain 
 be I to be do with it . fair child , say Habundia , little be the 
 shame though this woman hath have the upper hand of thee and hath use 
 thee cruelly : how might thou , a child , strive with she ? but now 
 I see and know that there be an end of that ; that she feareth thee 
 now , and will never again raise a hand against thee save thou fall 
 wholly into her power ; as thou shalt not , my child . be comfort 
 then for what be go by ! Nay , mother , say Birdalone , it be not 
 that which troubleth I ; for , as thou sayest , what else might I do ? 
 but thy wisdom which thou hast set in my heart hath learn I that 
 for these last month I have be meet guile with guile and lie 
 with lie . and now will I do so no more , lest I become a guileful 
 woman , with nought good in I save the fairness of my body . 
 wherefore hearken , sweet mother ! what be do , be do ; but when it 
 cometh to the day , which be speedily draw nigh , that I must part 
 from thee , it may be for a long while , then will I not fare to the 
 Sending Boat by night and cloud and with hidden head , but will walk 
 thither in broad day , and let that befall which must befall . 

 change then Habundia 's face and become haggard and woeful , and she 
 cry out : o if I could but weep , as ye child of Adam ! o my 
 grief and sorrow ! child , child ! then will betide that fall into 
 her hand which I spake of e'en now ; and then shall this wretch , this 
 servant of evil , assuredly slay thee there and then , or will keep 
 thee to torment thee till thy life be but a slow death . Nay , nay , do 
 as I should do , and fare with hidden head , and my ring on thy finger . 
 or else , o child , how wilt thou hurt I ! 

 birdalone weep ; but presently she fall to caress the mother 's 
 hand , and say : this be thy doing , wherein thou hast make I wise . 
 yet fear not : for I deem that the witch - wife will not slay I , 
 whereas she looketh to have some gain of I ; moreover , in the evil of 
 her heart be mingle some love toward I , whereof , as erst I tell 
 thee , I have a morsel of compassion . mother , she will not slay I ; 
 and I say that she shall not torment I , for I will compel she to 
 slay I else . it be my mind that she will let I go . say the 
 mother : yea , mayhappen , yet but as a bird with a string to its leg . 
 if it be so , say Birdalone , then let my luck prevail over her guile ; 
 as well it may be , since I have know thee , o wise mother ! 

 the wood - wife hang her head and spake nought for a while ; then she 
 say : I see that thou wilt have it so , and that there be something 
 in thine heart which we , who be not child of Adam , may not 
 understand ; yet once wert thou more like unto we . now all I may say 
 be , that thou must rule in this matter , and that I be sad . 

 then she look down again and presently raise a bright face , and 
 say : belike all shall be well than I think . then she kiss 
 birdalone and they part for that time . 



 CHAPTER XIX . THEY BID FAREWELL , BIRDALONE and the wood - mother 



 now April be go , and May be come with the thorn a - blossoming , and 
 there be birdalone wax still in loveliness . and now the witch 
 have leave all gird at she even , and spake to she but little , save 
 when she need must . but to Birdalone it seem that she watch she 
 exceed closely . 

 birdalone go oft to the wood , and learn yet more of lore : but of 
 the matter of the departure , how it be to be go about they spake 
 no more , and great be the love betwixt they . 

 at last when May be wear nigh to June come Birdalone to the Oak of 
 Tryst , and find the wood - mother there ; and when they have talk a 
 while , but ever from the tooth out , spake Habundia : though thou be 
 now the wiser of we two maybe , yet have I wisdom to wot that this be 
 the hour of our sundering , and that to - morrow thou wilt try the 
 adventure of the Sending Boat : be it not so ? yea , mother , say 
 birdalone ; I bid thee farewell now : woe be I therefor ! say 
 Habundia : and thou wilt deliver thyself into the hand of the witch , 
 wilt thou , as thou saidst that other day ? Quoth Birdalone : be it 
 not wisdom , dear mother , if I trust in my goodhap ? alas , say the 
 mother , it may be so when all be say . but o my sad heart ! and how I 
 fear for thee ! 

 my mother , my mother ! say Birdalone , that I should make the day 
 grievous unto thee ! and thou who hast make my day so joyous ! but 
 now canst thou not say of thy wisdom that we shall meet again ? 

 the wood - woman sit down , and let her head fall over her knee , and 
 be silent a long while ; then she rise up and stand before Birdalone , 
 and say : yea , we shall meet again , howsoever it may be . let we 
 depart with that sweet word in the air between we . yet first thou 
 shalt give I a tress of thine hair , as I do to thee when first we 
 meet ; for by mean of it may I know to - morrow how thou hast speed . 

 even so do Birdalone , and this be the end of their talk , save 
 break word of lamentation as they say farewell . and therewith for 
 that while they sunder . 



 CHAPTER XX . of birdalone and the SENDING BOAT 



 birdalone wake up in the morning , and arise and clothe herself , and she 
 see not the witch - wife in the chamber , though her bed look as if it 
 have be sleep in . birdalone account little thereof , whereas the 
 dame would oft go on one errand or another much betime in the 
 morning . yet be she somewhat glad , for she be nowise wishful for a 
 wrangle with she . Withal , despite her valiancy , as may well be 
 think , she be all a - flutter with hope and fear , and must need 
 refrain her body from overmuch quaking and restlessness if she might . 

 now she mingle the tress of the wood - mother 's hair with her own 
 hair , but deem it nought perilous to leave the ring yet sew to her 
 smock : she set some deal of bread and flesh in her scrip , lest she 
 voyage should be long , and then all simply step over the threshold 
 of the House of her Captivity . 

 she go straight to the strand aforesaid , see nought of the 
 witch - wife by the way ; and when she come there , be about to turn 
 straightway to her left hand down to the creek , when it come into her 
 mind that she would first swim over to Green Eyot for this last of 
 time . for the eyot indeed she love , and deem it her own , since 
 never have her evil dream , the witch , set foot thereon . moreover , she 
 say to herself that the cool lake would allay the fever of her 
 blood , and make her flesh firm and less timorous for the adventure . 
 and again , that if the witch should see she from afar , as she could 
 scarce fail to do , she would deem the maiden be about she wonte 
 morning swimming , and would be the less like to spy on she . 

 so now , when she have let her garment slip from off she on to the 
 sand close to the water 's edge , she stand a while , with her foot 
 scarce cover by the little ripple of the bight , to be a token of 
 safety to her mistress . to say sooth , now it be come so nigh to the 
 deed , she shrink aback a little , and be fain to dally with the time , 
 and , if it might be , thrust something of no import betwixt she and 
 the terror of the last moment . 

 now she take the water , and row strongly with her lovely limb till 
 she come to the eyot , and there she go aland , and visit every 
 place which have be kind to she ; and kiss the tree and flower 
 that have solace she , and once more draw the bird and rabbit to 
 sport with she ; till suddenly it come into her head that the time be 
 wear overfast . then she run down to the water and plunge in , and 
 swam over to the strand as fast as she might , and come aland there , 
 thinking of nothing less than what have befall . 

 for lo ! when she look around for her raiment and her scrip , it be 
 nowhere to be see ; straightway then it come into her mind , as in one 
 flash , that this be the witch 's work ; that she have divine this deed 
 of the flight , and have watch she , and take the occasion of her 
 nakedness and absence that she might draw she back to the House of 
 Captivity . and this the more as the precious ring be sew to 
 Birdalone 's smock , and the witch would have find it there when she 
 handle the raiment . 

 birdalone waste no time in seek for the lost ; she look down on 
 to the smooth sand , and see there footprint which be not her own , 
 and all those go straight back home to the house . then she turn , 
 and for one moment of time look up toward the house , and see 
 plainly the witch come out adoor , and the sun flash from something 
 bright in her hand . 

 then indeed she make no stay , but set off run at her swift 
 along the water - side toward the creek and the Sending Boat . as be 
 aforesaid she be as fleet - foot as a deer , so but in a little space 
 of time she have come to the creek , and leapt into the boat , pant 
 and breathless . she turn and look hastily along the path her 
 foot have just wear , and deem she see a flutter and flash 
 come along it , but some way off ; yet be not sure , for her eye 
 be dizzy with the swiftness of her flight and the hot sun and the 
 hurry of her heart . then she look about a moment confusedly , for 
 she call to mind that in her nakedness she have neither knife , nor 
 scissor , nor bodkin to let her blood withal . but even therewith 
 close to hand she see hang down a stem of half - dead briar - rose 
 with big thorn upon it ; she hastily tear off a length thereof and 
 scratch her left arm till the blood flow , and step lightly 
 first to stem and then to stern , and besmear they therewith . then 
 she sit down on the thwart and cry aloud : 


 the red raven - wine now 
 Hast thou drunk , stern and bow ; 
 then wake and awake 
 and the wonte way take ! 
 the way of the Wender forth over the flood , 
 for the will of the Sender be blent with the blood . 


 Scarce have she time to wonder if the boat would obey her spell ere it 
 begin to stir beneath she , and then glide out into the lake and take 
 its way over the summer ripple , go betwixt Green Eyot and the 
 mainland , as if to weather the western ness of the eyot : and it go 
 not a stonecast from the shore of the said mainland . 

 Hither to meet it now cometh the witch , run along the bank , her 
 skirt fly wild about she , and a heavy short - sword gleaming in her 
 hand . her furious running she stay over against the boat , and 
 cry out in a voice break for lack of breath : 


 back over the flood 
 to the house by the wood ! 
 back unto thy rest 
 in the alder nest ! 
 for the blood of the Sender lie warm on thy bow , 
 and the heart of the Wender be weary as now . 


 but she see that the Sending Boat heed her word nothing , whereas 
 it be not her blood that have awaken it , but Birdalone 's . then 
 cry out the witch : o child , child ! say the spell and come back to 
 I ! to I , who have rear thee and love thee and hop in thee ! O 
 come back ! 

 but how should Birdalone heed her prayer ? she see the sax ; and 
 withal have her heart forget , her flesh might well remember . she 
 sit still , nor so much as turn her head toward the witch - wife . 

 then come wild yelling word from the witch 's mouth , and she cry : 
 go then , naked and outcast ! go then , naked fool ! and come back 
 hither after thou hast be under the hand of the pitiless ! ah , it 
 have be well for thee have I slain thee ! and therewith she whirl 
 the sax over her head and cast it at Birdalone . but now have the boat 
 turn its head toward the ness of Green Eyot and be swiftly 
 departing , so that Birdalone but half hear the last word of the 
 witch - wife , and the sax fall flash into the water far astern . 

 there the witch stand toss her arm and screaming , wordless ; but 
 no more of her see Birdalone , for the boat come round about the ness 
 of Green Eyot , and there lie the Great Water under the summer heaven 
 all wide and landless before she . and it be now noon of day . 


 here end the First Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which be 
 call of the House of Captivity . and now begin the Second Part , 
 which be call of the Wondrous Isles . 




 the second part : of the WONDROUS ISLES 




 CHAPTER I. the first ISLE 



 so glide Birdalone over the lake and be come forth from the House 
 of Captivity ; it might well be that she be but swim unto death ; 
 naked as she be , fireless , foodless , and helpless , at the mercy of 
 mere sorcery . yet she call to mind the word of the wood - mother 
 that they should meet again , and take heart thereby ; and she be glad 
 in that she have have her will , and shake off the guile and thraldom 
 of the witch . much she think of the wood - mother , and love she , 
 and wonder have she yet seek into and see her welfare by the 
 burning of a hair of that tress of her ; and therewith she look on 
 that tress of Habundia 's hair and kiss it . 

 all day the Sending Boat speed on , and she see no land and nought to 
 tell of . it be but wave and sky and the familiar fowl of the lake , 
 as coot , and mallard , and heron , and now and then a swift wood - dove 
 go her way from shore to shore ; two gerfalcon she see also , an 
 osprey , and a great ern on his errand high up aloft . 

 birdalone wake in her loneliness till the day be spend , and 
 somewhat worn of the night ; then she fall asleep for weariness ; but 
 so it be , that before dusk she have deem that a blue cloud lie 
 before she in the offing which move not . 

 she sleep the short night through , and be awaken by the boat 
 smite against something , and when her eye open she see that she 
 be come aland and that the sun be just risen . she stand up , and 
 for the first minute wonder where she be , and she behold her 
 nakedness and know not what it mean ; then she loosen her hair , and 
 shake its abundance all about she , and thereafter she turn her eye 
 on this new land and see that it be fair and goodly . the flowery 
 grass come down to the very water , and first be a fair meadow - land 
 besprinkle with big ancient tree ; thence arise slope of vineyard , 
 and orchard and garden ; and , look down on all , be a great White 
 House , carven and glorious . a little air of wind have awaken with 
 the sunrise , and bear the garden sweetness down to she ; and warm it 
 be after the chill of the wide water . no other land could she see 
 when she look lakeward thence . 

 she step ashore , and stand ankle - deep in the sweet grass , and 
 look about she for a while , and see no shape of man astir . she be 
 yet weary , and stiff with abide so long amongst the hard rib of 
 the boat , so she lay herself down on the grass , and its softness 
 solace she ; and presently she fall asleep again . 



 CHAPTER II . birdalone falleth in with new friend 



 when she next awoke , the sun be not yet high , and the morning young , 
 yet she stand upon her foot much refresh by that short slumber . 
 she turn toward the hill and the gay house , and see one come over 
 the meadow to she , a woman to wit , in a shin golden gown , and as 
 she draw nigh Birdalone could see that she be young and fair , tall , 
 white - skinned and hazel - eye , with long red hair dance all about 
 she as she trip lightly and merrily over the greensward . 

 now she come up to Birdalone with wonder in her eye , and greet she 
 kindly , and ask she of her name , and Birdalone tell it all simply ; 
 and the new - comer say : what errand hast thou hither , that thou art 
 come thus naked and alone in this ill - omen ferry ? birdalone 
 tremble at her word , though she spake kindly to she , and she say : 
 it be a long story , but fate drave I thereto , and misery , and I know 
 not whither I be bind . but be there no welcome for I in this 
 lovely land ? I lack not deftness wholly ; and I will be a servant of 
 servant , and ask no well if it must be so . say the new - comer : 
 unto that mayst thou come , but sore will be thy servitude . I fear I 
 thy welcome here may be but evil . say birdalone : wilt thou not 
 tell I how so ? Quoth that lady : we know thy ferry here , that it be 
 the craft wherein cometh hither now and again the sister of our lady 
 the Queen , into whose realm thou art now come , and who liveth up in 
 the white palace yonder , and whom we serve . and meseem thou wilt 
 not have come hither by she leave , or thou wouldst be in other guise 
 than this ; so that belike thou wilt be the runaway of thy mistress . 
 wherefore I fear that thou wilt be send back to thy say mistress 
 after a while , and that that while will be grievous to thee , body and 
 soul . 

 Birdalone 's heart sink , and she be pale and trembling ; but she say : 
 o dear lady , might I then depart as I have come hither , without the 
 wotting of this Queen ! after thou hast give I a morsel of bread , 
 for I be hungry . say the gold - clothe one , look on her pitifully : 
 Nay , maiden , I can not choose but bring thee before our mistress , 
 whereas most like she hath already see thee from above there . for 
 she be far - sight beyond the will not of folk who be more manlike . but 
 as for the bread , see thou ! I have bring a manchet in my pouch , 
 and cheese withal , as I come hurry ; for I think , she will be 
 hungry . and she reach the victual out to she . and Birdalone take 
 it and kiss the golden lady 's hand , and she might not refrain her 
 tear , but weep as she eat . 

 meanwhile the golden lady spake unto she and say : nevertheless , 
 thou poor maiden , somewhat may be do for thine helping , and I will 
 presently speak to my sister thereon , who be , both of they , wise 
 than I. Sisters by blood be we not , but by love and fellowship . 
 and I doubt not but that as we go up into the house we shall happen 
 upon they in the garden . but now I look upon thee , how fair a woman 
 art thou ! 

 thou art kind and friendly , say Birdalone , smile amidst of her 
 tear , might I know by what name to call so dear a woman ? thou shalt 
 call I Aurea , say the other ; and my next sister be Viridis , and the 
 third , Atra ; for that be accord to the hue of our raiment , and 
 other name we have not now . and lo ! here cometh Viridis over the 
 meadow . 

 birdalone look , and see a woman come toward they clothe all in 
 green , with a rose - wreath on her head . and she draw nigh , and 
 greet Birdalone kindly , and she also be a very beauteous woman ; 
 not great of body , whereas Aurea be tall and big - make , though 
 excellently shapen . light brown and goodly wave of hair be 
 Viridis , her eye brown , and rather long than great ; her lip full 
 and ruddy , her cheek soft and sweet and smooth , and as rosy - tint 
 pearl ; her hand small and delicate of fashion ; her whole body soft- 
 shapen as an egg ; a kind , wheedle look her face bore . 

 when she have look a while on Birdalone , she kiss she , and say : 
 I would thou wert happier , for thou art beauteous , and all but the 
 evil must love thee . Therewith she draw a cate from her pouch , and 
 say : eat somewhat , for thou wilt be hungry ; and let we go meet our 
 other sister , who be wise than we . 

 so they go , all three of they , and come from off the meadow on to 
 the garden - slope , and at the entry thereof be come Atra to meet 
 they ; she be clothe all in black , a tall , slim woman , with the grace 
 of the willow - bough in the wind , with dark plenteous hair and grey 
 hawk - eye ; her skin privet - white , with but little red in her cheek . 
 she also greet Birdalone kindly , but sadly withal . she give she 
 strawberry to eat lay on a big kale - blade ; and she say : sister , 
 here be we hide by the tree , and can not be see from the house ; 
 therefore we may sit here for a minute or two , while we talk together 
 as to what may perchance be do for the helping of this unhappy 
 maiden , who be so fair and lovely , and hath stray into so ugly a 
 trap . then she say to Birdalone : Thou must know , poor wanderer , 
 that this Queen , our mistress , who be sister to the Witch under the 
 Wood , be big and strong , well - make , and white - skinned , so that she 
 deem herself a queen of all beauty : keen - eyed be she to see a fly 
 where other would see nought small than a coney ; fine - eare 
 withal ; wise in wizardry ; not altogether dull - witted , though she be 
 proud , and crueller than the cruell . but herein she faileth , that 
 her memory be of the short for matter of the pass hour , albeit 
 she remember her spell and witch - song over well . but other 
 matter will scarce abide in her head for four and twenty hour . 
 wherefore , sister , if we may keep this maiden out of her sight 
  after she hath see she and give doom upon she   till the dead of 
 to - morrow night , we may perchance do some good for she ; and it be in 
 my mind that then she may do good for we also . 

 now they rejoice in this word of Atra the wise ; and Atra pray 
 birdalone to tell they somewhat more of her story ; and she tell they 
 much ; but , whyso it be , she say nought concern the wood - wife , 
 whose outward semblance be the same as her . then they pity she , 
 and caress she ; but Atra say : we must tarry here no more , but go 
 straight up to the lady , or maybe we shall lose all . 

 so they go their way and come into the pleasance , and trod the 
 sweet greensward betwixt the garland flower and the beauteous tree ; 
 which now indeed , though Birdalone see they all clear and over - clear , 
 be become nought to she . those three also spake gently to she , and 
 now and then ask she somewhat , as if to show she that she be one 
 of themselves ; but she spake not , or answer at random , and to say 
 sooth scarce hear their word : forsooth she be now become heart- 
 sick , and be half dead for fear ; and her nakedness , which would have 
 trouble she little across the water , be now grow a shame and a 
 terror unto she , and every deal of her body quiver with the anguish 
 thereof . 



 CHAPTER III . birdalone be BROUGHT before the WITCH - WIFE 's SISTER 



 so come they at last to the very house , and whereas it stand high on 
 the bent , a great stair or perron of stone go up to it , and be of 
 much majesty . they go through the porch , which be pillare and 
 lovely , and into a great hall most nobly build , and at the other 
 end thereof , on a golden throne raise upon a dais , sit a big woman 
 clothe in red scarlet . the three damsel lead Birdalone to some four 
 pace of the great lady , and then stand away from she , and leave she 
 stand there alone , the scarlet - clothe woman before she ; on the right 
 and the leave the tall pillar go up gleam toward the roof , and 
 about her foot the dark polished pavement , with the wallowing of 
 strange beast and great serpent and dragon all do on the coal- 
 blue ground . 

 when she be so left alone , at first she totter , and go nigh to 
 fall ; but then come back some little heart to she , as she say to 
 herself that now she should verily die once for all , and that no long 
 while would be the passing from life into death . she look up and 
 behold the lady - witch , that she be somewhat like to her sister , 
 white - skinned and of plenteous golden - hair as be she , but young of 
 aspect , and nowise so ill - look as that other have now become ; for 
 somewhat well - shapen of body she be ; but her face forbid ; her 
 low lip thrust out , her cheek flaggy and droop , her eye little 
 more than half open ; to be short , a face both proud , foolish , and 
 cruel ; terrible indeed , sit in judgment in that place on a 
 shrink naked creature . 

 now she spake ; and if there be no majesty or solemnity in the 
 voice , there be ugly glee and malice therein ; but she say to those 
 damsel : be this the woman that my keen eye behold come aland from 
 my sister 's Sending Boat e'en now ? Aurea kneel on one knee , and 
 say : yea , so please you , my lady . 

 then say the witch : Ho thou ! wilt thou plead some errand hither 
 from my sister ? dost thou deem I so witless as not to know that if 
 she have send thee hither thou wouldst not have come in this plight ? 
 Nay , I know ; thou hast steal thyself from she : thou art a thief , 
 and as a thief shalt thou be deal with . 

 Spake Birdalone in a clear voice : no errand do I feign from thy 
 sister , lady : when I could bear my life there no long , I take 
 occasion to flee from she : this be all the tale . yet once and again 
 it hath be in my mind that it be thy sister who steal I from they 
 that love I . 

 Hah , thrall ! say the lady , thou art bold ; thou art over - bold , thou 
 naked wretch , to bandy word with I . what hee I thy tale now thou 
 art under my hand ? her voice be cold rather than fierce , yet be 
 there the poison of malice therein . but birdalone spake : if I be 
 bold , lady , it be because I see that I have come into the House of 
 Death . the dying may well be bold . 

 the House of Death ! cry the stupid lady ; and wilt thou call my 
 noble house the House of Death ? now art thou no long bold , 
 strip thrall , but impudent . 

 Scorn rise into Birdalone 's heart at this word , but she refrain 
 she , and spake : I mean that I have stir the wrath in thee , and 
 that thou wilt slay I therefor ; and that it availeth not to crave 
 mercy of thee . 

 laugh the lady : thou art a fool , thrall , say she ; if a sparrow 
 flee hither from my sister , I should not wring its neck , but keep it 
 for she . so shall I do with thee . I shall not slay thee , and so 
 destroy my sister 's chattel ; nor shall I spoil thee , and spoil her 
 possession . I shall send thee back unto she , the steal thrall in 
 the steal boat , when I have learn thee a lesson here . Forsooth it 
 be for that cause meseemeth that she let thee slip through her 
 finger , for she be wise enough to have stay thee from this holiday 
 have she will it . but she be tender - hearted , and kind , and soft , 
 and might well deem that if thy chastisement be do to her hand 
 here , it be well do than by her mercy . now , thrall , I have 
 speak enough to thee , or more than enough : get thee back out of 
 earshot ! 



 CHAPTER IV . of the WITCH 's prison in the WAILING - TOWER 



 Birdalone do as she be bid , and the witch call unto her Atra , 
 who come and stand humbly on the footpace beside she , and hold 
 converse with her mistress a while . then she go backward from she 
 a little , and then come to Birdalone , and in a somewhat harsh voice 
 bade she come with she . birdalone follow she , quaking , and they 
 come out of the hall and into a long passage , which lead to a wide 
 stair wind round a newel ; and all be build exceed fair , have 
 Birdalone 's heart suffer her eye to see it ; but her flesh be 
 weak , and quake before the torment to come , so that her knee well- 
 nigh fail she . 

 but now Atra lay a hand kindly on her shoulder and stay she , and 
 say : now meseem the wall of the Wailing - Tower , for so it hight , 
 have no ear to hear , and we may talk together . wottest thou why I 
 have bring thee hither ? say birdalone in a faint voice : Hast 
 thou be bid to whip I ? and if I have be so bidden , dear 
 maiden , say Atra laughing , nowise would I do it . hold up thine 
 heart ! for all hath go well so far , and now meseem betwixt we 
 three we shall save thee . 

 Birdalone 's spirit come back to she at that word , and she put she 
 hand to her face and fall a - weeping . but Atra be kind to she and 
 make much of she ; and she kiss she and wipe her tear , and 
 birdalone smile again amidst her sob , and she thank Atra ; who 
 say to she : first of all I must tell thee that I be take thee to 
 prison by the witch 's bidding . yea , say Birdalone , and what be 
 prison ? say Atra : a prison be a grim place where poor folk who 
 have do that which pleaseth not rich folk be shut up , that they 
 may be grieve and torment by not be able to fare abroad , or go 
 where they would ; and by suffer whatsoever their master may lay 
 upon they , as darkness , and cold , and hunger , and stripe . somewhat 
 so , or bad , our lady would have it for thee ; but so would not we . 
 therefore for thee shall this prison be a place where thou shalt be 
 safe till we may bring thee forth when the night hath wear towards 
 its ending . for she will have forget thee by to - morrow ; and this 
 she knoweth ; wherefore just now , when thou stoodest out of earshot , 
 she be bid I , amongst other matter , to bring thee before she 
 to - morrow morning , and tell she the tale of thee , that she might call 
 it to mind then what she have will to this morning . 

 Yea , say Birdalone , but will she not remember that she hath give 
 thee a charge concern I ? but little thereof , say Atra , and with 
 a few word I may easily confuse her memory so that speech thereon 
 will fail she . keep up thine heart , sweetle ; but let we up this 
 stair now forthwith , for I be fain to have thee hide away in this 
 prison , and then will I down to she and tell she that thou art lie 
 therein in all misery and terror , lest it come into her head to send 
 for thee ere her memory be grow dim . 

 again do Birdalone take heart , and they hasten a long way up the 
 stair , till Atra stay at last at a door all do with iron , endlong 
 and over - thwart . then she take a leash of key from her girdle , one 
 big and two little , and set the big one in the lock and turn it , 
 and shove the heavy door and enter thereby a chamber four - square 
 and vault ; and the vault be uphold by a pillar of red marble , 
 wherein , somewhat high than a man 's head , be set stanchion of 
 latten , that could be clasp and unclasped . this chamber be in a 
 way goodly , but yet grim to look on ; for the wall be all of black 
 ashlar stone close - jointed , and the floor black also , but of marble 
 polished so wholly that it be as dark water , and give back the image 
 of Birdalone 's dear foot and leg as she go thereon . the window 
 be not small , and the chamber be light in every corner because of 
 they , but they be so high up under the vaulting that none might see 
 thereout aught save the heaven . there be nought in the chamber 
 save a narrow bench of oak and three stool of the same , a great and 
 stately carven chair dight with cushion of purple and gold , and in 
 one corner a big oaken coffer . 

 now spake Atra : this be our lady 's prison , and I fear I we can not 
 make it soft for thee , dear stranger . yea , I must tell thee   and she 
 redden therewith   that it be part of my charge to set thee in 
 iron . birdalone smile on she , and be over weary to ask what that 
 mean , though she know not . but Atra go to the big coffer and 
 open it and thrust in her hand , and there be a jangling 
 therewith , and when she turn about to Birdalone again she have iron 
 chain in her hand , and she say : this shameth I , dear friend ; yet 
 if thou wouldst wear they it might be well , for she may have a mind 
 to go visit her prison , and if she find thee there unshackle she 
 shall be wroth , and oftenest her wrath hath a whip in its hand . and 
 these be the light that I might find . 

 birdalone smile again , and spake not , for she be very weary , and 
 Atra do the iron on her wrist and her ankle ; and say thereafter : 
 yet bear in mind that it be a friend that hath the key of these 
 thing . and now I will go away for a little , but I shall be on thine 
 errand ; for first I shall tell the mistress that thou art lie here 
 shackle and in all wanhope ; and next , by the will and command of 
 she , I be to see that thou be well feed and nourish to - day that thou 
 mayst be the strong for to - morrow . now if I may give thee rede , it 
 be that thou forbear to open the coffer yonder ; for ugly thing shalt 
 thou find there , and that may dishearten thee again . 

 Therewith she kiss she kindly on the cheek and go her way , and 
 the great key turn in the lock behind she . 

 there then be birdalone leave to herself ; and she be over weary even 
 to weep ; true it be that she make a step or two towards the coffer , 
 but reframe she , and take two of the pillow from the great chair 
 and turn aside into the other corner , her chain jingle as she 
 go . there she lay herself down , and nestle into the very wall- 
 nook , and presently fall asleep , and slumber dreamlessly and 
 sweetly a long while . 



 CHAPTER V. THEY feast in the WITCH 'S prison 



 birdalone be awaken by the sound of the key in the lock , and the 
 door open , and there be Atra bear dish and platter , and 
 behind her Viridis with the like gear , and beaker and a flagon to 
 boot , and both they be smile and merry . 

 Birdalone 's heart leapt up to meet they , and in especial be she 
 gladden by the coming of Viridis , who have seem to be the kind 
 of they all . 

 Viridis spake : now be come the meat for the dear sister , and it be 
 time , for surely thou art famish , and it be now long past high 
 noon . do off her iron , Atra . say Atra : maybe it be well to let 
 the fetter abide on her ankle , lest the mistress should come ; but 
 for the wrist , reach out thine hand , wayfarer . so do Birdalone , 
 and Atra lay her thing on the ground , and unlock the hand- 
 shackle , and do they off : and meanwhile Viridis spread forth the 
 banquet , partly on the floor , and partly on that ill - omen coffer . 
 then she go up to Birdalone and kiss she , and say : now shalt 
 thou sit in our lady 's throne , and we shall serve thee , and thou 
 shalt deem thee a great one . 

 Nought else would they have , and Birdalone lay her nakedness on the 
 purple cushion , and then they fall all three to the feast . the 
 victual be both plenteous and dainty , of venison and fowl , and cream 
 and fruit and sweetmeat , and good wine they have withal : never have 
 birdalone feast in like manner , and the heart come back unto she , 
 and her cheek grow rosy and her eye glitter . but she say : how 
 if your lady be to come upon we here , and we so merry ? say Atra : 
 out of the chair must thou when thou hear the key in the lock , and 
 then be all well , and she would have nought against we ; for she 
 herself bid we , and I in special , to keep thee company here , and 
 talk with thee ; and Aurea also would have be here , but that she be 
 serve the lady as now . hath she then some pity on I , say 
 Birdalone , that she hath bid thee do by I what be most to my 
 pleasure ? 

 laugh Viridis thereat , and Atra say : she hath no pity , nor ever 
 shall have ; but so hard of heart be she , that she may not deem that 
 we could love thee , a stranger , and unhappy , who can serve we in 
 nowise ; so she feareth not the abatement of thy grief from any 
 compassion of we . rather she hath send we , and I in especial , not 
 to comfort thee , but to grieve thee by word ; for she biddeth I tell 
 thee fair tale , forsooth , of what to - morrow shall be to thee , and 
 the day after ; and of how she shall begin on thee , and what shall 
 follow the beginning , and what thou mayst look for after that . for 
 by all this she deemeth to lower thy pride and abate thy valour , and 
 to make every moment of to - day a terror to thy flesh and thy soul , so 
 that thereby thou mayest thole the bitterness twice over . such be 
 her pity for thee ! and yet belike this cruelty hath save thee , for 
 but for that she have not refrain she from thee to - day , and to- 
 morrow thou shalt be far away from she . 

 meanwhile , say Viridis , in her soft sweet voice , none of all these 
 thing will we talk over with thee , but thing comfortable and kind ; 
 and we will tell each to each of our story . will we not , Atra ? yea , 
 verily , say she . 

 birdalone look upon they and say : wondrous be your compassion and 
 love - kindness unto I , and scarce do I know how to bear the burden 
 thereof . but tell I one thing truly ; will ye not suffer in my place 
 when this witch cometh to know that ye have steal I away from she ? 

 Nay , say Atra , I have tell thee that by to - morrow she will have 
 altogether , or at least almost , forget thee and thy come hither . 
 moreover , she be foresee , and hath come to know that if she raise 
 a hand against any of we three , it will lead she to her bane , save it 
 be for heavy guilt clearly prove against we . Forsooth , in the 
 early day of our captivity such a guilt we fall into , and do not 
 wholly escape , as Viridis can bear I witness . but we be now grow 
 wiser , and know our mistress well , and will give she no such joy . 

 Viridis cast her eye down at those word and Atra 's smile , and 
 turn red and then pale , and Birdalone look on she wonder what 
 ail she ; then she say : do ye sister work in the field and the 
 garden ? I mean at milk the kine and the goat , and dig the 
 earth , and sow and reaping , and the like . Nay , say Atra ; either 
 our mistress or someone else who be of marvellous might , hath so 
 ordain , that here everything waxeth of itself without tillage , or 
 sowing or reaping , or any kind of tending ; and whatso we need of 
 other matter the mistress taketh it for we from out of her wonder- 
 coffer , or suffereth we to take it for ourselves . for thou must know 
 that this land be one of the Isles of the Lake , and be call the 
 Isle of Increase Unsought . 

 Meseemeth then , say Birdalone , be the mistress of you to gainsay 
 you the gift of the Wonder - coffer , ye be undo . yea , verily , 
 say Atra ; then would be but the fruit of the earth and the wild 
 creature for our avail , and these , we have not learn how to turn 
 they into dinner and supper . and they all laugh thereat ; but 
 birdalone say : see ye then how I be right to offer myself unto you 
 as a servant , for in all matter of the house and the byre and the 
 field have I skill . but since ye would not or could not have I , I 
 wonder not that ye be ill at ease here , and long to be go , for as 
 plenteous and lovely as the isle be , and though ye live here without 
 present mishandling or pin . for , sooth to say , ye have over you a 
 tyrant and a fool . 

 Viridis answer : yet be there something else , dear friend , that 
 whet our longing to depart . tell she thereof , Atra . 

 Atra smile and say : simple it be : there be they who long for we 
 and for whom we long , and we would be together . say birdalone : be 
 these kinsfolk of your , as father , mother , sister , brother , or 
 the like ? 

 reddened Viridis again ; but Atra spake , and she also blush 
 somewhat , though she smile : those whom we love , and who love we , be 
 not quean , but carle ; neither be they of our blood , but alien , 
 till love overcometh they and causeth they to long to be of one flesh 
 with we ; and their longing be beyond measure , and they desire our 
 body , which they deem far fair than belike they be . and they 
 would bed we , and beget child on we . and all this we let they do 
 with a good will , because we love they for their might , and their 
 truth , and the hotness of their love toward we . 

 look up Viridis thereat , and her eye gleam amidst the flushing 
 of her cheek , and she say : Sister , sister ! even in such wise , and 
 no other , as they desire we do we desire they ; it be no mere good 
 will toward they from we , but longing and hot love . 

 now must atra blush no less than Viridis ; yet she but say : I have 
 tell thee hereof , Birdalone , because I deem that thou hast live 
 simply and without the sight of man ; but it be what all know in the 
 world of the son of Adam . say birdalone : thou say sooth 
 concern I . yet about this love have I learn somewhat even ere 
 to - day , and now , as ye speak and I , meseem the lore of it come 
 pour in on I and fill my heart with its sweetness . and o , to 
 have such love from any , and with such love to be love withal ! 

 dear sister , say little Viridis , fear not ; such as thou shall not 
 fail of the love of some man whom thou must need love . be it not 
 so , sister Atra ? say Atra : yea ; such love shall come unto she as 
 surely as death . 

 they be silent now a little , and it be as if some sweet incense 
 have be burn within the chamber . for Birdalone the colour come 
 and go in her cheek , her flesh quake , her heart beat quick , and 
 she be oppress by the sweetness of longing . more daintily she 
 move her limb , and lay foot to foot and feel the sleekness of her 
 side ; and tender she be of her body as of that which should one day 
 be so sorely love . 

 now she spake timidly to the other , and say : each one of you then 
 have a man who love she , and long for she and for none else ? so it 
 be , say Viridis . how sweet that shall be ! say Birdalone ; and now 
 all the more I wonder that ye could trouble yourselves over I , or 
 think of I once ; and the kind I think it of you . 

 say Atra smile on she : Nay , now must the cat be out of the bag , 
 and I must tell thee that thou art to think of we as chapman who with 
 our kindness would buy something of thee , to wit , that thou wouldst 
 do an errand for we to those three lover of our . surely , say 
 Birdalone , it be a little payment to set against your saving of my 
 life and my soul ; and have I to go barefoot over red gleed I would do 
 it . and yet , if I may go hence to your lover , why not all three of 
 you along with I ? 

 say Atra : for this reason ; thy ferry , the Sending Boat , wherein ye 
 come hither , be even somewhat akin to thy mistress and our ; and the 
 mistress here hath ban it against bear we ; and now , be we so 
 much as to touch it , such sore turmoil would arise , and such hideous 
 noise as if earth and heaven be fall together ; and the lady 
 would be on we straightway , and we should be undo ; and , as thou 
 shalt hear presently , this hath be prove . but thou , thou art free 
 of the say ferry . Forsooth I wot not why thy mistress ban it not 
 against thee ; maybe because she deem not that thou wouldst dare to 
 use it or even go anigh it . 

 birdalone consider , and think that even so it be ; that the witch 
 deem that she would not dare use the Sending Boat , nor know how to , 
 even if she come upon it , and that if she do so find it , she would 
 sicken she of the road thereto . so now she tell her friend the 
 whole tale thereof more closely than she have afore , save again what 
 pertain to Habundia ; withal she tell every word of what her 
 mistress have say to she at that time when she change she into a 
 hind . and Viridis hear and wonder , and pity she . but Atra sit 
 somewhat downcast a while . then she say : however this may be , we 
 will send thee forth to - morrow in the dawn , and take the risk of what 
 may befall thereafter ; and thou shalt bear a token for each of those 
 three that love we . for we deem that they have not forget aught , 
 but be still seek we . 

 birdalone say : Whatsoever ye bid I ; that will I do , and deem I 
 your debtor still . but now I pray you , pleasure a poor captive 
 somewhat more . wherein ? say they both ; we be all ready thereto . 
 say the maiden : would ye do so much as to tell I the tale of how 
 ye come hither , and then how it hath be with you from your first 
 come until now ? with a good will , say Atra ; hearken ! 



 CHAPTER VI . ATRA tell of how they three come unto the ISLE of 
 INCREASE UNSOUGHT 



 we be bear and breed in the land that lie south - west along this 
 Great Water , and we wax happily , and become fellow when we be 
 yet but child , and thus grow up dear friend into maidenhood and 
 womanhood . we be woo by many man , but our heart turn to none 
 of they save unto three , who be goodly , kind , and valiant ; and thou 
 mayst call they the Golden Knight , who be Aurea 's man ; the Green 
 Knight , who be man of Viridis ; and my man , the Black Squire . but in 
 this be unhap , that because of certain feud which have endure from 
 old time , this love be perilous unto they and we ; so that we live 
 in doubt and unrest . 

 come a day , now three year ago , when the king of the whole land 
 bring his folk into our lakeside country , and there hold a court 
 and a mote in a fair great meadow anigh to the water . but even as 
 the mote be hallow , and the Peace of God proclaim at the blast 
 of the war - horn , come we three woeful lady clothe in black and knelt 
 before the lord king , and pray he hearken we . and he deem that 
 we be fair , so he have compassion on we , and raise we up , and bade 
 us speak . 

 so we tell our tale , how that strife and wound and death stand 
 betwixt we and love ; and we weep , and bewail it , that our love must 
 be slay because man be wroth with each other and not with we . 

 the king look on we kindly , and say : who be the swain for whom 
 these lovely damsel make such a piece of work ? so we name they , 
 and say that they be there in the mote ; and the king know they for 
 valiant man who have do he good service ; and he cry out their 
 name , and bid they stand forth out of the throng . so forth they 
 stand , the Golden Knight , the Green Knight , and the Black Squire   and 
 he also be now a knight ; but now be they all three clothe in black , 
 and they be unarmed , save for their sword girt to their side , 
 without which no man amongst we may come to the mote , be he baron or 
 earl or duke , or the very lord king himself . 

 so the king look upon we and they , and laugh and say : fair 
 lady , ye have get I by the nose , so need must my body follow . do 
 ye three knight , whom I know for valiant man and true , take each his 
 love by the hand , and let the wedding be to - morrow . who then be 
 joyful but we ? but even at the word the king spake arise great 
 turmoil in the mote , for they smite the feud and contention awake , 
 and man throng forward against each other , and sword be draw 
 and brandish . but the king arise in his place and spake long and 
 deftly , and wax exceed wroth , while none heed he nor 
 hearken . and there stand our three man , who lay no hand to hilt , 
 but abode heart - whole by seem amid the tumult . and lovely they 
 be to look on . at last the wise man and old baron go between , 
 and by fair word appease the trouble , and the mote grow hush . 
 then spake the king : what be this , my thane ? I have deem that my 
 foeman be far away , and that ye that here be be all friend unto 
 I and unto each other . but now must we try another rede . Therewith 
 he turn unto our man and say : ye champion , be ye so much in 
 love with Love that ye will fight for he ? they all yeasaid that , 
 and then the king say : then do I declare that these three will hold 
 the field against all comer from matin till high noon , and that he 
 who vanquisheth any one of they shall have his lady and we d she if he 
 will , and , if he will , shall ransom she . and this field shall be 
 foughten after two month ' frist in these fair meadow , when I return 
 from the outermost march of the south , whereto I be now wend . 
 but when the battle be do , then let all man bow to the judgment of 
 God , whether he be well content or not , and this on peril of life and 
 limb . and now let there be deep peace between all man meanwhile ; and 
 if any break the peace , be he high or low , rich or unrich , churl or 
 earl , I swear it by the soul of my father that he shall lose nought 
 save his life therefor . 

 at these word be there a rumour of yeasay , and all man be 
 content , save we three poor maiden , into whose heart have now 
 enter fear of loss and death . 

 but our kindred on both side be glad and proud , and they be not 
 so bitter against we as they have be ; they put hand to pouch , and 
 let rear for we a fair pavilion of paint timber , all hang with silk 
 and picture cloth and saracen tapestry , by the very lake - side ; and 
 gay boat gaily bedight lie off the say pavilion for our pleasure ; 
 and when all be do , it yet lack a half month of the day of 
 battle , and thither be we bring in triumph by the kindred on a 
 fair day of May , and there be not a sword or a spear amongst the 
 whole company , and peaceful and merry be all by seem . but we 
 be not suffer to meet our lover all this while , from the time 
 when the mote be . 

 now on a day come a messenger on the spur , and do we to wit that the 
 king would be with we on the morrow , and that the day after , the 
 fateful field should be foughten . then , though the coming of this 
 day have be so long for by we , yet now it be at hand it cast we 
 into all unrest and trouble , so that we scarce know whether to go , or 
 stand , or sit , or what to do with our body . our folk , and all 
 other man withal , be so busy make ready for the morrow of to- 
 morrow , that they leave we alone to wear through the day as we might . 

 now it be afternoon , and the day hot and hazy , and we stand on the 
 very lip of the land weary with hope and fear , and strive to keep 
 good countenance to each other ; and there come a boat unto the shore 
 gaily paint and gild , and bedight with silken cloth and 
 cushion ; and the steerer thereof be a woman , not young , by seem 
 of fifty winter ; red - haired she be , thin - lipped and narrow - eye , 
 flat - breasted and strait - hippe ; an ungoodly woman , though her skin 
 be white and smooth as for her age . Hast thou ever see such an 
 one , guest ? Said Birdalone , smile : Forsooth that have I ; for such 
 an one be my mistress to behold . 

 well , say Atra , this dame stretch out her hand to we , and say : 
 will not the pretty lady , the dear lady , who have nought on hand 
 this afternoon , come into my boat and look on the face of the water , 
 so calm and fair as it be , and let their lovely hand go over the 
 gunwale and play with the ripple , and so beguile this heavy time for 
 a two hour ; and then give a little gift of a piece or two of silver 
 to a poor carline , who loveth all fair lady and bright warrior , 
 and who needeth a little livelihood ? 

 now the woman seem nought lovely unto we , and to I forsooth she 
 seem hateful ; but we look on each other , and we find that we 
 be utterly weary of go up and down on the meadow , and lie 
 about in the pavilion , and it seem as if this would give we a 
 little rest ; withal we see not that the woman could do we any hurt , 
 whereas we be three , and strong enough as woman go ; nor be we 
 mariner so evil but that we might sail or steer a boat at a pinch . 
 so we step into the boat straightway , and the woman sit aft and 
 paddle deftly with the steering oar , and we glide away from the 
 land . 

 soon we be come so far that we could but just see our pavilion 
 through the haze , which have somewhat thicken , and we say to the 
 woman that she should go about and make for the shore , and that then 
 we would go to and fro a while along by our stead . she nod 
 yeasay , and begin by seem to dight the craft for return . but 
 therewith the haze be grow suddenly into a low cloud , which come 
 down upon we from the south - west in the arm of a cold breeze , that 
 grow strong every minute , so no wonder it be though the steerer 
 might not keep head to wind ; and then who be afraid and ashamed save 
 ourselves ? 

 but the woman say , and there seem to be a mock in her voice : Ill 
 luck , pretty lady ! now be there nought for it but to drive , if we 
 would not drown . but belike this duskiness will clear presently , and 
 then at least we shall know whither we be go ; and we may either 
 turn back , or seek some other shelter , for I know the lake well ; I 
 know , I know . 

 we be too terror - stricken to speak , for we feel that still the wind 
 grow strong , and the lake begin to rise into wave , and the craft 
 to wallow ; but well - nigh therewith be the dusk and the mist go ; 
 the sky be bright blue overhead , and the westere sun shine 
 cloudless ; but on no land it shine , or on aught save the blue water 
 and the white wave - crest . 

 then weep Aurea , and this Viridis here , but as to I , I grow wroth 
 and cry out to the steerer : Accursed carline ! thou hast betray 
 we ; never now may we get back to our pavilion till the fight be 
 foughten , and our lover will deem that we have forsake they , and we 
 be sham for ever . well , well , say the carline , what remedy save 
 patience for the wind and wave ? and she laugh mockingly . Quoth 
 I : there be this remedy , that we three arise and lie hand on thee , 
 and cast thee outboard , save thou straightway turn the boat 's head 
 and back to the main . Forsooth I doubt not but that as thou hast 
 raise this foul wind against we , thou canst raise a fair wind for 
 we . 

 Hearken to the lovely lady ! quoth the carline , how she deemeth I to 
 be none other than the great God himself , to hold the wind in the 
 hollow of my hand , and still the wave with a word ! what ! be I 
 work somewhat after his image , kind lady ? and she grin 
 horribly therewith . then she say again : as to thy remedy , 
 sweetling , meseemeth it nought . for how shall ye sail this stormy 
 water when your captain be go , and ye but holiday sailor belike ? 

 as she spake , a great wave come up from the windward , and brake over 
 we , and half fill the craft , and lift she bow up tower , and 
 then down we go into the trough ; and I sit cow and quaking , and 
 spake never another word . 

 now begin the sun to sink , and the wind abate , and the sea go 
 down , but the boat speed on as swift as ever over the landless water . 

 now the sun be down , and dusk be at hand , and the carline spake , 
 and draw a bright - gleam sax from under her raiment : damsel , I 
 warn you that now it be good that ye obey I in all thing ; for 
 though ye be three and I one , yet whereas I have here an edge - friend , 
 I may take the life of any one of you , or of all three , as simply as 
 I could cut a lamb 's throat . moreover it will serve you well in 
 the house whereto ye be wend , that I make a good tale of you 
 rather than a bad . for the mistress of that house be of all might ; 
 and I must say it of she , though she be my very sister , yet she be 
 not so sweet - temper and kind of heart as I be , but somewhat rough 
 and unyielding of mood , so that it be good to please she . wherefore , 
 maiden , I rede you be sage . 

 our unhappy heart be now so sink in wan - hope , that we have no 
 word wherewith to answer she , and she spake : now obey ye my bidding 
 and eat and drink , that ye may come hale and sound to your journey 's 
 end , for I would not give starveling to my dear sister . Therewith 
 she bring forth victual for we , and that nought evil , of flesh and 
 bread , and cheese and cake , and good wine withal ; and we be 
 hunger - weary as well as sorrow - weary ; and hunger do at that moment 
 overcome sorrow , so we eat and drank , and , would we , would we not , 
 something of heart come back to we thereby . then again spake the 
 carline : now my will be that ye sleep ; and ye have cushion and 
 cloth enough to dight you a fair bed ; and this bidding be easy for 
 you to obey . Forsooth , so weary be we with sorrow , and our hunger 
 be now quench , that we lay we down and sleep at once , and forgat 
 our trouble . 

 when we awake it be after the first dawn , and we be come aland 
 even where thou didst this morning , guest . and thou mayst deem it 
 wondrous , but so it be , that close to where our boat take land lay 
 the ferry which bring thee hither . 

 now the carline bade we get ashore , and we do so , and find the land 
 wondrous fair , little as that solace we then . but she say unto we : 
 Hearken ! now be ye come home ; and long shall ye dwell here , for 
 never shall ye depart hence save by the will of my sister and I , 
 wherefore , once more , I rede you be good , for it will be well for 
 you . go forth now unto yonder house , and on the way ye shall meet 
 the queen of this land , and ye have nought to do but to say to she 
 that ye be the Gift ; and then shall she see to your matter . 

 Therewith she gat into her own craft , the Sending Boat , and therein 
 do the deed and spake the word ye wot of , and be go north - away ; 
 and when we turn to seek for our boat wherein we have come hither , 
 it be go . 

 we stand miserably for a while on the lip of the land , and then I 
 say that we might as well go meet our fate as die there of grief and 
 hunger . so we go , and come into those fair garden , and as we go 
 slowly up toward the house come on we a woman clothe in red scarlet and 
 grandly dight . a big woman she be , and like to she that beguile 
 we , but far young and fair of favour , foolish and proud of 
 visage . she star on we , and seem half afeard of we at first , but 
 ask we what we be , and I answer that we be the Gift . the 
 Gift ? say she , what meaneth that ? will ye obey I in all thing ? 
 if ye gainsay it , ye will perish , unless ye can eat grass ; for on 
 this isle everything cometh from my hand . 

 what might we do ? we all knelt down before she , and swear to do she 
 will . then she say , after she have star on we a while : now I 
 know : ye be they of whom my sister spake , that she would fetch I a 
 gift of a leash of damsel for my service . now I take the Gift and 
 thank her good heart . but if ye would do my will , then . . . but 
 she break off here and star at we a long while , and then she say : 
 now I know ; she bid I treat you well , and hold my hand from you , or 
 evil would come of it , belike at last my bane . so go ye home to the 
 house , and I will give you meat and drink , and show you my store and 
 the wonder - coffer , and ye shall serve I in honour . 

 even so do we ; and we eat and drank and rest , and nought we 
 lack , save leave to depart home to our lover , and some mistress 
 well than this stupid and proud lump of flesh . but the next 
 morning when we come before the lady , she know nought of what we 
 be ; and again we have to tell she that we be the Gift , and again 
 she glare at we balefully , and again she call to mind her sister 
 and her rede concern we . and this go on for many day , till at 
 last she get to know what we be ; and she follow her sister 's rede 
 in that she never mishandle we , though we could see that it irk 
 she to forbear , nor do she speak to we more roughly than her fool 's 
 will not be ; and we have in our hand all that be need for our 
 sustenance , and live easily enough . 

 now our come hither betid three year ago , and a month thereafter 
 come thy witch hither in her ferry , and she greet we when we meet , 
 and ask we , grin , have she not be kind to win we such good 
 day ? yea , and over kind , say she , ye would deem I , know ye what 
 would have betid you save for my good word . Forsooth we deem it no 
 kind deed to steal we from our lover ; but we keep good tongue in 
 our head , for thrall must need kiss the rod . 

 she go away in two day , but come again many time thereafter , till 
 we win the secret of the Sending Boat , and her spell therewith ; but 
 we know not that be ban against we . wherefore on a day in the 
 grey of the morning , when we have be on this isle somewhat less than 
 a year , we go down to it and step in , and reddened stem and 
 stern and say the spell - word . but straightway arise an hideous 
 braying and clatter , and thunder come therewith , and tremble of the 
 earth , and the water of the lake arise in huge wave ; nor might we 
 move from our seat in the boat till the two witch come run 
 down to we , and hale we out ashore , and have we up into the house , 
 and into this very prison - chamber , wherein we be now sit so 
 merry . and here we bear what be lay upon we , whereof , dear guest , 
 we shall tell thee nought . but this come of it , that never 
 thereafter durst we try the adventure of the Sending Boat , but have 
 live on in lazy sorrow and shameful ease , till thou , dear guest and 
 sister , wert send hither by heaven for our helping . 

 now what become of the king 's court , and the hazelled field of our 
 champion , we wot not , or whether they be yet alive we can not tell 
 thee ; but if they be alive , it be to they that we would have thee do 
 our errand , and thereof will we tell thee closely to - morrow . and so , 
 sweetling , an end of my tale . 



 CHAPTER VII . the three damsel take birdalone out of the WITCH 'S 
 prison 



 birdalone thank Atra much for her tale , and strange it be to she 
 to hear of such new thing and the deed of folk ; but the dealing of 
 the witch with those three be familiar to she and be of her 
 world . 

 now they talk merrily , till there come a footstep to the door and 
 one without knocked . Viridis pal thereat , and a pang of fear smote 
 Birdalone , and she swiftly get from out the chair and sit down on a 
 stool ; but when Atra open , it be but Aurea come from her service 
 to bid Atra take her place . so she go , and again be there 
 pleasant converse betwixt Aurea and the other twain ; and certain 
 matter do Aurea tell Birdalone which have be leave untold by Atra . 
 and chiefly , when Birdalone ask if any other folk have come into the 
 isle while they dwelt there , she say yea ; once have come a knight 
 with a lady , his love , flee from war and mishap , and these have the 
 witch overcome by wizardry , and destroy they miserably : and that 
 again another have stray thither , and he also the witch undo , 
 because he would not do she will and lie in her bed . Withal have come 
 drift there a young damsel , a castaway of the wind and wave ; she 
 the witch keep as a thrall , and after a while take to mishandle she 
 so sorely , that at last , what for shame and what for weariness of 
 life , she cast herself into the water and be drown . none of these 
 folk might the damsel help so as to do they any good , though they 
 try it , and go nigh to suffer therefor themselves . 

 now the day wear , and in a while Atra come back , and Viridis must 
 serve . at last the dusk and the dark be come . then say Atra : now 
 must we twain begone to wait upon our lady , as the will not be : and that 
 be now for our good hap , for if we be with she all three , and 
 especially , to say sooth , if I be with she , we may well keep she from 
 visit thee here ; since belike she shall yet dimly remember that 
 thou art in her prison . therefore thou must forgive it if I shackle 
 thy wrist again . and now if thou wilt follow my rede , thou shalt 
 try to sleep some deal , and it be well if thou might'st sleep till 
 we come for thee in the grey dawn . 

 Therewith they leave she there , and she nestle in the corner once 
 more , and there do verily fall asleep , and sleep till the key in the 
 lock and the opening door awaken she , and Atra come steal soft- 
 foot into the prison . Eager she be and panting , and she kneel 
 before Birdalone and unlock her leg - shackle , and then stand up and 
 do the like by the iron on her wrist . then she say : look up , 
 dear friend , to thy prison window , and behold the dawn begin to 
 break on the day of thy deliverance , and our maybe . but come now at 
 once : and again , wilt thou pardon I , that we clothe thee not here 
 for thy journey ? for from our own body must we clothe thee , and if 
 by any hap our lady be to see any one of we more or less unclad , it 
 might draw she on to see what be toward , and we might yet be find 
 out , for our undoing . 

 Therewith she take her hand , and lead she forth of the prison , and 
 lock the door behind she ; and then downstairs they go , and out - a- 
 door by a little wicket at the stair - end . the dawn draw on apace 
 now , and Birdalone see at once the other twain lurk in the wall- 
 nook hard by . no word be speak between they , and with noiseless 
 foot they go forth into the orchard , where the blackbird and 
 thrush be begin their first morning song , and ere they come 
 out on to the meadow the full choir of they be a - singing . 



 CHAPTER VIII . in what WISE birdalone be clad , and how SHE go she 
 way from the ISLE of INCREASE UNSOUGHT 



 when they be all clear of the orchard tree the three damsel keep 
 Birdalone between they closely , so that her white body should not be 
 see if the lady be awake and look forth . thus they bring she 
 to where a few thorn - bush make a cover for they close to the 
 water 's edge , some twenty yard from the Sending Boat . there they 
 stand together , and Atra say : 

 now , dear guest , and dear messenger , it be our matter to clothe 
 thee from our very body ; and do thou , Viridis , begin . 

 Viridis come forward blushing , as she will not be , and take off her 
 green gown and lay it on the grass ; then she set her hand to her 
 smock , and do it off , and stand naked , knee set to knee , and sway 
 like the willow branch ; and then be see all the dainty fashion of 
 her body , and how lovely of hue and sweet of flesh she be . 

 but she say : dear sister Birdalone , here be my smock , which I lend 
 thee , but as to my love , I give it thee therewith ; therefore grudge 
 it not , though thou give I back the linen , for happy will be the day 
 to I when I have it again ; for now none may do it on I save the 
 Green Knight , my own love . therewith she give she the smock , and 
 kiss she , and Birdalone do it on , and feel the valianter and 
 mighty when she have a garment upon she . 

 then Aurea do off her golden gown , and stand in smock alone , so that 
 her naked arm shine more precious than the golden sleeve that have 
 cover they . and she spake : Birdalone , dear messenger , take now my 
 golden gown , and send it back to I when thou hast find the man unto 
 whom it be due ; and think meanwhile that , when thou wearest it , thou 
 wear my love , and that when thou pull it off , thou art clothe 
 with my love instead of it . 

 so Birdalone do on the gown , and become to look on as the dainty 
 of the queen of the earth ; and she turn her head about to look on 
 her gold - clothe flank , and wonder . 

 thereafter Atra knit up her skirt into her girdle , and then do off 
 her shoon , so that her slim foot shine like pearl on the green 
 grass ; and she say : 

 Birdalone , sweet friend ! wilt thou be my messenger to bear these 
 shoon to my Black Squire , and meanwhile put my love for thee under 
 thy foot , to speed thee and to bear thee up ? wherefore be good to 
 I . 

 birdalone then shod herself , and though pity it be to hide her foot 
 from the eye of Earth , yet feel she the stouter - hearted thereby , and 
 her cheek flush and her eye brighten . 

 thereafter Aurea give her withal a golden collar for the neck , and 
 Viridis a girdle of silver well - wrought , and Atra a gold finger - ring 
 set with a sapphire stone ; and all these she do on she ; but yet she 
 know that they be token to be deliver to the three lover 
 accord as be due . 

 then spake Atra : Lo , sister , we pray thee to bear these lending on 
 thy body in such wise that when thou comest to the mainland they may 
 be see by knight seek adventure , and that thou mayst answer to 
 any who may challenge thee thereof and say that thou bearest this 
 raiment and these jewel from Aurea and Viridis and Atra to Baudoin 
 the Golden Knight , and to Hugh the Green Knight , and to Arthur the 
 Black Squire . and if thou deem that thou hast find these , then 
 shall they tell thee a token , such as we shall tell thee , that they 
 be truly these and none other ; and thereafter , when thou art make 
 sure , they shall take of thee the raiment , the gem , and the Sending 
 Boat , and come hither if they may . and God look to the rest ! but as 
 for the token to be tell aforesaid , we have determine that each of 
 we shall tell thee privily what question thou shalt ask for she , and 
 what answer thou must look for . 

 when she have do speak , each come up to Birdalone and spake 
 something into her ear amidst blush enough forsooth . and what they 
 say will be see hereafter . then again say Atra : now by this 
 errand shall we be well pay for the care we have have of thee . it 
 may be , forsooth , that thou shalt not find our speech - friend ; for 
 they may be dead , or they may deem we untrue , and may have forsake 
 we and their land ; and in any such case thou art free of our errand ; 
 but whatsoever may betide we , God speed thee ! 

 then Viridis draw forth a basket from under a bush , and say : we 
 know not how long thy voyage may be , but some little provision for 
 the way we may at least give thee : now wilt thou bear this aboard 
 thyself ; for we dare not touch thy craft , nay , nor come nigh it , no 
 one of we . and she set down the basket and cast her arm about she , 
 and kiss she and weep over she ; and the other twain , they also 
 kiss she lovingly . birdalone weep even as Viridis , and say : May 
 ye do well , who have be so kind to I ; but now be I both so glad 
 and so sorry , that the voice of I will not make due word for I . o 
 farewell ! 

 Therewith she take up her basket , and turn and go speedily to the 
 Sending Boat ; and they behold she how she step aboard and bar 
 her arm , and draw blood from it with the pin of her girdle - buckle , 
 and therewith redden stem and stern ; and a pang of fear smote into 
 their heart lest their lady have ban it for Birdalone as for they . 
 but Birdalone sit down on the thwart , and turn her face south , and 
 spake : 


 the red raven - wine now 
 Hast thou drunk , stern and bow ; 
 awake then , awake ! 
 and the southward way take : 
 the way of the Wender forth over the flood , 
 for the will of the Sender be blent with the blood . 


 no cloud bar the gateway of the sun as she speak ; no wave rise 
 upon the bosom of the lake ; no clatter nor tumult be there ; but the 
 Sending Boat stir , and then shoot out swiftly into the wide water ; 
 and the sun arise as they look , and his path of light flash on 
 Birdalone 's golden gown for a moment , and then it grow grey again , 
 and presently she be go from before their eye . 

 so they turn up into the orchard : and now be Viridis of good 
 cheer , and Aurea no less ; but Atra lag behind , and as she go , 
 some passion take she , she know not wherefore ; her bosom swell , her 
 shoulder heave therewith , and she weep . 



 CHAPTER IX . how birdalone come to the ISLE of the YOUNG and the OLD 



 all go well with Birdalone when she have leave the Isle of Increase 
 Unsought , much as it have on her first voyage , save that now she be 
 both clothe and victual , and her heart , if yet it harbour fear , 
 be also full of new and strange hope ; and oft , even as she sit there 
 amidst the waste of water , she wonder what new longing this be 
 which work so sweet a pain in she , that it make her cheek burn , 
 and her eye dim , and her hand and her limbs restless . and then 
 would she set her mind to her friend and their errand , and would 
 hope and pray for they ; but again would she fall to picture to 
 herself what manner of man they be who be so sore long for by 
 those three beauteous woman ; and she deem that since they be thus 
 desire , they must be fair even than her friend of the isle ; and 
 again the nameless longing overtake she , and hold she till it weary 
 she into sleep . 

 when she awake again the boat have stay , and she be come aland ; but 
 the dawn be not yet come , and the night be moonless , yet be there 
 light enough to see , from the water and the star , that the bow of 
 the boat be lie safe on a little sandy beach . so she step out 
 and look around , and deem she could see great tree before she , 
 and imagine also dark mass of she know not what . so she walk 
 warily up the said strand till she come on to soft grass , and smell 
 the scent of the clover as her foot - sol crush it . there she sit 
 down , and presently lie along and go to sleep . 

 after a while she awake , and feel happy and well at ease , and have no 
 will to move : the sun be shin brightly , but have not be up 
 long : the song of bird be all about she , but amidst it she deem 
 she hear some speech of man , though it be not like to what she have 
 hear in her life before . so she raise herself on her elbow , and 
 look up and see a new thing , and sit up now , and beheld and 
 wonder . 

 for there stand before she , gaze wide - eyed on she , two little 
 child , some three winter of age , a man and a woman as it seem . 
 the man - child with light and fine white - golden hair , fall straight 
 down and square over his brow , and blue - grey eye which be both 
 kind and merry , and shyly seek as it be . plump and rosy he be , 
 sturdy and stout - limbed . no less fair be the woman ; her hair 
 golden - brown , as oft it be with child who grow up dark - haired , and 
 curl in fair little ring all over her head ; her eye be big and 
 dark grey ; she be thin than the lad , and somewhat tall . 

 these two babe have between they a milk - white she - goat , and have be 
 play with she , and now she turn her head to this and that one of 
 they , bleat , as if to crave more of the game ; but they have no eye 
 for she , but stand star with might and main on the new - comer and 
 her shin golden gown . 

 birdalone laugh with joy when she see the little one , and a dim 
 memory of the day of Utterhay pass before she : she stretch out 
 a hand to they , and spake softly and caressingly , and the little lad 
 come forward smile , and take her hand , and make as if he would help 
 she up for courtesy 's sake . she laugh on he , and arise ; and when 
 she stand up , tall and golden , he seem somewhat afeard of so big a 
 creature , but stand his ground valiantly . then she stoop down to 
 he and kiss he , and he naysaid she not , but seem rather glad 
 when it be over ; but when Birdalone go to the little maid , and 
 kiss she , the child clung to she as if she be her mother , and 
 babble to she . 

 then come the lad to she , and take her hand , and would draw she 
 away , and speak to she in his prattle , and she understand he to 
 mean that she should come with he to see the father . so she go , 
 wonder what should next betide ; and the little maiden go on the 
 other side of she , hold by a fold of her skirt . Forsooth the goat 
 follow bleating , not well pleased to be forget . 

 now have Birdalone time to look about she , though the two babe fall 
 to prattle with she in their way , and she think it sweet to look 
 down on the two little face that look up to she so pleased and 
 merry . 

 she be in a grassy plain , somewhat over rough and break to be 
 call a meadow , and not enough be - timbere to be call a wood ; it 
 rise up a little and slowly as they leave the water , but scarce so 
 much as one might call it a hill . straight before she on the way 
 that they be go go up into the air great mass of grey stone 
 build by man 's hand , but look , even from this way off , rag 
 and ruinous . it may well be think that Birdalone wonder what 
 thing might lie betwixt the tree and the tower . 

 now as they go they come on other goat , who seem tame , and these 
 join they to their fellow , and suffer the youngling to play with 
 they . moreover there be rabbit great plenty scuttle in and out 
 of the brake and the rough ground upon the way , and the youngling 
 behold they , and the little lad say , after his fashion : why do the 
 rabbit run away from we , and the goat follow we ? now , sooth to 
 say , Birdalone scarce know why , and have no word ready for the child ; 
 but she say at last : mayhappen they will come to I ; so it be once 
 when I dwelt away from here . shall I go fetch thee one ? the little 
 one yeasaid that , though somewhat shyly and doubtfully . then say 
 birdalone : do ye , sweetling , abide I here , and go not away . they 
 nod their head thereat , and Birdalone kilte her skirt and go 
 her way to some broken bush ground , where be a many rabbit 
 play about ; but she go not out of eye - shot of the babe . before 
 she be well - nigh to the little beast , she fall to talk to they 
 in a low sweet voice , as have be she will not when she be little ; and 
 when they hear it , those who have not scuttle away at first glance 
 of she , fall to creep little short creep one to the other , as 
 their manner be when they be alone together and merry ; and they 
 suffer she to come quite amongst they , and creep about her foot 
 while she stand , still talk unto they . then she stoop down and 
 take up one in her arm and caress it , and then lay he down and 
 take up another , and so with three or four of they ; and she fall to 
 push they , and roll they over with her foot ; then she turn a 
 little away from they toward the child , and then a little more , 
 and the rabbit fall to follow she , and she turn and take up one 
 in her arm , and go straight on toward the child , but turn 
 and talk to the rabbit now and again . 

 as to the babe , she see the goat , of whom be now a dozen , or 
 thereabout , stand together in a kind of ring , and the little one 
 go from one to the other playing with they happily . but presently 
 the lad turn and see she come with her tail of little beast , and 
 he cry out a great oh and run toward her straightway , and the 
 maiden after he ; and he hold out his arm to have the rabbit she 
 bore , and she give it to he smile , and say : lo now ! here be 
 pretty playmate ; but look to it that ye be soft and kind with they , 
 for they be but feeble people . so the youngling fall to sport 
 with their new friend , and for a little forgat both goat and golden 
 lady ; but the goat draw nigh , and stand about they bleat , nor 
 durst they run at the rabbit to butt they , because of Birdalone and 
 the little one . 

 there then stand the slim maiden , tall and gleam above her little 
 flock ; and her heart be full of mirth and rest , and the fear be all 
 forget . but as she look up toward the grey wall , lo , new 
 tiding to hand ! for she see an old man with a long white beard 
 slowly come toward they : she start not , but abode his come 
 quietly , and as he draw nigh she could see of he that he be big and 
 stark , and , old as he be , not yet bow with his many year . he 
 stand look on this queen and her court silently a while , and then 
 he spake : such a sight I look not to see on this Isle of the Young 
 and the Old . she say : but meseemeth it be full meet that these 
 youngling should sport with the creature . he smile and say : 
 such a voice I look not to hear on the Isle of the Young and the 
 Old . 

 birdalone become somewhat troubled , and say : be I welcome here ? for 
 if I be not , I will pray thy leave to depart . he say : thou art as 
 welcome as the very spring , my child ; and if thou have a mind to 
 abide here , who shall naysay thee ? for surely thou art young ; nay , 
 in regard to I thou art scarce old than babe . all blessing be 
 with thee . but though thou art true and kind , as be clear to be see 
 by thy playing with these child and the landward beast in peace 
 and love , yet it may be so that thou hast bring hither somewhat 
 less than peace . and he smile upon she strangely . 

 she look somewhat scared at his last word , and say : but how so ? 
 if I might I would bear nought but peace and happiness to any place . 
 the old carle laugh outright now , and say : how so , dear child ? 
 because lady so sweet and lovesome as thou be send by love , and 
 love rendeth apart that which be join together . 

 she wonder at his word , and be bewilder by it , but she hold she 
 peace ; and he say : now we may talk hereof later on ; but the matter 
 to hand now be the quenching of thine hunger ; for I will not ask thee 
 whereby thou camest , since by water thou need must have come . 
 wherefore now I bid thee to our house , and these little one shall go 
 with we , and the three of these horn folk whom we be will not to 
 tether amidst the wrack and ruin of what once be fair ; the rest have 
 our leave to depart , and these nibbler also ; for we have a potherb 
 garden by our house , and be fain to keep the increase of the same 
 for ourselves . birdalone laugh , and shake her skirt at the 
 coney , and they all scuttle away after the manner of their kind . 
 thereat the little lad look downcast and well - nigh tearful , but the 
 maid stamp her foot , and roar well - favouredly . 

 birdalone do she good to solace she , and pluck a bough from a 
 hawthorn bush far above the little one ' reach whereon be yet some 
 belate blossom , and give it to she and still she . but the old man 
 pick out his milch - goat from the flock   whereof be the white , 
 and drave they before he , while the two babe go on still beside 
 Birdalone , the little carle hold her hand and play with the 
 finger thereof ; the maiden sometimes hang on to her gown , 
 sometimes go loose and sport about beside she . 

 so come they to where the ground become smoother , and there be a 
 fair piece of greensward in a nook make by those great wall and 
 tower , which shelter it from the north . the say wall seem to 
 be the remnant of what have once be a great house and castle ; and up 
 aloft , where be now no stair to come at they , be chimney and 
 hearth here and there , and window with fair seat in they , and 
 arch door and carven pillar , and many thing beautiful , but now 
 be all ruin and break , and the house be roofless and floorless : 
 withal it be overgrow with ash - tree and quicken - beam , and other 
 berry - tree and key - tree , which have many year ago seed in the 
 rent wall , and now grow there great and flourishing . but in the 
 innermost nook of this mighty remnant , and use for its lowly wall 
 two side of the ancient ashlar one , stand a cot build not over 
 trimly of small wood , and now much overgrown with rose and woodbine . 
 in front of it be a piece of garden ground , wherein wax potherb , 
 and a little deal of wheat ; and therein be a goodly row of bee- 
 skep ; and all without it be the pleasant greensward aforesaid , 
 wherein stand three great ancient oak , and diver thorn , which also 
 be ancient after their kind . 

 the elder lead his guest into the cot , which have but simple plenishing 
 of stool and bench , and a table unartful , and then go to tether 
 his goat in the ruin hall of the house , and the child must 
 need with he , though Birdalone have be glad of one of they at 
 least ; but there be no nay , but that they must go see their dear 
 white goat in her stall . howsoever all three come back again 
 presently , the old carle with a courteous word in his mouth , and he 
 take Birdalone 's hand , and kiss it and bade her welcome to his 
 house , as though he have be a great lord at home in his own castle . 
 Therewith must the little one also kiss her hand and be courteous ; 
 and Birdalone suffer it , laugh , and then catch they up in her 
 arm , and clip and kiss they well - favouredly ; wherewith belike 
 they be not over - well pleased , though the boy endure it kindly . 
 thereafter the elder set forth his banquet , which be simple enough : 
 upland cheer of cream and honey , and rough bread ; but sweet it be to 
 birdalone to eat it with good welcome , and the courtesy of the old 
 man . 

 when they be do , they go out - a - door , and Birdalone and the old 
 man lay they down under an oak - tree , and the child sport about 
 anigh they . then spake Birdalone : old man , thou hast be kind unto 
 I ; but now would thou tell I about thee , what thou art , and what 
 be these wall about we here ? say he : I doubt if I may do so , 
 this day at least . but belike thou shalt abide with we , and then 
 some day the word may come into my mouth . she hold her peace , and 
 into her mind it come that it would be sweet to dwell there , and 
 watch those fair child wax , and the lad grow up and love 
 she ; yea , even she fall to tell up the year which would make he 
 a man , and try to see herself , how she would look , when the year 
 be wear thereto . then she redden at the untold thought , and 
 look down and be silent . but the elder look on her anxiously , 
 and say : it will be no such hard life for thee , for I have still 
 some work in I , and thou mayst do something in spite of thy slender 
 and delicate fashion . she laugh merrily , and say : Forsooth , good 
 sire , I might do somewhat more than something ; for I be deft in all 
 such work as here ye need ; so fear not but I should earn my 
 livelihood , and that with joy . merry day shall we have then , say 
 he . 

 but therewith her eye catch the gleam of her golden sleeve , and she 
 think of Aurea , and her heart smite she for her errand ; then she 
 lay her hand on her girdle and call to mind little Viridis , and 
 the glitter of the ring on her finger bring the image of Atra 
 before she ; then she rise up and say : thou art kind , father , but I 
 may not ; I have an errand ; this day must I depart from thee . he 
 say : Thou hast break my heart ; if I be not so old , I would weep . 
 and he hang adown his head . 

 she stand before he abash , as if she have do he a wrong . at 
 last he look up and say : must it be to - day ? wilt thou not abide 
 with we night - long , and go thy way in the early morning ? 

 now she scarce know how to gainsay he , so wretched as the old carle 
 look ; so it come to this , that she yeasaid the abiding till to- 
 morrow . then suddenly he become gay and merry , and he kiss she 
 hand , and fall to much speak , tell tale of little import 
 concern his early day . but when she ask he again of how he 
 come there , and what mean the great ruin house , then he become 
 foolish and wandering , and might scarce answer she ; whereas otherwise 
 he be a well - speak old carle of many word , and those of the 
 grandest . 

 then change his mood again , and he fall to bewail her departure , 
 and how that henceforth he should have none to speak to he with 
 understanding . then she smile on he and say : but yonder babe 
 will grow up ; month by month they will be well fellow unto thee . 
 Fair child , he say , thou dost not know . my day to come be but 
 few , so that I should see but little of their waxing in any case . 
 but furthermore , wax they will not ; such as they be now , such shall 
 they be till I at least see the last of they and the earth . 

 birdalone wonder at this word , and the place seem change to she , 
 yea , be grow somewhat dreary ; but she say to the carle : and thou , 
 dost thou change in any wise , since these change not ? he laugh 
 somewhat grimly , and say : the old that be here change from old to 
 dead ; how could I change to well ? yea , the first thing I have to do 
 here be to bury an old man . Quoth she : and be there any child 
 here then ? Yea , say he ; these same , or I can see no difference in 
 they . say birdalone : and how long ago be that ? and how camest 
 thou hither ? his face become foolish , and he gibber rather than 
 spake : no , I wot not ; no , no , no , not a whit , a whit . but presently 
 after be he himself again , and tell she a tale of a great lady of 
 the earl - folk , a baron 's dame , and how dear he be unto she . he lie 
 yet on the grass , and she stand before he , and presently he put 
 forth a hand to her gown - hem and draw she to he thereby , and fall to 
 caress her foot ; and Birdalone be ashamed thereat , and a little 
 angry . he be nought abash , but sit up and say : well , since thou 
 must need depart to - morrow , be we merry to - day . and I pray thee 
 talk much with I , fair child , for sweet and sweet be thy voice to 
 hearken . then he arise and say : now will I fetch thee somewhat to 
 eke the joy of we both . and he turn therewith and go into the 
 house . 

 birdalone stand there , and be now perplexed and downhearte ; for now 
 the look of the eld scarce like she , and the child begin to 
 seem to she as image , or at the good not more to she than the 
 rabbit or the goat ; and she rue her word that she would abide 
 there the night through . for she say to herself : I fear some trap 
 or guile ; be the witch behind this also ? for the old man be yet 
 stark , and though he be foolish at while , yet may wizardry have 
 learn he some guile . 

 with that cometh out the carle again , bear a little keg and a 
 mazer roughly wrought ; and he come to Birdalone , and sit down , and 
 bade she sit by he , and say to she : maybe I shall hear more of thy 
 sweet voice when thy sweet lip have be in the cup . therewith he 
 pour forth into the mazer , and hand it to Birdalone , and lo ! it 
 be clear and good mead . she sip thereof daintily , and , to say 
 sooth , be well - pleased therewith , and it stir the heart in she . 
 but then she give back the cup to the elder , and would no more of it . 
 as for he , he drink what be leave in the cup , look over the rim 
 thereof meanwhile ; and then fill himself another , and another , and 
 yet more . but whereas it might have be look for that his tongue 
 should be loosen by the good mead into foolishness and gibbering , 
 he become rather few - speak , and more courteous and stately even than 
 he have be at the first . but in the end , forsooth , he be 
 forget Birdalone , what she be , and he fall a - talk , always 
 with much pomp and state , as if to baron and earl , and great 
 lady ; till suddenly his head fall back , he turn over on his face , 
 and all wit be go from he . 

 at first , then , Birdalone be afraid that he be dead , or nigh unto 
 death , and she kneel down and raise his head , and fetched water and 
 cast it over his face . but when she see that he be breathe not so 
 ill , and that the colour be little change in his lip and cheek , 
 she know that it be but the might of the mead that have overcome he . 
 wherefore she lay he so that he be easy , and then stand up and 
 look about she , and see the child play together a little way 
 off ; and nought else anigh she , save the bird in the brake , or 
 fly on their errand eagerly from place to place . then , as it 
 be , without she will be tell they , her limb and her foot turn 
 she about to the shore where lie the Sending Boat , and she go 
 speedily but quietly thitherward , her heart beat quick , for fear 
 lest something should yet stay she , and her eye glance from brake 
 to bush , as if she look to see some enemy , old or new , come out 
 thence . 

 so now she will be clear enough to her foot , and they bring she 
 down to the water - side and the long strand , past which the wide water 
 lie windless and gleam in the hot afternoon . then lightly she 
 step aboard , and awake the Sending Boat with blood - offering , and 
 it obey she , and speed swiftly on the way to the southward . 



 CHAPTER X. birdalone come to the isle of the QUEENS 



 birdalone awake the next morning while the boat be yet speed over 
 the water , and the sun be up : but she be hard on the land , which 
 sit low and green , like a meadow exceed fair , on the bosom of the 
 water , and many goodly tree be sprinkle about the greenland . but 
 from amidst the tree , no great way from the water 's edge , rise a 
 great house , white and fair , as if it be new - builded , and all 
 glorious with pinnacle , and tabernacle set with imagery . 

 presently the boat 's bow run into the reed and rush at the brim of 
 the water , and Birdalone step ashore without more ado , and the 
 scent of the meadow - sweet amongst which she land bring back unto 
 she the image of Green Eyot that while agone . 

 but now when she be ashore the dread take hold of she again , and her 
 knee tremble under she , so that she might scarce stand , so fearful 
 be she of walk into some trap ; especially when she behold that 
 goodly house , lest therein await she some proud and cruel lady , and 
 no kind damsel to deliver she . 

 she look about she , and see in all the fair meadow neither man nor 
 woman , nor draught - beast nor milch - beast , nought but the little 
 creature of the brake and the bent - grass , which be but as the 
 blossom thereof ; and the bird run in the herbage or singing 
 amidst the tree - bough . 

 then she think that she must need go forward , or belike her errand 
 would not speed ; that the Sending Boat might not obey she , unless she 
 see through the adventure to the end ; so she go on toward the house 
 quaking . 

 soon be she at the porch of the white palace , and have see no man 
 nor hear any voice of man ; much she marvel , despite her dread , at 
 the beauty of the said house , and the newness thereof ; for it be as 
 one flower arise out of the earth , and every part of it make the 
 beauty of the other part more excellent ; and so new it be , that it 
 would have seem as if the mason thereof have but strike their 
 scaffold yesterday , save that under the very foot of the wall the 
 sweet garden flower grow all uncrushe . 

 now come Birdalone through the porch unto the screen of the great 
 hall ; and she stop a little to recover her breath , that she might 
 be the quieter and calm amongst the great folk and mighty whom she 
 look to find therein . so she gather heart ; but one thing daunt 
 she , to wit , that she hear no sound come from that great and goodly 
 hall , so that she doubt if it be perchance leave desert by they 
 who have be its lord . 

 she raise her hand to the door of the screen , and it open easily 
 before she , and she enter , and there indeed she see new tiding . 
 for the board end - long and over - thwart be set , and thereat be 
 sit a many folk , and their hand be reach out to knife and to 
 dish , and to platter and cup ; but such a hush there be within , that 
 the song of the garden bird without sound to she as loud as they 
 be the voice of the child of Adam . 

 next she see that all that company , from the great folk on the dais 
 down to those who stand about the hall to do the service , be woman , 
 one and all ; not one carle might she see from where she stand : 
 lovely be they many of they , and none less than comely ; their 
 cheek be bright , and their eye gleam , and their hair flow 
 down fair of fashion . and she stand , and durst not move a long 
 while , but expect when someone would speak a word , and all should 
 turn their head toward the new - comer . but none move nor spake . 
 and the fear increase in she amidst that hush , and weigh so heavy 
 on her heart , that at last she might endure it no long , but fall 
 swoon to the floor . 

 when she come to herself ; and the swoon - dream have leave she , she see 
 by the changing of the sun through the hall - window , that she have 
 lain there long , more nearly two hour than one ; and at first she 
 cover her face with her hand as she crouch there , that she might 
 not see the sight of the silent hall , for yet be it as hush as 
 before . then slowly she arise , and the sound of her raiment and her 
 stir foot be loud in her ear . but when she be upright on her 
 foot , she harden her heart , and go forth into the hall , and no 
 less be her wonder than erst . for when she come close to those 
 lady as they sit at table , and her raiment brush the raiment of 
 the serve - woman as she pass by , then see she how no breath come 
 from any of these , and that they neither spake nor move , because 
 they be dead . 

 at first , then , she think to flee away at once , but again she have 
 mind of her errand , and so go up the hall , and so forth on to the 
 dais ; and there again , close by the high table , she see new tiding . 
 for there be set a bi , cover with gold and pall , and on it be 
 lay a tall man , a king , belt and crown ; and beside the said 
 bi , by the head of the king , kneel a queen of exceed goodly 
 body , clothe all in raiment of pearl and bawdekin ; and her hand be 
 clasp together , and her mouth be draw , and her brow knit with the 
 anguish of her grief . but athwart the king 's breast lie a naked 
 sword all bloody ; and this birdalone note , that whereas the lady be 
 of skin and hue as if she be alive , the king be yellow as wax , and 
 his cheek be shrink , and his eye have be close by the waker 
 of the dead . 

 Long Birdalone look and wonder ; and now if her fear be less , 
 her sorrow be more for all that folk sit there dead in their 
 ancient state and pomp . and be not the thought clean out of her 
 head , that yet they might awake and challenge she , and that she might 
 be make one of that silent company . Withal she feel her head 
 begin to fail she , and she fear that she might swoon again and 
 never waken more , but lie for ever beside that image of the dead 
 king . 

 so then she refrain she both of fear and sorrow , and walk 
 speedily down the hall , look neither to the right nor left : and 
 she come forth into the pleasance , but stay there nought , so nigh 
 it seem to that hush company . Thence come she forth into the 
 open meadow , and sweet and dear seem its hot sunshine and noisy 
 bird and rustle leaf . nevertheless , so great be the tumult of 
 her spirit , that once more she grow faint , and feel that she might 
 scarce go far . so she drag herself into the shade of a thorn- 
 tree , and let her body sink unto the ground , and lie there long 
 unwitting . 



 CHAPTER XI . and now she come to the isle of the king 



 when Birdalone come to herself it be draw toward the glooming , 
 and she rise up hastily , and go down to the Sending Boat , for she 
 would not for aught abide the night in that fearful isle , lest the 
 flock of the hall should come alive and walk in the dusk and the 
 dark . she step aboard lightly , and yield her blood to the pride 
 of that ferry , and it awake and bear her forth , and she go through 
 the night till she fall asleep . 

 when she awake it be broad day and the sun just arise , and lo ! 
 before she , some half mile off , an isle rugge and rocky , and go 
 up steep from the shore ; and then , hold as it be by the fang of 
 the rock and pike of the high land , be a castle , white , high , 
 and hugely build , though , because of the rock - land belike , it 
 spread not much abroad . like to the lovely house of yesterday , it 
 seem new - builded ; and , little as Birdalone know of such matter , 
 her heart tell she that this new house be fashion for battle . 

 she be downcast when she see the isle so rugged and forbidding , but 
 when the boat come aland in a stony bight , whence the ground go up 
 somewhat steeply toward the height , she go ashore straightway , and 
 toil up toward the white battlement . presently she find herself 
 in a strait and rugged path betwixt two wall of rock , so that she 
 lose sight of the castle a while , till she come out on to a level 
 place which look down from aloft on to the blue water , but all over 
 against her close at hand be the great tower and wall . she be 
 wear by the rough road , and over helpless she feel she , and all too 
 little to deal with that huge morsel of the world ; and her valiancy 
 give way , and her trust in her errand . she sit down on a stone and 
 weep abundantly . 

 after a while she be amend , and she look up and see the huge 
 hold , and say : Yea , but if it be less by the half than it be , it 
 would still be big enough to cow I . yet she stand not up . then she 
 put forth a foot of she , and say aloud : sorely hath this rough road 
 try Atra 's shoon and their goodly window - work ; if they be to be 
 know I must be speedy on my journey or go barefoot . 

 as she speak she stand up , and the sound of her own voice fright 
 she , though nought noiseless be the place ; for the wind be there , 
 and beat to and fro the castle and the rock , and run baffle into 
 every corner of that market - place of nothing . for in that garth be 
 neither knight nor squire nor sergeant ; no spear - head glitter from 
 the wall , no gleam of helm show from the war - swale ; no porter be 
 at the gate ; the drawbridge over the deep ghyll be down , the 
 portculli be up , and the great door cast wide open . 

 birdalone steel her heart and go forward swiftly , and over the 
 bridge , and enter the basecourt , and come without more ado to the 
 door of the great hall , and open it easily , as with the door of 
 yesterday , look to find another show like unto that one ; and even 
 so it fall out . 

 Forsooth the hall be nought light and lovely , and gay with gold and 
 bright colour , as that other , but beset with huge round pillar that 
 bore aloft a wide vault of stone , and of stone be the table ; and 
 the halling that hang on the wall be terrible picture of battle 
 and death , and the fall of city , and tower a - tumble and house 
 a - flaming . 

 none the less there also be the shape of folk that move not nor 
 spake , though not so thronged be that hall as the other one ; and it 
 seem as if man be sit there at a council rather than a feast . 
 close by Birdalone 's right hand as she enter be stand in a row 
 along the screen big man - at - arm all weapone , and their face hide 
 by their sallet ; and down below the dai on either side of the high 
 table be again a throng of all - arm man ; and at the high - table 
 itself ; and look down the hall , sit three crown king , each with 
 his draw sword lie across his knee , and three long - hoary wise man 
 stand before they at the nether side of the board . 

 birdalone look on it all , strive with her fear : but yet more 
 there be , for she deem that need must she go through the hall up 
 to the dai , lest the Sending Boat deny its obedience . up toward the 
 dais she go then , pass by weapone man who sit as if abide the 
 council 's end at the end - long table . and now , though no shape of 
 man there spake or breathe , yet sound lack not ; for within the 
 hall go the wind as without , and beat about from wall to wall , and 
 drave clang and clash from the weapon hang up , and wave the arra , 
 and fare moaning in the nook , and hum in the vault above . 

 come she up to the dais then , and stand beside one of the wise man , 
 and look on the king , and see the mightiness which have be in 
 they , and quake before they . then she turn from they and look 
 down to the floor , and lo ! there , just below the dai , lie a woman on 
 a golden bier ; exceed fair have she be , with long yellow hair 
 stream down from her head ; but now waxen white she be , with ashen 
 lip and sunken cheek . Clad be she in raiment of purple and pall , 
 but the bosom of she be bar on one side , and therein be the road 
 whereby the steel have fare which have be her bane . 

 now when Birdalone have gaze thereon a while , she deem that if she 
 tarry there long amidst those fierce man by the dead woman , she 
 should lose her wit full soon , so sore the fear , hold back , beset she 
 now . wherefore she turn and go hastily down the hall , and out - a- 
 door , and over the bridge , and run fleet - foot down the rocky way 
 whereby she have come , till she could run no far , and lie down 
 under a great stone breathless and fordone ; yet her heart uphold she 
 and suffer she not to swoon , belike because she have give her limb 
 such hard work to do . 

 there she lie awake and trouble for an hour or more , and then she 
 fall asleep , and sleep till the day be wear toward sunset , and 
 nought meddle with she . she arise and go to her ship somewhat 
 downhearte , wonder how many such terror should befall she ; nay , 
 whether the Sending Boat would so lead she that henceforth she should 
 happen on no child of Adam but such as be dead image of the 
 living . have all the world die since she leave the Isle of the Young 
 and the Old ? 

 Howsoever , she have nought to do save to board her ferry , and content 
 its greedy soul with her blood , and drive it with the spell - word . 
 and thereafter , when it be speed on , and the twilight dusk 
 apace , she look aback , and seem to see the far - off woodland in 
 the northern ort , and the oak - clothe ridge , where she have meet her wood- 
 mother ; and then it be as if Habundia be say to she : Meet 
 again we shall . and therewith straightway become life sweet unto 
 she . 

 deepen then the dusk , and become night , and she float on through 
 it , and be asleep alone on the bosom of the water . 



 CHAPTER XII . of BIRDALONE , how she come unto the isle of nothing 



 long before sunrise , in the very morn - dusk , she awake and find that 
 her ferry have take land again . little might she see what the say 
 land be like ; so she sit patiently and abode the day in the boat ; 
 but when day be come , little more be to see than erst . for flat 
 be the isle , and scarce raise above the wash of the leeward ripple 
 on a fair day ; nor be it either timbere or bushed or grass , and , 
 so far as Birdalone might see , no one foot of it differ in aught 
 from another . Natheless she deem that she be bind to go ashore 
 and seek out the adventure , or spoil her errand else . 

 out of the boat she step then , and find the earth all pave of a 
 middling gravel , and nought at all grow there , not even the 
 small of herb ; and she stoop down and search the gravel , and 
 find neither worm nor beetle therein , nay nor any one of the sharp 
 and slimy creature which be will not in such ground . 

 a little far she go , and yet a little far , and no change 
 there be in the land ; and yet she go on and find nothing ; and she 
 wend her way southward by the sun , and the day be windless . 

 at last she have go a long way and have no sight of water south of 
 the isle , nor have she see any hill , nay , not so much as an ant - heap , 
 whence she might look far around ; and it seem to she that she 
 might go on for ever , and reach the heart of Nowhither at last . 
 wherefore she think she would turn back and depart this ugly isle , 
 and that no other adventure abide she therein . and by now it be 
 high noon ; and she turn about and take a few step on the backward 
 road . 

 but even therewith it seem as if the sun , which heretofore have be 
 shin brightly in the heaven , go out as a burn - down candle , and 
 all be become dull grey over head , as all under foot be a dull dun . 
 but Birdalone deem she could follow a straight course back again , 
 and so walk on sturdily . hour after hour she go and stay not , 
 but see before her no glimpse of the northern shore , and no change in 
 the aspect of the ground about she . 

 it have so happen that a little before she have turn to go back , 
 she have eat her dinner of a piece of bread and a morsel of cheese , 
 and now as she stoop and peer on the ground , look for some 
 sign of the way , as her foot - print go south , and have her eye low 
 anigh the earth , she see something white at her foot in the gathering 
 dusk   for the day be wear , and she put her hand to it and lift 
 it , and find it a crumb of bread , and know that it must have come 
 from her dinner of ' seven hour ago , whereas till that time her bread 
 have lie unbroken in her scrip . fear and anguish smite she 
 therewith , for she see that in that dull land , every piece whereof 
 be like every other piece , she must have go about in a ring , and 
 come back again to where she first turn to make for the northern 
 shore . 

 yet would she not cast aside all hope , but clothe herself in her 
 valiancy . Forsooth she know it avail nought to try to move on in 
 the twilight ; so she lay herself down on that waste , and make up her 
 mind to sleep if she might , and abide the new day there , and then to 
 strive with the way once more , for belike , she think , it may be 
 fair to - morrow , and the sun shin . and as she be very weary with 
 tramp the waste all day , she fall asleep at once , and sleep the 
 short night through . 

 but when she awake , and see what the new day be , her heart fall 
 indeed , for now be she encompass and shut in with a thick dark 
 mist   though it seem to be broad day , so that have there be aught 
 to see she would not have see it her own length away from she . so 
 there she stand , hang her head , and strive to think ; but the 
 master - thought of death draw nigh scatter all other thought , or 
 make they dim and feeble . 

 long she stand there ; but suddenly something come into her mind . she 
 set her hand to the fair - broider pouch which hang from Viridis ' 
 loin - girdle , and draw out thence flint and steel and tinder , which 
 matter , forsooth , have serve she before in the boat to make fire 
 withal . then she set her hand to her head , and draw forth the tress 
 of hair which Habundia have give she , and which be coil up in the 
 crown of her own abundant lock which deck she so gloriously ; she 
 draw two hair from the say tress , and hold they between her lip 
 while she do up the tress in its place again , and then , pale and 
 trembling , fall to strike a light , and when she have the tinder 
 burning , she cry out : 

 o wood - mother , wood - mother ! how then may we meet again as thou didst 
 promise I , if I die here in this empty waste ? o wood - mother , if 
 thou mightest but come hither for my deliverance ! 

 then she burn the hair one after another , and stand wait , but 
 nought befell a great while , and her heart sicken , and there she 
 stand like a stone . 

 but in awhile , lo ! there come as it be a shadow amidst the mist , or 
 rather lie thereon , faint and colourless , and it be of the shape 
 of the wood - mother , with girt - up gown and bow in hand . birdalone 
 cry aloud with joy , and hasten toward the semblance , but come to 
 it no nigh , and still she go , and the semblance still escape 
 she , and she follow on and on ; and this last long , and fast and 
 fast must she follow lest it vanish , and she gather her skirt 
 into her girdle , and fall to run fleet - foot after the flee 
 shadow , which she love dearly even amidst the jaw of death ; and all 
 her fleetness of foot have Birdalone to put forth in follow up the 
 chase ; but even to die in the pain would she not miss that dear 
 shadow . 

 but suddenly , as she run , the mist be all go from before she , the 
 sun shine hot and cloudless ; there be no shadow or shape of Habundia 
 there , nought but the blue lake and the ugly lip of that hideous 
 desert , with the Sending Boat lie a half score yard from her foot ; 
 and behind she stand up , as it be a wall , the mist from out of 
 which she have come . 

 Forsooth Birdalone be too breathless to cry out her joy , but her 
 heart go nigh to break therewith , and lovely indeed to she be 
 the ripple water and the blue sky ; and she know that her wood - mother 
 have speed a sending to her help , and she fall a - weeping where she 
 stand , for love of her wise mother , and for longing to behold she : 
 she stretch out her arm to the north quarter , and say blessing 
 on she in a voice faint for weariness . then she lay she down on the 
 desert , and rest she with sleep , despite the hot sun , and when she 
 awake , some three hour thereafter , all be as before , save that the 
 sky have now some light - fly cloud , and still be the wall of mist 
 behind she . wherefore she deem she have yet time , and the blue 
 ripple water woo her much - besweate limb ; so she do off her 
 raiment and take the water , and become happy and unweary therein . 
 then she land and stand in the sun to dry she , and so , strengthen 
 with that refreshing , clothe she , and go aboard and do the due 
 rite , and speed over the water , and have soon lose sight of that ugly 
 blotch on the fair face of the Great Water . 


 here end the Second Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which 
 be call of the Wondrous Isles , and begin the Third Part of the 
 say tale , which be call of the Castle of the Quest . 




 the third part : of the CASTLE of the QUEST 




 CHAPTER i. birdalone come to the castle of the QUEST 



 Empty be the day to Birdalone save for her thought , and she sleep 
 not a good while of the night . when she awake in the morning there 
 be no land before she , and she begin to fear somewhat that so it 
 might be many day , and that she might have to fare the water 
 landless , and perchance till she starve for hunger ; for now be 
 there but little victual left of that which the kind Viridis have 
 give she . so she wear the day somewhat uneasily , and by then night 
 fall have eat but little ; yet be that little the last crumb and 
 gobbet of her store . wherefore it be no wonder though she be 
 dismay when she awake early on the morrow , and beheld nought before 
 she save the landless water . 

 but about noon she deem she see a little cloud in the offing that 
 move not as the other cloud , and she watch it closely at first , 
 and it change not any the more , and she grow weary of watch it 
 and strove to sleep , turn her head to the after part of her ferry ; 
 and thus betwixt sleep and wake she wear away three hour : then 
 she stand up and look ahead , and lo , the white cloud have take 
 shape , and be a white castle far away   for the day be exceed 
 clear , sit , as it seem , on the very face of the water . the 
 boat speed on swiftly thitherward , so that it be not right long ere 
 birdalone beheld the green shore on either side of the said castle , 
 and at last , three hour before sunset , she be draw nigh thereto , 
 and behold it all clearly , what it be . 

 it be brand - new , and be fair enough , build part of stone and 
 lime , part of framed work , but be but middling big . as she draw 
 nigh yet , she see that there be folk on the wall of it , and they 
 seem to see she , for a horn be wind from the battlement , and 
 folk be run together to somewhither . and now be Birdalone 
 come so near , that she see the water - gate of the castle , and folk 
 come out thereby on to the landing - place ; and she see presently , 
 that a very tall man with grizzle hair stand foremost of they , and 
 he wave his hand to she , and spake something , but the wind bear the 
 word away from she ; yet she seem to know that this folk would do 
 she to wit that they would have none of she ; and her heart die 
 within she , so faint and hungry as she be . 

 Howsoever the ferry speed on its way swiftly , and in a minute or two 
 have stay itself at the landing - stair , whereabout be gather a 
 score of man , some arm some unarmed , and they seem for the more 
 part to be grey - headed and past middle - age . 

 birdalone stand up in her craft , and the aforesaid tall grey man , who 
 be unarmed , but clothe in knightly raiment , stand on the stair and 
 spake unto she , and say : Lady , this be an house where woman enter 
 never since first the roof be do thereon , which forsooth be but a 
 year ago . we will pray thee therefore to turn thy boat 's head away , 
 and seek some other lodge by the water , either eastward or 
 westward . 

 little know Birdalone of worldly courtesy , or she have make he a 
 sharp answer belike ; but she only look on he ruefully , and say : 
 good warrior , I be come a long way , and may not turn back from mine 
 errand ; and I be now lack victual and hungry , and if ye help I 
 not , it be like that I shall die . much lieth on mine errand , if ye 
 know it . she be weeping - ripe , but refrain her tear , though she 
 lip quiver . she stretch out her hand to the greybeard , and he 
 look on she and find she exceed fair ; and he deem she to be 
 guileless , both because of her simple speech and sweet voice , and the 
 goodliness of her face and eye . but he say : Lady , thine errand 
 hath nought to do with it , it be thy womanhood that bar our door . 
 for all we be bind by oath not to suffer a woman to abide in this 
 castle till our lord take the bann off , and bid we open to woman . 
 she smile faintly , and say : if I might but see thy lord then , 
 since thou art not master here . he say : they be away , and will 
 not be back till to - morrow morning ; and I wot not the hour of their 
 return . and yet , say he , I would we might help thee somewhat . o I 
 pray thee , I pray thee ! she say , or mine errand will come to nought 
 after all . 

 Therewith come another man down the stair , and stand by the old 
 knight and pluck his sleeve , and fall to talk with he softly . 
 this man be by his habit a religious , and be a young man than the 
 other , it might be of five and thirty winter , and he be fair of 
 favour . while they spake together Birdalone sit she down again , and 
 be well - nigh spend . 

 at last the old man spake : Damsel , he say , we deem we may suffer 
 thee to enter the castle since thy need be so great , and have a 
 meal 's meat at our hand , and yet save our oath , if thou depart 
 thence by the landward gate before sunset . will this serve thee ? 
 Fair sir , say Birdalone , it will save my life and mine errand ; I may 
 say no more word for my faintness , else would I thank thee . 

 she stand up on her foot , and the old man - at - arm reach out his 
 hand to she , and she take it and come her way up the stair , but 
 find herself but feeble . but the priest   forsooth he be chaplain 
 of the castle   help she on the other side . but when she stand on 
 the level stone by the water - gate , she turn to the old man and 
 say : one thing I will ask of thee , be this place one of the 
 Wondrous Isles ? the elder shake his head . we know not the Wondrous 
 Isles , say he ; this castle be build on the mainland . her face 
 flush for joy at the word , and she say : one thing I will crave of 
 thee , to wit , that thou wilt leave my barge lie here untouched till 
 thy master come back , and wilt give command that none meddle 
 therewith . 

 he would have answer , but the priest brake in , and say : this will 
 he do , lady , and he be the castellan , and moreover he will swear to 
 obey thee herein . and therewith he draw forth a cross with God 
 nail thereon , and the castellan swear on it with a good will . 

 then the priest draw Birdalone on , and between they they bring she 
 into the great hall , and set she down in a chair and prop she with 
 cushion . and when she be thus at rest , she begin to weep somewhat , 
 and the castellan and the priest stand by and comfort she ; for 
 themseeme , despite her grief , that she have bring the sun into 
 their house . 

 Next be victual bring unto she of broth and venison , and good 
 wine and cate and strawberry ; and she be not so famished but she 
 might eat and drink with a good will . but when she be do , and have 
 rest a little , the castellan stand up and say : Lady , the sun be 
 go off the western window now , and I must save mine oath ; but ere 
 thou depart , I be fain to hear thy voice give I pardon for my 
 evil cheer and the thrusting of thee forth . and therewith he put one 
 knee to the ground , and take her hand and kiss it . but birdalone 
 be grow merry again , and she laugh and say : what pardon thou 
 canst have of I , kind knight , thou hast ; but now methink thou 
 makest overmuch of I , because I be the only woman who hath come into 
 thy castle . I be but a simple maiden , though mine errand be not 
 little . 

 Forsooth she wonder that the stark and gruff old man be so change 
 to she in little space ; for nought she know as yet how the sight of 
 she cast a hot gleed of love into the heart of they who behold she . 

 now Birdalone arise ; but the castellan kneel at her foot , and kiss 
 her hand again , and again , and yet again . then he say : thou art 
 gracious indeed . but methink the father here will lead thee out - a- 
 gate ; for he may show thee a lair , wherein thou shalt be safe enough 
 to - night ; and to - morrow may bring new tiding . 

 so the priest make obeisance to she and lead she down the hall , and 
 the castellan 's eye be follow they till the screen hide they . 
 the priest leave she in the hall - porch a while , and go into the 
 buttery , and come back with a basket of meat and drink , and they go 
 forth at the great gate together , and there be the last of the sun 
 before they . 



 CHAPTER II . of BIRDALONE , and how she rest the night through in a 
 bower without the CASTLE of the quest 



 on a fair smooth road go they amidst of a goodly meadow - land , 
 wherein be little copse here and there . when they be fairly out 
 of the gate , the priest reach for Birdalone 's hand , and she let he 
 take it and lead she along thereby , think no evil ; but he might 
 scarce speak for a while , so great be the stir in his heart at the 
 touch of her bare flesh . but Birdalone spake and say : thou art 
 kind , father , to lead I on my way thus . 

 he answer in a husky voice with his eye cast down , and forsooth 
 set on the foot of she : it be not far that I be lead thee ; there 
 be a broken cot by the copse at the turn of the road yonder , where 
 thou mayst abide to - night ; it be well lodge than none , evil as it 
 be for such an one as thou . birdalone laugh : worse have I have , 
 say she , than would be the copse without the cot . and she think 
 withal of the prison in the Isle of Increase Unsought . 

 her voice seem so cheery and friendly to the priest , that he shake 
 off somewhat the moodiness of his desire , and look up and say : I 
 shall tell thee , lady , that I suppose thou hast more errand with my 
 lord than to crave lodging of they despite the custom of the castle . 
 Nay , I have an inkling of what thine errand may be , whereof more 
 anon ; but now shall I tell thee what be good for thee to do so as to 
 have speech of they the soon . they have go forth with some of 
 our lad to gather venison , or it may be beef and mutton for our 
 victualling , and somewhat of battle may they have have on the way , for 
 ill neighbour have we . but if they come back unfoughten they will 
 be wend this road , and must need pass by thy copse - side ; and if 
 thou be sleep the noise of they will full surely awaken thee . 
 then all thou hast to do be to come forth and stand in the way before 
 they , that they may see thee ; and when once they have see thee , how 
 may they pass thee by unspoken with ? 

 I thank thee heartily for thy rede , say Birdalone ; but I would ask 
 thee two thing : first , what be the name of the castle behind we ? 
 and second , why have ye the custom of shut the door upon woman ? 
 say the priest : the castle be call in this country - side , the 
 White Ward by the Water ; but within there we call it the Castle of 
 the Quest ; and thus be it call because my lord be seek their 
 love whom they have lose ; and they have swear an oath that no woman 
 shall enter therein till their own love have tread its floor . 

 rose the heart of Birdalone at that word , and she deem indeed that 
 she be come thither whereas her she - friend would have have she . the 
 priest beheld she and see how her beauty be eke by that gladness , 
 and he scarce know how to contain himself ; and might speak no word 
 awhile ; then he say : Hearken far concern thy matter ; if my 
 lord be tarry , and come not by matin - song , then I doubt not but 
 the castellan will send folk to see to thee . he look down 
 therewith and say : I will come to thee myself ; and will bring thee 
 man - at - arm , if need be . but sometime to - morrow morning my lord 
 will come , save mischief hath betid , which God forbid . and he 
 cross himself ; then he look up and full in her face , and say : 
 but keep thine heart up ; for whatsoever may betide , thou shalt not be 
 leave uncared for . 

 say birdalone : I see of thee that thou art become my good friend , 
 and it rejoiceth my heart ; I shall be well at ease to - night in thy 
 cot , and to - morrow morn I shall be valiant to do thy bidding . 

 the sweetness of her speech so overcome he , that he but look 
 confusedly on she , as if he scarce hear she ; and they go on 
 together without more word , till he say : here be we at the cot , 
 and I will show thee thy chamber . so he lead she to a little thatched 
 bower , build with wall of wattle - work daub with clay , which stand 
 without the remnant of the cot : it be clean and dry , for the roof 
 be weather - tight ; but there be nought in it at all save a heap of 
 bracken in a corner . 

 there stand the priest , still hold Birdalone 's hand , and spake 
 not , but look about , yet always covertly on Birdalone ; but in a 
 while he let go her hand , and seem to wake up , and say : this it 
 be ; a sorry place enough , be it even for a gangrel body . even so 
 be I , quoth she laugh ; and thou mayest look to it , that herein I 
 shall rest full happily . then he give she a horn , draw it from 
 out of the basket of victual , which he now set down on the ground ; 
 and he say : if thou shouldst deem thee hard bestead , then wind this 
 horn , and we shall know its voice up there and come to help thee . 
 now I give thee good - night . 

 she thank he sweetly , and he go slowly out of the bower , but be 
 scarce go ere he come back again , and say : one thing I may 
 perchance tell thee without draw thine anger on my head ; to wit , 
 that I it be who say to the castellan that he should take thee in . 
 Wilt thou say aught to this ? she say : I will thank thee again and 
 again ; for it be the saving of my life and mine errand . and clear 
 be it now than ever that thou art a good friend unto I . 

 as she look on he and caress he with kind eye , she see that 
 his brow be knit , and his face trouble , and she say to he : what 
 ail thee ? art thou wroth with I in any wise ? o no , say he ; how 
 should I be wroth with thee ! but there be a thing I would ask of 
 thee . yea , and what ? say she . he say : nay , I may not , I may not . 
 it shall be for to - morrow , or another day . he spake it look down , 
 and in a broken voice ; and she wonder somewhat at he , but not 
 much , deem that he be trouble by something which have nought to 
 do with she , and which he might refrain from thinking of , even before 
 a stranger . 

 but presently he catch her hand and kiss it , and bade her good- 
 night again , and then go hastily out of the bower ; and when he be 
 well without , he mutter , but not so as she might hear he : durst I 
 have ask she , she would have suffer I to kiss her cheek . alas ! 
 fool that I be ! birdalone turn then to her bracken bed , and find 
 it sweet and clean ; and she be at rest and peace in her mind , albeit 
 her body be exceed weary . she feel happy in the little lonely 
 cot , and her heart have go out to the sweet meadow - land , and she 
 love it after all the trouble of the water ; and herseeme that even 
 now , in the dusk a - grow into dark , it love and caress she . so 
 she lay she down , nor unclad herself at all , lest she should have to 
 arise on a sudden , and show those token of the three damsel on her 
 body . 

 a little while she lie there happily , hearken the voice of the 
 nightingale in the brake , and then she fall into a dreamless sleep , 
 unbroken till the short night pass into day . 



 CHAPTER III . how birdalone dight she for meet the CHAMPIONS of 
 the quest 



 it be the bird begin their first song once more that awaken 
 birdalone before the sun be up ; but she have no will to stir a while , 
 whereas she feel so happy and restful ; and that all the more when she 
 remember where she be , and tell herself that her errand be now 
 like to be accomplish ; and she think of her friend whom she have 
 leave on the Isle of Increase Unsought , and bless they for their 
 kindness , and the love of they be sweet to her heart , and amidst 
 such thought she fall asleep again . 

 when she awake thereafter there be a flood of sunshine lie on the 
 meadow , and she spring up in haste lest she have overslept herself , 
 but when she be come out of the bower , she soon see that the 
 sunbeam lie low on the land , and that it be yet the first hour of 
 the sun ; so she turn about , and go through the copse to the other 
 side , and lo ! a little clear stream run before she . so she spake 
 to herself softly and say : fie on it ! I be weary with the boat 
 and my hunger last night , and I go to bed unwashen ; and this morn I 
 be weary for the foulness of my unwashen body . unseemly it be to 
 I to show myself sluttish before these lord ; let I find time for a 
 bath at least . 

 Therewith she go swiftly down to the water , undo her girdle and 
 lace by the way . she come to the stream and find it run 
 between blue - flower mouse - ear and rush , into a pool which 
 deepen from a sandy shallow : so anon her borrow raiment be 
 lie on the grassy lip of the water , and she be swim and 
 disport she in the pool , with her hair loose and waver over her 
 white back like some tress of the water - weed . therein she durst not 
 tarry long , but come hurry out on to the grass , and clothe herself 
 in haste . but she cover not her shoulder with the golden gown , 
 nor lace it over her bosom , so that Viridis ' smock might be the 
 plainer to see : which smock be noteworthy , for the breast thereof 
 be broider with green bough , whence brake forth little flame of 
 fire , and all so dainty - wrought as if the faery have do it . 

 Withal she gather up the gown into her girdle , and let the skirt- 
 hem clear her ankle , so that Atra 's shoon might be see at once ; and 
 they be daintily dight with window - work and broidery of gold and 
 green stone , and blue . and forsooth it be little likely that any 
 man should stand before she a minute ere his eye would seek to her 
 foot and ankle , so clean and kindly as they be fashion . 

 Therewith she set her hand to her head , and truss up her hair , and 
 bind it closely to her head , so that it might hide no whit of she 
 borrow attire . 

 there she stand , with Aurea 's collar lie on her dear neck , and 
 Viridis ' girdle about her shapen loin , and Atra 's ring on her 
 lovesome finger . and she hearken a while and hear no sound of 
 come man ; and there come into her heart a gentle fear , which 
 grieve she not . over the water before she hang an eglantine bush , 
 with its many rose either bud or but just out . birdalone steal 
 thither softly , and say , smile : Nay , if I have nothing that be 
 mine on my body , I will take this of the maiden 's bath and make it 
 mine . and therewith she pluck a spray of the bush and turn it 
 into a garland for her head ; and then when she have stand shyly a 
 while in that same place , she turn and go swiftly to her place 
 beside her night - harbour , and stand there hearken with that sweet 
 fear grow upon she , her colour come and go , and her heart 
 beat fast . 

 now the thought of that kind priest who have lead she to the bower last 
 night come into her mind , and she wonder why he have be so 
 troubled . and she think , would those other be so kind to she , or 
 would they deem she an impudent wench or a foolish , or pass she by ? 

 Forsooth if any have pass she by it have be not that he should miss 
 see her beauty , but that he should fear it , and deem she some 
 goddess of the gentile of old time come before he for his 
 ensnare . 



 CHAPTER IV . and now she meet the champion 



 now , as she stand hearken , she deem she hear something that be 
 not so loud as the song of the blackbird in the brake , but far 
 off and long voice : and again she hearken heedfully , and the 
 sound come again , and she deem now that it be the voice of an 
 horn . but the third time of her hear it she know that it be 
 nought less ; and at last it grow nigh , and there be mingle with 
 it the sound of man shout and the lowing of neat . 

 then she step down to the very edge of the way , and now she see 
 the riding - reek go up into the clear air , and she say : now be they 
 come without fail , and I must pluck up a heart ; for surely these 
 dear friend of my friend shall neither harm a poor maiden nor scorn 
 she . 

 soon come the lead beast from out of the dust - cloud , and behind 
 they be the glitter of spear - head ; and then presently be a herd of 
 neat shambling and jostle along the road , and after they a score or 
 so of spearman in jack and sallet , who , forsooth , turn to look on 
 birdalone as they pass by , and spake here and there a word or two , 
 laugh and point to she , but stay not ; and all go on 
 straight to the castle . 

 thereafter be a void , and then come rid leisurely another score 
 of weapone man , whereof some in white armour ; and amongst they be 
 five sumpter horse laden with carcass of venison . and all these 
 also go by and stay not , though the most of they gaze on 
 birdalone hard enough . 

 last of all come three knight riding , one with a gold surcoat over 
 his armour , and thereon a cleft heart of red ; the second with a green 
 surcoat , and on the same a chief of silver with green boughs thereon , 
 their end a - flaming ; but the third bore a black surcoat besprinkle 
 with silver tear . and all these three ride bare - headed , save that 
 the Black Knight bear an oak - wreath on the head . 

 now do Birdalone take to her valiancy , and she step out into the 
 road till she be but a ten pace from those man , who rein up when 
 they behold she ; and she say in a clear voice : abide , warrior ! for 
 if ye be what I deem you , I have an errand unto you . 

 Scarce be the word out of her mouth , ere all three have leapt off 
 their horse , and the Golden Knight come up to she , and lay his hand 
 upon her side , and spake eagerly and say : where be she , whence thou 
 gattest this gown of good web ? and thou , say she , art thou Baudoin 
 the Golden Knight ? but he set his hand to the collar on her neck , 
 and touch her skin withal , and say : this , be she alive when thou 
 camest by it ? she say : if thou be Baudoin the Golden Knight , I 
 have an errand to thee . I be he , say the knight ; o tell I , tell 
 I , be she dead ? say birdalone : Aurea be alive when last I see 
 she , and mine errand be from she to thee , if thou be verily her 
 lover . now with this word I pray thee to be content a while , say 
 she , smile kindly upon he , for need must I do mine errand in such 
 wise as I be bid . and thou seest also that thy friend would 
 have a word of I . 

 Forsooth , they be thrust in on she , and the Green Knight gat a 
 hold of her left wrist in his left hand , and his right be on her 
 shoulder , and his bright face close to her bosom whereon lie Viridis ' 
 smock ; and thereat she shrink aback somewhat , but say : Sir , it be 
 sooth that the smock be for thee when thou hast answer I a 
 question or two . meanwhile I pray thee forbear a little ; for , as I 
 trow , all be well , and thou shalt see my dear friend Viridis again . 

 he withdraw he a little , flushed and shameface . he be a young man 
 exceed beauteous , clear - skin and grey - eye , with curly golden 
 hair , and he bear his armour as though it be silken cloth . 
 birdalone look upon he kindly though shyly , and be glad to the 
 heart 's root that Viridis have so lovely a man to her darling . as for 
 the Golden Knight , as Birdalone might see now , he stand a little 
 aloof ; he be a very goodly man of some five and thirty winter ; tall 
 he be , broad - shoulder and thin - flank , black - haired , with 
 somewhat heavy eyebrow , and fierce hawk - eye ; a man terrible of 
 aspect , when one first behold he . 

 now when the Black Squire have hearken Birdalone 's word concern 
 Viridis , he throw himself down on the ground before she , and fall to 
 kiss her foot ; or , if you will , Atra 's shoon which cover they . 
 when she draw back a little , he rise on one knee and look up at she 
 with an eager face , and she say : to thee also I have an errand from 
 Atra , thy speech - friend , if thou be Arthur the Black Squire . he 
 spake not , but still gaze on she till she redden . she know not 
 whether to deem he less goodly than the other twain . he also be a 
 young man of not over five and twenty year , slim and lithe , with 
 much brown hair ; his face tan so dark that his eye gleam light 
 from amidst it ; his chin be round and cleave , his mouth and nose 
 excellently fashion ; little hair he have upon his face , his cheek 
 be somewhat more hollow than round . birdalone note of his bare 
 hand , which be as brown as his face , that they be very trim and 
 shapely . 

 now he rise to his foot , and the three stand together and gaze on 
 she ; as how might they do otherwise ? birdalone hang her head , and 
 know not what next to do or say . but she think within herself , 
 would these three man have be as kind to she as her three friend 
 of the Isle , have she happen on they in like case as she be that 
 time ? and she settle with herself that they would have be no less 
 kind . 

 now spake the Golden Knight , and say : will the kind maiden do she 
 errand to we here and now ? for we be eager and wear with trouble . 
 birdalone look adown and be somewhat confused . fair sir , say 
 she , I will do your will herein . 

 but the Black Squire look on she and see that she be troubled , and 
 he say : your pardon , fair fellow , but be it not so that we have an 
 house somewhat anigh , not ill purvey of many thing ? by your leave 
 I would entreat this kind and dear lady to honour we so much as to 
 enter the Castle of the Quest with we , and abide there so long as she 
 will ; and therein may she tell we all her errand at her leisure ; and 
 already we may see and know , that it may not be aught save a joyous 
 one . 

 then spake the Golden Knight , and say : I will ask the lady to 
 pardon I , and will now join my prayer to thine , brother , that she 
 come home with we . Lady , he say , wilt thou not pardon I , that in 
 the eager desire to hear tiding of my speech - friend I forgat all 
 else . 

 and therewithal he kneel before she , and take her hand and kiss it ; 
 and for all his fierce eye and his warrior 's mien , she deem he 
 kind and friendly . then need must the Green Knight kneel and kiss 
 also , though he have no pardon to crave ; but a fair sweet lad she 
 think he , and again her heart swell with joy to think that her 
 friend Viridis have so dear a speech - friend to long for she . 

 then come the turn of the Black Squire , and by then be the two 
 other turn away a little toward their horse ; and he kneel down on 
 both knee before Birdalone and take she right arm above the wrist , 
 and look at the hand and kiss it as if it be a relic , but stand 
 not up ; and she stand bend over he , and a new sweetness enter 
 into she , the like of which she have never feel . but as for the Black 
 Squire , it seem that one hand would not suffice he , and he take 
 her left hand and fall to kiss it , and then both the hand 
 together all over the back of they , and then the palm thereof , and 
 he bury his face in the two palm , and hold they to his cheek ; and 
 the dear hand suffer it all , and consent to the embracing of his 
 cheek . but Birdalone deem that this be the kind and sweetest 
 of the three kind warrior , and sorry she be when he let go her 
 hand and stand up . 

 his face be flushed , but his speech calm , as he spake so that the 
 other knight might hear he : now will we straight to the castle , 
 lady , and we will ask thee which of we three thou wilt honour by 
 rid his horse there ; shall it be Baudoin 's bright bay , or Hugh 's 
 dapple - grey , or my red roan ? and therewith he take she by the hand 
 and lead she toward the horse . but she laugh , and turn a 
 little , point to the castle , and say : Nay , sweet lord , but I 
 will fare afoot , such a little way as it be , and I all unwont to the 
 saddle . 

 spake the Green Knight : if that be so , lady , then shall we three 
 walk afoot with thee . Nay , nay , she say ; I have nought to carry but 
 myself ; but ye have your byrnie and your other armour , which be 
 heavy for you to drag on afoot , even a little way . moreover , I be 
 fain to see you mount your horse , and ride and run about the meadow 
 with toss mane and flash sword , while I trudge quietly toward 
 the gate ; for such thing , and so beauteous , be all new unto I , as 
 ye shall learn presently when I tell you my story . do so much to 
 pleasure I , kind knight . 

 the tall Baudoin nod to she , smile kindly , as much as to say 
 that he think well of her desire . but the Green Knight run to his 
 horse with a glad shout , and anon be in the saddle with his bright 
 sword in his fist ; then he spur , and go a - gallop hither and 
 thither over the mead , make his horse turn short and bound , and 
 play many trick of the tilt - yard , and cry , a Hugh , a Hugh , for 
 the Green Gown ! the Golden Knight be slow and more staid , but in 
 manywise he show his war - deftness , rid after Hugh as if he would 
 fall on he , and stay his way just as it become perilous ; and he 
 cry , Baudoin , Baudoin , for gold - sleeve ! and all this seem to 
 birdalone both terrible and lovely . 

 but for the Black Squire , he be slow to let loose Birdalone 's hand ; 
 but thereafter he be speedy to vault into his saddle , and he make 
 course over the meadow , but ever come back to Birdalone as she go 
 her way , rid round and round she , and toss his sword into the 
 air the while and catch it as it fall . and no less lovely do 
 this seem to Birdalone , and she smile on he and wave her hand to 
 he . 

 go slowly in this wise , she come at last to the castle gate ; and 
 now have all those three out - go she and stand afoot in the wicket to 
 welcome she , and the Golden Knight , who be the old of the three , 
 be the speaker of the welcome . 

 over the threshold of the Castle of the Quest go Birdalone 's foot 
 then , and she be grow so happy as she have never deem she should 
 be all her life long . 



 CHAPTER V. BIRDALONE have true tokens from the champion of the quest 



 now they bring Birdalone into a very fair chamber , where be 
 presently everything she might need , save a tiring woman , which , 
 forsooth , be no lack unto she , since never have she have any to help 
 her array her body . so she do what she might to make herself the 
 trimmer ; and in a while come two fair swain of service , who bring 
 she in all honour into the great hall , where be the three lord 
 abide she . there be they serve well and plenteously , and fair 
 be the converse between they ; and in especial be the talk of Arthur 
 the Black Squire goodly and wise and cheery , and well - measure ; and 
 the Green Knight 's speech merry and kind , as of an happy child ; and 
 the Golden Knight spake ever free and kindly , though not of many 
 word be he . and who be happy if Birdalone be not ? 

 but when they have eat and wash their hand , then spake the Golden 
 Knight : dear maiden , now be we ready to hear the innermost of thine 
 errand , all we together , if thou wilt . 

 birdalone smile and redden withal , as she say : fair lord , I 
 doubt not but ye be even they unto whom I be send , but they who 
 send I , and who save I from death and bad , bid I do mine 
 errand in such a way , that I should speak with each one of you 
 privily , and that for a token each should tell I a thing know but 
 to he and his love , and to I unto whom she hath tell it . now be I 
 all ready to do mine errand thus , and no other wise . 

 laugh they now , and be merry , and the Green Knight blush like a 
 maiden ; forsooth like to his very speech - friend Viridis . but the 
 Black Squire say : fair fellow , get we all into the pleasance this 
 fair morn , and sit there on the grass , and our sweet lady shall take 
 we one after other into the plashed alley , and have the token of we . 

 even so they do , and go into the pleasance , which be a goodly 
 little garth south of the castle , grass , and set thick with rose 
 and lily and gillyflower , and other fragrant flower . there then 
 they sit on the daisied greensward , the three lord together , and 
 birdalone over against they , and they three watch her beauty and 
 loveliness and wonder thereat . 

 but she say : now it come to the very point of mine errand ; 
 wherefore I bid thee , Baudoin the Golden Knight , to come apart with 
 I and answer to my question , so that I may know surely that I be 
 do mine errand aright . 

 Therewith she arise to her foot , and he also , and he lead she into the 
 plash alley , out of earshot of the other twain , who lie upon the 
 grass bid their turn with but little patience . 

 but when those two be in the deep shade of the alley , Birdalone 
 say : Thou must know , Sir Golden Knight , that the three lover of 
 you three be good to I in my need , and clothe my nakedness from 
 their very body , but this raiment they lend I , and give it not ; 
 for they bid I give it up piece by piece each unto the one who have 
 give it to his love , whom I should know by the token that he should 
 tell truly the tale of its giving . now , fair sir , I know well , for I 
 have be tell , what be the tale of thy give this golden gown to 
 Aurea , and that same tale shalt thou now tell I , and if thou tell it 
 aright , then be the gown thine . Begin , then , without more tarrying . 

 Lady , say the knight , thus it be : Aurea , my sweetling , abode with 
 an ancient dame , a kinswoman of hers , who be but scantly kind to 
 she ; and on a day when we have meet privily , and be talk together , 
 my love lament the niggard way of her say kinswoman , and tell how 
 she have no goodly gown to make she fair when feast be toward ; but 
 I laugh at she , and tell she that so clad as she be   and her 
 attire be verily but simple   she be fair than any other ; and 
 then , as ye may wot , there be kiss and clip between we ; but 
 at last , as from the first I mean it , I promise she I would purvey 
 she such a gown as no lady should go with a well in all the 
 country - side ; but I say that in return I must have the gown she go 
 in then , which have so long embrace her body and be strain so 
 close to her body and her side , and be as it be a part of she . 
 that she promise I with kiss , and I go away as merry as a bird . 
 Straightway thereafter I do do make this very gown , which thou 
 bearest , dear maiden , and on the appoint day she come out to I 
 unto the same place clothe as she be before ; but the new gown I have 
 with I . hard by our tryste - place be a hazel - copse thick enow , 
 for it be midsummer , and she say she would go thereinto and shift 
 gown , and bear I out thence the gift of the old clout   so she 
 call it , laugh merrily . but I say : nay , I would go into the 
 copse with she to guard she from evil thing , beast or man ; and 
 withal to see she do off the old gown , that I might know before I 
 wed she whatlike stuffing and padding go to make the grace of 
 her flank and her hip . and again be she merry , and she say : 
 come , then , thou Thomas unbelieving , and see the side of I . so we 
 go into that cover together , and she do off her gown before mine 
 eye , and stand there in her white coat with her arm bare , and her 
 shoulder and bosom little cover , and she be as lovely as a woman 
 of the faery . then I make no prayer unto she for leave , but take my 
 arm about she , and kiss her arm and shoulder and bosom all she 
 would suffer I , for I be mad with love of her naked flesh . then 
 she do on this golden gown , and depart when she have give I the 
 old clout aforesaid , and I go away with it , scarce feel the 
 ground beneath my foot ; and I set the dear gown in a fair little 
 coffer , and here in this castle I have it now , and many time I take 
 it forth and kiss it and lie my head upon it . now this be a simple 
 tale , lady , and I be ashamed that I have make it so long for thee . 
 and yet I know not ; for thou seemest to I so kind and loving and 
 true , that I be fain that thou shouldest know how sorely I love thy 
 friend and mine . 

 birdalone deem Baudoin a good man indeed , and the tear come into 
 her eye as she answer and say : true be thy tale , dear friend , 
 and I have deem it rather short than long . I see well that thou 
 art Aurea 's very lover ; and it joy I to think that thou , o terrible 
 champion , art yet so tender and true . now be the golden gown thine , 
 but I will pray thee to lend it I a little long . but this jewel 
 shalt thou have from my neck here and now ; and thou know whence it 
 come , thine Aurea 's neck forsooth . 

 Therewith she betook it he , and he hold it in his hand doubtfully a 
 while , and then he say : dear maiden , I thank thee , but I will take 
 this collar , and lie it in my casket , and be glad thereof ; and that 
 the more , as , now I look on thee , I see nought miss from the 
 loveliness of thine own neck . 

 go to thy fellow now , say Birdalone , and send I the Green Knight , 
 the goodly lad . so go he , and presently come Hugh thither merry 
 and smile , and say : Thou hast be long about the first token , 
 sweet mistress ; I fear I I shall make no such goodly story as hath 
 Baudoin . and yet , say she , Viridis ' tale be the long of all . I 
 doubt thou mayst fail in the token . and she laugh ; and he no less , 
 and take she by the shoulder , and kiss her cheek frankly , and in 
 such wise that she fear he nought , and say : now that be to pay 
 thee for thy gibe ; what wouldst thou have of I ? say birdalone : I 
 would have thee tell I how it be that Viridis come by the smock 
 with the green boughs aflame , which now I bear upon I . 

 Hearken , darling lady , say he : on a day Viridis and I be alone in 
 the meadow , and so happy , that we might find nought to do save to 
 fall into strife together ; and I say it to she , that she love I 
 not as well as I love she ; which , by the way , be no less than a 
 lie , for of all thing live she be the most loving , and when we be 
 together she knoweth not how to make enough of I . well , we fall to 
 wrangle after the manner of lover , till I , have nothing else to 
 say , bid she remember that since we have first come to love each 
 other , I have give she many thing , and she have give I nothing . 
 Lo , then ! my dear , what an ill - condition lad be I. But , little as 
 I mean it , she take it all amiss , and leapt up , and fall to run 
 back home over the meadow ; thou mayst think how easily I catch up 
 with she , and how little loth she be to be drag back by the 
 shoulder . so when we be sit again under the thorn - bush , we 
 have well - nigh do our wrangle ; but she unlace her gown and draw 
 down a corner thereof , to show I her shoulder , how I have hurt it 
 e'en now ; and forsooth some little mark there be on the rose - leaf 
 skin ; and that make good time for kiss again , as ye may well wot . 
 then she say unto I : and how may I , a poor damsel , give thee 
 gift , and my kindre all greedy about I ? yet would I give thee a 
 gift , such as I may , if I but know what thou wouldst take . now my 
 heart be afire with that kissing of her shoulder , and I say that I 
 would have that very same smock from her body , which then she bore , 
 and that thereof I should deem that I have a rich gift indeed . what ! 
 say she , and wouldst thou have it here and now ? and indeed I think 
 she would have do it off she that minute have I press she , but I 
 lack the boldness thereto ; and I say : Nay , but would she bring it 
 unto I the next time we meet ; and forsooth she bring it fold in a 
 piece of green silk , and dearly have I love it and kiss it 
 sithence . but as for thy smock , I have it fairly wrought and 
 embroider with the flame green branch , as thou seest it , and I 
 give it to she ; but not on the day when she give I the gift ; for the 
 new one be long about do . now this be all the tale , and how 
 Viridis might eke it into a long one , I wot not . but let it be , and 
 tell I , have I win thy smock , or lose it ? 

 birdalone laugh on he and say : well , at least thou shalt have it 
 as a gift ; and thou mayst call it give either by Viridis or I , 
 which thou wilt . but with it go another gift ; which thou mayst 
 have at once since thou must lend I the smock a little long . and 
 therewith she betake he her girdle , and he kiss it , but say : 
 Nay , fair lady , this befitteth well the loveliness of thy body that 
 thou shouldst wear it ; and well it befitteth the truth and love of 
 thy soul toward it for I ; I pray thee to keep it . nevertheless , she 
 say , I will not have it , for it goeth with mine errand that thou 
 take it of I . now I bid thee depart , and send hither thy fellow , 
 the Black Squire . 

 go he then , and anon come the Black Squire , and now that he be 
 alone with Birdalone this first time , he seem moody and downcast , 
 all unlike the two other . he stand a little aloof from Birdalone , 
 and say : what wouldst thou ask of I ? her heart be somewhat 
 chill by his moodiness , for erst have she deem he the kind of 
 the three ; but she say : it be of mine errand to ask of thee 
 concern this foot - gear which Atra lend I until I give it unto 
 thee , if thou be verily her lover . say he : I be verily her lover . 
 birdalone say : then canst thou tell I the manner of thy give 
 these fair shoon unto Atra ? 

 he say : even so ; we be walk together in this country - side and 
 come to a ford of the river , and it be somewhat deep and take I to 
 over the knee , so I bear she over in my arm ; then we go on a 
 little far till we must cross the river back again in another 
 place , and there the ford be shallow , and , the day be hot , Atra 
 must need wade it on her own foot . so she do off hosen and shoon , 
 and I lead she by the hand , and it take she but up to mid - leg . but 
 when we come up out of the water and be on the grass again , I 
 crave the gift of her foot - gear for the love of she , and she give it 
 straightway , and fare home barefoot , for it be over the mead we 
 be wend in early summer , and the grass be thick and soft . but 
 thereafter I do do make the fair shoon which thou hast on thy foot , 
 and give they to she . and , for a far token that my tale be true , 
 I shall tell thee that the name of the first ford we wad that day 
 be the Grey - nag 's Wade , and the second be call Goat Ford . this be 
 all my tale , lady ; be the token true ? 

 true it be , squire , say Birdalone , and be silent awhile , and he 
 also . then she look on he friendly , and say : thou art out of 
 heart as now , my friend . fear not , for thou shalt without doubt see 
 thy speech - friend again . moreover here be a ring which she set upon 
 my finger , bid I give it thee . and she hold it out unto he . 

 he take the ring , and say : yea , it be good that I have it of thee , 
 lest unluck come thereof . she see trouble in his face , but know not 
 what to say to cheer he , and they stand silently face one another 
 for awhile . then he say : let we back to our fellow , and talk it 
 over , what be now to be do . 

 so they go their way to where lay the other two upon the green 
 grass , and the Black Squire lie down beside they ; but Birdalone stand 
 before they and spake unto the three . 



 CHAPTER VI . how the CHAMPIONS would do birdalone to be clothe ANEW in 
 the CASTLE of the QUEST 



 Lords , she say , now be it clear by the token that mine errand be to 
 you and none other ; now therefore be I to tell you what to do to come 
 unto your speech - friend and deliver they and bring they back hither . 
 for this be their case , that they be in captivity in a wonder - isle 
 of this great water , and it be call the Isle of Increase Unsought . 

 spake the Golden Knight : Fair lady , we have hear before that our 
 friend fare hence , or rather be take hence over the water . and 
 that be the cause why we build this castle on the water 's edge , on 
 the very stead where be raise the pavilion , the house make for the 
 lady to abide therein the battle of the Champions . since that 
 time , moreover , many a barge and keel have we thrust out into the 
 water , that we might accomplish the Quest whereunto we be vow ; 
 but ever one way go our seafaring , that when we be come so far 
 out into the water as to lose sight of land , come upon us mist , rise 
 against we dusk and darkness ; and then a fierce driving wind that 
 drave we back to this shore . it be but six day ago since we try 
 this adventure for the last time , and belike the same shall befall we 
 the next time we try it . wherefore I must ask thee , lady , dost thou 
 know any way whereby we may come to the said isle ? for if thou dost , 
 full surely we will try it , whatsoever may be the risk thereby to our 
 body or our soul . 

 full surely I do , say Birdalone ; else how have I come from thence 
 hither mine own self ? and therewith she tell they of the Sending 
 Boat , what it be , and how she have come all the way by mean thereof 
 from the Isle of Increase Unsought ; and they all hearken she 
 heedfully , and wonder both at the sorcery , and the valiant heart of 
 she who have drive it as she would in despite of the evil . but in 
 the end she spake and say : lord , ye have now hear some deal of my 
 story , even that which concern you thereof ; and which must need be 
 tell at once : wherefore doubtless ye shall fare unto your speech- 
 friend by this ferry in the very wise that I shall show you ; unless 
 perchance ye deem that I have be lie and make light tale to 
 you , as , sooth to say , I deem ye think it not . 

 spake the Golden Knight : Damsel , in all wise we trow in thee and thy 
 tale . and God forbid that we should tarry ! go we hence this very 
 day . 

 Yea , but hearken , say the Black Squire : be it not a part of this 
 damsel 's errand that she should deliver to we the raiment of our 
 friend , which now she beareth on her own body , that we may bear it 
 back unto they ? 

 Sooth be that , say Birdalone , and ye may well wot that this may be 
 nought but needful , whereas the say lady be all beset by 
 sorcery . 

 see ye then , fellow , say the Black Squire , it may not be to - day nor 
 yet to - morrow that we may take the road . for ye wot that there be no 
 woman 's gear in all the castle , and we must need send otherwhere to 
 seek it . 

 look thou , maiden , say the Golden Knight , laughing , how duly this 
 young knight thinketh of thee ; whereas I , who be his elder , and 
 should be wise than he , be but heedless of thee . I pray thy pardon . 

 moreover , say the Black Squire , there may well be wisdom in abide ; 
 for it be to be think that our dear love consider this , and know 
 what the time of tarrying should be , and have so dight their matter 
 as to fit in therewith ; and I may not deem it of they that they would 
 have we array this our dear sister and theirs in unseemly wise . Nay , 
 for that would be an ill beginning of this deal of the Quest . 

 now all yeasaid this gladly ; and the Green Knight say : it be not 
 so ill do that we should see more of our sister here ere we depart , 
 and hear more of her tale ; for meseemeth she begin it erewhile but 
 half - way . and he turn to Birdalone , and take her hand and caress 
 it . 

 birdalone smile on they somewhat shyly , and thank they ; but bade 
 they spend as little time as might be on her arrayal . for , say she , 
 though those lady may well have reckon on the time of the arrayal 
 of my body , yet surely also they shall have reckon with the eager 
 fire of love in the heart of you , and the haste it shall breed 
 therein . 

 well pleased be they with that word of her , but none the less send 
 two sergeant and a squire with lead horse unto the cheaping - town , a 
 goodly and great town hight Greenford , which be some twenty mile 
 thence , with the errand to bring back with they a good shaper and 
 embroideress , and sewing - woman , and cloth and silk and linen , and all 
 thing needful . 

 as for jewel , each one of they be fain to give she something which 
 he prize , and fair and rich be the gift , though they have not be 
 make for woman . as a fair SS collar of gold , which the Golden Knight 
 give she , and a girdle of broad golden plate , work beauteously , 
 which be the gift of the Black Squire . albeit he do not offer to 
 clasp it round her loin , as she deem he would ; for when the Green 
 Knight bring his gift , a great gold ring , very ancient of fashion , 
 he would have her turn back the sleeve from her fore - arm , that he 
 might set his dwarf - wrought gold upon the bare flesh ; neither do he 
 refrain he from kiss it withal . 

 but the messenger come back with their work - woman and stuff early 
 on the morrow ; and now be change all the manner of the womanless 
 castle , and man be full merry therein . 



 CHAPTER VII . of BIRDALONE , how she tell the champion all her TALE 



 it be a matter of eight day , the making of all Birdalone 's raiment , 
 and meanwhile she be ever with the three Champions , either all three 
 together , or one or other of they . and as to their manner with she , 
 ever be the Golden Knight of somewhat sober demeanour , as if he be 
 an old man than he verily be . the Green Knight be for ever 
 praise Birdalone 's beauty to her face , and seem to find it no 
 easy matter to keep his eye off she , and somewhat he weary she 
 with kiss and caress ; but a gay and sportive lad he be ; and when 
 she rebuke he for his overmuch fondness , as now and again she do , 
 he would laugh at himself along with she ; and in sooth she deem he 
 heart - whole , and of all truth to Viridis , and oft he would talk of 
 she to Birdalone , and praise her darling beauty to she , and tell of 
 his longing for his love aloof . only , quoth he , here art thou , my 
 sister , dwell amongst we , and shed thy fragrance on we , and 
 show to we , wilt thou , wilt thou not , as do the flower , all the 
 grace and loveliness of thee ; and thou so tender of heart withal , 
 that thou must not blame I overmuch if while I forget that thou art 
 my sister , and that my love be , woe 's I ! far away . so thou wilt 
 pardon I , wilt thou not ? yea , verily , say she , with a whole heart . 
 yet thou need not reach out for my hand ; thou hast have enough of 
 it this morning . and she hide it , laugh , in the fold of her gown ; 
 and he laugh also , and say : of a truth thou art good in all wise , 
 and a young fool be I ; but Viridis shall make I wiser , when we come 
 together again . saw thou ever so fair a damsel ? never , she say , 
 and surely there be none fair in all the world . so hold thee aloof 
 now for a while , and think of she . 

 as for the Black Squire , hight Arthur , Birdalone be trouble for 
 he , and he make she somewhat sad . true it be that he come not 
 before she again so moody and downcast as when he be give she the 
 token ; yet she deem that he enforce himself to seem of good cheer . 
 furthermore , though he seek her company ever , and that lonely with 
 he , and would talk with she almost as one man with another , though 
 with a certain tenderness in his voice , and look earnestly on she 
 the while , yet never would he take her hand , or touch she in any 
 wise . and true it be that she long for the touch of his hand . 

 on the third day of her sojourn in the Castle of the Quest , Birdalone 
 take heart at the much egging of her friend , as they sit all 
 together in the meadow without the castle , to tell they all the story 
 of she ; she hide none , save concern the wood - mother , for she deem 
 that her sweet friend would love she the well if she babble not of 
 she . 

 so the Champions hearken her tell the tale in her clear lovely 
 voice , and great be their love and pity for the poor lonely maiden . 
 and in especial clear it be to see that they be sore move when 
 she tell how she first come on the Sending Boat , and how the witch- 
 wife torment her innocent body for that guilt . then Baudoin lay 
 his hand upon her head , and spake : poor child , much indeed hast thou 
 suffer ! and now I will say it , that it be for we and our love 
 that thou hast bear all this anguish of captivity and toil and 
 stripe . 

 but Hugh lean over to she , as she sit with her head hang down , 
 and kiss she cheek , and say : yea ! and I be not there to smite 
 the head off that accurse one ; and I know nought of thee and thine 
 anguish , as I take my light pleasure about these free meadow . and 
 he turn very red , and go nigh to weep . 

 Arthur sit still with his eye bent down on the ground , and he say 
 nothing ; and birdalone glance on he wistfully ere she go on with 
 her tale . and she go on and tell closely all that have happen 
 unto she in the crossing of the water and on the Isle of Increase 
 Unsought , and the other Wonder Isles ; and she deem it not too much 
 that she should tell it twice over , nor they that twice over they 
 should hearken it . 

 that same evening as Birdalone walk by herself in the castle 
 pleasance , she see Arthur peer about as if he be seek 
 someone ; so she stand forth , and ask he be he seek aught ; and 
 he say : Thee be I seek . but she durst not ask he what he 
 would , but stand silent and tremble before he , till he take she 
 hand , and spake not loud but eagerly . 

 after what thou hast tell we to - day , I seem to know thee what thou 
 art ; and I tell thee that it be a pain and grief to I to leave thee , 
 yea to leave thee be it but for a minute . o I pray thee pity I 
 for the sundering . and therewith he turn about and hasten into 
 the castle . but Birdalone stand there with her heart beat fast 
 and her flesh quivering , and a strange sweetness of joy take hold of 
 she . but she say to herself that it be no wonder though she feel 
 so happy , see that she have find out that , despite her fear , this 
 one of her friend love she no less well than the other . and then 
 she spake it in a soft voice that she would indeed pity he for the 
 sundering , yea , and herself also . 

 nevertheless , when they meet thereafter , his demeanour to she be none 
 otherwise than it have be ; but she no long heed this since now 
 she trowe in he . 



 CHAPTER VIII . in the MEANWHILE of the departing of the CHAMPIONS , 
 they would pleasure birdalone with FEATS of ARMS and GAMES of PROWESS 



 pass the day now speedily , and the three Champions do what they 
 might for the solace of Birdalone . for they and their household 
 show she of arm , and they tilt together courteously ; and the 
 sergeant stand forth , and shoot in the bow before she , till she 
 herself by their bidding take the bow in hand , and shoot straighter 
 and well - nigh as hard as the good man there , whereat they marvel , 
 and praise she much . 

 then the young man run afoot before she for the prize of a belt and 
 knife , and forsooth she wotte well that be she to run against they 
 with truss - up skirt she would bear off the prize ; but she have no 
 heart thereto , for amidst they all , and her new friendship , she have 
 grow shamefast , and might play the wood - maiden no long . yet twice 
 the Champions fare far afield with she to show she some 
 woodcraft ; yet be not very free to go far , because of the ill 
 neighbour whereof the chaplain have tell she that first night of she 
 come . 

 and in all these pastime , whatso they be , Birdalone bear herself 
 well and merrily , and put from she the sorrow of the sundering , and 
 the peril of her dear friend which grow now so near at hand . 

 the chaplain aforesaid , who hight Leonard , she fall in with not 
 seldom ; and he be ever meek and humble before she ; and ever withal 
 be sorrow easy to be see in his countenance , and trouble withal ; 
 and she know not how to help he , save by be courteous and kind 
 with he whenso they meet ; but none the more might he pluck up 
 cheerful countenance in answer to her kindness . 

 with Sir Aymeris , the grizzle - haired castellan , she foregather also 
 oft enough , and could not forbear some merry gibe with he 
 concern their first meeting , and how that she have be a burden 
 and a terror to he ; and these mock she make he because she see it 
 like he not ill to be mock in friendly fashion ; though forsooth 
 betwixt the laughter he look on her somewhat ruefully . and ever , 
 ere he part from she , he make occasion to kiss her hand ; and she 
 suffer it smile , and be debonair to he ; whereas she see that he 
 be of good will to she . in such wise then wear the hour and the 
 day . 



 CHAPTER IX . BIRDALONE COMETH before the CHAMPIONS in her new ARRAY 



 now the time be come when Birdalone have all her gear ready , and the 
 woman be to abide in the castle as her serve - damsel while the 
 Champions be away . 

 so now in the summer eve , an hour before sunset , Birdalone do on the 
 rich of her new raiment , and come into the hall where sit the 
 Three together , and Sir Aymeris with they . she be so clad , that she 
 have on a green gown with broidered sleeve , and thereover a white 
 cote - hardie welt with gold , and gold - embroider ; on her foot be 
 gold shoon of window - work , pearl and gem ; and on her head a rose 
 garland ; on her neck she bear the Golden Knight 's collar ; her loin 
 be gird with the Black Squire 's girdle ; and on her wrist be the 
 Green Knight 's ancient gold ring ; and she carry in her arm Aurea 's 
 gown and Viridis ' shift and Atra 's shoon . 

 rather sunrise than sunset it seem , as verily birdalone she come 
 into the hall with bright eager eye , and flushed cheek , and 
 countenance smile with love . the man stand up all , and would come 
 down from the dais to meet she ; but she bid they go back , and sit 
 each in his place till she stand before they . 

 up the hall then she walk , and every step of hers seem lovely 
 than the last , till she come to they and give unto each his keepsake , 
 and say : champion , now be mine errand all do , save that to- 
 morrow I must show you the manner of the Sending Boat . now there be 
 nought save the darkness of the come night to hinder you from this 
 last deal of your Quest ; and it be I that have bring you to this , 
 and have do this good unto you , if no more good I do in the world . 
 wherefore I pray you to love I ever , and bear I ever in your mind . 

 they gaze on she , and be overcome by her loveliness and grace , and 
 by the kindness and valiancy of her heart . next arise the Golden 
 Knight , Baudoin to wit , and take a cross from his breast , and hold it 
 up , and spake : Maiden , thou say well , and never shall we forget 
 thee , or cease to love thee ; and here I swear by God upon the Tree , 
 that it shall be a light thing for I to die for thee , if in any need 
 I find thee . brother , will ye not swear the same ? and this be but 
 thy due , maiden , for I declare unto thee , that when thou didst enter 
 the hall e'en now , it be as if the very sun of heaven be come in 
 unto we . 

 Thereon the other two take the Rood and swear upon it : and Hugh be 
 hush and meek and sad - faced after he have swear ; but Arthur the 
 Black Squire bow down his head and weep , and his fellow marvel 
 nought thereat , neither do Birdalone ; and all her body yearn 
 toward he to solace he . 

 now turn Sir Baudoin to the castellan and say : Sir Aymeris , I 
 will now swear thee to guard this lady as the apple of thine eye 
 while we three be away , and therein to spare neither thyself nor 
 other . for thou se well what grief it would be to we if she come 
 to any harm . 

 and to I also , say the castellan . and therewith he swear upon the 
 Rood , and then come round the table , and knelt before Birdalone , and 
 kiss her hand . 

 thereafter be they all silent a space ; and then come Birdalone to 
 the inner side of the table and sit betwixt Baudoin and Hugh . but 
 the Black Squire take up the word and spake : Birdalone , sweet child , 
 one thing be to be say , to wit , that it be well that thou keep 
 within wall while we be away ; or at least that thou go but a little 
 beyond the castle , and never but within a half bowshot , save thou be 
 well accompany . for there be man of violence dwell no great way 
 off , reiver and rover , who would be well pleased to take from we 
 anything which we deem dear ; besides other who would think the 
 lifting of such a jewel good hap indeed . Sir Aymeris , have a care of 
 the Red Knight ; and if thou mightest come by a few more stout lad , 
 to wage they , it be well . 

 birdalone heed not what the castellan answer , such a shaft of joy 
 go to her heart when she hear that friend speak her own name in 
 such wise as he have never do erst , and that before they all . she 
 but murmur some yeasay to that which Arthur have speak unto she , 
 and then she hold her peace for the sweetness of that moment . 

 so there they sit and talk a while in dear and pleasant converse ; 
 and Hugh fall to ask she of her life in the House under the Wood , 
 and she answer all frankly and simply , and the more she tell the 
 dearer she seem to they . 

 thus draw night in , till folk come flockmeal into the hall ; for need 
 must be feast and banquet for triumph of the furtherance of the 
 Quest ; and the most of man be merry ; but somewhat sober be all 
 the three Champions , so that whoso run might read it in their face . 
 as for Birdalone , she show cheerful to all that folk which love 
 she and praise she ; but inwardly sorrow have come home to her heart . 



 CHAPTER X. the champion go their way in the SENDING BOAT 



 when the sun be arise on the morrow the three Champions go down 
 to the landing - place , and there be none with they ; for they have 
 give command that no man should pry into their doing . Thither to 
 they cometh Birdalone , clothe no more in her gay attire , but in a 
 strait black coat and with unshod foot ; and she look no sorry 
 than she be . 

 by Birdalone 's rede the Champions bear down in their own hand the 
 victual and weapon and armour that they need for the voyage ; for 
 she know not but that the Sending Boat might take it amiss that any 
 should touch she save the sender . and when they have do lading 
 she , then all four stand together by the water 's edge , and birdalone 
 spake to her friend , and again bid they beware of the wile of the 
 Isle of Nothing ; and again she tell they of the woful image of the 
 Isle of king and the Isle of Queens , and the strange folk of the 
 Isle of the Young and the Old . then she say : now when ye come to 
 the Isle of Increase Unsought , what think ye to do ? say the Green 
 Knight : if I might rule , we should go straight up to the witch 
 sit in her hall , as thou told we , my dear , and then and there 
 smite the head from off she . his eye flash and his brow knit , 
 and so fierce he look that birdalone shrink back from he ; but the 
 Black Squire smile and say : it may come to the smiting off of 
 head in the end ; yet must we so fashion our carving , that it avail 
 we for the freeing of our friend ; else may the witch die , and the 
 secret of the prison - house die with she . how sayest thou , dear 
 Birdalone ? 

 she redden at the caress of his voice , and answer : by my rede ye 
 shall seek and find your speech - friend ere ye make open war upon the 
 witch ; else may her malice destroy they ere ye undo she . her face 
 flush yet more as she spake again : but concern all thing , I 
 deem that Atra may give you the good rede , when ye have meet the 
 love ; for that she knoweth more of the isle and its guile than the 
 other . 

 Quoth Baudoin : Herein be wisdom , sweet maiden , for as guileless as 
 thou mayst be ; and so far as we may we shall follow thy rede ; but all 
 lieth in the fathom of the come time . and now this moment be the 
 moment of sundering and farewell . 

 come he then to Birdalone and take his two hand about her head , and 
 lift her face unto he , and kiss it kindly , as a father might 
 kiss a daughter , and say : farewell , dear child , and take heed to 
 the word that Arthur spake yesterday , and go not from the castle even 
 a little way save with good and sure company . 

 then come Hugh to she , and take her hand somewhat timidly ; but she 
 put up her face to he in simple wise , and he kiss either cheek of 
 she , and say no more than : Farewell , Birdalone ! 

 lastly come Arthur , and stand before she a little ; and then he kneel 
 down on the stone before she and kiss her foot many time , and she 
 shudder and catch her breath as they feel his kiss ; but neither 
 he nor she spake a word , and he stand up and turn away at once 
 toward the Sending Boat , and board she first of the three ; and the 
 other follow straightway . 

 thereafter the Champions bar each an arm , and let blood flow thence 
 into a bowl , and reddened stem and stern of their barge , and then all 
 three spake the spell together thus , as Birdalone have teach they : 


 the red raven - wine now 
 Hast thou drunk , stern and bow : 
 wake then , and awake , 
 and the northern way take ! 
 the way of the Wenders forth over the flood , 
 for the will of the Senders be blent with the blood . 


 go all as before thereafter , that the Sending Boat stir under 
 they , and then turn about and point she bow to the northward , 
 and speed swiftly over the water . it be a fair sunny day , with no 
 cloud , nought save the summer haze lie on the lake far away . 
 birdalone stand watch the speeding of the boat , till she could see 
 it no long , not even as a fleck on the face of the water . then 
 she turn away and go toward her chamber , say to herself that 
 the sundering be easy to bear than she have deem it would be , and 
 that she have a many thing to do that day . but when she come into 
 her chamber , and shut the door , she look about she on the thing 
 which have grow so familiar to she in these few latter day , and she 
 stand watch the bright sunshine that stream across the floor and 
 lie warm upon her foot ; then she take three step toward the window , 
 and see the lake lie all a - glitter under the sun , and her heart 
 fail her withal , and she have no might so much as to think about her 
 sorrow and caress it , but fall down where she be swoon on to the 
 floor , and lie there , while all the house begin to stir about she . 


 here end the Third Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which be 
 call of the Castle of the Quest , and begin the fourth Part of the 
 say tale , which be call of the day of Abiding . 




 the fourth PART : of the day of abiding 




 CHAPTER I. of BIRDALONE 's GRIEF ; and of LEONARD the CHAPLAIN 



 now come Birdalone to herself , and that be but little joy unto she , 
 and she yet lie still on the floor for a while , for she loathe the 
 hour that be to come . then the life stir in she , and whereas she 
 would not that her woman should find she there , she stand up , and 
 clothe herself somewhat more seemly ; yet she do on her black raiment ; 
 and determine in her mind that nought would she wear save black 
 unadorned while her friend be away . 

 she betake she now to the chamber where her woman be gather 
 together , and watch they work a while , but spake nought . then 
 she go her way into the pleasance , and pace the plashed alley up 
 and down , let the tear run down from she as they would . then 
 she turn back into the castle , and go out - a - gate and walk over 
 the meadow a little , and might well have go far than wisdom 
 would . but the castellan espy she from a window , and come hurry 
 out after she , and with many prayer for pardon , bring she back 
 again , babble to she by the way ; but not a word might he get from 
 she ; and when he come into the hall with she , and , after his will not , 
 knelt down to kiss her hand , she catch they away from he 
 peevishly , and be sorry for it thereafter . 

 long she sit in the hall , scarce move , till she hear one enter 
 from the screen , and lo it be Leonard the chaplain . he come she 
 way , and show her rueful countenance ; and pity of he smite she , 
 and she remember therewith how they first go out of gate 
 together ; and at the thought thereof her tear brake forth again , but 
 she make he a sign with her hand to sit down beside she , and he do 
 so ; and when she might for her weeping , she look kindly on he , and 
 he fall to talk , make as if he note not her tear and sorrow ; but 
 she answer he little , for she have shame to begin the talk 
 concern the Champions and their Quest , and their departure ; yet 
 might she not bring her tongue to make any speech else . but 
 presently he take up the word , and ask she how long a while she 
 deem they would be away , and she answer , smile on he for 
 thank , and have reckon the day on her finger : if all go 
 well than well , they may be back in ten day ' time . say the 
 chaplain : there be long while of wait in most man 's life . 
 Yea , she say , but this be the delay at the good ; it may be far 
 long ; for how may we tell what hap may be ? 

 Yea , say Leonard , shall we then call it twenty day , or thirty ? 
 Forsooth , that may be long for thee ; though there be some who must 
 need endure hope defer a deal long . but it may run out long 
 than even thirty day , thy waiting - tide . 

 she answer not , and he say : Whenso the time hang heavy on hand 
 with thee , if thou hast will to fare abroad out of the castle , I 
 shall be ever at hand to guide thee . indeed , I wot that the 
 castellan will be loth to let thee go ; but he be old and straitlace : 
 and yet withal he wotteth , as do we all , that there be now little 
 peril or none be we to fare a five mile or more , whereas we be as 
 good as at peace for the last five day with all save the Red Knight , 
 and of he we wot that he be go into another land with as many of 
 his folk as be not need for the warding of his hold . 

 I thank thee , say Birdalone , but it be like to be my will not to 
 fare out - a - gate till the Champions come back home . I be glad e'en 
 now when the castellan fetch I in again : to say sooth , fear of 
 peril have just enter my heart when he come up with I . 

 the priest seem somewhat chapfallen at her answer . he spake little 
 more , and presently he stand up , make his obeisance , and depart . 



 CHAPTER II . birdalone LEARNETH LORE of the PRIEST . ten day of 
 waiting wear 



 wear that day and the next , and Birdalone fall to talk with her 
 woman , whereof be five now leave ; and four of they be young , the 
 eld scarce of thirty summer , and the fifth be a woman of sixty , 
 both wise and kind . all these tell she somewhat of their own life 
 when she ask they ; and some withal tell of folk whom they have know 
 or hear tell of . and well pleased be birdalone to hear thereof , 
 and learn more of the way of the world , and quick - witted she be at 
 the lesson , so that she need not to ask many question . 

 furthermore , she take to she broider again , and fall to do a 
 goodly pair of shoon for Atra , since she have wear those borrow one 
 somewhat hardly . and the woman wonder at her needlework , so 
 marvellous fine as it be , and how that in little space of time be 
 come flower and tree , and bird and beast , all lovely ; and they 
 say that the faery must have learn she that craft . but she 
 laugh and redden , and thought of the wood - mother ; and , sit 
 there within the four wall , she long for the oak - glade , and the 
 wood - lawn , and for the sight of the beast that dwelt therein . 

 again she fall in with Leonard the priest , and he ask she could she 
 read in a book , and when she say nay , he offer to teach she that 
 lore , and she yeasaid that joyously ; and thenceforth would she have 
 he with she every day a good while ; and an apt scholar she be , and 
 he no ill master , and she learn her a b C speedily . 

 now it be the ninth day since the Champions be go , and all that 
 time she have not be out - a - gate ; and after the first two day , have 
 enforce herself to fill up her time with her work as aforesaid : but 
 this last day she might do but little , for she could not but take it 
 for sure that the morrow would be the day of return ; nay , even she 
 deem that they might come in the night - tide ; so that when she go 
 to bed , though she be weary , she would wake if she might , so that it 
 be nigh dawn ere she fall asleep . 

 some three hour after she wake up , and hear a sound of folk 
 stir in the house , and the clashing of weapon ; and the heart 
 leapt in she , and she say : they be come , they be come ! 
 nevertheless she durst not get out of bed , lest her hope have beguile 
 she ; and she lie awake another hour , and no tiding come to she ; and 
 then she weep herself to sleep ; and when she awake once more , she 
 find that she must have weep sleep , for the pillow beside she 
 face be all wet with the tear . 

 the sun be high now , and his beam be cast back from the ripple of 
 the lake , and shine waver on the wall of the chamber , the window 
 whereof give on to the water . then come a hand on the latch of the 
 door , and she start , and her heart grieve she ; but it be one of 
 the woman who open , and come in , and Birdalone rise up sit in 
 her bed , and say faintly , for she could scarce speak : be any tide 
 toward , Catherine ? the maid say : yes , my lady ; for early after 
 sunrise come weapone man to the gate , and would sell we beef ; and 
 my lord , Sir Aymeris , must need go forth and chaffer with they , 
 though belike they have be lift what be neither ours , nor 
 their , nor the neighbour ' . maybe Sir Aymeris look to buy tiding 
 from they as well as beef . anyhow they depart when they have get 
 their money and drunk a cup . and now it be say that the Red Knight 
 hath be hurt in some fray , and keepeth his bed ; wherefore the land 
 shall have peace of he awhile . say birdalone : I thank thee , good 
 Catherine ; I shall lie a little long ; depart now . 

 the woman go her way ; and when she be go , Birdalone weep and 
 sob , and writhe upon her bed , and find no solace to her grief . 
 but she arise and pace the chamber , and sithence look out of the 
 window over the empty water , and weep again . then she say : yet 
 they may come ere noon , or it may be ere evening , or perchance to- 
 morrow morning . and she stay her weeping , and be calm . but 
 still she walk the floor , and while look out of window , and 
 while she look on her limb , and feel the sleekness of her side , 
 and she say : o my body ! how thou long ! 

 but at last she clothe herself in haste , and go stealthily from the 
 chamber , as if she fear to meet anyone ; and she steal up to the 
 tower - top that be nighest , and look through the door on to the 
 lead , and see no one there ; so she go out , and stand by the 
 battlement , and gaze long over the water , but see neither boat nor 
 burn mountain come towards she . 



 CHAPTER III . now would birdalone RIDE abroad 



 after a while she come down again , and go to the woman , and sit 
 work with they a while , and so wear away two hour . then she send 
 for the priest and have her lesson of he ; and when she have be at it 
 another two hour , she bid he begin and learn her writing ; and 
 nought loth he be thereto ; forsooth he have be long to pray she 
 to suffer he learn she , but durst not . for in such teaching need 
 must he sit full nigh to she , and watch her hand , and her finger 
 strive to shape the letter ; nay , while must he touch her hand 
 with his , and hold it . wherefore now he promise himself a taste of 
 Paradise . withal he be full meet to learn she , whereas he be one 
 of the good of scribe , and a fair - writer full handy . 

 so they fall to the lesson , and she become eager thereover , and 
 learn fast , and clave to the work , while his soul be torment 
 with longing for she . and thus wear a three hour , and then suddenly 
 she look up wearily from her work , and her trouble be awake , and 
 the longing for her speech - friend , and she give the priest leave for 
 that day , but suffer he to kiss her hand for wage . 

 then she hurry up to the tower - top , when the afternoon be wear 
 into evening ; and abode there a long while look over the water , 
 till it begin to dusk , and then come down miserably and go to her 
 woman . 

 the next day be like unto this ; nought betid , and she wear the hour 
 while go up to the tower - top and look over the lake , while 
 broider amidst her maid , while learn her clerk 's work with 
 Sir Leonard , but ever eat her heart out with her longing . 

 on the third of these day she call the castellan to she for a 
 talk , and ask he what he think of it , this delay of his lord ' 
 return . Quoth the greyhead : my lady , we may not wonder if they be 
 tarry for a few day ; for this be an adventure on which they have 
 go , and many hap betide in such tale . now I beseech thee torment 
 not thyself ; for the time be not yet come for thee even to doubt that 
 they have miscarry . 

 his word solace she much for that time , whereas she see that he 
 spake but the sooth ; so she thank he , and smile upon he kindly ; 
 and he be ravish thereat , and be for kneeling before she at once 
 and kiss her hand after his will not ; but she smile again and 
 refrain he , and say : Nay , not yet , fair friend ; that be for the 
 departure , and I have yet a word to say unto thee : to wit , that I 
 long to go out - a - gate , and it will solace I and give I patience to 
 abide the coming of my friend . for thou must know , Sir Aymeris , 
 that I be rear amidst the wood and the meadow , with the burning 
 of the sun , and the buffet of the wind ; and now for lack of some 
 deal of that be I wax white and faint . and thou wouldst not have 
 I fall sick on thine hand now , wouldst thou ? 

 Nay , surely , lady , say Sir Aymeris ; this very day I will ride out 
 with thee ; and two score or more of weaponed man shall ride with we 
 for fear of mishap . say Birdalone , knit her brow : Nay , 
 knight , I need not thy man - at - arm ; I would fain go free and alone . 
 for hast thou not hear how that the Red Knight be hurt and keepeth 
 his bed ? so what peril be there ? say Sir Aymeris : Yea , lady ; but 
 the Red Knight be not the only foe , though he be the bad : but it 
 may well be that the story be but feign , for the said enemy hath 
 many wile . and look you , kind lady , it be most like that by now he 
 hath hear how in my poor castle be keep a jewel , a pearl of great 
 price , that hath not its like in the world , and will encompass the 
 stealing of it if he may . 

 Laughed Birdalone , and say : but how if the say jewel hath a will , 
 and leg and foot thereto , and be ready to take the peril on she , and 
 will wend out - a - gate if she will ? what wilt thou do then , lord ? 
 then , say the castellan , I shall fetch thee back , and , though it be 
 a grief to I , shall have thee bear back perforce if nought else may 
 do . for so the oath swear to my lord compelleth I . 

 again laugh Birdalone , and say : Hearken , whereto cometh all this 
 kneeling and hand - kissing ! but bear in mind , fair lord , how once on 
 a time thou wouldst have I out - a - gate , would I , would I not , and 
 now , will I , will I not , thou wouldst keep I within ; so have time 
 change , and mayhappen they may change yet again . but tell I , be I 
 mistress over my woman to bid they what I will ? certe , say he , and 
 over all of we . say she : if then I bade they , some two or three , 
 come with I into the meadow and wood a half day 's journey for our 
 disport , how then ? for that once , say Sir Aymeris , I should bid 
 they disobey their lady . say birdalone : and how if they disobey 
 thee , and obey I ? Quoth Sir Aymeris : if they bring thee back 
 safe , they may chance to sing to the twiggen fiddle - bow , that they 
 may be warn from such folly ; but if they come back without thee , by 
 All - hallow the wind of wrath shall sweep their head off they ! 

 birdalone flush red at his word , and be silent a while ; then she 
 say , make cheerful countenance again : thou art a hard master , 
 lord castellan ; but I must need obey thee . therefore I will take 
 thy bidding , and ride abroad in such wise that I shall scare the land 
 with an army , since no otherwise may I look on the summer land . but 
 to - day I will not go , nor to - morrow belike ; but some day soon . and 
 in good sooth I thank thee for thy heedful care of I , and wish I 
 be well worth it . Nay , nay , thou shalt not kneel to I , but I to 
 thee : for thou art verily the master . 

 Therewith she rise from beside he , and kneel down before he and 
 take his hand and kiss it , and go her way , leave he ravish 
 with love of she . but now she have no scorn of he , but deem , as 
 be true , that he be both valiant and trusty and kind , and she 
 thank he in her heart as well as in word . 



 CHAPTER IV . of birdalone 's faring ABROAD 



 indeed Birdalone long on any term to be out - a - gate and to have 
 some joy of the summer ; for now she begin to see that she might have 
 to abide some while ere her friend should come to she in the Castle 
 of the Quest ; and she be angry with herself that her longing be 
 thus waste she , and she rebuke herself and say : where be now 
 that birdalone who let but few day go by without some joyance of the 
 earth and its creature ? she who bear lightly the toil of a thrall , 
 and gibe and mocking and stripe ? surely this be grievous folly , 
 that I should be worsen since I have come to be the friend of 
 gentle lady , and noble champion , and mighty warrior . have it not 
 be well to have abide under the witch - wife 's hand ? for not 
 every day nor most day do she torment I . but now for many day 
 there have be pain and grief and heart - sickness hour by hour ; and 
 every hour have I dread the coming of the next hour , till I know 
 not how to bear it . 

 so she strove with herself , and become of well heart , and set 
 herself strongly to the learning of the clerkly lore ; she gather 
 her wit together , and no long look for every day and every hour 
 to bring about the return of the Champions , nor blame the day and 
 the hour because they fail therein , and in all wise she strove to 
 get through the day unworn by vain longing . 

 wherefore , on a day when three whole week be go since the day of 
 departure , she be glad when the castellan come to she and say : 
 Lady , these two day I have have man out to spy the land , and their 
 word go that nought be stir which a score of we well - arm 
 might have cause to fear ; wherefore to - morrow , if it be thy will , we 
 shall bring thee out - a - gate , and so please thee , shall be in no 
 haste to come back , but may lie out in the wildwood one night , and 
 come back at our leisure on the morrow of to - morrow . how sayest thou 
 of thy pleasure herein ? 

 she thank he , and yeasaid it eagerly , and next morning they set 
 forth ; and Birdalone have with her three of the woman , and they have 
 sumpter - beast with they , and tent for Birdalone and her maid . 

 so they ride by pleasant way and fair meadow , and the weather be 
 good , for it be now the first day of July , and all be as lovely as 
 might be ; and for that while Birdalone cast off all her care , and 
 be merry , and of many word and sweet ; and all the folk rejoice 
 thereat , for all love she in the Castle of the Quest , besides those 
 one or two that love her overmuch . 

 ride they thus a twelve mile or more , and then they come , as their 
 purpose be , to the beginning of a woodland plenteous of venison , and 
 they hunt here , and Birdalone take her part therein , and all 
 praise her woodcraft ; albeit because of she go a head or two free 
 that have fall else , whereas of the carle hunter be some who 
 deem the body of her well worth look on than the quarry . 

 Howsoever , they slay of hind and roe and other wood - cattle what they 
 would , some deal for their supper in the wilderness , some to bear 
 home to the castle . but when night be nigh at hand they make stay 
 in a fair wood - lawn about which run a clear stream , whereby they 
 pitch the lady ' tent ; and Birdalone and hers go down into the 
 water and wash the weariness off they ; and her lady wonder at 
 the deftness of Birdalone 's swimming ; for they bath in a pool 
 somewhat great into which the stream widen , so that there be space 
 enough for her therein . 

 by then they be washen and clothe goodly in raiment which they have 
 bring on the sumpter , the man have light fire and be cook 
 the venison , and anon there be supper and banquet in the wildwood , 
 with drinking of wine and pleasant talk and the telling of tale and 
 singing of minstrelsy ; and so at last , when night be well worn , and 
 out in the open meadow the eastern sky be wax grey , then 
 Birdalone and her lady go to bed in their fair tent , and the 
 man - at - arm lie down on the greensward under the bare heaven . 



 CHAPTER V. SIR AYMERIS SHOWETH birdalone the MOUNTAINS afar off 



 when it be morning and they arise , the day be as fair as yesterday , 
 and folk be even as joyous as they have be then , all but 
 Birdalone , and she be silent and downcast , even when she come forth 
 from the fresh water into the sweetness of the midsummer wood . she 
 have dream in the night that she be all alone in the Castle of the 
 Quest , and that her old mistress come to she from out of the Sending 
 Boat to fetch she away , and bring she aboard , and strip she of 
 her rich garment and sit face she , draw ugsome grimace at she ; 
 and she think she know that her friend be all dead and go , and 
 she have none to pity or defend she . then somehow be they two , the 
 witch and she , amidmost of the Isle of Nothing , and the witch draw 
 close anigh she , and be just go to whisper into her ear something 
 of measureless horror , when she awake ; and the sun be bright outside 
 the shaded whiteness of her tent ; the shadow of the leaf be 
 dance on the ground of it ; the morning wind be rustle the tree- 
 bough , and the ripple of the stream be tinkle hard by . at first 
 be Birdalone joyous that what she have awaken from be but a dream ; 
 but presently she feel the burden of her longing , and she say to 
 herself that when they come back to the castle they should find 
 tiding , and that she should know either that her friend be indeed 
 dead , or that they be come back again alive and well . and then she 
 think within herself , suppose the three Champions and their love 
 be dead and go , how would she do with those that be leave she , 
 as Sir Aymeris , and Leonard the priest , and her woman ? and her soul 
 turn with loathing from a life so empty as that would be ; and yet 
 she blame herself that she be so little friendly to these less 
 friend , whom forsooth she love because of her love for the great 
 one . so , as abovesaid , she be troubled and silent amongst the joy 
 of the other . 

 that see Sir Aymeris the castellan ; and when they have break fast and 
 be get to horse , he come to she and say : Lady , the day be yet 
 young , and if we fetch a compass by a way that I wot of we shall see 
 place new to thee , and mayhappen somewhat wonderful , and yet come 
 home timely to the castle . wilt thou ? 

 birdalone be still somewhat distraught , but she know not how to 
 naysay he , though at heart she would liefer have go back to the 
 castle by the short way . so folk bring she her palfrey , and 
 they ride their way , the castellan ever by her side . and by fair 
 way indeed they go , and so joyous be all about they , that little 
 by little Birdalone 's gladness come back to she , and she make the 
 most of it to be as merry of seem as she might be . 

 now they ride fair and softly by thicket and copse and glade of the 
 woodland , follow up the stream aforesaid for the more part , till 
 at last the tree fail they suddenly , and they come forth on to a 
 wide green plain , all unbuilded , so far as their eye could see , and 
 beyond it the ridge of the hill and blue mountain rise high 
 beyond they . 

 when Birdalone 's eye beheld this new thing , of a sudden all care 
 leave she , and she drop her rein , and smote her palm together , and 
 cry out : oh ! but thou art beautiful , o earth , thou art beautiful ! 
 then she sit gaze on it , while the greyhead turn and smile on 
 she , well pleased of her pleasure . 

 after a while she say : and might we go nigh ? yea , certe , say 
 he , yet I doubt if thou wilt like it the well , the nigher thou art . 
 ah ! she say , but if I be only amidst it , and a part of it , as once 
 I be of the woodland ! 

 so thitherward they ride over the unharvested mead , and see hart and 
 hind thereon , and wild kine , and of small deer great plenty , but of 
 tame beast none ; and the hill be before they like a wall . but as 
 they draw nigh , they see where the say wall of the hill be 
 cleave by a valley narrow and steep - sided , that go right athwart 
 the lie of the hill ; the say valley be but little grassed , and the 
 bare rock be crow - black . when they have go a little far , 
 they could see that the ground near the foot of the hill rise in 
 little knoll and ridge , but these be low and few about the 
 entry into that valley . also presently they come upon a stream which 
 run out of the say valley , and Sir Aymeris say that this be the 
 water whereby they have lie last night ; albeit here it be little 
 indeed . 

 now when they have ride some five mile over the plain , they come 
 amongst those knoll at the mouth of the valley , and Sir Aymeris lead 
 birdalone up to the top of one of the high of they , and thence 
 they could look into that dale and see how it wind away up toward 
 the mountain , like to a dismal street ; for not only be it but 
 little grassed , but withal there be neither tree nor bush therein . 
 moreover , scatter all about the bottom of the dale be great 
 stone , which look as if they have once be set in some kind of 
 order ; and that the more whereas they be not black like the rock 
 of the dale - side , but pale grey of hue , so that they look even as 
 huge sheep of the giant feed down the dale . 

 then spake birdalone : verily , sir knight , thou saidst but sooth that 
 I should see thing new and strange . but shall we go a little way 
 into this valley to - day ? Nay , lady , say Sir Aymeris , nor to - morrow , 
 nor any day uncompelle ; neither shall we go nigh unto it than now 
 we be . wherefore not ? say Birdalone , for meseemeth it be as the 
 gate of the mountain ; and fain be I in the mountain . 

 Lady , say the castellan , overmuch perilous it be to ride the 
 valley , which , as thou sayest , be the very gate of the mountain . 
 for the say dale , which hight the Black Valley of the Greywethers , 
 hath a bad name for the haunting of unmanlike wight , against which 
 even our man - at - arm might make no defence . and if any might escape 
 they , and win through the gate and up into the mountain , I wot not 
 if suchlike devil and thing unkent be there in the mountain - land , 
 but of a sooth there be fierce and wild man , like enough to devil , 
 who know no peace , and slay whatsoever cometh unto they , but if they 
 themselves be slay of they . 

 well , say Birdalone , then to - day , at least , we go not into the dale ; 
 but know thou any tale of these wild place ? many have I hear , 
 say he , but I be an ill minstrel and should spoil they in the 
 telling . ask they of Sir Leonard our priest , he knoweth of they 
 well than other , and hath a tongue duly shapen for tell they . 

 birdalone answer nought thereto ; she but turn her horse 's head 
 and ride down the knoll ; and so they come unto their company , and all 
 go their way toward the Castle of the Quest . 

 Nought befell they on their way home ; but the nigh they come to the 
 castle the more pensive wax Birdalone , and , though she hide it , when 
 they be come to the gate she scarce have her wit ; for it be as if 
 she think to have one rush out and cry : tiding , tiding ! 
 they be come . 

 Nowise it so befell ; they be no more come than be the Day of Doom . 
 and a little after they be within gate ; it be night , and 
 birdalone creep wearily up to her chamber , and gat to bed , and so 
 tired be she that she fall asleep at once and dream not . 



 CHAPTER VI . birdalone HEARETH tell TALES of the black VALLEY of the 
 greywether 



 on the morrow be Birdalone heavy of heart than ever yet , and 
 weary for tiding ; and she wonder how she could have be so 
 joyous that day in the wildwood . yet she think much of the Valley 
 of the greywether , and that solace she somewhat after a while , so 
 sore she long to go thither ; and , as ' tis say , one nail knock out 
 the other . so that morning , when she have have her lesson of priest 
 Leonard , she spake thereof to he , and tell he what Sir Aymeris have 
 say concern his knowledge thereof ; and she ask he what he 
 know . 

 I have be there , say he . she start at that word and say : do 
 aught of evil befall thee ? 

 Nay , say he , but a great fear and dread hang about I ; and ' tis say 
 that they try their luck overmuch who go thither twice . 

 birdalone say : tell I now of the tale that be tell of that 
 valley . Quoth Leonard : they be many ; but the main of they be this : 
 that those greywether be giant of yore agone , or landwight , 
 carle , and quean , who have be turn into stone by I wot not what 
 deed ; but that while they come alive again , and can walk and talk as 
 erst they do ; and that if any man may be so bold as to abide the 
 time of their awakening , and in the first moment of their change may 
 frame word that crave the fulfilment of his desire , and if therewith 
 he be both wise and constant , then shall he have his desire fulfil 
 of these wight , and bear his life back again from out the dale . and 
 thus must he speak and no otherwise : o Earth , thou and thy first 
 child , I crave of you such and such a thing , whatsoever it may be . 
 and if he speak more than this , then be he undo . he shall answer 
 no question of they ; and if they threaten he he shall not pray they 
 mercy , nor quail before their uplifted weapon ; nor , to be short , 
 shall he heed they more than if they still be stone unchanged . 
 moreover , when he hath say his say , then shall these wight throng 
 about he and offer he gold and gem , and all the wealth of the 
 earth ; and if that be not enough , they shall bring he the goodly 
 of woman , with nought lack in her shape , but lack all raiment , 
 so that he shall see she as she be verily shapen . but whoso shall 
 take any one of all these gift be lose for ever , and shall become 
 one of that Stony People ; and whoso naysayeth they all until the cock 
 crow , and abideth steady by his one craving , shall win fulfilment 
 thereof , and , as some say , all those gift aforesaid ; for that the 
 Stony People may not abide the day to take they back again . 

 he be silent therewith , and nought spake Birdalone , but look down 
 on the ground , and longing encompass her soul . then the priest 
 spake again : this be a fair adventure , lady , for a hapless one , 
 but for the happy it be a fool 's errand . she answer not , and 
 they part for that time . 

 but the next week , there be yet no tiding come to hand , Birdalone 
 pray the castellan to take she out - a - gate again , that she might 
 once more behold the mountain , and the gate thereof ; and he yeasaid 
 her asking , and go with she , well accompany , as before ; but this 
 time , by Birdalone 's will , they ride straight to the plain aforesaid , 
 and again she look into that dale of the Greywethers from the 
 knoll . somewhat belated they be , so that they might not get back 
 to the castle before dusk , wherefore again they lie out in the 
 wildwood , but there lack somewhat of the triumph and joyance which 
 they have have that other day . they come back to the castle on the 
 morrow somewhat after noon , and find no news there ; nor , to say 
 sooth , do Birdalone look for any ; and her heart be heavy . 



 CHAPTER VII . birdalone beguileth the priest to help she to outgoing 



 now have the time so wear that the season be in the first day of 
 August , and weariness and heartsickness increase on Birdalone again , 
 and she begin to look pined and pale . yet when she spake of the 
 tarrying of the Champions both to the castellan and Sir Leonard the 
 priest   who be the wise man of the two , each say the same thing , 
 to wit , that it be no marvel if they be not yet come , see 
 whatlike the adventure be ; and neither of those two seem in 
 anywise to have lose hope . 

 Thrice in these last day do Birdalone go out - a - gate with Sir 
 Aymeris and his company ; and the last of the three time the journey 
 be to the knoll that look into the Black Valley ; but now be 
 Birdalone 's pleasure of the sight of it afar off mar by her 
 longing to be amidst thereof ; yet she do not show that she be irk 
 by the refraining of her desire to enter therein , and they turn , 
 and come home safely to the castle . 

 on the morrow she sit with Sir Leonard the priest over the writing 
 lesson , and she let it be long , and oft he touch her hand , so that 
 the sweetness of unfulfilled desire go deep to his heart . 

 at last birdalone look up and say : friend , I would ask thee if 
 thou se any peril in my enter the Black Valley of the 
 greywether by daylight if I leave it by daylight ? alone ? quoth he . 
 Yea , she say , alone . he ponder a little , and then say : sooth to 
 say I deem the peril little in the valley itself , if thou be not 
 overcome by terror there . yea , for my part I be not all so sure that 
 thou shalt see the wonder of the Stony Folk come alive ; for ' tis 
 not say that they quicken save on certain night , and chiefly on 
 Midsummer Night ; unless it be that the trier of the adventure be some 
 one fat above other thereto ; as forsooth thou mayst be . and as 
 for peril of evil man , there be few who be like to be as venturesome 
 as thou or i. they durst not enter that black street , save sore need 
 compel they . but forsooth , go thither , and come back again , 
 some peril there may be therein . and yet for week past there have 
 be no word of any unpeace ; and the Red Knight it be say for 
 certain be not rid . 

 birdalone be silent a while ; then she say : fair and kind friend , I 
 be eat my heart out in longing for the come back of my friend , 
 and it be like , that unless I take to some remedy , I shall fall sick 
 thereby , and then when they come back there shall be in I but sorry 
 cheer for they . now the remedy I know , and it be that I betake I 
 alone to this adventure of the Black Valley ; for meseemeth that I 
 shall gain health and strength by my go thither . wherefore , to be 
 short , if thou wilt help I , I will go to - morrow . what sayest thou , 
 wilt thou help I ? 

 he turn very red and spake : Lady , why shouldest thou go , as thy 
 name be , birdalone ? Thou hast call I just now thy kind friend , so 
 kind as it be of thee ; now therefore why should not thy friend go 
 with thee ? 

 kindly indeed she smile on he , but shake her head : I call thee 
 trusty and dear friend again , say she ; but what I would do I must do 
 myself . moreover to what end shouldst thou go ? if I fall in with 
 ghost , a score of man would help I nought ; and if I happen on 
 weapone man who would do I scathe , of what avail be one man 
 against they ? and look thou , Sir Leonard , there be this avail in 
 thine abide behind ; if I come not back in two day ' space , or three 
 at the most , thou wilt wot that I have fare amiss , and then mayst 
 thou let it be know whither I go , and man will seek I and deliver 
 I maybe . 

 Therewith she stay her word suddenly , and turn very pale , and 
 lay her hand on her bosom , and say faintly : but o my heart , my 
 heart ! if they should come while I be away ! and she seem like to 
 swoon . 

 Leonard be afraid thereat , and know not what to do ; but presently 
 the colour come into her face again , and in a little while she 
 smile , and say : Seest thou not , friend , how weak I be get to 
 be , and that I must now beyond doubt have the remedy ? wilt thou not 
 help I do it ? 

 yea verily , say he ; but in what wise wilt thou have it ? he spake as 
 a man distraught and redeless ; but she smile on he pleasantly , and 
 say : now by this time shouldst thou have devise what be to do , 
 and spar I the pain thereof . two thing I need of thee : the 
 first and most , to be put out of the castle privily betime in the 
 morning when nought be stir ; the second , to have my palfrey 
 await I somewhat anigh the gate , so that I may not have to go 
 afoot : for I be become soft and feeble with all this house - life . 

 Leonard seem to wake up with that word , and say : I have the key 
 of the priest 's door of the chapel , and the postern beyond it ; that 
 shall be thine out - gate , lady . I will come and scratch at thy 
 chamber - door much betime , and I will see to it that thy palfrey be 
 bestow in the bower wherein thou didst rest the first night thou 
 camest amongst we . she say : I trust thee , friend . and she thank 
 he sweetly , and then rise up and fall to pace the hall up and 
 down . Leonard hang about watch she a while , she nought forbid 
 he , for her thought be elsewhere , and she have forget he ; and 
 at last he go his way to set about do what she would . 



 CHAPTER VIII . birdalone FARES on her adventure 



 Dawn be but just begin when Birdalone awake , and though she have 
 not hear Leonard at the door , she spring out of bed and clothe 
 herself , do on her black gown ; and she have a scrip with some bread 
 therein , and a sharp knife at her girdle . then even as she have do 
 she hear the priest 's nail on the door , and she turn thereto ; but 
 as she go , her eye catch her bow and quiver of arrow where they 
 hang on the wall , so she take the bow in her hand and sling the 
 quiver over her shoulder ere she open the door and find Leonard 
 stand there . neither of they spake aught , but they stole 
 downstair , and so to the chapel and out by the priest 's door and the 
 postern in the wall - nook , and be presently out in the fresh morning 
 air ; and Birdalone be joyous and lightfoot , and scarce feel the 
 earth beneath her sol for pleasure of her hope , whereas she deem 
 she have a thing to crave of the Stony Folk , if they should come alive 
 before she . fain be she , if she might withal , to give a joy to 
 some other ; so that when they be go but a little way from the 
 castle she reach out her hand to Leonard and take his , and say : 
 Hand in hand we walk when first I go this way , and I deem thee 
 kind and friendly then , and even so hast thou be sithence . 

 he be dumbfoundere at first for joy of the touch of her hand and 
 the sweetness of her word ; but presently he spake to her confused 
 and stammering , and praise she that she have think to take her bow 
 and arrow ; for , say he , that they might stand she in stead for 
 defence or for get of food , or for an excuse for wend the 
 wood . she nod yeasay unto he , and bid he again to bide three 
 day for she , and if she come not again in that time , to make a clean 
 breast of it to Sir Aymeris . 

 Yea , say the priest , and then . . . why , what then ? he can but 
 shove I out by the shoulder , and then I can seek to the little 
 house of canon that be at Gate Cross on the road to Greenford . 

 ah , my friend ! say Birdalone , how we woman think of nothing at all 
 but ourselves ! and wilt thou be thrust out of thine home for help 
 I herein ? why do I not look to my palfrey myself ? and the key I 
 might have steal from thee , always with thy good will . but now I 
 see that I have do thee a hurt . 

 say Sir Leonard : Lady , a priest hath a home wheresoever be an house 
 of religion . there be no harm do , save Sir Aymeris bethink he of 
 hang I over the battlement ; as I doubt he will not with a 
 priest . moreover , I pray thee believe , that wert thou go from the 
 castle , house and home be none for I there . and he look upon 
 she piteously , as if he be beseech . 

 but she know not what to say , and hang her head adown ; and presently 
 they be come to the bower in the copse , which this time be a 
 stable for Birdalone 's palfrey instead of a chamber for herself . so 
 Leonard go in and fetch out the comely beast ; and Birdalone stand 
 with he just in the cover of the copse wait to put her foot in 
 the stirrup ; but she might not but abide to look upon the priest , who 
 stand there as if he be strive with his word . 

 so she say : now be need of haste to be go . yet one word , my 
 friend : be there aught betwixt we wherein I have do thee wrong ? 
 if so it be , I pray thee to say out what it be ; for it may be   though 
 I think it not   thou shalt not see I again from henceforth . 

 he catch his breath , as if he have much ado to refrain the sobbing ; 
 but he master it , and say : Lady and dear friend , if I see thee 
 not again , I hee not what shall befall I . Thou hast do I no 
 wrong . there be this only betwixt we , that I love thee , and thou 
 lov not I . 

 she look on he sweetly and pitifully , and say : I may not choose 
 but understand thy word , to wit , that thy love for I be the desire 
 of a man toward a woman ; and that be unhappy ; for I love thee indeed , 
 but not as a woman loveth a man . it be good to say thus much to thee 
 downright . but I feel in my heart that when I have say it , it be as 
 much as to say that I can not help thee , and therefore be I sorry 
 indeed . 

 he stand before she abash , but he say at last : now art thou so 
 sweet , and so kind , and so true , that I must perforce love thee yet 
 more ; and this maketh I bold to say that thou mayst help I a 
 little , or so meseemeth . how so ? say Birdalone . Quoth he : if thou 
 wouldst suffer I to kiss thy face this once . she shake her head , 
 and spake : how may it avail thee , when it be for once , and once 
 only , as forsooth it must be ? yet it be thy choice , not mine , and I 
 will not naysay thee . 

 and therewith she put up her face to he , and he kiss she cheek 
 without touch she otherwise , and then he kiss her mouth ; and she 
 know that he be both timorous and sad , and she be ashamed to look 
 on he , or to speak to he any more , lest she should behold he 
 ashamed ; so she but say : Farewell , friend , till to - morrow at least . 

 and therewith her foot be in the stirrup , and anon she sit in the 
 saddle , and her palfrey be amble briskly on the way she would . 



 CHAPTER IX . birdalone come to the BLACK VALLEY 



 Little be to tell of Birdalone 's journey unto the knoll above the 
 Black Valley of the Greywethers . it be about noon when she come 
 there , and have meet but few folk on the way , and those few be 
 husbandman , or carline , or maidens wending afield betime not far 
 from the Castle of the Quest . 

 now she sit on her horse and look down into the dale and its stony 
 people once more , and see nought stir save three raven who , not 
 far off , be flap about from stone to stone of the Greywethers , 
 and croak loud to each other as if some tiding be toward . she 
 watch their play for a little , and then gat off her horse , and sit 
 down on the grass of the knoll , and draw forth her victual , and eat 
 and drank ; for she deem it happy to eat and drink there than in 
 the very jaw of the Black Valley . 

 soon be her dinner do , and then she get to her saddle again , and 
 ride slowly down to the little stream , and along it toward the valley 
 and the gate of the mountain , which she have be fain to pass 
 through ; but now , as have happe with she that morning when she be 
 boun for the Sending Boat , somewhat she hang back from the adventure , 
 and when she lack but some five score yard from the very dale 
 itself , she light down again , and let her way - beast bite the grass , 
 while she sit down and watch the ripple water . 

 in a while she draw off shoon and hosen , and stand in the shallow 
 ripple , and bath her hand and face withal , and stoop up - stream 
 and drink from the hollow of her hand , and so step ashore and be 
 waxen hardier ; then she string her bow and look to the shaft in 
 her quiver , and do on her foot - gear , and mount once more , and so 
 ride a brisk amble right on into the dale , and be soon come amongst 
 the Greywethers ; and she see that they be a many , and that all the 
 bottom of the dale be besprinkle with they on either side of the 
 stream , and some stand in the very stream itself , the ground whereof 
 be black even as the rest of the valley , although the water run over 
 it as clear as glass . 

 as for the dale , now she be fairly within it , she could see but a 
 little way up it , for it wind much , and at first away from her left 
 hand , and the side of it go up in somewhat steep scree on either 
 side , which be top with mere upright stave and burg of black 
 rock ; and these be specially big and outthruste on the right hand 
 of she ; and but a furlong ahead of where she be , one of these burg 
 thrust out past the scree and come down sheer into the dale , and 
 straiten it so much that there be but little way save by the 
 stream itself , which run swift indeed , but not deep , even there where 
 it be straiten by the sheer rock . 

 but up the dale would she go , whatever be before she ; and now she 
 tell herself her very purpose , as forsooth she scarce have heretofore ; 
 to wit , that she would abide in the dale the night over and see what 
 should betide , and if those wight should chance to come alive , then 
 she look to have valiance enough to face they and crave the 
 fulfilment of her desire . 

 so she take the water and ride the stream till she be past the say 
 sheer rock , and then the valley widen again , and presently be 
 wide than it be in the beginning ; and here again be the 
 greywether grow many more and close together , and , as she deem , 
 be set in ring round about one very big one , which , forsooth , be 
 somewhat in the shape of a man sit down with his hand lay on 
 his knee . 

 birdalone rein up for a minute , and look about she , and then go 
 up on to the grass , and ride straight to the say big stone , and 
 there light down from off her horse again , and stand by the stone 
 and ponder . presently she deem that she see something dark 
 move just beyond the stone , but if it be so , it be go in a 
 twinkling ; nevertheless she stand affright , and star before she 
 long , and see no more , but yet for a while durst not move hand nor 
 foot . 

 at last her courage come again , and she think : yet how if this 
 great chieftain be inwardly stir and will come awake ? shall I 
 say the word now , lest hereafter it be of no avail ? Therewith she 
 stretch out her right hand and lay it on the stone , and spake 
 aloud : o Earth , thou and thy first child , I crave of you that he 
 may come back now at once and love I . and her voice sound 
 strange and unkent to she in that solitude , and she rue it that she 
 have speak . 



 CHAPTER X. how birdalone fall in with a man in the BLACK VALLEY of 
 the greywether 



 come new tiding therewithal ; for the moment after she have speak , a 
 tall man draw out from behind the big stone , and stand before she ; 
 and at first it be in her mind that this be the very chieftain come 
 alive for she , and for terror she be like to swoon this time ; but he 
 spake nought a while , but look on she eagerly and curiously . 

 she come to herself presently , so much that she could see he 
 clearly , and be now grow more shamefast than afraid , when she see 
 beyond doubt that the man be of the son of Adam ; but what with she 
 shame that be now , and her fear that have be , she yet have no might 
 to move , but stand there pale and tremble like a leaf , and might 
 scarce keep her foot . 

 now the new - comer bow before her smile , and say : I ask thy 
 pardon , fair damsel   or indeed I should say fair damsel , that I 
 have scar thee . but sooth to say I behold thee come riding , and 
 even from a little aloof I could see that nought which might befall 
 could ever make it up to I for not see thee close at hand and 
 hear thee speak . wherefore I hide myself behind the king 's stone 
 here ; and no harm be do thereby I trow ; for now I see that the 
 colour be come into thy cheek again , and thy fear be go . and as 
 for I , thou hast not flee away from I , as thou wouldst have do 
 have I not hide and come on thee suddenly ; and then thou being 
 horse and I unhorse , thou wouldst have escape I , whereas now thou 
 art within reach of my hand . then he smile , and say : furthermore , 
 thou hast tell so little of thy secret to this stony king here , that 
 I be little the wiser for thy word , and thou the little more 
 betray . only this I will say , that if he loveth thee not , he be 
 more of a fool than I be . 

 he reach out his hand to her , but she draw it aback , and grow yet 
 more ashamed , and could find no word for he . his voice be soft and 
 full , and he spake deftly , but she be not content with it for its 
 kindness , as she have be with all the other man whom she have meet 
 since she leave the House under the Wood , and she durst not trust she 
 hand to he . 

 as for his aspect , she see that he be tall and well - knit , and goodly 
 of fashion ; dark - haired , with long hazel eye , smooth - cheek and 
 bright - skinned ; his nose long , and a little bent over at the end , and 
 come down close to his lip , which be full and red ; his face be 
 hairless save for a little lip - beard . he be so clad , that he have no 
 helm on his head , but a little hat with a broad gold piece in the 
 front thereof ; he be girt to a long sword , and have an anlace also in 
 his belt , and Birdalone see the ring of a fine hauberk at his collar 
 and knee ; otherwise he be not arm . over his hauberk he wear a 
 black surcoat , without device of any kind , and his foot and leg gear 
 be of the same hue ; wherefore may we call he the Black Knight . 
 Sooth to say , for all his soft speech , she fear he and rue the 
 meeting of he . 

 now he spake to she again : I see that thou art wroth with I , lady ; 
 but mayhappen it be not so ill that I have happen on thee ; for this 
 dale hath a bad name for more than one thing , and be scarce meet for 
 damsel to wander in . but now since thou hast a weapone man with 
 thee , and thou , by all - hallows ! not utterly unarmed , thou mayst well 
 go up the valley and see something more thereof . so come now , mount 
 thine horse again , and I will lead he for thee . 

 now Birdalone find speech and say : Knight , for such thou seemest 
 to I , I deem now that I have no need to fare far in this dale , 
 but I will get I into the saddle and turn my horse 's head outward 
 again , give thee good day first and thank thee for thy courtesy . 
 and therewith she turn to get to her palfrey , but sore trembling 
 the while ; but he follow she and say , with brow somewhat knit : 
 Nay , lady , I have leave my horse somewhat far up , and I must go 
 back to fetch he , that we may wend out of the dale together . for I 
 will not suffer thee to flee from I and fall into the hand of evil 
 wight , be they ghost or live man , and that the less since I have 
 hear the speech in thy mouth , as of honey and cream and rose . 
 therefore if thou go out of the dale , I shall go with thee afoot , 
 lead thine horse . and look to it if it be courteous to unhorse a 
 knight , who be ready to be thy servant . moreover , since thou hast 
 come to this dale of wonder , and mayst leave it safely , pity it be 
 that thou shouldst see nought thereof , for strange be it forsooth , 
 and belike thou shalt never seek thither again . wherefore I crave of 
 thee , once more , to mount thine horse and let I lead thee up the 
 dale . 

 he spake these last word rather as one give a command than make 
 a prayer , and Birdalone fear he now sorely . Forsooth she have she 
 bended bow in hand ; but let alone that the knight be over - near to 
 she that she might get a shaft out of her quiver and nock it , ere he 
 should run in on she , and let alone also that he be byrnie , she 
 scarce deem that it behove she to slay or wound the man because 
 she would be quit of he . wherefore angrily , and with a flushed 
 face , she answer he : so shall it be then , Sir Knight ; or rather 
 so must it be , since thou compell I . 

 he laugh and say : Nay , now thou art angry . I compel thee not , I 
 but say that it will not do for thee to compel I to leave thee . go 
 which way thou wilt , up the dale , or down it and out of it ; it be all 
 one unto I , so long as I be with thee . Forsooth , damsel , I have 
 say hard word to lady who have do my pleasure and not deem 
 themselves compel . 

 she pal but answer nought ; then she mount her palfrey , and the 
 knight go to her bridle - rein without more word , and so lead she on 
 up the valley by the easy way amongst the greywether . 



 CHAPTER XI . birdalone be lead up the BLACK VALLEY 



 as they go , the knight fall a - talk to Birdalone , and that 
 without any of the covert jeering which he have use erewhile ; and he 
 show her place in the dale , as cavern under the burg , and little 
 eyot in the stream , and certain stone amongst the greywether 
 whereof story run ; and how this and the other one have fare in 
 dealing with the land - wight , and how one have perish , and another 
 have be make happy , and so forth . withal he tell of the mountain- 
 folk , and in especial how they of the plain , when he be scarce more 
 than a boy , have meet they in battle in that same dale , and how fierce 
 the fight be ; whereas the mountain - man be fight for a life of 
 desire accomplish , which hitherto have be but a dream unto they ; 
 and the man of the plain fight for dear life itself , and for all 
 that make it aught save death in life . wherefore up and down the 
 dale they fight , at first in order rank and then in knot , and 
 lastly sword to sword and man to man , till there be no foot of grass 
 or black sand there which have not its shower of blood ; and the stream 
 be choke with the dead , and run red out of the dale ; till at last 
 well - nigh all the host of the mountain - man be fall , and scarce 
 less of the folk of the plain , but these man hold the field and have 
 the victory . 

 all this he tell she deftly and well , and though he say not so right 
 out , yet let she wot that , youth as he be , he be of the battle ; and 
 his voice be clear and good , and Birdalone 's wrath run off she , and 
 she hearken his tale , and even ask he a question here and there ; 
 and so courteous be this Black Knight now become , that Birdalone 
 begin to think that she have fall short of courtesy to he , because 
 of her fear and the weariness of the waiting which so oppress she ; 
 and that sham and irk she , for she would fain be of all courtesy . 
 wherefore now she deem that perchance she have err in deem he 
 an evil man ; and she look on he from time to time , and deem he 
 goodly of fashion ; she think his eye be deep , and his face sober 
 and fair of aspect , but that his nose turn down at the end , and be 
 over thin at the bridge , and moreover his lip look over - sweet and 
 licorous . 

 now when the knight be silent of his tale , Birdalone fall to ask 
 he question sweetly concern this Stony People which be all 
 about they ; and he tell she all he know , soberly enough at first , yet 
 indeed end by mock they somewhat , but mock not at her any 
 more . at last he say : Fair lady , that thou hast not come here all 
 for nought I partly know by those word which I hear come from thy 
 mouth at the King 's Stone ; wherefore I marvel indeed when I hear 
 thee say that thou wouldst go straight out of the dale ; for I have 
 deem thee desirous of try the adventure of wake this Stony 
 People a - night - tide . Forsooth be this thy mind when thou sought 
 hither to the dale ? 

 she redden at his word , and yeasaid he shortly . then say he : be 
 it not thy mind still ? Sir , say she , as now I have get to fear it . 
 Yea ? and that be strange , say he , for thou wouldst have wake the 
 dale alone ; and now thou art no long alone , but hast I to watch 
 and ward thy waking , thou art more afeard . 

 she look on his face steadily , to wot if there be no half - hide 
 smile therein ; but herseeme that he spake in all soberness ; and she 
 have nought to say to he save this : Sir , I be now become afraid of 
 the waking . and he say no more thereof . 

 now they go thus , and Birdalone not without pleasure , since she 
 fear of the knight be minishe , some three hour up the dale , and 
 still be the Greywethers everywhere about they , so that there be 
 well - nigh as many hour as mile in their wending . 

 at last they seem to be draw nigh to the head of the dale , and 
 the burg and the rock be before they all round it as a wall , 
 though yet about a mile aloof at the further end ; and this end it be 
 wide than elsewhere . 

 come they then to a level space of greensward clear of the grey 
 stone , which be draw all around it in ordered ring , so that it 
 be as some doom - ring of an ancient people ; and within the say space 
 birdalone behold a great black horse tethered and crop the grass . 
 the knight lead she into the ring , and say : now be we come home for 
 the present , my lady , and if it please thee to light down we shall 
 presently eat and drink , and sithence talk a little . and he draw 
 nigh to help she off her horse , but she suffer he not , and light 
 down of herself ; but if she suffer not his hand , his eye she must 
 need suffer , as he gaze greedily on the trimness of her foot and 
 leg in she slide from her horse . 

 Howsoever , he take her hand , and lead she to a little mound on the 
 other side of the ring , and bid she sit down there , and so do she , 
 and from under the nighest of the stone he draw forth a pair of 
 saddle - bag , and take victual and wine thence , and they eat and drank 
 together like old companion . and now Birdalone tell herself that 
 the knight be frank and friendly ; yet forsooth she wotte that her 
 heart scarce trowe what it feign , and that she yet fear he . 



 CHAPTER XII . how those TWAIN get they from OUT of the BLACK VALLEY 
 of the greywether 



 when they have din , and have sit a while talk , the knight say : I 
 will ask thee once more wherefore thou must need depart from this 
 dale leave the greywether unwaked ? yet this must I tell thee 
 first , that this ring at the dale 's end be the only one due place 
 where the greywether can be rightly wake , and that there be few who 
 wot this . wilt thou not tell I then what be in thy mind ? 

 birdalone gaze down on the ground a while ; then she lift up her 
 head and look on the Black Knight , and say : Sir Knight , we have 
 be bring so close together to - day , and as meseemeth I be so 
 wholly in thy power , that I will tell thee the very truth as it be . 
 my mind it be to wake the dale here to - night , and take what might 
 befall I . and well indeed might I fear the adventure , which few , 
 meseemeth , would not fear . but so strong be my longing for that 
 which I would crave of these wight , that it overmaster my fear , 
 and my purpose hold when I enter the dale . then I meet thee ; and 
 here again be the truth , take it how thou wilt , that presently I 
 fear thee , and yet I fear thee ; for I have note thee closely all 
 this while , and have see of thee , that thou art over heedful of my 
 poor body , and wouldst have it for thine own if thou mightest . and 
 there be this in thee also , as I deem , though thou thyself mayst not 
 know it , that thou wouldst have thy pleasure of I whether it 
 pleasure I or grieve I ; and this thy pleasure must I need gainsay ; 
 for though thou mayest hereafter become my friend , yet be there 
 other friend of mine , who be such , that my grief would mar any 
 pleasure they might have . Hast thou hear and understand ? 

 she look on his face steadily as she spake , and see that it 
 flush , and darken , and scowl , and that his hand be clench , 
 and his tooth set hard together . and again she spake : Sir , thou 
 shalt know that beside these shot - weapon , I have a thing here in my 
 girdle that may serve either against thee or against I , if need 
 drive I thereto ; wherefore I will pray thee to forbear . Forsooth , 
 thou shalt presently happen on other woman , who shall be well unto 
 thee than I can be . 

 by then Birdalone have speak the word , the knight 's face have clear , 
 and he laugh aloud and say : as to thy last word , therein at 
 least thou liest , my lady . but for the rest , I see that it must all 
 be as thou wiliest . yea , if such be thy will , we shall presently to 
 horse and ride down the dale again , and at the end thereof I shall 
 leave thee to go home alone at thy will . she say : for that I can 
 thee thank with all my heart . but why hast thou not ask I of 
 whence I be , and whither I would go home ? 

 again he laugh and say : because I know already . I have have more 
 than two or three tale from they who have see thee , or speak unto 
 other who have see thee , how the gay Champions of the Castle of the 
 Quest have fish up a wondrous pearl of price from out of the Great 
 Water ; and when I set eye on thy beauty , I know that the say pearl 
 could be nowhere else than under mine eye . 

 let that pass , she say , and blush not ; but now tell I the truth 
 as I have tell thee , why thou art so instant with I to wake the 
 greywether to - night ? he keep silence a while , and , as she look on 
 he , she think she see confusion in his face ; but at last he say : 
 Thou wert wrong in say that I heed not thy pleasure , and solace , 
 and welfare . Meseemed , and yet doth , that it might be to thine avail 
 to wake the Greywethers to - night ; and never again mayst thou have a 
 chance of the waking , as erst I say . I say I wish thee to have 
 fulfilment of thy craving . nor hast thou aught to fear of they , 
 see that it be but dastard and fool that they undo . 

 he break off his speech , and Birdalone yet look on he , and after a 
 little he say : Thou drawest the truth out of I ; for moreover I 
 would have thee with I long than thou wouldst be if we but ride 
 together down the water and out of the dale , and thou to fare away 
 alone . 

 birdalone spake in a while , and that while he gaze upon she eagerly ; 
 she say : I shall now tell thee that I shall abide the adventure of 
 the wake to - night , whatever befall . and I , say he , will so do 
 that thou mayst fear I the less ; for I will unarm I when the night 
 cometh , and thou thyself shalt keep mine hauberk and sword and 
 anlace . 

 she say : it be well ; I will take that , lest desire overmaster thee . 

 they spake no more of it at that time , and it be now five hour 
 after noon . birdalone arise , for she find it hard to sit still and 
 abide nightfall : she go without the two first ring of the 
 Greywethers , which be set in more open order beyond that , and she 
 look all about she , to the black rock on either side , and to the 
 great black wall at the dale 's ending , and the blue mountain aloof 
 beyond it ; then down toward the plain of the dale come her eye , and 
 she look through the tangle of the grey stone . now she seem to 
 be look more intently upon some one thing ; with that she call to 
 she the Black Knight , who be hang about watch she , and she 
 say to he : Fair sir , art thou clear - see and far - seeing ? I be 
 not think to be purblind , quoth he . then Birdalone reach out her 
 hand and point and say : Canst thou see aught which thou didst not 
 look to see , there , up the dale as I point ? say he : all too clear 
 I see the hand and the wrist of thee , and that blind I to aught 
 else . I pray thee fool not , she say , but look heedfully , and thou 
 mayst see what I see , and then tell I what it mean . though 
 forsooth I be exceed in far sight . 

 he look under the sharp of his hand heedfully , then he turn unto 
 she and say : by all - hallow ! there be in thee every excellency ! 
 thou art right ; I see a bay horse up there feed on the bite of 
 grass amongst the greywether . look again ! she say ; what else canst 
 thou see ? be there aught anigh to the bay horse which be like to the 
 gleam and glitter of metal . Christ ! say he , once more thou art 
 right . there be weapone man in the dale . tarry not , I beseech 
 thee , but get to horse forthright , and I will do no less . 

 there goeth the waking of the dale for this time , say Birdalone , 
 laugh . but art thou not in haste , fair sir ? may not these be 
 friend ? 

 the knight lay his hand upon her shoulder , and thrust she on toward 
 her palfrey , and spake fiercely , but not loud : Thee I pray not to 
 fool now ! there be not a minute to spare . if thou deem I evil , 
 as I think thou dost , there be worse than I , I tell thee , there be 
 worser . but we will talk of it when we be in the saddle , and clear 
 of this accurse dale . 

 birdalone know not what to do save obey he , so she lightly gat into 
 her saddle , and follow he , for he be mount in a twinkling , and 
 rid on . he lead out of the ring , and fall to thread the maze of 
 the greywether , keep ever toward the steep side of the dale , 
 which be on that hand that look toward the Castle of the Quest , 
 that be to say , the eastern bent . birdalone wonder at this 
 leading , and when she be come up with the knight she spake to he 
 breathlessly , and say : but , fair sir , why wend we not down the 
 dale ? he answer : first , lady , because we must hide we from they 
 straightway ; and next because they be more than we , many more , and 
 their horse be fresh , while thine at least be somewhat spend ; and if 
 they be to spur down the dale in chase , they would soon be upon we ; 
 for think not that I would escape and leave thee behind . 

 say birdalone : but thou know they , then , what they be ? since 
 thou wottest of their number and their riding . Hearken now ! upon 
 thy soul and thy salvation , be they more friend unto thee than unto 
 I ? 

 he say , as be ride on a little slow than erst : upon my soul and 
 my salvation I swear it , that the man yonder be of the bad 
 unfriend to thee that may be in the world . and now , lady , I promise 
 thee that I will unravel thee the riddle , and tell thee the whole 
 truth of these hap , whatsoever may come of my word , when we be in a 
 safe place than this ; and meantime I beseech thee to trust in I 
 thus far , as to believe that I be lead thee out of the very bad 
 peril that might befall thee . Nay , thou must need trust I ; for I 
 tell thee , that though I now love thee well than all the world and 
 all that be in it , I would slay thee here in this dale rather than 
 suffer thee to fall into the hand of these man . 

 birdalone hear he with a sick heart ; but such passion go with his 
 word that she believe what he say ; and she spake softly : Sir , I 
 will trust thee thus far ; but I beseech thee to have pity upon a poor 
 maiden who hath have but little pity show unto she until these latter 
 day ; and then : o woe 's I , to have fall out of the kindness and 
 love once more ! 

 the Black Knight spake to she in a little while , and say : what pity 
 I can to thee , that I will . once more I tell thee , that if thou but 
 know it thou wouldst thank I indeed for what I have do for thee in 
 this hour ; and henceforth I will do and forbear with thee to the 
 uttermost that love will suffer I . but lo thou ! here be we safe 
 for this present ; but we must nowise tarry . 

 birdalone look and see that they be come to the wall of the dale , 
 and that there it go down sheer to the plain thereof , and that 
 before they be a cleft that narrow speedily , and over which the 
 rock well - nigh meet , so that it be indeed almost a cave . they ride 
 into it straightway , and when that they have go but a little , and 
 because it have wind somewhat , they could but see the main valley as 
 a star of light behind they , then it narrow no more , but be as a 
 dismal street of the strait , while light and while dark , 
 accord as the rock roof it in overhead or draw away from it . 
 long they ride , and while come trickle of water from out the rock 
 on one hand or the other ; and now and again they meet a stream which 
 cover all the ground of the pass from side to side for the depth of 
 a foot or more . great rock also be strew over their path every 
 here and there , so that while must they need dismount and toil 
 afoot over the rugged stone ; and in most place the way be toilsome 
 and difficult . the knight spake little to Birdalone , save to tell 
 she of the way , and warn she where it be perilous ; and she , for she 
 part , be silent , partly for fear of the strange man , or , it might 
 be , even for hatred of he , who have thus bring she into such sore 
 trouble , and partly for grief . for , with all torment of sorrow , she 
 keep turn over and over in her mind whether her friend have yet 
 come home to the Castle of the Quest , and whether they would go seek 
 she to deliver she . and such shame take hold of she when she think 
 of their grief and confusion of soul when they should come home and 
 find she go , that she set her mind to ask if it have not be 
 well have she never meet they . yet in good sooth her mind would not 
 shape the thought , howsoever she bid it . 



 CHAPTER XIII . now they rest for the night in the STRAIT pass 



 at last , when they have be go a long while , it might be some six 
 hour , and it have long be night in the world without , but moon - light , 
 and they have rest but seldom , and then but for short while , the 
 knight draw rein and spake to Birdalone , and ask she be she not 
 weary . o yea , she say ; I be at point to pray thee suffer I to get 
 off and lie down on the bare rock . to say sooth , I be now too weary 
 to think of any peril , or what thou art , or whither we be go . he 
 say : by my deeming we be now half through this mountain highway , 
 and belike there be little peril in our resting ; for I think not that 
 any one of they knoweth of this pass , or would dare it if he do ; and 
 they doubtless come into the dale by the upper pass , which be strait 
 enough , but light and open . 

 as he speak , Birdalone bow forward on her horse 's neck , and would 
 have fall but that he stay she . then he lift she off her 
 horse , and lay she down in the seemly place he might find ; and 
 the pass there be much widen , and such light as there be in the 
 outer world come down freely into it , though it be but of the moon 
 and the star ; and the ground be rather sandy than rocky . so he 
 dight Birdalone 's bed as well as he might , and do off his surcoat 
 and lay it over she ; and then stand aloof , and gaze on she ; and he 
 mutter : it be an evil chance ; yet the pleasure of it , the pleasure 
 of it ! yea , say he again , she might well be weary ; I myself be 
 ready to drop , and I be not the least tough of the band . and 
 therewith he lay he down on the further side of the pass , and fall 
 asleep straightway . 



 CHAPTER XIV . the BLACK KNIGHT tell the truth of HIMSELF 



 when the morning be come down into the straitness of their secret 
 road , Birdalone open her eye and see the Black Knight busy over 
 dighte their horse : so she arise and thrust her grief back into 
 her heart , and give her fellow - farer the sele of the day , and he 
 bring her victual , and they eat a morsel , and gat to horse 
 thereafter and depart ; and the way become smooth , and it be 
 light overhead everywhere now , and the rock never again meet 
 overhead athwart the way ; and it seem to Birdalone that now they 
 be wend somewhat downward . 

 the knight be courteous unto Birdalone , and no long for the 
 present thrust his love upon she , so that now she have some solace of 
 his fellowship , though he be but few - speak to she . 

 it be betime when they arise , and they ride all the morning till it 
 be noon , which they might well wot of , because the way be much 
 wide , and the cliff - wall of the pass much low , so that the sun 
 shine in upon they and cheer they . 

 now the Black Knight draw rein and say : shall we rest , lady , and 
 eat ? and thereafter , if thou wilt , I shall tell thee my tale . or 
 rather , if thou wilt suffer I , I shall speak first and eat 
 afterwards , or else the morsel might stick in my throat . Knight , 
 say Birdalone , smile , I hope thou hast no lie to swallow down 
 before the meat . Nay , lady , say he ; no lie that be of moment at 
 least . 

 so they light down , and Birdalone sit on the wayside under a birch- 
 bush that come thrust out from the rock , and the knight stand 
 before she , hang his head , as though he be one accuse who would 
 plead his cause ; and he begin : 

 Lady , I must tell thee first of all , that to - day I have do as an 
 unfaithful servant and a traitor to my lord . say Birdalone simply : 
 shall I tell thee the truth , and say that from the first I seem to 
 see in thee that thou wert scarce trusty ? he say : well , that mind 
 I see in thee , and it go to my heart that thou shouldest think it , 
 and that it should be no less than true . but now I must tell thee , 
 that it be for thy sake that I have be untrusty to my lord . how 
 so ? say she . Quoth he : Heardest thou ever of the Red Knight ? yea , 
 say Birdalone , I have hear of he ever as a tyrant and oppressor . 
 then she grow pale , and say : art thou he ? Nay , say the knight , I 
 be but a kinsman of his , and his well - trust man ; nor have I fail 
 he ever till yesterday . 

 he keep silence a while , and then say : this be the true tale : that 
 we have have tiding of thee and of thy riding abroad with that old 
 fool , Sir Aymeris , and how thou hadst be twice to look into the 
 Black Valley . this I say hath the Red One heard , and the heart of 
 he be touch by the mere hearsay of thee ; and moreover ' tis 
 bless bread to he the doing of any grief to the knight of Quest 
 Castle ; wherefore he hath send I to hang about the dale , to lay 
 hand on thee if I might for ; he know be wise , that thou wouldst 
 hanker after it ; and moreover he let one of his wise woman sit out in 
 spell on thee . so I espy , and happen on thee all alone ; and 
 mine errand it be , since I come upon thee thus , to draw thee till I 
 have thee safe at home in the Red Hold . Forsooth I begin mine errand 
 duly , and fall to beguile thee , so that thou mayst well have see 
 the traitor in I . but then , and then my heart fail I , because I 
 fall , not to desire thee as covet my master 's chattel , but to 
 love thee and longing for thee as my fellow and speech - friend . and 
 I say to myself : into the Red Hold she shall not go if I may hinder 
 it . 

 birdalone be very pale , but she refrain she from grief and fear , 
 and say : but those horse and weapone man up the dale , who be 
 they ? he say : I will not lie now , not even a little ; they come 
 into the dale by that upper pass whereof I tell thee ; they be of 
 our man ; I bring they . I be never all alone in the dale ; I be to 
 have fetch thee to they , so that thou might not see a rout of 
 folk and flee away ; and then would we all have go home together by 
 the upper pass . but we two must have go on unto they in the dale 's 
 head , whereas for all that I could say I might not bring they down 
 into that doom - ring where we eat and talk yesterday . we two have 
 be valianter than thou mayst have deem , to have do the deed of 
 dining there ; for all man fear it . but as for I , I have be there 
 more than twice or thrice , and thence have I wander , and find this 
 pass wherein now we be ; concern which I have hold my tongue , 
 deeming that it might one day serve my turn ; as it hath do now 
 abundantly , since it hath be a refuge unto thee . 

 Yea , but whither be we go now ? say birdalone ; be it perchance to 
 the Red Hold ? Nay , never , say the knight , so help I God and All- 
 hallow ! 

 Whither then ? say birdalone ; tell I , that I may at least trust 
 thee , even though I owe thee for all the pain and grief which thou 
 hast work I . he redden and say : wait a while ; I bring thee 
 to no ill place ; there shall no harm befall thee . and he fret and 
 fume , and be confuse of speech and look , and then he say : when 
 we come there I shall belike crave a boon of thee . 

 O , but I crave a boon of thee here and now , say Birdalone . wipe 
 away thine offence to I and take I back to my friend and the 
 Castle of the Quest ! so mayst thou yet be dear unto I , though maybe 
 not wholly as thou wouldst have it . and she reach out her two 
 hand toward he . 

 his breast heave , and he seem nigh to weeping ; but he say : Nay , 
 lady , ask I not here and now , but there and to - morrow . but again I 
 swear to thee by thine hand that to the Red Hold I will not bring 
 thee , nor suffer thee to be bring , if I may hinder it ; nay , not 
 though I give my life therefor . 

 birdalone be silent awhile ; then she say : and what shall befall I 
 if I come to the Red Hold ? what be the Red Knight , and what would he 
 do with I ? say he : the Red Knight be terrible and fierce and 
 wise ; and I fear he , I. he hold his peace , and say : I must need 
 say it , that to thee he would have be as death and the Devil . he 
 would have bed thee first . she break in : Nay , never ! and flush 
 very red . but the knight go on : and after , I wot not ; that be 
 accord to his mood . and as to thy never , lady , thou wott not 
 the like of he or of the folk he hath about he . such as thou ? she 
 say angrily . Nay , he say , far bad than I ; man who fare little 
 afield , and be not sweeten by adventure and war - peril ; and woman 
 worse yet ; and far worse be they deal with a woman . she be 
 silent again awhile , and pal once more ; then her colour come back 
 to she , and she hold out her hand to he and say kindly : Thou be 
 what thou art , I thank thee for thy dealing with I ; and now until 
 to - morrow , when I shall ask thee of that again , I be friend with 
 thee ; so come now , and let we eat and drink together . 

 he take her hand and kiss it , and then come and sit down meekly 
 beside she , and they eat and drink in that wild place as though they 
 have be friend of long acquaintance . 



 CHAPTER XV . the black KNIGHT bring birdalone to the bower in the 
 DALE 



 when they have make an end of their meal , they gat to horse again and 
 ride on their way ; and every mile now be their road the easy , the 
 pass wide , and its wall lower and now also more broken ; till at 
 last they begin to go down hill swiftly , and after a little their 
 road seem to be swallow in a great thicket of hornbeam and holly ; 
 but the knight ride on and enter the said thicket , and ever find 
 some way amidst the branch , though they be presently in the very 
 thick of the tree , and see no daylight between the trunk for well- 
 nigh an hour , whereas the wood be thick and tangle , and they have to 
 thread their way betwixt its maze . 

 at last the wood begin to grow thin before they , and the white 
 light to show between the trunk ; and Birdalone deem that she hear 
 the sound of fall water , and presently be sure thereof ; and the 
 knight spake to she : Patience , my lady ; now be we near home for to- 
 day . she nod kindly to he , and therewith they ride on to open 
 ground , and be on the side of a steep bent , break on their right 
 hand into a sheer cliff as Birdalone see when the knight lead she to 
 the edge and bade her look over . then she see down into a fair dale 
 lie far below they , through the which run a little river , clear and 
 swift , but not riotous , after it have fall over a force at the upper 
 end of the dale , and make the sound of water which she have hear . 
 the say dale be so , that whatsoever be on the other side thereof 
 be hide by tall and great tree , that stand close together some 
 twenty yard aloof from the stream , and betwixt they and it be fair 
 greensward with a few bush and thorn - tree thereon . 

 Quoth the knight : down there shall we rest till to - morrow , if it 
 please thee , lady ; and since the sun will set in an hour , we be 
 good on our way at once . it please I well , say Birdalone , and I 
 long to tread the turf by the river - side , for I be weary as weary may 
 be of the saddle and the pass . 

 so down the bent they ride , and it be but a little ere they have 
 ride it to an end , and have meet the river as it sweep round the 
 cliff - wall of the valley ; and they ride through it , and come on to 
 the pleasant greensward aforesaid under the tree ; and in a bight of 
 the wood be a bower build of turf and thatch with reed ; and 
 there , by the bidding of the knight , they alight ; and the knight 
 say : this be thine house for to - night , my lady ; and thou may lie 
 there in all safety after thou hast sup , and mayst have my weapon 
 by thy side if thou wilt , while I lie under the tree yonder . and if 
 thou wilt bathe thee in the cool water , to comfort thee after the 
 long ride and the weariness , I swear by thy hand that I will take 
 myself out of eye - shot and abide aloof till thou call I . 

 Said Birdalone , smile somewhat : Fair sir , I will not have my watch 
 and ward unarmed ; keep thou thy weapon ; and thou wilt not forget , 
 perchance , that I be not wholly unarmed , whereas I have my bow and 
 arrow and my knife here . and as to my bathing , I will take thee at 
 thy word , and bid thee go aloof a while now at once ; for I will go 
 down to the water ; and if thou spy upon I , then will it be thy shame 
 and not mine . 

 the knight go his way therewith , and Birdalone go down to the 
 water and unclad she ; but ere she step into the river , she lay 
 her bow and three shaft on the lip thereof . then she take the 
 water , and disport she merrily therein ; and now , forsooth , she be 
 nowise downcast , for she say to herself , this man be not all evil 
 and he lovest I well , and I look for it that to - morrow he will bring 
 I on my way toward the Castle of the Quest , for mere love of I ; and 
 then shall he be a dear friend to I , and I will comfort he what I 
 can for as long as we both live . 

 so she come out of the water and clothe she , and then call aloud for 
 the knight , and he come speedily unto she , as if he have be not 
 exceed far away , though he swear with a great oath that he have 
 nowise espy she . she answer he nought , and they go side by 
 side to the bower ; and there the knight dight the victual , and they 
 sit together and eat their meat like old friend ; and Birdalone ask 
 the knight concern this valley and the bower , if he have know it 
 for long , and he answer : yea , lady , I be but a stripling when I 
 first happen on the dale ; and I deem that few know thereof save I ; 
 at least none of our flock knoweth thereof , and I be fain thereof , 
 and keep they unknowing , for if my lord be to hear of my have a 
 haunt privy unto I he would like it but ill . 

 Birdalone turn pale when she hear he speak of his lord ; for fear 
 of the Red Knight have enter into her soul , so that now the flesh 
 creep upon her bone . but she enforce she to smile , and say : yea , 
 and what would he do to thee be he ill - content with thy way ? 
 Forsooth , lady , say he , if he could spare I he would make an end of 
 I in some miserable way ; nay , if he be exceed ill - content , he 
 would do as much for I whether he could spare I or not ; otherwise 
 he would watch his occasion , and so grieve I that what he do would 
 go to my very heart . Woe 's I ! say Birdalone , thou serv an evil 
 master . the knight answer not , and Birdalone go on speak 
 earnestly : it be a shame to thee to follow this fiend ; why dost thou 
 not sunder thee from he , and become wholly an honest man ? say he 
 gruffly : it be of no use talk of this , I may not ; to boot , I fear 
 he . then do Birdalone hold her peace , and the knight say : Thou 
 dost not know ; when I part from thee I must need go straight to he , 
 and then must that befall which will befall . speak we no more of 
 these matter . 

 birdalone flush with hope and joy as he spake thus , for she take 
 he to mean that he would lead she , on the morrow , on her way to the 
 Castle of the Quest . but the knight spake in a voice grow cheerful 
 again : as to this bower , lady , the tale thereof be soon tell ; for 
 with mine own hand I build it some fifteen year ago ; and I have 
 come to this place time and again when my heart be overmuch 
 oppress with black burden of evil and turmoil , and have while 
 prevail against the evil , and while not . Mayst thou prevail this 
 time , then ! say she . he answer she not , but presently fall to 
 talk with she of other matter , and the two be frank and 
 friendly together , till the August night grow dark about they ; and 
 then spake birdalone : now would I rest , for I can no long keep 
 mine eye open . abide aloof from I to - morrow morning till I call to 
 thee , as thou didst this evening ; and then , before we eat together 
 again , thou shalt tell I what thou wilt do with I . he stand up to 
 depart , and she reach out her hand to he in the glimmer , and he 
 see it , but say : Nay , if I take thine hand , I shall take thine 
 whole body . and therewith he depart , and she lay she down in her 
 smock alone , and sleep anon , and be dreamless and forget 
 everything till the sun be up in the morning . 



 CHAPTER XVI . yet a day and a night they tarry in the DALE 



 Birdalone awake when the sun come into the bower to she , and stand up 
 at once , and go down to the river and wash the night off she ; and 
 then , when she be clothe , call on the knight to come to she ; and he 
 come , look downcast and troubled ; so that Birdalone think within 
 herself : it be well , he will do my will . 

 she stand before he , and give he the sele of the day , and he look 
 on she sorrowfully . then she say : now be come the time when I be 
 to ask thee to take I back to the Castle of the Quest and my own 
 people . he be not hasty to answer she , and she spake again : this 
 must thou do , or else take I to the Red Hold and deliver I to the 
 tyrant there ; and I have hear it from thine own mouth that will be 
 nought else than cast I into shame and torment and death . and I 
 deem thou canst not do it . Nay , she say , stay the word that 
 be come from his mouth , I wot that thou canst do it if thine 
 heart can suffer it ; for thou art strong than I , and thou mayst 
 break my bow , and wrest this knife out of mine hand ; and thou canst 
 bind I and make I fast to the saddle , and so lead my helpless body 
 into thraldom and death . but thou hast say that thou lov I , and 
 I believe thee herein . therefore I know that thou canst not will to 
 do this . 

 he answer in his surly voice : thou art right , lady , I can not . 
 Nay , hearken thou this time . I have be turn over night - long 
 what thou didst say about leave my lord , that is , betray he , 
 for it come to that ; and now I have make up my mind to do it , and I 
 will betray he for thy sake . wherefore there be a third way to take 
 which thou hast not see ; we will ride out of this dale in an hour 's 
 time , and I will bring thee to they who be only less the mortal foe 
 of the Red Knight than be thy fellow of the Quest , to wit , to the 
 captain and burgess of the good town of Greenford by the Water ; and 
 I will do they to wit that I have rescue thee from the hand of the 
 Red Knight , and be become his foe ; and will show they all his 
 incoming and outgoing , and every whit of rede , and entrap he , so 
 that he fall into their hand . now , though be I to be take in 
 battle by they , I should be speedily bring to the halter , or may be 
 to the bale - fire   for we be wizard all in the Red Hold ; yet with 
 this word in my mouth , if they trow in it , I shall be make their 
 captain , and presently their master . Trow in my tale they will , if 
 thou bear I out therein , and they will honour thee , and suffer thee 
 to give thyself to I in marriage ; and then I know thee , and myself 
 also , and that ere long we shall be both mighty and wealthy and 
 beloved , and fair will be the day before we . 

 his voice have grow soft as he spake , and toward the end of his 
 word he falter , and at last brake out a - weeping , and cast himself 
 wordless on the grass before she . 

 she be pale , and her brow be knit , and her face quiver ; but 
 she spake coldly to he and say : this way I can not take ; and I 
 wonder at thee that thou hast show it unto I , for thyself thou 
 know that I can not go with thee . I will go nowhere hence save to 
 the Castle of the Quest . if thou wilt not lead I thereto , or put I 
 on the road , I ask thee straight , Wilt thou stay I if I go seek the 
 way thither myself ? 

 he rise up from the ground with a pale face full of anger as well as 
 grief , and catch she by the wrist and say , scowl the while : 
 tell I now which of they it be ; be it the stupid oaf Baudoin , or the 
 light fool Hugh , or the dull pedant Arthur ? but it matter not ; for 
 I know , and all the country - side know , that they be vow , each man 
 of they , to his own woman ; and if they find not the woman themselves , 
 such dolt they be , that they will ever be worship the mere 
 shadow of they , and turn away from flesh and blood , be it the 
 fairest in the world , as thou art , as thou art . 

 she shrink away from he what she might , but he still hold she 
 wrist ; then she spake in a quivering voice , her very lip pale with 
 fear and wrath : it be well see that thou art a man of the Red 
 Knight ; and belike thou wouldst do with I as he would . but one 
 thing I crave of thee , if there be any grain of mercy in thee , that 
 thou wilt draw thy sword and thrust I through ; thou mayst leave 
 thine hold of I to get at the blade , I will not stir from where I 
 stand . o ! to think that I deem thee well - nigh a true man . 

 he drop her hand now and stand aloof from she , star at she , 
 and presently cast himself on the ground , roll about and tear 
 at the grass . she look on he a moment or two , and then step 
 forward and stoop to he , and touch his shoulder and say : rise 
 up , I bid thee , and be a man and not a wild beast . 

 so in a while he arise , and stand before her hang - dog - like ; then she 
 look on he pitifully , and say : Fair sir and valiant knight , thou 
 hast go out of thy mind for a while , and thus hast thou sham both 
 I and thyself ; and now thou wert well forget it , and therewithal my 
 last word to thee . 

 Therewith she hold out her hand to he , and he go on his knee and 
 take it , sobbing , and kiss it . but she say , and smile on he : 
 now I see that thou wilt do what I pray of thee , and lead I hence 
 and put I on the road to the Castle of the Quest . he say : I will 
 lead thee to the Castle of the Quest . 

 say birdalone : then shall it be as I promise , that I will be thy 
 dear friend while both we live . and now , if thou canst , be a little 
 merry , and come and sit with I , and let we eat our meat , for I 
 hunger . 

 he smile , but woefully , and presently they sit down to their meat ; 
 and he strove to be somewhat merry of mood , and to eat as one at a 
 feast ; but while his heart fail he , and he set his tooth and tore 
 at the grass , and his face be fierce and terrible to look on ; but 
 birdalone make as if she heed it nought , and be blithe and 
 debonair with he . and when they have do their meat he sit look 
 at she a while , and at last he say : Lady , dost thou deem that , when 
 all be say , I have do somewhat for thee since first we meet the day 
 before yesterday at the low end of the Black Valley ? Yea , she 
 say , as erst I spake , all thing consider I deem that thou hast 
 do much . and now , say he , I be to do more yet ; for I be to lead 
 thee to where henceforth I shall have no more part or lot in thee 
 than if thou wert in heaven and I in hell . I pray thee say not so , 
 say Birdalone ; have I not say that I will be thy friend ? Lady , 
 say the knight , I wot well that accord to the sweetness of thine 
 heart wilt thou do what thou canst do . and therewith he be silent a 
 while and she also . 

 then he say : I would ask thee a grace if I durst . ask it , say 
 she , and I will grant it if I may ; I have gainsay thee enough 
 meseemeth . 

 Lady , he say , I will ask this as a reward of the way - leader , to wit , 
 that thou abide with I here in this dale , in all honour holden , till 
 to - morrow morning ; and let this place , which have help I aforetime , 
 be hallow by thy dwelling here ; and I , I shall have have one happy 
 day at least , if never another . Canst thou grant I this ? if thou 
 canst not , we will depart in an hour . 

 her countenance fall at his word , and she be silent a while ; for 
 sore she long to be speedily whereas her friend should find she if 
 they come back to the castle . but she think within herself how 
 wild and fierce the man be , and doubt if he might not go stark mad 
 on her hand and destroy she if she thwart overmuch ; and , moreover , 
 frankly she pity he , and would do what she might to ease his pain 
 and solace his grief of heart . wherefore she clear her face of its 
 trouble and let it be vex no long , but smile upon the knight and 
 say : Fair sir , this meseemeth but a little thing for I to do , and 
 I grant it thee with a good will , and this shall now be the first day 
 of the friendship if so thou wilt take it ; and may it solace thee . 

 who then be gleeful but the knight , and strange it be to see all 
 his sorrow run off he ; and he become glad and gamesome as a youth , 
 and yet withal exceed courteous and kind with she , as though he 
 be serve a mighty queen . 

 so then they wear the day together in all good fellowship ; and first 
 they go up the dale together and right to the foot of that great 
 force , where the stream come thunder down from the sheer rock ; 
 and long Birdalone stand to look thereon , and much she marvel at 
 it , for no such thing have she see before . 

 thereafter they go afoot into the wood behind the green bower , and 
 when they have go some way therein for their pleasure , they fall to 
 seek venison for their dinner ; and the knight take Birdalone 's bow 
 and shaft to strike the quarry withal , but he would have her gird 
 his sword to she , that she might not be weaponless . so they gat they 
 a roe and come back therewith to the bower , and the knight dight it 
 and cook it , and again they eat in fellowship and kindness ; and 
 Birdalone have be to the river and fetched thence store of blue- 
 flower mouse - ear , and of meadow - sweet , whereof be still some left 
 from the early day of summer , and have make her garland for her head 
 and her loin ; and the knight sit and worship she , yet he would 
 not so much as touch her hand , sorely as he hunger for the beauty 
 of her body . 

 next , when dinner be do , and they lie in the shadow of the tree , 
 and hearken the moor - hen cry from the water , and the moaning of 
 the wood - dove in the high tree , she turn to he and bid he tell 
 she somewhat of the tale of his life and deed ; but he say : Nay , 
 lady , I pray thee pardon I , for little have I to tell thee that be 
 good , and I would not have thee know of I aught bad than thou 
 know of I already . rather be thou kind to I , and tell I of thy 
 day that have be , wherein I know full surely shall be nought but 
 good . 

 she smile and blush , but without more ado fall to tell he of 
 her life in the House under the Wood , and spar not even to tell he 
 somewhat of the wood - mother . and he say no word to her thereover , 
 save thank and praise for the kindness of her story . 

 at last the day wear to its ending , and then the knight 's grief 
 strode over he again , and he be moody and few - spoken ; and birdalone 
 be blithe with he still , and would have solace his grief ; but he 
 say : let it be ; as for thee , thou shalt be happy to - morrow , but 
 this happy day of mine be well - nigh wear , and it be as the wearing of 
 my life . and the dark night come , and he bid her good - night 
 sorrowfully , and depart to his lair in the wood . birdalone lie in 
 the bower , and might not sleep a long while for her joy of the 
 morrow , which should bring she back to the Castle of the Quest . 

 but when morning be , and the sun be but just risen , Birdalone 
 awake , and stand up and do on her raiment , and call her servant 
 the knight , and he come at once lead the two horse , and say : 
 now go we to the Castle of the Quest . and he be sober and 
 sorrowful , but nought fierce or wild . 

 so Birdalone thank he kindly and praise he , and he change 
 countenance no whit therefor . 

 then they mount and set forth , and the knight lead straight into the 
 wood , and by road that he wotte of , so that they go nowise slowly 
 for wender through the thick woodland . thus go they on their way 
 together , he sorry and she glad . 

 but now leave the tale to tell of Birdalone and the knight on whom 
 she happen in the Black Valley of the Greywethers , and turn to the 
 Castle of the Quest and the folk thereof , and what they do in this 
 while and thereafter . 


 here end the Fourth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which 
 be call of the day of Abiding , and the Fifth Part now begin , 
 which be call the Tale of the Quest 's Ending . 




 the FIFTH PART : the tale of the QUEST 's ENDING 



 CHAPTER I. of SIR LEONARD 's TROUBLE and the coming of the quest 



 tell the tale that when the chaplain have depart from Birdalone at 
 the bower in the copse , he go home to the castle sadly enough , 
 because of his love and longing for she , which well he wotte might 
 never be satisfied . moreover when he be come into the castle again , 
 there fall fear upon he for what might betide she , and he rue it 
 that he have do she will in get she forth of the castle ; and in 
 vain now he set before himself all the reason for deeming that she 
 peril herein be little or nothing , even as he have lay they before 
 she , and which he then believe in utterly , whereas now himseeme 
 there be an answer to every one of they . so he sigh heavily and 
 go into the chapel , wherein be an altar of St. Leonard ; and he 
 kneel thereat , and pray the saint , as he have erst deliver folk 
 from captivity , now to deliver both he and Birdalone from peril and 
 bond ; but though he be long a - pray and make many word , it 
 lighten his heart little or nothing ; so that when he rise up again , 
 that if anything evil happen to this pearl of woman , he wish 
 heartily that some one might take his life and he be do with it . 

 now be the house astir , and the chaplain come from out the chapel , 
 and think all thing over , he think he would go straight to Sir 
 Aymeris and make a clean breast of it , so that weapone man might be 
 send at once to seek Birdalone . and he say to himself : what matter 
 if he slay I or cast I into prison , if birdalone be lose ? 

 so he go his way to the high tower , which look landward and 
 hight the Open Eye , deeming to find Sir Aymeris ; but when he get to 
 the topmost , he find neither captain nor carle there : wherefore he 
 stay a little and look forth betwixt the battlement , if 
 perchance there be some wild chance of see Birdalone 's come 
 home again ; but his keen eye beheld nothing more than he look to 
 see , as sheep and neat , and the field - folk of thereabout . so he 
 turn away and go by the swale toward the next tall tower , 
 which look lakeward , and be call Hearts ' hope ; and as he go 
 he fall to frame in his mind the word which he should say to the 
 castellan . 

 thus come he , haggard and hapless , on the lead of the tower , which 
 be nought small ; and there gather together in a knot , and all 
 gaze eagerly out over the lake , he find a dozen of man - at - arm and 
 the castellan amongst they . they take no heed of he as he come up , 
 though he stumble as he cross the threshold and come clatter 
 over the lead floor , and he see at once that there be something 
 unwonted toward ; but he have but one thought in his mind , to wit , the 
 rescuing of Birdalone . 

 he go up now behind where the castellan be lean over the 
 battlement , and pull his skirt , and when Sir Aymeris turn round , 
 he say : Lord , I have a word for thine ear . but the old knight do 
 but half turn round , and then spake peevishly : tush , man ! another 
 time ! se thou not I have get no eye for aught save what we see on 
 the lake ? yea , but what then ? say the priest . there cometh a boat , 
 say Sir Aymeris , not look back at he , and our thought be that 
 therein be our lord . 

 when the priest hear that word , it be to he as if hell have open 
 underneath his foot ; and he have no might to speak for a minute ; then 
 he cry out : Sir Aymeris , hearken , I pray thee . but the old knight 
 but thrust he back with his hand , and even therewith one of the men- 
 at - arm cry out : I hear the voice of their horn ! then shout Sir 
 Aymeris : where art thou , Noise ? blow , man , blow , if ever thou 
 blewest in all thy life ! and therewithal come the blare of the 
 brass , and Sir Aymeris nod to the trumpeter , who blow blast after 
 blast with all his might , so that the priest might as well have be 
 dumb for any hearing he might get ; and all the while to Leonard the 
 minute seem hour , and he be well - nigh distraught . 

 and then when the knight hold up his hand for the Noise to stay his 
 blowing , and Leonard strove to speak , the castellan turn on he and 
 say : Peace , Sir Leonard ; dost thou not know that now we would 
 listen with our ear to heed if they answer we ? not a word any one 
 man of you , learn or lewd , or ye shall rue it ! 

 even therewith come clearly the sound of the horn from the water , and 
 again and yet again ; and no man spake but the chaplain , who cry 
 out : Hearken , knight , it be of Birdalone . but Sir Aymeris lay his 
 hand on his shoulder and say in an angry whisper : Thou shalt be put 
 downstair , priest , if thou hold not thy peace . 

 Leonard draw aback scowling , and go out of the door , and so slowly 
 down the stair , and withdraw he into the cover of the door of the 
 first chamber down from the tower - top , with the mind to waylay Sir 
 Aymeris as he come down ; and meanwhile he curse he for a fool and a 
 dull - wit , and himself yet more , as be but right , for a fool and a 
 licorous traitor . 

 but he have not tarry there more than a score of minute , ere he 
 hear a great shout from those up above : they be come ! they be 
 come ! and next thereafter come all the man clatter down the stair 
 past he , scarce refrain they from shove each his neighbour on 
 to the next one ; Leonard follow on they , and presently arise great 
 shouting and tumult through all the house , and all folk , man and 
 woman , hurried flock - meal toward the water - gate , and with they go 
 Leonard perforce ; and sick of heart he be , call to mind the first 
 come thither of Birdalone . 

 but now when they come to the water - gate , there verily be the 
 send Boat just come to hand ; and in the stern stand the three 
 knight together , all clothe in their armour , and before they sit three 
 lovely lady , clothe one in gold , one in green , and one in black : and 
 lo , there be the Quest come home . 



 CHAPTER II . now ask THEY of BIRDALONE , and SIR LEONARD SPEAKS 



 now the prow touch the stone of the stair , and folk be busy to 
 lay hold of it that the wayfarer might land , but Sir Baudoin cry 
 out in a great voice : let none be so hardy as to touch this ferry , 
 either now or hereafter ; for there be peril therein . and therewith 
 he take Aurea by the hand , and lead she out of the boat and up the 
 stair , and she all joyous and wonder ; and thereafter come Hugh and 
 his darling , and last of all Arthur and Atra , and she alone of the 
 three woman look downcast , and her eye wander about the throng 
 that be before they there , as though she seek something , yet 
 fear to see it . 

 but when they be all stand together on the landing - plain , and 
 the folk be all about they in a ring , Sir Baudoin spake to the 
 castellan and say : Sir Aymeris , thee and other folk I see here , the 
 sight of whom doth I great joy ; but where , I pray thee , be the lady , 
 our friend Birdalone , by whom it be that all we be come happily 
 hither ? and he look around with an anxious face ; but Arthur be as 
 pale as ash , yet he spake nought , and Atra let her hand fall away 
 from his . 

 then spake the castellan , and say : no harm hath befall the Lady 
 Birdalone ; but while she hath be somewhat ailing of late , and it 
 be like that she wotteth not what be toward , and keepeth her chamber 
 now , for it be yet betime in the morning . 

 as he spake , come thrust a man through the throng , eager and pale- 
 face ; who but the chaplain ; and he say : he would not let I speak , 
 this fool ; I can not choose my time . lord , I bear evil tiding and 
 an ugly welcome home . the Lady Birdalone be in peril , and she be not 
 in the castle ; I wot not where she be . Ye must send armed man to 
 seek she out . 

 Thereat fall the silence of woe upon the throng ; but Arthur run 
 forward on the priest with draw sword , and cry out : I misdoubt I 
 that thou art a traitor ; speak ! or I will slay thee here and now . if 
 I be a traitor , quoth Leonard , I shall tell thee in little while what 
 ye must do to undo my treason , if there be yet time thereto ; so slay 
 I not till ye have hear , and then do what ye will with I . 

 but Baudoin put Arthur aside , and say : refrain thee a little , fair 
 brother , else shall word tumble over each other and we shall know 
 nothing clear . Sir Aymeris , bring our dear lady to the fair 
 chamber , and do all honour and courtesy to they . and ye , 
 sweetling , ye will not begrudge we that we go to seek your friend . 
 Thou priest , come with we a little apart , and tell thy tale as 
 shortly as thou mayst , and fear nought ; we be not God 's dastard , as 
 the Red Knight and his man . 

 Viridis weep and kiss her love before all folk , and bid he go and 
 do his good to find her friend , or never come back to she else . much 
 move , even to tear , be Aurea withal , and reach her hand to 
 Baudoin , and say : if any man on earth can help we it be thou . go 
 thou . but Atra weep not , and but say to Arthur : go thou , it be 
 meet . 

 Therewith be the lady bring to fair chamber ; but the three 
 knight go with the priest and Sir Aymeris into the solar , and set 
 a guard at the door that their talk should be privy . 



 CHAPTER III . how they follow the slot of BIRDALONE and the black 
 KNIGHT 



 it be but five minute ere the priest have tell they all that need 
 be ; so they let he abide alone there , though sooth to say there be 
 none of they but have good will to break his neck ; and the same rede 
 have all three , that there be nought for it but to go their way with 
 all speed to the Black Valley of the Greywethers , and follow up the 
 slot of birdalone if it might yet be find ; wherefore they bid 
 saddle their horse straightway ; and while that be a - do they eat 
 a morsel , and bade farewell to their loveling . and they dight they 
 to go , they three together , with but one squire and a sergeant , who 
 be both of they keen tracker and fell woodsman . but ere they 
 go , by the rede of Arthur they bid Sir Aymeris to arm a two score 
 of man and ride toward the Red Hold , and beset the way ' twixt that 
 and the Castle of the Quest ; for one and all they deem that if any 
 harm befell Birdalone , the Red Knight would be at the bottom of it . 

 so ride those fellow , and come unto the dale but some four hour 
 after Birdalone have happen on the stranger knight ; and they take up 
 the slot of she , but not easily , whereas the ground be hard and 
 stony ; howbeit , they find token of the knight also , find here 
 and there what they deem the footprint of a tall man . and this 
 be grievous to those fellow , since now they could not but deem that 
 somewhat untoward have befall Birdalone . but they go on make 
 out the slot , and they follow it with much toil until they come to 
 the doom - ring in the head of the dale , whereas Birdalone and the 
 stranger have sit down to meat ; but by that time , so toilsome have be 
 their go , it be somewhat more than dusk , and there be nought for 
 it but to abide there night - long . so a while they sit talk , all 
 of they , and the squire and the sergeant aforesaid be not a little 
 timorous of the adventure of make that stead unkenned their 
 sleeping chamber ; and to while away the time , their lord make they 
 tell tale such as they know concern that place ; and both they 
 say that they have never erst come into the dale but a very little 
 way , and say that they have do so then but trust in their lord ' 
 bidding and the luck of the Quest . thereafter turn the talk as to 
 what have befall Birdalone , and the chance of come on she ; and , 
 as folk will in such a plight , they talk the matter over and over 
 again till they be weary and could say no more . 

 then they go to sleep , and nought befell they till they awake in 
 the broad daylight ; but they have little inkling of what hour it be , 
 for all the dale be full of thick white mist that come roll down 
 from the mountain , so that they could scarce see their hand before 
 they , and there they have to tarry still , would they , would they not ; 
 and the sergeant fall to tell tale of folk who have be lose in 
 that stony maze ; and all of they deem , more or less , that this be 
 the work either of evil wight , or it might be of the wizardry of the 
 Red Knight ; and , to be short , they all deem that he it be who have 
 wield it , save the sergeant , who say that the mountain wight be 
 the master and not the servant of he of the Red Hold . 

 thus , then , it betide ; but when the say mist have be hang upon 
 they for some six hour , it roll up like a curtain , and lo the blue 
 sky and the sun , and the mountain as clear blue as in a picture ; and 
 they see by the sun that it be but a little after high noon . 

 but as they rejoice herein , and betook they once more to track 
 out the slot of Birdalone and the other , the sky become suddenly 
 overcast , and down from the jaw of the mountain come a storm of wind 
 and rain , and thunder and lightning , so great that they might scarce 
 see each other 's face , and when it clear off , in about an hour and 
 a half , and go down the wind to the south - east , the stream be 
 waxen great , and run brown and furious down the dale , so that it be 
 fordable only here and there ; and as for track the slot of those 
 twain , there be no need to talk thereof , for the fury of the driving 
 rain have wash all away . 

 thus fare they the whole day betwixt fog and clear weather , and they 
 lay they down to rest at night sore dishearten . when the day 
 break they talk together as to what be good to do ; and the 
 sergeant aforesaid spake : Lords , say he , meseemeth I be more at 
 home in the Black Valley than ye be ; heed ye not wherefore . now so 
 it be that if we tarry here till night come we wot not what of evil 
 may betide we , or at the least we do nought . or if we turn back and 
 go southward out of the dale we shall be safe indeed ; but safe should 
 we have be at your house , lord , and should have do no less . but 
 now I shall tell you that , if ye will , lord , I shall guide you to a 
 pass that goeth out of the head of the dale to our right hand , and 
 so turneth the flank of the mountain , and cometh out into the 
 country which lieth about the Red Hold ; and meseemeth it be 
 thitherward that we must seek if we would hear any tiding of the 
 lady ; for there may we lay in ambush and beset the way that lead up 
 to the Hold , by which she must have be bring if she hath not be 
 carry through the air . how say ye , lord ? soothly there be peril 
 therein ; yet meseemeth peril no more than in our abide another 
 night in the Black Valley . 

 Said Arthur : we hee not the peril if there be aught to be do ; 
 wherefore let we be stir straightway . and so say they all . 
 wherefore they gat to horse , and ride up to the very head of the 
 valley , and the weather be now calm and bright . 

 but the sergeant bring they to the pass whereof the stranger knight 
 have speak to Birdalone , which lead into the Red Knight 's country , and 
 without more ado they enter it when it be now about three hour 
 after noon . but the way be both steep and rough , so that they have 
 much toil , and go not very far ere night fall upon they , and the 
 moon be not yet up . so when they have stumble on another two hour , 
 and their horse be much spend and they themselves not a little 
 weary , they lay they down to sleep , after they have eat such meat 
 as they have with they , in a place where be a little grass for the 
 horse to bite ; for all the road hitherto have be mere grim stone 
 and big rock , wall on either side by stony scree , above which 
 rise steep and beetle crag . 

 in the dawn they arise again , and make no ado till they be in the 
 saddle , and ride till they come to the crest of the pass , and come 
 out thence after a while on to the swell flank of a huge mountain 
  as it might be the side of the mountain of Plinlimmon in Wales , 
 which be grass and nought craggy , but utterly treeless . 

 now the sergeant lead they somewhat athwart the say mountain till 
 they begin to go down , and see below they a country of little hill 
 much cover with wood , and in a while , and ere it be noon , they 
 be among the say wood , which be grow mostly with big tree , as 
 oak here and beech there , and the going be good for they . 



 CHAPTER IV . of the slaying of FRIEND and FOE 



 so come they , three hour after noon , to where be a clearing in the 
 woodland , and a long narrow plain some furlong over lie before they , 
 with a river run along it , and the wood rise on the other side 
 high and thick , so that the say plain look even as a wide green 
 highway lead from somewhence to somewhither . 

 at the edge hereof their way - leader , the sergeant , bade draw rein , 
 and say : lord , we be now in the land of the Red Hold , and 
 therein be mickle peril and dread to any save stout heart as ye be ; 
 but meseem we be so steade , that whatever may come out of the 
 Black Valley of the Greywethers to the Red Hold , ye now may scarce 
 miss . yonder along this plain to the north lie the way to the say 
 hold , and any man come from the head of the valley be sure to come 
 by the way we have come , and will pass we not many yard at the bad 
 from where we now be . on the other hand , if any come to the hold 
 from the mouth of the Black Valley , then along this green road must 
 they need pass under your very eye . lastly , if we do what we be 
 come to do , to wit , to deliver the lady from the Red Knight , then , 
 the deed do , we have to take the green road southward , and ride it 
 for a league and then turn east , and we shall have our head turn 
 toward the Castle of the Quest , and shall speedily fall in with Sir 
 Aymeris and our man who be guard the out - gate of the Red Knight 's 
 country toward our house . so now , by my rede , ye shall lay in covert 
 here and abide a while what may befall ; if nought come hereby ere two 
 hour be lack of sunset , then may we seek far . 

 they all yeasaid this , and gat off their horse , and lie quiet on the 
 grass , not even speak save softly . and when they have abide thus 
 scarce an hour 's space , the squire , who be a man of very fine ear , 
 hold up his hand as though to bid utter silence , and all hearken 
 eagerly . presently he say : hear ye not ? Said Arthur : Meseemeth I 
 hear a faint tinkle as of a sheep - bell . say the squire : ' tis the 
 clashing of sword down the plain to the south , and meseemeth ' tis 
 but of two : ride we thither ? 

 Quoth Baudoin : Nay , not by my rede ; for if we can hear they they can 
 hear we ; let we quietly edge along afoot somewhat nigh their way , 
 ever keep the cover of the wood betwixt we and the open plain . 
 now then to it ; and let each man keep his weapon ready . 

 even so do they , and spread out in a line as they go , in such wise 
 that there be some six pace betwixt each man of they , and they go 
 softly forward ; Baudoin go first , Hugh second , then Arthur ; then 
 the squire and the sergeant last of all . 

 now when they have go but a quarter of an hour , the squire catch up 
 with Arthur , and spake to he softly , and say : the voice of the 
 sword have be silent now a while , and I hear a voice cry out 
 e'en now , a woman 's voice . and now again I could well - nigh deem that 
 I hear horse - hoof . 

 Arthur nod to he , and they go but a little furth ere he say : 
 Lo , lo ! ' tis the time of the eye now ! here come folk . and 
 therewithal they stay they . for the wood turn somewhat here , so 
 as to hide all but a little of the plain , and round the wood neb the 
 new - comer hove in sight , and be close on they at once , so that 
 they might see they clearly , to wit , a knight weapone , clothe all in 
 red , a very big man , rid on a great bay horse , and behind he a 
 woman go afoot in very piteous plight ; for she be tethered to the 
 horse 's crupper by a thong that bind her wrist together , so that 
 she have but just room leave ' twixt she and the horse that she might 
 walk , and round about her neck be hang a man 's head newly hew off . 

 this sight they all see at once , and be out of the wood in a trice 
 with weapon aloft , for they know both the man and the woman , that 
 they be the Red Knight and Birdalone . 

 so swift and sudden have they be , that he have no time either to spur 
 or even to draw his sword ; but he have a heavy steel axe in his hand 
 as the first man come up to he , which be the tall Baudoin ; and 
 therewith he smite down on Baudoin so fierce and huge a stroke , that 
 come on he betwixt neck and shoulder , that all give way before it , 
 and the Golden Knight fall to earth all carven and stark dead : but 
 even therewith fall Hugh , the squire , and the sergeant on the Red 
 Knight ; for Arthur have run to Birdalone and shear she loose from 
 her tether . the sergeant smite he on the right arm with a maul , so 
 that the axe fall to the ground ; the squire 's sword come on the side 
 of his head , and , as it be cast back beneath the stroke , Hugh thrust 
 his sword through the throat of he , and down he fall unto the earth 
 and be dead in less than a minute . 

 then gather the other round about Baudoin , and see at once that he 
 be dead ; and Birdalone come thrust through the press of they , and 
 kneel down beside he , and when she see her friend so piteously 
 dight , she weep and wail over he as one who might not be 
 comfort ; and Hugh stand over she and let his tear fall down upon 
 the dead man ; and withal the squire and the sergeant do not refrain 
 their lamentation , for sore beloved be Sir Baudoin the Golden 
 Knight . 

 but Arthur spake dry - eye , though there be grief in his countenance , 
 and he say : fellow , and thou , lady , let we lament afterwards , but 
 now be time for we to get we go hence as speedily as may be . yet I 
 will ask , doth any know whose be this head that the slain tyrant here 
 have hang about the lady 's neck ? may the fiend curse he therefor ! 

 say the sergeant : yea , lord , that wot I ; this be the head of the 
 Red Knight 's captain and head man , Sir Thomas of Estcliffe ; one of 
 the hardy of knight he be while he be alive , as ye surely wot , 
 lord ; neither , as I have hear say , be he as cruel a tyrant as his 
 lord that lieth there ready for the raven . 

 now have Birdalone arise and be stand face Arthur ; her face be 
 pale and full of anguish , and she be dabble with blood from the 
 dead man 's neck ; but there be nought of shame in her face as she 
 stand there and speak : o my living friend , who have but now save 
 I , ye and my dead friend , from what shame and death I know not , the 
 tale of this woeful hap be over long to tell if there be peril at 
 hand , and I scarce alive from dread and sorrow ; but shortly thus it 
 be : this man , whose head here lieth , entrap I as I foolishly 
 wander in the Black Valley , and afterwards deliver I , and be 
 lead I to your castle , my friend , when this other one , his 
 master , the tyrant of the Red Hold , come upon he , and fall upon he 
 and slay he as a traitor , and dighte I as ye see . and woe 's I ! 
 I be the fool whose folly have slay your friend and mine . wherefore 
 I be not worthy of your fellowship , and ye shall cast I forth of it ; 
 or to slay I be well . 

 so she spake , gaze earnestly on Arthur ; and so troubled and 
 grieve , that she might well have die but for her woodland breeding , 
 and the toil of the day she have win through in the House under the 
 Wood . 

 but Hugh spake gently to she and say : keep up thine heart yet , 
 maiden ; for the hand of Fate it be that lead thee , and none doeth 
 grievously amiss but if he mean wrong - doing in his heart ; and we know 
 thee for true ; and thou hast be our helper , and bring our 
 loveling unto we to make we happy . 

 but she brake out weeping afresh , and say : o no , no ! it be but woe 
 and weariness I have bring unto my friend ; and to myself woe and 
 weariness yet more . 

 and she look piteously into Arthur 's face , and hard and stern it 
 seem unto she ; and she writhe and wrung her hand for anguish . 
 but he spake and say : this will we look into when we be safe behind 
 our wall , and see what she hath do amiss and what not amiss . but 
 now be there but one thing to do , and that be to get we speedily on 
 our way to the Castle of the Quest , and bind our fellow 's body on his 
 horse that he also may ride with we , and the lady shall ride the 
 horse of the accursed thief . then they turn to go toward their 
 horse ; but therewith Birdalone smite her foot against the slain 
 knight 's head , and shrank aback from it , and point down toward it 
 and spake no word ; and Hugh say : friend , the lady be right , this 
 at least we will cover with earth . do ye go fetch hither our horse , 
 since we be on the road , and I will do here what need be meanwhile . 

 so they go on that errand , and then Hugh and Birdalone between they 
 dig a hole with the sword and lay the head of the captain of the 
 Red Knight therein . and forsooth , somewhat would Birdalone have weep 
 for he have she have a tear to spare . 

 then they fall to and bind the dead Baudoin on the Red Knight 's 
 mighty bay steed , so that no time might be waste ; and when that be 
 do , and the other have not come back with their horse , Hugh take 
 Birdalone 's hand and lead she down to the stream and wash the gore 
 off her bosom , and she wash her face and her hand and let he lead 
 she back again in such wise that now she could hearken to the word 
 of comfort he spake to she , and piteous kind he seem unto she ; so 
 that at last she pluck up heart , and ask he how Viridis do . 
 Quoth he : they be all safe at home in the castle , and Viridis be 
 well and loveth thee well . and Aurea be well , woe worth the while 
 for she now ! as for Atra , she have not be so glad as the other 
 twain , I wot not wherefore . 

 even as he spake be the other come up with the horse , and Arthur 
 nod yeasay when he see what have be do with Baudoin dead ; and 
 so they gat to horse , and birdalone it be that rode Baudoin 's steed . 
 then they go their way , cross the river into the wood ; and the 
 sergeant be ever way - leader , but the squire lead the horse which bore 
 the sorrowful burden of the dead Knight of the Quest . 



 CHAPTER V. THEY come home to the CASTLE of the quest 



 now they have go but some three hour , rid dreary and nigh 
 speechless all of they , ere they begin to know the land they be in , 
 and that they be come to the place where they might look 
 presently to fall in with Sir Aymeris and his company ; and even so 
 the meeting betid , that they see man stand and go about their 
 horse beside a little wood , and know they presently for their folk , 
 who mount at once and spur forward to meet they , spear aloft . 
 Speedily then be the joy of those abider turn into sorrow , nor 
 may the grief of Sir Aymeris be tell , so great it be ; and birdalone 
 look on and see the mourning and lamentation of the warrior , and 
 eke be her anguish of mind ; and she behold Arthur the Black Squire , 
 how he sit still upon his horse with a hard and dreary countenance , 
 and look on those mourner almost as if he contemn they . but Sir 
 Aymeris come up to Birdalone , and knelt before she and kiss she 
 hand , and say : if my heart might rejoice in aught , as some day it 
 will , it would rejoice in see thee safe and sound , lady ; here at 
 least be gain to set beside the loss . 

 she thank he , but look askance toward Arthur , who say : if that 
 be gain , yet be there more , for the Red Knight lieth in the green 
 plain for a supper to the wolf and the crow . vengeance there hath 
 be , and belike more yet may come . but now , if ye have lament as 
 much as ye deem befitteth warrior , let we tarry here no long ; for 
 even yet meseemeth shall we be safe behind wall , now that our chief 
 and captain be slain , I scarce know in what quarrel . 

 none naysaid it , so they all ride forth together , and the sergeant 
 and the squire and Sir Hugh tell of their tale what they might to Sir 
 Aymeris and the other ; but Arthur hold his peace , and rode aloof 
 from Birdalone , whereas Sir Aymeris and Hugh ride on either side of 
 she , and do not spare to comfort she what they might . 

 they ride straight on , and make no stay for nightfall , and thus come 
 home to the Castle of the Quest before the day be full ; and woeful 
 be their entry as they go in the dawn underneath the gate of the 
 say castle , and soon be the whole house astir and lament . 

 as for Birdalone , when she get down from her horse in the gateway , 
 and be stiff and weary of body , and all daze and confuse of mind , 
 there be but little life in she ; nor could she so much as think of 
 the new day and Aurea 's awakening , but creep up unto her own chamber , 
 so long as it seem since she have leave it , though it be but a 
 little while ; and she cast herself upon the bed and fall asleep 
 whether she would or not , and so forgat her much sorrow and her 
 little hope . 



 CHAPTER VI . of the talk BETWIXT BIRDALONE and VIRIDIS 



 when she wake again , she have sleep the night away , and it be broad 
 day , and for a moment she lie wonder what be the burden upon she ; 
 but presently she call it all to mind , and deem it be well 
 might she forget it all again . Anon she become aware of someone 
 move about the chamber , and she look about unhappily ; and lo ! a 
 woman , fair and dainty , clothe all in green , and it be Viridis that 
 have come there . but when she see Birdalone stir , she come up to 
 she and kiss she sweetly and kindly , and weep over she , so that 
 birdalone might nowise refrain her tear . but when she might cease 
 weeping , she say to Viridis : tell I , art thou weep for thy 
 friend who be lose , and who shall be thy friend no more ; or thy 
 friend whom thou hast find ? say Viridis : Forsooth I have weep for 
 Baudoin plenteously , and he be worthy of it , for he be valiant and 
 true and kind . say birdalone : True be that ; but I mean not my 
 question so ; but rather I would ask thee if thou weep because 
 thine heart must need cast I away , or because thou hast find I 
 again ? Quoth Viridis : Whoso may be dead , or whoso alive , but if it 
 be Hugh , my loveling , I be rejoice beyond measure to find thee , 
 my friend . and again she kiss she as one who be glad and kind . 
 but for new rest of soul and for joy , Birdalone fall a - weep 
 afresh . 

 again she spake : and what mind have the other about I ? for thou 
 art but one , though the dear , save . . . and would they punish I 
 for my fault and folly that have slay the good man in the world ? if 
 the punishment be short of put I forth of their fellowship , I 
 be fain thereof . 

 Viridis laugh : Forsooth , she say , they have much to punish thee 
 for ! whereas it be by thy doing and thy valiance that we all come 
 together again and the Quest be accomplish . Nay , but tell I , 
 say Birdalone , what do they say of I , each one of they ? 

 Viridis redden ; she say : Hugh , my mate , saith all good of thee ; 
 though no one of carl - folk may be sorry of the loss of his fellow . 
 Aurea layeth not the death of her man upon thee ; and she saith : when 
 the fountain of tear be dry up in I , I will see she and comfort 
 she , as she I . Atra saith : she saith but little , yet she saith : 
 so be it fat . I have do belike no well , but bad than she . 

 now turn Birdalone red and then pale again , and she say , but in a 
 quavering voice : and the Black Squire , Arthur , what sayeth he ? say 
 Viridis : he sayeth nought of thee , but that he would hear all the 
 tale of what befell thee in the Black Valley . sweet friend , say 
 Birdalone , I pray thee of thy kindness and sweetness that thou go 
 unto he presently and bring he in hither , and then I will tell he 
 all ; and he and thou and I together . 

 Viridis say : there be this to be say , that when a man loveth a 
 woman he coveteth she , to have she all wholly to himself , and hard 
 and evil he groweth for the time that he misdoubteth she whom he 
 loveth . and I will tell thee that this man be jealous lest thou wert 
 never so little kind to the slain stranger knight whose head the 
 tyrant hang about thee . furthermore , I fear there be no help for it 
 that thou wilt undo the happiness of one of we , that be atra ; yet 
 be it well that that befell later than soon . and if Sir Arthur 
 come in here to thee , and hath thy tale with none beside save I , 
 meseem the poor Atra will feel a bitter smart because of it . be 
 it not well that we all meet presently in the solar , and that there 
 thou tell thy tale to we all ? and thereafter shall we tell the tale 
 of our deliverance and our come hither . and thus do , it will 
 seem less like to the breaking up of our fellowship . 

 say birdalone : it will be hard for I to tell my tale before Atra 
 and before he . might it not be that thou hearken to it here and 
 now , and tell it to the other hereafter ? Nay , nay , say Viridis , I 
 be not a proper minstrel to take the word out of thy mouth . never 
 shall I be able to tell it so that they shall trow it as if they have 
 see it all . besides , when all be tell , then shall we be more bound 
 together again . I pray thee , and I pray thee , sweet , do so much for 
 I as to tell thy tale to the fellowship of we . and if it be hard to 
 thee , look upon it as my share of the punishment which be due to thee 
 for fall into that mishap . 

 smile Birdalone ruefully , and say : so be it ; and may the share of 
 the other be as light as thine , sister . yet soothly be I liefer 
 that my body and my skin should pay the forfeit . but now , since I 
 must need do this , the soon be the well meseemeth . 

 in a little half hour , say Viridis , will I bring what be leave of our 
 fellowship into the solar to hearken thee . so come thou there unto 
 we when thou art clothe . and hear thou ! be not too meek and humble , 
 and bow thyself to we in fear of our sorrow . for whereas thou didst 
 speak of our punish thee , there will be one there whom thou mayst 
 easily punish to thy pleasure ; forsooth , friend , I rue that so it be ; 
 but since it will not well be , what may I do but wish thee happy 
 and he also . 

 Therewith she turn and go out of the chamber , and Birdalone , leave 
 to herself , feel a secret joy in her soul that she might not master , 
 despite the sorrow of her friend , whatever it might be . 



 CHAPTER VII . BIRDALONE TELLETH the tale of she wander up the 
 VALLEY of the greywether 



 now Viridis do as she say , and bring they all in to the solar ; 
 there be none lack save Baudoin , and they sit silently in a half 
 ring , till the door open and Birdalone come in to they , clothe all 
 simply in but a black coat ; and she make obeisance to they , and stand 
 there with her head bend down as if they be her judge , for so in 
 sooth she deem they . then Hugh bade she sit down amongst they ; but 
 she say : Nay , I will not sit amongst you till ye have hear my 
 story , and ye have tell I that I be yet of your fellowship . none 
 say aught ; Atra look straight before she , and her eye meet not 
 Birdalone 's eye ; Arthur look down on the ground ; but Hugh and 
 Viridis look kindly on Birdalone , and to Viridis ' eye the tear 
 be come . 

 then spake Birdalone and say : I be here as one that hath do 
 amiss ; but I will tell you , so that ye may not think bad of I than 
 ye should , that when ye be go , ye Champions , and the time wear 
 long that ye come not again , it lie heavy on my heart , and hope wan 
 and fear wax , and my soul so grieve my body that I think to fall 
 sick thereof , and I know that it would be ill for you to come home 
 hither and find I sick ; so that I long sore to do somewhat which 
 should make I whole again . then weird would that I should hear all 
 the tale of the Black Valley of the Greywethers , and of how therein 
 be while grant fulfilment of desire ; and methought how well it 
 be if I might seek the adventure there and accomplish it . thereof , 
 doubtless , hath the chaplain , Sir Leonard , tell you ; but this 
 furthermore would I say , that his do herein be nought ; all be 
 do by my doing and by my bidding , and he might not choose but do 
 it . wherefore I do pray you all earnestly that ye keep no grudge 
 against he , but pardon he all . tell I , then , will ye do thus 
 much ? 

 say Hugh : let he be pardon , if he can take pardon . but Arthur 
 spake not , and Birdalone look on he anxiously , and her face be 
 move , and it be with her throat as if she have swallow something 
 down . then she spake again , and fall to tell they all that have betid 
 to she when she go to the Black Valley , even as be hereafore writ , 
 hide nought that have be do and say ; and freely she tell it , 
 without fear or shame , and with such clearness and sweetness of word 
 that no one of they doubt her aught ; and Arthur lift up his head , 
 and once and again his eye meet her , and there be nought of 
 hardness in they , though they turn away at once . 

 so at last fall Birdalone to tell what betid after they two , the 
 stranger knight and she , leave the valley of the force and fall to 
 rid the wildwood with their head turn toward the Castle of the 
 Quest ; and she say : 

 when we turn into the wood away from the say valley it lack some 
 four hour of noon ; and we ride till noon be , and rest by a 
 stream - side and eat , for we know no cause wherefore we should hasten 
 overmuch ; but my fellow the strange knight be downcast and heavy , 
 and some might have call he sullen . but I strove to make he of 
 well cheer , and spake to he kindly , as to one who of an enemy have 
 become a friend ; but he answer I : Lady , it availeth not ; I grieve 
 that I be no well company than thou seest I , and I have strive to 
 be merry ; but apart from all that I wot and that thou wott which 
 should make I of evil cheer , there be now a weight upon my heart 
 which I can not lift , such as never have I feel erst . so by thy leave 
 we will to horse at once , that we may the speedy come to the Castle 
 of the Quest and Sir Aymeris ' prison . 

 so I arise , but smile on he and say : hold up thine heart , friend ! 
 for thee shall be no prison at the Castle of the Quest , but the fair 
 welcome of friend . he say nought , and mend not his cheer ; and in 
 this plight we gat to horse and ride on for some three hour more , 
 till we come out of the thick forest into a long clearing , which go 
 like a wide highway of greensward between the thicket , and it seem 
 as if the hand of man have clear that say green road . Thereto we 
 have come , follow a little river which come out on to the clearing 
 with we , and then , turning , run well - nigh amidst it toward the north . 

 now when we be come thither , and be betwixt the thicket and the 
 water 's edge , we draw rein , and it seem to I as fair a stead as 
 might be in the woodland , and I look thereon well pleased and with 
 a happy heart . but the knight say : Lady , art thou not exceed 
 weary ? Nay , say I , not in any wise . say he : it be strange then , 
 for so weary be I , that I must in any case get off my horse and lie 
 I down on the grass here , or I shall drop from the saddle . and 
 therewith he light down and stand by I a little , as to help I off 
 my horse ; but I say to he : Knight , I pray thee , even if ye be 
 weary , to struggle forward a little , lest we be in peril here . in 
 peril ? quoth he ; yea , that might be if the Red Knight know of our 
 whereabout ; but how should that be ? he speak this heavily , as one 
 scarce awake ; and then he say : I pray thee pardon I , lady , but for 
 nought may I hold my head up ; suffer I to sleep but a little , and 
 then will I arise and lead thee straight to thy journey 's end . 
 Therewithal he lay he down on the grass and be presently asleep , 
 and I sit down by he all dismay . at first , indeed , I doubt some 
 treachery in he , for how might I trust he wholly after all that have 
 come and go ? but when I see that there be no feigning in his 
 sleep , I set that doubt aside , and know not what to make of it . 

 thus pass an hour , and from time to time I shake he and strove to 
 waken he , but it be all in vain ; so I know none other rede than to 
 abide his awakening ; for I know not the way to take toward this 
 castle ; and , moreover , though he be a knight , and arm , yet might 
 it be perilous for he if he be leave there alone and unguarde ; so 
 I abode . 

 but now come new tiding . methought I hear the sound of the 
 tinkling of weapon and armour ; the green highway so turn that a 
 wood neb about an hundred yard to the north hide it from my sight , so 
 that a man might have draw somewhat near to we without be see , 
 come he on the hither side of the river . so I stand up hastily , and 
 string my bow , and take a shaft in my finger , and no soon be it 
 do than there come a rider round about the aforesaid wood neb . he 
 be all - armed and have a red surcoat , and ride a great shin bay 
 horse . I keep my eye upon he while I stir the sleep knight 
 with my foot , and cry to he to wake , but he scarce move , and but 
 utter word without sense . 

 now the new - comer draw rein for a moment when he see we , and then 
 move on a little toward I , but I nock a shaft and point it at 
 he , and cry out to he to stay . then I hear a great rattle 
 laugh come from he , and he shout : Nay , do thou stay , fair wood- 
 wife , and I will risk thy shaft to come at thee . but why doth not 
 the sluggard at thy foot rise up and stand before I , if he be thy 
 loveling ? or be he dead ? his voice be harsh and big , and I fear 
 he sore ; and it be as much because of fear as of hardihood , that I 
 draw and loose straightway ; and doubtless it be because of fear 
 that I see my shaft fly an inch or so over his right shoulder . I 
 hear his rattle laugh again , and see he bend forward as he 
 spur ; I know that time lack for draw another shaft , so I 
 catch up my skirt and run all I might ; but swift - foot as I be , it 
 avail I nought , for I be cumber with my gown , and moreover I 
 be confuse with not know whither to run , since I wotte that in 
 the water the horse would do well than I. 

 so he be up with I in a twinkling , and reach out his hand and 
 catch hold of I by the hair , and tug I to he as he rein back 
 his horse . then he laugh again and say : Forsooth she will look 
 well when she be no long redden and roughen with flee ; 
 and , by Red Peter ! what limb she hath . then he let I loose and get 
 off his horse , and shove I on before he till we come to where the 
 Black One lie still sleep heavily . then the Red Knight stand 
 against I , and look hard into my face ; and I see how huge a man he 
 be , and how a lock of bright red hair come out from under his 
 sallet . his eye be green and fierce underneath shaggy red 
 eyebrow ; terrible he be to look on . 

 now he spake fiercely and roughly , and as though he have something 
 against I : tell I , thou , who thou art and who this be ? I answer 
 nought , for fear have freeze my speech . he stamp his foot on the 
 ground and cry : hah ! art thou go dumb ? speak ! thou wert well ! 
 I say , all quake : my name be Birdalone ; I belong to no one ; I 
 have no kindre : as for this man , I know not his name . he say : 
 com thou from the Castle of the Quest ? art thou the whore of 
 those lily - and - rose champion there ? my heart be hot with anger in 
 spite of my dread , but I spake : I come from the Castle of the Quest . 
 he say : and this man   therewith he turn about and spurn he in 
 the side , where didst thou happen upon he ? again I be silent , and 
 he roar out at I : so thou wilt not answer ! beware , or I may see 
 how to compel the speech of thee . now answer I this : be it in the 
 Black Valley of the Greywethers that ye two come together ? again I 
 know not how to answer , lest I might do a wrong to he who have 
 repent he of the wrong he have do I . but the Red Knight burst 
 out a - laugh and say : it shall be remember against thee , first , 
 that thou didst let fly a shaft at I ; second , that thou didst run 
 from I ; and thirdly , that thou hast be slack in answer my 
 question . but all this scathe I nought ; first , because thy shaft 
 miss I ; second , because thy leg fail thee   though they be 
 fair to look on , run ; and third , because all thou canst tell I 
 I know without thine answering . now thee will I tell that this be 
 Friday , and that ye two first meet in the Black Valley on Tuesday ; now 
 I will ask this last question , and thou mayst answer it or not as 
 thou wilt ; for presently I shall wake this brisk and stir knight , 
 and I deem that he will tell I the truth of this if of nought else . 
 tell I , thou whore of the Questing Champions , where and how many 
 time thou hast lain in this good knight 's arm since last Tuesday ? 
 nowhere and never , quoth I. Thou liest , I doubt thee , say the Red 
 Knight ; howsoever , let we see what this doughty one will say . hah ! 
 thou deem he shall be hard to wake up , dost thou not ! well , I 
 shall see to that . he who giveth sleep may take it away again . 

 Therewith he go up to the Black One and stoop adown over his 
 head , and spake some word over he , but so softly that I hear not 
 their import ; and straightway the sleeper rise up so suddenly that he 
 wellnigh smote against the Red Knight . he stand awhile staggering , 
 and blink at the other one , but somehow get his sword draw forth , 
 and the Red Knight hinder he nought therein , but spake anon when 
 the other be come to himself somewhat : the sele of the day to thee , 
 Sir Thomas , True Thomas ! Fair be thy bed , and most fair thy 
 bedfellow . 

 the Black Knight draw aback from he and be now come awake , 
 wherefore he stand on his guard , but say nought . then say the Red 
 Knight : Sir Thomas , I have be ask this fair lady a question , 
 but her memory faileth she and she may not answer it ; perchance thou 
 mayst do well . tell I where and how many time hast thou bed 
 her betwixt last Tuesday and this ? nowhere and never , cry Sir 
 Thomas , knit his brow and handle his sword . Hah , say the Red 
 Knight , an echo of her speech be this . Lo , the tale ye have make up 
 betwixt you . but at least , have do mine errand , though meseemeth 
 somewhat leisurely , and have get the woman for I , thou art now 
 bring she on to the Red Hold , whatever thou hast do with she on 
 the road ? I be not , say my fellow , I be lead she away from the 
 Red Hold . pity of thee , quoth the other , that thou hast fall in 
 with I , and thou but half - arm . and he raise aloft his sword ; but 
 presently sink it again , and let the point rest on the earth . 

 then he speak again , not mockingly as erst : a word before we end it , 
 Thomas : thou hast hitherto do well by I , as I by thee . I say 
 thou hast get this woman , and I doubt not that at first thou hadst 
 the mind to bring she to I unminished ; but then thou wert overcome 
 by her beauty , as forsooth I know thee woman - mad , and thou hadst 
 mean to keep she for thyself , as forsooth I marvel not . but in thy 
 love - make thou hast not bethink thee that keep she to thyself 
 thou mayst not while I be above ground , save thou bewray I , and join 
 thee to my foeman and thine . because I be such a man , that what I 
 desire that will I have . for this reason , when I misdoubte I of 
 thee for thy much - tarrying , I cast the sleep over thee , and have 
 catch thee . for what wilt thou do ? doubt it not , that if our 
 sword meet , I shall pay thee for try to take my bedthrall from I 
 by take from thee no more than thy life . but now will I forgive 
 thee all if thou wilt ride home quietly with I and this damsel- 
 errant to the Red Hold , and let she be mine and not thine so long as 
 I will ; and then afterwards , if thou wilt , she shall be thine as long 
 as thou wilt . now behold , both this chance and thy life be a mere 
 gift of I to thee , for otherwise thou shalt have neither damsel nor 
 life . 

 Yea , yea , say my friend , I know what thou would : I have be no 
 unhandy devil to thee this long while , and thou wouldst fain keep I 
 still ; but now I will be devil no long , on this earth at least , but 
 will die and take my luck of it . and do thou , God , see to the saving 
 of this damsel , since thou hast take the matter out of my hand . 
 Farewell , dear maiden ! 

 Scarce be the word out of his mouth ere his sword be in the air , 
 and he smite so fierce and straight that he beat down the huge man 's 
 blade , and , ere he could master it again , smote the Red Knight so 
 heavily on the crest that he fall to his knee ; and the heart rise in 
 I , for I deem that he might yet prevail ; and in as ' twere a flash 
 I bethink I of the knife at my girdlestead , and draw it and run to 
 the Red Knight , and tear aside his mail hood with one hand and thrust 
 the knife into his shoulder with the other ; but so mighty be he that 
 he heed nought the hurt , but sweep his sword back - handed at the 
 Black Knight 's unarmed leg , and smite he so sore a wound that down 
 he fall clatter . then arise the Red Knight , and thrust I from 
 he with the left hand , and stride over my fellow - farer and thrust 
 his sword through his throat . then he turn to I , and spake in a 
 bray voice as if a harsh horn be blow : 

 abide thou ; if thou tak one step I will slay thee at once . so he 
 go and sit down on a bank a little way from the dead man , and wipe 
 his sword on the grass and lay it beside he , and so sit ponder a 
 while . thereafter he call I to he , and bid I stand in face of 
 he with my hand clasp before I . then he spake to I : thou art 
 my thrall and my having , since I have thus doom it no few day ago ; 
 and thou art now in my hand for I to do with as I will . now 
 instead of be meek and obedient to I thou hast rebel against 
 I , shoot an arrow at I , run from I , deny answer to my question , 
 and thrust a knife into I . to be short , thou hast make thyself my 
 foe . furthermore , it be by thy do that I have lose a right good 
 servant and a trusty fellow , and one that I love ; it be thou that 
 hast slay he . now have I be ponder what I shall do with thee . 
 I say : if I have deserve the death , then make an end and slay I 
 presently ; but bring I not to thine house , I pray thee . I pray by 
 the mother that bear thee ! 

 Quoth he : hold thy peace , it be not what thou deservest that I be 
 look to , but what shall pleasure I . now hearken ; I say that thou 
 hast make thee my foe , and I have overcome thee ; thou art my runaway 
 thrall , and I have catch thee . as my foe I might slay thee in any 
 evil way it might like I ; as my thrall I might well chastise thee as 
 sharply and as bitterly as I would . but it be not my pleasure to 
 slay thee , rather I will bring thee to the Red Hold , and there see 
 what we may make of thee ; whereas I can not but deem that in thee be 
 the making of somewhat more than a thrall ; and if not , then a thrall 
 must thou need be . again as to the chastising of thee , that also I 
 forgive thee since I have get the hope aforesaid . yet forsooth 
 some shame must I do thee to pay thee back for the love that be 
 betwixt thee and the slain man . I will ponder what it shall be ; but 
 take heed that whatsoever it shall be , it will not avail thee to pray 
 I to forego it , though thy speech be as fair and sweet as thy body . 

 Therewith he be silent a while , and I stand there not dare to 
 move , and my heart be so downcast that all the sweetness of life 
 seem depart . yet I withhold lamentation or prayer , think 
 within myself , who know what occasion may be between this and the 
 Red Hold for my escaping ; let I keep myself alive for that if it may 
 be . 

 presently he arise and take his sword , and go up to the slain man 's 
 body and smite the head from off it . then he go to the two horse 
 of Sir Thomas and of I , and take from they such gear of girth and 
 thong as he would , and therewith he dight I as ye see , do a 
 girth about my middle and make I fast to a line wherewith to hold 
 I in tow . and then he do that other thing which sicken my very 
 soul to tell of , to wit , that he take the slain man 's head and tie a 
 lace thereto , and hang it about my neck ; and as he do so , he say : 
 this jewel shalt thou thyself bear to mine house ; and there belike 
 shall we lay it in earth , since the man be my trusty fellow . lo 
 now , this be all the ill I shall do thee till it be try of what 
 avail thou art . this be a shaming to thee and not a torment , for I 
 will ride a foot' - pace , and the green way be both soft and smooth ; 
 wherefore fear not that I shall throw thee down or drag thee along . 
 and to - morrow thy shame shall be go and we shall see what be to 
 betide . 

 Lo , friend , this be the last word he spake ere he be slain , and the 
 ending of my tale ; for we have go thus but a little way ere ye brake 
 out of the wood upon we ; and then befell the death of one friend , and 
 the doubt , maybe , of the other , and all the grief and sorrow that I 
 shall never be quit of unless ye forgive I where I have do amiss , 
 and help I in the day to come . and she spread out her hand before 
 they , and bow her head , and the tear fall from her eye on to the 
 floor . 

 Viridis weep at Birdalone 's weeping , and Aurea for her own sorrow , 
 which this other sorrow stir . Atra weep not , but her face be 
 sad than weep . 

 but Arthur spake and say : Herein hath be the hand of Weird , and 
 hath be heavy on we ; but no blame have we to lay on our sister 
 Birdalone , nor hath she do light - mindedly by we ; though maybe she 
 err in not trust to the good - hap of the Quest to bring we back 
 in due time : and all that she saith do we trow as if it be write 
 in the Holy Gospel . they all yeasaid this , and call on she to come 
 amongst they ; but she think of little at first save the joy of 
 hear the sweetness of those word as Arthur spake they ; wherefore 
 she hang back a little , and think shame of it that she might not 
 give more heed to the other of they . then come Viridis and take she 
 by the hand and lead she to Sir Hugh , and Birdalone kneel down before 
 he and take his hand to kiss it , but he put both hand about she 
 face and kiss she kindly and merrily on the lip . then she kneel 
 before Aurea , and be hapless before she ; but Aurea kiss she , and 
 bid she be of well cheer , albeit the word come coldly from her 
 mouth . next she come to Arthur , and knelt before he and take his 
 hand and kiss it , and thank he kindly for his kind word , 
 look into his face meanwhile ; and she see that it be pale and 
 trouble now , and she long to be alone with he that she might ask 
 he wherefore . 

 as for Atra , she arise as Birdalone come before she , and cast she 
 arm about her neck , and weep and sob upon her bosom , and then 
 go hurry from out the solar and into the hall , and walk to and 
 fro there a while until the passion that tear she be lull 
 somewhat , and she might show her face to they calm and friendly once 
 more . and as she enter Arthur be speak , and he say : 

 to you , lady , I tell what we of the castle wot well than well , 
 that our dear friend hath escape so heavy a fate in escape the Red 
 Hold , that it be unmeet for we to murmur at our loss in our fellow ; 
 for a warrior 's life , which be ever in peril of death , be nought over 
 heavy a ransom for such a friend , and so dear and lovely , from such a 
 long and evil death . whereas ye must wot that the say Hold hath 
 this long while be a very treasure - house of woe and a coffer of 
 lamentation ; for merciless be the tyrant thereof , and merciless all 
 his folk . now another time , when ye be strong in heart than now 
 ye be , I may tell you tale thereof close and more nicely of those 
 who do his will ; as of his innermost band of man - at - arm , call the 
 miller ; and of his fellow - worker in wizardry and venom , call the 
 Apothecary ; and the three hag , call the Furies ; and the three 
 young woman , call the Graces ; and his hound that love man 's flesh ; 
 and the like tale , as evil as nightmare turn into deed of the 
 day . but now and here will I say this , that when we have do the 
 obsequie of our dear fellow , it be good that we follow up the 
 battle so valiantly begin by he . I mean that the Quest of our 
 lady be now accomplish , we should turn what be leave of the 
 fellowship into a war against the Red Hold and its evil thing ; and 
 that so soon as the relic of Baudoin be lay in earth , we gather 
 force and go thither in arm to live or die in the quarrel , and so 
 sweeten the earth , as do the man of ancient day when they slay the 
 dragon and the giant , and the child of hell , and the son of 
 Cain . 

 his cheek flush as he speak , and he look around till his eye 
 fall on Birdalone , and he see that her face also glow and her eye 
 gleam ; but Viridis , her heart sink so that she pal , and her lip 
 tremble . 

 but Aurea spake and say : I thank thee for thy word , Black Squire , 
 and I know that my man shall rejoice in Paradise when he knoweth of 
 it , and thereof shall I tell he to - morrow when the mass be say for 
 he . 

 and Atra say : Good be the word , and we look to it that the deed 
 shall be well yet . thus hath the evil arisen that shall destroy 
 the evil , as oft hath be when the valiant have be grieve , and 
 the joy of the true - hearted hath be steal from they ; then the hand 
 doth the doughty deed and the heart hath ease , and solace be sorrow . 

 they look on she and wonder , for she spake with her head upraise 
 and her eye glitter , as she have be one of the wise woman of 
 yore agone . and Birdalone fear she , though she love she . 

 lastly spake Hugh , and say : Brother , this be well thought of 
 indeed , and I marvel that I do not prevent thee ; and I be thine to 
 live and die with thee . and the adventure be nought unlikely ; for if 
 we have lose a captain they have lose their head devil , and their 
 head little devil ; moreover , the good man of Greenford shall join 
 they to we , and that shall make we strong , whereas they have man 
 enough , and those stout man - at - arm ; and artificer they have to make 
 us engine , and do other wisdom ; and therewithal money to buy or to 
 wage what they will . wherefore , to my mind , we be good to make no 
 tarrying , but send out the messenger for the host straightway . 

 Straightway , say the Black Squire ; and let we go now and find Sir 
 Aymeris . so they arise both and go their way , and leave the woman 
 there alone , and be go a good while . 



 CHAPTER VIII . ATRA and birdalone talk together while the lords SIT 
 AT the MURDER - COUNCIL 



 meanwhile of their absence , Viridis sit sad and silent and downcast , 
 though she weep not , for her gladness , which erst have be so great , 
 seem now reft from she ; and no merry be Aurea , as might have 
 be look for . but Atra come quietly unto Birdalone , and say 
 softly : I have a word for thee if thou wilt come forth with I into 
 the hall . Birdalone 's heart fail she somewhat , but she suffer 
 Atra to take her hand , and they go into the hall together , and Atra 
 bring she into a shot - window , and they sit down together side by 
 side and be silent awhile . Spake Atra then , trembling and 
 redden : birdalone , know thou what think , what hope , be in 
 my heart when I spake so proudly and rashly e'en now ? Birdalone keep 
 silence , and tremble as the other do . this it be , say Atra : he 
 will go to this battle valiantly , he may fall there , and that be 
 well ; for then be life to begin anew : and what be there to do with 
 these dreg of life ? say Birdalone , with flushed face : if he die 
 he shall die goodly , and if he live he shall live goodly . yea , yea , 
 say Atra ; forsooth thou art a happy woman ! dost thou hate I ? say 
 Birdalone . say Atra : Proud be thy word , but I hate thee not . Nay , 
 e'en now , when I spake thus boastfully , I think : when he hath die 
 as a doughty knight should , then , when life begin again , Birdalone 
 and I shall be friend and sister , and we two will talk together oft 
 and call he to mind , and the kindness of he , and how he love we . 
 Woe 's I ! that be when he be there sit beside I and I could 
 see he and his kindness ; and then it be as if I could give he 
 away ; but now he be go and I may not see he , it be clear to I 
 that I have no part or lot in he , and I call back my thought and my 
 word , and now it be : o that he may live ! o thou happy woman , that 
 shall be glad whether he liveth or dieth ! 

 say birdalone : and now thou hatest I , dost thou not , and we be 
 foe ? Atra answer not , nor spake for a while ; then she say : hard 
 and bitter be it , and I know not what to turn to . I have see once 
 and again , on the wall of the Minorites ' church at Greenford , a fair 
 picture of the Blessed , and they walk in the mead of Paradise , 
 clothe in like raiment , man and woman ; their head flower - crown , 
 their foot naked in the harmless blossom grass ; hand in hand they 
 walk , with all wrath pass for ever , all desire change into loving- 
 kindness , all the anguish of forgiveness forget . and underneath 
 the picture be it writ : 


 bitter winter , burn summer , never more shall waste and wear ; 
 blossom of the rise undying bring undying springtide there . 


 o for the hope of it , that I might hope it ! o for the day to be and 
 the assuaging of sorrow : I speak the word , and the hope springeth ; 
 the word be speak , and there abideth desire barren of hope ! and she 
 bow down her head and weep bitterly ; and Birdalone call to mind 
 her kindness of the past and weep for she , she also . 

 after a while Atra lift up her head , and thus she spake : I hate 
 thee not , Birdalone ; nor doth one say such thing to a foe . yea , 
 furthermore , I will crave somewhat of thee . if ever there come a 
 time when thou mayst do something for I , thou wilt know it belike 
 without my telling thee . in that day and in that hour I bid thee 
 remember how we stand together erst at the stair - foot of the Wailing 
 Tower in the Isle of Increase Unsought , and thou naked and fearful 
 and quaking , and what I do to thee that tide to comfort thee and 
 help and save thee . and then when thou hast call it to mind , do 
 thou for I what thou canst do . wilt thou promise this ? yea , yea , 
 say Birdalone ; and with all the well will , that oft and over again 
 have I call it to mind . wherefore I behight thee to let I serve 
 thee if I may whenso the occasion cometh , even if it be to my own 
 pain and grief ; for this I know thou mean . 

 see thou to this then , say Atra coldly ; and thou shalt be the well 
 for it in the long run belike : for thou art a happy woman . 

 she arise as she spake , and say : Hist ! here come the lord from the 
 murder - council ; and lo , now that he cometh , my heart groweth evil 
 toward thee again , and well - nigh biddeth I wish that thou wert naked 
 and helpless before I again . lo my unhap ! that he should mark my 
 face that it show as if I be fain to do thee a mischief . and 
 nought of that would I do ; for how should it avail I , and thou my 
 fellow and the faithful messenger of the Quest ? 

 now little of her last word do Birdalone meet , as into the hall 
 come Hugh and Arthur ; and though she strove to sober her mind and 
 think of her she - friend and her unhappiness , yet she could not choose 
 but to be full of joy in her inmost heart now she know without doubt 
 that she be so well - beloved of her beloved : and she deem that 
 Atra be in the right indeed to call she a happy woman . 

 so now they all go into the solar together , and sit they down with 
 the two other ; and Hugh do they to wit , how they have order all 
 the matter of the messenger who be to summon the knight and 
 chief of thereabout , and the aldermen of Greenford , to meet at the 
 Castle of the Quest , that they might set afoot the hosting to go 
 against the Red Hold . 



 CHAPTER IX . HUGH tell the STORY of the QUEST 's ending . 



 when this be say , and there have be silence a while , Birdalone 
 take up the word , and spake meekly and sweetly , say : dear 
 friend , how it fare with you on the isle from the time of my 
 leave you , and how with you , true knight , from the time of your 
 departure , I both be fain to know for the tale 's sake , and also I 
 would take the telling thereof as a sign of your forgiveness of my 
 transgression ; so I would crave the same of you but if it weary you 
 overmuch . 

 all they yeasaid she kindly , and Hugh spake and say : by your leave , 
 fellow , I will tell in few word what betid we on our way to the 
 Isle of Increase Unsought , and then shall Viridis take up the tale 
 from the time that Birdalone leave the say isle in the witch 's ferry . 
 none say aught against it , and Hugh go on : Short be my tale of 
 the journey : we come to the Isle of nothing on the morrow 's morn of 
 our departure , and be warn of thee , Birdalone , we abode there 
 but a little while to rest we from the boat , and go nowhither from 
 the strand , and so go on our way in a three hour ' space . 

 Thence again we take the water , and come to the Isle of king , and 
 that be in the middle of the night : we behold the dead long and 
 heedfully when the morning come , and depart again before noon , and 
 come to the Isle of Queens a little after nightfall . the next 
 morning we deem we need must go see the image of those lady , 
 lest aught might have befell since thou wert there which might be of 
 import to the Quest , but all be unchanged , and we come away while 
 the day be yet young . 

 we make the Isle of the Young and the Old about sunset that day , and 
 the boy and the girl come down to the strand to behold we and wonder 
 at we , and we sport with they merrily a while ; and then they 
 bring we to the house of the old man , who receive we courteously 
 and give we to eat and drink . Forsooth , when the night be somewhat 
 spend , he bring out strong drink to we , and take it somewhat amiss 
 that we drink not overmuch thereof , as forsooth he do , and so fall 
 asleep . before he be drunk we ask he many question about the 
 isle and its custom , but he know nought to tell we of they . of thee 
 also we ask , sister , but he have no memory of thee . 

 on the morrow he fare down with we to our ferry , and make many 
 prayer to we to take he along with we ; for here , say he , be 
 neither lordship nor fair lady ; and if here I abide , soon shall I 
 come to mine end day , and sore I yearn for joyance and a long term 
 to my year . now we durst not take he aboard lest we should fare 
 amiss with the wight of the Sending Boat ; so we naysaid he 
 courteously , thank he for his guesting , and give he gift , to 
 wit , a finger gold ring and an ouch of gold , so he turn away from 
 we somewhat downcast as we deem ; but ere we have give the word to 
 the Sending Boat we hear he sing merrily in a high crack voice 
 as he go on his way . 

 now on this last day betid somewhat of new tiding ; for scarce be 
 this isle out of sight behind , ere we see a boat come sail toward 
 we from the north - east , and it come on swiftly with a blue ripple of 
 the lake behind it . thereat we marvel , and yet more when we see 
 that its sail be strip of gold and green and black ; next then be 
 we betwixt fear and joy when , as it draw nigh , we see three woman 
 in the said boat , clothe in gold , green , and black ; and it come so nigh 
 unto we at last , that we could see their face that they be verily 
 those of our loveling ; and each reach out her arm to we and 
 call on we for help , each by our name : and there we be , oarless , 
 sailless , at the mercy of our unkenned ferry . then would Baudoin and 
 I have leap overboard to swim to our love at all adventure ; but Sir 
 Arthur here stay we , and bid we think of it , that we be now 
 near the Witch - land , and if we might not look to be beset with 
 guile and gin to keep we from win to our journey 's end ; 
 wherefore we forbore , though in all wretchedness , and the gay boat 
 run down the wind away from we , and the breeze and the ripple pass 
 away with it , and the lake lie under the hot sun as smooth as glass ; 
 and on we go , weary - hearted . 

 come again another sail out of the north - east , when the sun be 
 get low , and speedily it draw nigh , but this time it be no small 
 boat or barge , but a tall ship with great sail , and goodly - tower 
 she be and shield - hung , and the basnet gleam and the spear 
 glitter from her castle - top and bulwark , and the sound of her 
 horn come down the wind as she near we . we two handle our 
 weapon and do on our basnet , but Arthur there , he sit still , and 
 say : not over - wise be the witch , that she let loose on we two 
 sending in one day so like unto each other . hah , say Baudoin , be 
 we wary though ; they be go to shoot . and sure enough we see a 
 line of bowman in all the castle and even along , and a horn blew , 
 and then forth fly the shaft , but whither we know not , for none 
 come anywhere anigh we ; and Arthur laugh and say : a fair shot 
 into the cloud ; but , by our Lady ! if none shoot well in our 
 country , I would bear no armour for their shaft . but we two be 
 confused and know not what to think . 

 the great ship fly past we on the wind as the barge have do , but 
 when she be about half a mile aloof we see her canvass fall to 
 shivering and her yard sway round , and Arthur cry out : St. 
 Nicholas ! the play beginneth again ! she be come about ! 

 even so it be , and presently she be bear on we , and be ere long 
 so close aboard that we could see she every spar and rope , and her 
 folk all gather to the windward , knight , sergeant , archer , and 
 mariner , to gaze at we and mock we ; and huge and devilish laughter 
 arise from amongst they as she plough the water so close beside we , 
 that one might well - nigh have cast a morsel of bread aboard she ; for 
 clear it be presently that she have no mind to run we down . 

 Spake Arthur then : there will be a fresh play presently , my mate , 
 but ye sit fast , for meseemeth this show be no more perilous than the 
 other , though it be big . 

 Scarce be the word out of his mouth , ere there be a stir amongst 
 the man gather in the waist , and lo , amidst a knot of big and 
 fierce mariner , three woman stand , pale , with fly hair , and 
 their hand bind behind they , and one be clothe in gold and another 
 in green and the third in black ; and their face be as the face of 
 Aurea and Viridis and Atra . 

 then there come forth from that ship a huge cruel roar blent with 
 mocking laughter that sham our very heart , and those evil thing 
 in the form of mariner take hold of each one of the lady and cast 
 they overboard into the gulf of the water , first Aurea , next 
 Viridis , and then Atra ; and we two stand up with our useless sword 
 brandish and would have leapt over into the deep , but that Arthur 
 arise also and take hold of an arm of each of we and stay we , and 
 say : Nay , then , if ye go , take I with you , and let all the Quest 
 sink down into the deep , and let our loveling pine in captivity , and 
 birdalone lose all her friend in one swoop , and we be know 
 hereafter as the fool of lover , the unstable . 

 so we sit we down , but huge shrieking laughter rise up unblended from 
 the keel of the evil thing , and then they let she go down the wind , 
 and she go her way with flashing of arm , and streaming of banner 
 and pennon , and blow of horn , and the sun be set over the 
 wide water . 

 but Arthur spake : cheer up , brother ! see ye not how this proud 
 witch be also but an eyeless fool to send we such a show , and the 
 second time in one day to show we the image of our dearling , who 
 hour ago flit past we in the stripe - sail boat ? where , then , 
 do they of the ship meet with they ? Nay , lord , let not the anguish 
 of love steal all your wit . 

 we see we have be fool to be so overcast by guile , and yet be we 
 exceed ill at ease , and over - long the time seem unto we until we 
 should be come to the Isle of Increase Unsought , and find our 
 loveling there . 

 now be the night come , and we fall asleep , but belike be not often 
 all asleep at once ; and at last it be , when we feel the dawn draw 
 near , though , the moon be down , it be the dark of the summer 
 night , that we be all three awake , when all of a sudden we hear 
 just astern the rushing of the water , as though some keel be 
 cleave it , and dimly in the dark we see a sail as of a boat 
 overhaul we . close at hand there ring out a lamentable cry : o , 
 be ye there , fellow of the Quest ? o , help I , friend ! save I and 
 deliver I , who be snatch away to be cast into the hand of my 
 mistress that be . help I , Baudoin , Hugh , Arthur ! help ! help ! 

 then all we know the voice of Birdalone , and Arthur leapt up , and 
 would have be overboard in a trice have not we two hold he , and he 
 fight and curse we well - favouredly , there be no nay thereto ; and 
 meanwhile the wail voice of thee , my sister , die out in the 
 distance , and the east grow grey , and dawn be come . 

 then spake Baudoin : Arthur , my brother , dost thou not mark that this 
 also be of the same sort of show as those two other , and thou who 
 wert so wise before ? it be but beguiling to bring the Quest to 
 nought ; wherefore call to mind thy manhood and thy much wisdom ! 

 and we admonish he and rebuke he till he become quiet and wise 
 again , but be sad and downcast and silent . but the Sending Boat 
 speed on through the dawning , and when it be light we see that we have 
 the Isle of Increase close aboard , and we run ashore there just as 
 the sun be rise . fain be we then to get out of the boat and 
 feel earth under our foot . we take all our hard out of the boat , 
 and hide away under the root of an old thorn a little mail wherein 
 be your raiment , my lady , which ye have lend to Birdalone ; then we 
 do on our armour , and advise we of whereabout on the isle we be , 
 and we see the orchard and garden before we , and the great fair 
 house above all , even as ye tell we of they , Birdalone . 

 next , then , without more ado , we go our way up through the orchard 
 and the garden , and when we be well - nigh at the end of they , and 
 in face of those many step ye spake of , we see at the foot of they a 
 tall woman clothe in red scarlet , stand as if she abode our come . 
 when we draw nigh we see that she be strong - look , well - knit , 
 white - skin , yellow - haired , and blue - eye , and might have be 
 call a fair woman , as to her shaping , save that her face be heavy , 
 yet hard - look , with thin lip and somewhat flagging cheek , a face 
 stupid , but proud and cruel . 

 she hail we as we come up , and say : man - at - arm , ye be welcome to 
 our house , and I bid you to eat and drink and abide here . 

 then we loute before she , and bade her hail ; and Baudoin say : 
 Lady , thy bidding will we take ; yet have we an errand to declare ere 
 we break bread with thee , lest when it be tell we be not so welcome 
 as ye tell we now . what be it ? say she . Said Baudoin : this man 
 here be call the Green Knight , and this the Black Squire , and I be 
 the Golden Knight ; and now will we ask thee if this isle be call 
 the Isle of Increase Unsought ? even so have I call it , quoth she , 
 wherefore I deem none other will dare call it otherwise . it be well , 
 quoth Baudoin ; but we have hear say that hereto have stray three 
 dear friend of ours , three maiden , who hight Viridis , the friend of 
 the Green Knight , and Atra , who be the Black Squire 's , and Aurea , who 
 be mine own friend , so we have come to take they home with we , since 
 they have be so long away from their land and their love . now if 
 they be thy friend thou wilt perchance let they go for love 's sake 
 and the eking of friendship ; but if they be thy captive , then be we 
 well willing to pay thee ransom , not accord to their worth , for no 
 treasure heap up might come nigh it , but accord to thy desire , 
 lady . 

 laugh the proud lady scornfully and say : big be thy word , Sir 
 Knight : if I have these maiden in my keeping I would give they unto 
 you for nothing , and deem that I have the good of the bargain . but 
 here be they not . true it be that I have here three thrall who be 
 hight as thou hast say ; but a while ago , not many day , they 
 transgress against I till I chastise they ; and then be I weary 
 of they and would be quit of they ; for I need no servant here , 
 whereas I myself be enough for myself . wherefore I send they away 
 across the water to my sister , who dwell in a fair place hight the 
 House under the Wood ; for she needeth servant , because the earth 
 there yieldeth nought save to the tiller and the herdsman and the 
 hunter , while here all cometh unsought . with she may ye deal , for 
 what I know , and buy the maiden whom ye prize so high ; though belike 
 ye may have to give her other servant in their place . for , indeed , 
 a while ago her thrall flee from she and leave she half undo , and it 
 be say that she come hither in her shamelessness : but I know not ; 
 if she do , she slip through my finger , or else I would have make 
 her rue her impudence . now meseemeth , Sir Knights , here be enough of 
 so small and foolish a matter ; and again I pray you to enter my poor 
 house , and take meat and drink along with I , for ye be none the less 
 welcome because of your errand , though it be a foolish one . 

 now would Sir Baudoin have answer wrathfully , but Arthur pluck at 
 his skirt , and he yeasaid the lady 's bidding , though somewhat 
 ungraciously ; but that she heed nought ; she take Sir Baudoin by the 
 hand and lead he up the stately perron , and thence come we into a 
 pillare hall , as fair as might be . and there on the dais be a 
 table dight with dainty meat and drink , and the lady bade we 
 thereto , and we sit to it . 

 Thereat be the lady buxom and merry : Baudoin scowl across the 
 board ; I be wary and silent ; but Arthur be as blithe with the lady 
 as she with he ; nor do I altogether marvel thereat , since I know 
 he wise of wit . 

 but when we be do with the meal , the lady stand up and say : 
 now , Sir Knights , I will give you leave ; but this house be as your 
 own to roam through all its chamber and pleasure you with its 
 wonder and goodliness ; and when ye be weary of the house , then be 
 the orchard and the garden free to you , and all the isle wheresoever 
 ye will go . and here in this hall be meat and drink for you whenso 
 ye will ; but if ye would see I again to - day , then shall ye meet I 
 where ye first happen on I e'en now , at the foot of the great 
 perron . 

 then she lay her hand on Arthur 's shoulder , and say : Thy big 
 friend may search out every nook in this house , and every bush in the 
 whole island , and if he find there the maiden he spake of , one or 
 all of they , then be they a gift from I unto he . 

 Therewith she turn , and go out of the hall by a door in the side 
 thereof ; and now already meseeme that though the woman be hateful 
 and thick - hearted and cruel , yet she be become fair , or seem so , 
 than when we first come on she ; and for my part I ponder on what it 
 might grow to , and fear of she come into my soul . 

 now spake Baudoin : fellow , let we get out into the garden at least ; 
 for this place be evil , and meseem it smell and taste of tear and 
 blood , and that evil wight that hate the life of man be lurk in 
 the nook thereof . and lo , our very she - friend that be so kind and 
 simple and dainty with we , there be , as it be , the image of the 
 dear maiden standing trembling and naked before the stupid malice of 
 this lump of flesh . so spake he , Birdalone . 

 but I say to Arthur in a soft voice : and when shall we slay she ? 
 say he : not until we have get from she all that may be get ; 
 and that be the live body of our friend . but come we forth . 

 so do we , and come down to the orchard and do off our helm , and 
 lie down under a big apple - tree which be clear of cover all round 
 about , and so fall to our rede ; and I ask Arthur what he deem of 
 the story of our love have be carry to the House under the 
 Wood , and if it might not be try seek thither ; but he laugh 
 and say : never would she have tell we thereof have it be sooth : 
 doubtless our friend be here on this isle , but , as I deem , not in 
 the house , else have not the witch leave all the house free for we to 
 search into . Yea , say I , but how if they be in her prison ? say 
 he : it be not hard to find out which be the prison of so dainty a 
 house as be yonder ; and when we have find it , soon should we have hit 
 upon a way to break it , since we be three , and stout fellow enough . 
 Nay , I deem that the loveling be stow away in some corner of the 
 isle without the house , and that mayhappen we shall find they there ; 
 and yet I trow not before we have make guile meet guile , and overcome 
 the sorceress . but come now , let we be do , and begin to quarter 
 this little land as the kestrel doth the water - meadow ; and leave we 
 our armour , lest we weary we , for we shall have no need for hard 
 stroke . 

 we hang up there on the tree helm and shield and hauberk , and all our 
 defence , and go our way quarter the isle ; and the work be 
 toilsome , but we rest not till the time be come to keep tryst with 
 the lady ; and all that while we find no sign of the darling one : 
 and the isle be everywhere a meadow as fair as a garden , with little 
 copse of sweet - grow tree here and there , and goodly brooks of 
 water , but no tillage anywhere : wild thing , as hart and buck and 
 roe , we come upon , and small deer withal , but all unhurtful to man ; 
 but of herding be no token . 

 come we then back to that lordly perron , and there , at the foot 
 thereof , stand the witch - wife , and receive we joyously ; clothe be she 
 all gloriously in red scarlet broidered and begemme ; her arm bare 
 and her foot sandalle , and her yellow hair hang down from under 
 its garland ; and certainly it be so that she have grow fair , and 
 be sleek and white and well - shapen , and well - haired ; yet by all 
 that , the visage of she be little better , and unto I she be 
 loathsome . 

 now the feast go much as the early meal have do ; and Baudoin be 
 surly and Arthur blithe and buxom ; and nought befell to tell of , save 
 that dish and meat , and flask and cup , and all thing come upon 
 the board as if they be bear thereon by folk unseen ; and thereat 
 we wonder not much , consider in what wonder - house we be . but 
 the lady - witch look on we and smile , and say : knight , ye marvel 
 at the manner of our service , but call to mind that we tell you this 
 morning that we be enough for ourselves , and we have so dight our 
 day here that whoso be our friend on this Isle of Increase shall 
 lack nothing . fear not , therefore , to see aught ugly in our servant 
 as now unseen , if their shape be make manifest unto you . 

 all thing be we heedful to note at this banquet ; but when it be 
 over , then come music into the hall from folk unseen , but not as if 
 the musician be a many , only belike some three or four . and 
 thereat the lady spake , say : knight , ye may deem our minstrel 
 but few , but such be our mind that we love not our music overloud , 
 and for the most part only three sing or play unto we at one time . 

 thereafter the lady bring we to fair chamber , and we sleep there 
 in all ease , and we arise on the morrow and find the lady still 
 blithe with we ; yet I note this , that she seem to deal with Arthur 
 as if she see he now for the first time , and much he seem to be to 
 her liking . 

 again we fare forth , and be no less diligent in search the isle 
 than erst , and find nought ; and all go that day as before . 

 on the morrow   that be , the third day   the witch seem to have 
 somewhat more memory of Arthur than erst , and even yet more liking of 
 he , so that she reach out her hand for he to kiss , which need 
 must he do , despite his loathing of she . 

 when we have lie under the apple - tree a little while , Baudoin spake 
 and say : yesterday and the day before we search the open land and 
 find nought ; now to - day let we search the house , and if we find 
 nought , then at least it shall lie behind we . we yeasaid it , and 
 presently go back , and from chamber to chamber , and all be fair 
 and goodly as might be , and we marvel what would betide to it when 
 the witch be undo and her sorcery come to an end . 

 to the Wailing Tower we come , and up the stair , and find the door 
 open of the prison - chamber , and all there as thou hast tell we , 
 Birdalone ; only we open the great coffer , whence thou didst refrain 
 thee , and find it full of hideous gear truly , as fetter and chain , 
 and whip and rod , and evil tool of the tormentor , and curse it 
 all and come away ; and Arthur say : lo you , this stupid one ! how 
 eager be she to bid we what to do , and to tell we that our lady be 
 not in this evil house , since she leaveth all open to we . yet we 
 go about the house without , and count the window heedfully to 
 see that we have miss no chamber , and find nought amiss ; and then 
 we go in again and seek as low down as we might , to see if 
 perchance some dungeon there be underground , but find nought save 
 a very goodly undercroft below the great hall , which be little less 
 fair than that which be above it . so come the evening and the 
 banquet , and the end of that day ; but the witch - wife lead Arthur by 
 the hand to the board , and afterwards to the chamber ere we sleep . 

 on the fourth day and the fifth it be no otherwise than erst ; and 
 when I fare to bed I feel confused in my head and sick of heart . 

 the night of the next day   the sixth , as we go to our chamber , 
 and the witch - wife and Arthur hand - in - hand , she stay he a while , 
 and spake eagerly to he in a soft voice ; and as he come up to I 
 afterwards he say : to - night I have escape it , but there will not 
 be escape for long . from what ? say I. he say : from bed she ; 
 for now it have come to this , that presently we must slay she at once 
 and have no knowledge of our sweetling , or I must do she will . 

 in such wise pass four more day , and it be the twelfth morning of 
 our sojourn there , and we go forth on our search of every mead and 
 every covert of the isle , and all day we find nought to our purpose ; 
 but as it grow toward sunset , and there grow great cloud in the 
 eastern ort , pile up and copper - colour , we come over a bent on to 
 a little green dale water by a clear brook , and as we look down 
 into it we see something shine amongst its tree ; so we hasten 
 toward that gleam , and lo , amidst the dale , with the brook run 
 through it , a strange garth we see . for there be a pavilion do of 
 timber and board , and gaily paint and gild , and out from that 
 house be , as it be , a great cage of thin gild bar , both wall 
 and roof , just so wide apart as no one full - grow , carl or quean , 
 could thrust through . 

 Thitherward then run we , shout , for we see at once that in the 
 say cage be three woman whose aspect be that of our sweetling , 
 and presently we be stand by the say herse , reach our hand 
 out to they to come to we and tell we their tale , and that we would 
 deliver they . but they stand together in the midst of the say cage , 
 and though they gaze piteously on we thence , and reach out their 
 hand to we , they neither spake nor come to the herse to we ; so we 
 deem that they be bewitch , and our joy be dash . 

 then we go all about the cage and the pavilion to find ingate , and 
 find it not ; and then the three of we together strove with the bar 
 of the herse , and shake and sway they , but it be all to no 
 purpose . 

 moreover , while we be at this work the sun seem to go out , and 
 there come a heavy black mist roll into the dale , and wrap we 
 about so that we see not each other 's face , and the bar of the 
 herse be go from our hand as we stand there . then come rain and 
 thunder and lightning on to the black night , and by the glare of the 
 lightning we could see the leaf and grass of the dale , but neither 
 herse nor house nor woman . so we abode there in the dark night , and 
 the storm all bewilder we , till the rain and cloud draw off and it 
 be calm fair starlight again , but clean go be the golden cage and 
 they that stand therein ; and we turn sadly , and go our way 
 toward the witch - house . 

 on the way say Arthur : Brethren , this meseemeth be but a - go on 
 with the show which be play we on the water as we come hither ; 
 but whether she doth this but for to mock and torment we , or that she 
 would beguile we into deeming that our friend be verily here , I wot 
 not ; but to - morrow , meseemeth , I shall can to tell you . 

 now come we to the perron of the house , and there stand the witch- 
 wife under the star to meet we . and when she see we , she take hold 
 of Arthur by the hand and the arm to caress he , and find that he 
 and we be drench with the rain and the storm , as might well be 
 deem ; then she bid we up to our chamber to do on raiment which 
 she have dight for we , and we go thither , and find our garment 
 rich and dainty indeed ; but when we come down into the hall where the 
 witch abode we , we see that Arthur 's raiment be far the rich and 
 daintiest . but the witch run to he and cast her arm about he , and 
 clip and kiss he before the other , and he suffer it . so 
 speed the feast again . 

 but when they go to bed , the say witch take Arthur 's hand and 
 spake a word unto he , and lead he away , and he go with she as one 
 nought loth ; but we twain be afraid lest she should destroy he 
 when she have have her will of he . wherefore we wake through the 
 more part of the night with our sword ready to hand . 

 but when we be clothe in the morn he come unto we , he also clothe , and 
 be downcast and shameface indeed , but safe and sound ; and he say : 
 speak no word about our matter till we be out in the open air , for I 
 fear all thing about we . 

 so when we have go forth and be under the apple - tree once more , 
 spake Arthur : now , lord , be I sham for ever , for I have become 
 the leman of this evil creature ; but I pray ye not to mock I ; and 
 that the more as the same lot may happen on you both , or either ; for 
 I can see for sure that the wretch will weary of I and desire one of 
 you two . let it pass . somewhat have I find out from she , but not 
 much ; first , that she have forget her first lie , to wit , how she 
 send our lady to the sister - witch ; for I tell she of the golden 
 cage , and how we have miss it in the storm ; and she say : though I 
 deem it a folly that ye should seek these thrall , yet would I help 
 you if I might , since ye be now become my dear friend . though , 
 forsooth , when ye meet they I deem that ye will find they sore 
 change to you . for , as I tell you , they flee away from I , after I 
 have chastise they for a treason , into the hidden place of the isle , 
 whereas they have no keel to sail away hence . and I care not to 
 follow they , as I myself be queen and lady of all thing here , and be 
 enough for myself , save when love constraineth I , dear lord . now , 
 my rede be that ye seek the golden cage again and yet again , because 
 I deem that these thrall have somehow learn some wisdom , and they 
 have enchant the say cage for a defence against I , from whom they 
 might not hide as they do from you ; for of I have they steal their 
 wizardry , and I be their mistress therein . 

 this , therefore , be the new lie of she , and my rede be that we hee 
 it nought . for my mind be that she it be that hath make the 
 appearance of the cage and the woman therein , and that she hath our 
 poor friend somewhere underneath her hand . 

 now this we deem most like ; yet whereas we have nought to do with 
 the time , which , now that we have search the isle throughly , hung 
 heavy on hand , we deem it good to go to the dale of the golden cage 
 again , though we look not to find the cage there any more . but 
 this betid , that we find the little dale easily enough , and there 
 stand the cage as we have see it yesterday , but nought be there 
 within its bright bar save the grass and the flower , and the water 
 of the brook a - running . 

 we loiter about that place a while , and go back to the house in 
 due time ; and to shorten the tale , I shall tell that for many day it 
 betid that we go every day to seek the golden cage , but after the 
 first three day we see it no more . 

 now begin sadness and weariness to overcome we as the day and week 
 wear , and belike the witch - wife note it that we be bad company 
 than heretofore . 

 and now on a day Arthur bade we note that the say witch be grow 
 weary of he , and he bid I look to it ; for , say he , she be turn 
 her face toward thee , brother . my heart burn with rage at that 
 word ; I say nought , but make up my mind that I would try to bring 
 the matter to an end . 

 that same night befell what Arthur have threaten ; for the feast 
 be do in the evening , the witch draw I aside while the music 
 be a - playing , and caress my hand and my shoulder , and say : I be 
 yet wonder at you Champions , that ye must need follow after those 
 three wretched thrall , whom never will ye find , for they . need ye 
 not , but will flee from you if ye have sight of they , as they do 
 that other day ; and therein they be scarce in the wrong , whereas 
 they may well think that if ye find they they should fall into my 
 hand ; for easily may I take they any day that I will , and then I 
 have a case against they , and may lawfully chastise they accord to 
 the law that have be give unto I ; and then shall they be in 
 grievous plight . wherefore the rede we give unto you three now be 
 the rede of friendliness that ye make yourself happy in our Island , 
 and then will we do everything we may for your pleasure and delight ; 
 and if ye will that we make ourselves even fair than now we be , 
 that may be do , and shall be a reward unto you for your yielding 
 and obedience . and if ye will woman thrall for your pleasure , that 
 also may be get for you ; for we be not wholly without power in 
 these water , though we have no keel or ferry upon they . and now , 
 thou fair lad , we give thee this last word : Ye Champions have be 
 dwell in our house a long while , and that while have ever strive 
 to thwart we . we now counsel you to make an end of it , and it shall 
 be well for you . 

 she seem to my eye prouder and stupider than ever erst , despite 
 her golden hair and white skin and lovely limb ; and I say to myself 
 that now must we destroy the evil of that house even if we die for 
 it , or else we be all undo ; withal I see somewhat of truth 
 thrust up through her much lying , and I deem , even as Arthur 
 do , that she have our friend under her band somewhere . 

 Nought else betid that night ; but on the morrow we go forth and 
 stray on till we be come into the southernmost quarter of the 
 isle , and not very far from the water we come upon a wood or big 
 thicket which be new to we . so we enter it , and as we go and 
 note the wild thing of the wood go hither and thither , we espy 
 afar off the shape of a man go amidst the thicket ; wherefore we 
 go warily towards he , lest he should see we and flee from we ; and 
 when we draw a little nigh we see it be a woman , though she be 
 clothe as a hunter , with leg naked to above the knee . she have a 
 quiver at she back and a bow in her hand , and her coat be black of 
 hue . belike now she hear our go amongst the dry leaf , for she 
 turn her face to we , and lo ! it be the face of Atra . 

 when she see we , she give a shrill cry , and fall to run at she 
 swiftest away from we , and we follow all we might , but we could not 
 over - run she , though we keep she in sight ever , till we have run all 
 through the wood , and before we be the sheer side of a rocky hill 
 and the mouth of a cave therein , and by the say mouth who should 
 there be but Aurea and Viridis , as we think , clothe in gold and in 
 green , but the fashion of their raiment not otherwise than Atra 's . 
 their bow be bended and they have shaft in their hand , and as we 
 come out of the thicket into the open lawn before the cave , Viridis 
 nock a shaft and aim at we and draw , and the shaft fly over my 
 head ; therewith mocking laughter come from they , and they run into 
 the cave . speedily we run up to it , but when we come home thither , 
 there be the sheer hillside , but never a cave nor an opening . 

 Dismayed be we thereat ; but more dismayed have we be but that we 
 deem that all this be but a cheat and a paint show put upon we 
 by the witch to back up her lying . nevertheless we fare the next 
 day to seek the wood and the cave in the sheer rock , but nowise might 
 we find either wood or cave . 

 now it be the night of the day hereafter , as we go to our 
 chamber , that the witch - wife take I by the hand and lead I apart , 
 and say I many soft thing of her accursed lust , whereof I will not 
 say one again . but the upshot of it all be that she would bring I 
 to her chamber and her bed . and whereas I be determine what to do , 
 and have my war - sword by my side , I naysaid she not , but make her good 
 countenance . and when we come to her chamber , which be full 
 gloriously dight , and fragrant as with the scent of the rose and 
 lily of mid - June , she bid I to lie in her bed of gold and ivory 
 and she would be with I anon . so I unclad myself and lay I down , 
 but I draw forth my sword , and lay the ancient naked blade betwixt 
 my side and her place . 

 Anon she cometh back again unclad , and would step into the bed ; but 
 she see the sword and say : what be this , Champion ? say I : these 
 edge be the token of sunder between we , for there be a spell on 
 I , that with no woman may I deal , save with mine only love , but I 
 shall do her mortal scathe ; so beware by the token of the grey edge 
 of battle . she draw aback , and be as a spiteful and angry cat , and 
 there be no loveliness in she ; and she say : thou liest , and thou 
 hatest I ; see thou to it , both for thyself and thy loveling . and 
 she turn about and stride out of the chamber ; but I arise and clothe 
 myself in haste , and take my naked sword in my hand . but before I 
 go , I look around , and espy an ambry fashion in the wall of 
 the bed - lane , and the door be half open ; and the say ambry be 
 wrought of the daintiest , all of gold and pearl and gem ; and I say 
 to myself : Herein be some treasure , and this be a tide of war . so I 
 open the ambry , and within it be even more gloriously work than 
 without ; and there be nought therein , save a little flask of crystal 
 do about with band of gold set with great and goodly gem . so I 
 take the say flask and go my way hastily to my own chamber , and 
 there I look at the say flask and take out the stopple ; and there 
 be a liquor therein , white like to water , but of a spicy smell , 
 sweet , fresh , and enheartene . so I yet think this be some great 
 treasure , and that much hang upon it , could I find out unto what use 
 it might be put . and I say : to - morrow we will put it to the proof . 
 then I put the said flask under my pillow , and lay my sword by my 
 side and sleep , and be not ill - content so far . 

 but on the morrow , when I meet my fellow , they ask I how I have 
 speed , and I tell they , well , and that we would talk the matter over 
 under our tree of counsel . so we go down into the hall , where we 
 meet the witch - lady ; and I look for it that she would be angry and 
 fierce with I ; but it go far otherwise ; for she be blithe and 
 buxom , and abound in endearment more than I could away with . but 
 this I note , that her eye wander , and her speech falter at 
 while , and ever she seem to be seek somewhat ; and withal that 
 her caress hand be seek if they could aught stow away in 
 the bosom of my coat . but all be nought , for as we come to the door 
 of the hall I give Baudoin the flask to guard until we should come to 
 our apple - tree of rede . wherefore the she - wolf go red and white by 
 turn , and fume , and fret her bedizenment with unrestful hand , 
 and when she should let we go our way , she linger and look back 
 oft , and be loth to depart ere she have get what she lack , and 
 that , forsooth , be the said flasket . 

 but when we be without the house , I bid our fellow go with I to 
 another place than the wonte apple - tree of rede , and they understand 
 my word , and I lead they to a little grassy plain without the orchard , 
 where be no covert for a wide space about it , nought but the one 
 linden - tree under which now we sit . there I tell they all the tale 
 of the last night and of the flasket , and put before they all that 
 be in my mind to do that evening at the banquet , and they both of 
 they yeasaid it . but what it be , that shall ye hear anon when we 
 carry the matter through ; but I bade Baudoin still carry the 
 flasket till the evening . 

 thereafter we spake of other matter ; but soon we have good cause to 
 rejoice that we have not talk our talk under the apple - tree   whereas 
 I doubt not that the witch would spy upon we there , for not long 
 have we be at our talk ere , look that way , we see the evil 
 creature by the hedge of the orchard and gaze over at we . 

 we arise then , and come to she as if nought have happen ; and she 
 bid we walk the garden with she , and we yeasaid it , and go with 
 she , and pace about amidst the flower and lie on the blossom 
 grass . Forsooth , both to she and to we the time hang heavy on hand . 
 and meseeme that the sleekness and fairness of her body be worsen 
 since yesterday , and she be pale and haggard , and her eye be 
 wandering and afraid . 

 now she bid we come a little far into the garden and eat a 
 morsel at noon ; and we arise , and she bring we to where be vine 
 trellis all about and overhead , so that it be like a fair green 
 cloister ; and there be a board lay and spread with many dainty of 
 meat and drink . and she bid we sit . verily we have but little 
 stomach to that dinner ; and I say to myself , Poison ! poison ! and 
 even so my fellow deem , as afterwards they tell I . and I see 
 Baudoin loosen his sword in the sheath , and I know that his mind be 
 to smite at once if he see aught amiss . and I , who sit next to the 
 witch , lay my hand on a little dagger which I wear at my girdle . 
 she also see this , and turn as pale as death , and sit tremble 
 before we ; and whatso we eat or drink at that board under the 
 rustle vine - leaf , she give unto we with her own hand ; and then we 
 wotte full surely that she have mean our death there and then , but 
 be cow by the fierce eye of Baudoin and the threat of my hand . 

 Withal it seem that she might not bear it to sit there long amongst 
 we . she rise up and smile on we as ghastly as a corpse , and give we 
 leave , and go hurry into the house . and right glad we be to 
 be at rest from she . yet as we ourselves durst not go far away from 
 the house , lest some new thing might happen , neither could she leave 
 we quite alone , but thrice again that afternoon at some turn of the 
 garden , or orchard , or meadow , we come upon her wan face and eye 
 full of all hate and star pride , and she enforce she to smile 
 upon we , and turn away with some idle word . 

 at last the sun begin to sink , and we go to the perron of the 
 house , and find she stand to meet we in her wonte way . but when 
 we come up she give no hand to any one of we but go up the stair 
 before we , and we follow with no word speak . 

 there be the hall with the lordly service on the board , and the wax- 
 candle light all about , and the great vault of stone fair and 
 stately over it . we go to the dais and the board and sit down , the 
 witch - wife in her gold and ivory chair at the board 's end , and I at 
 her right hand and look down the hall , my two fellow face I , 
 with their back to the clear of the hall . 

 there we sit , and the meat and drink be before we as dainty as 
 ever erst ; but we put forth no hand to they , but sit star at each 
 other for some two minute it might be , and the witch look from one 
 to the other of we , and quake that her hand shake like palsy . 

 then I rise up and put my hand to my bosom   for Baudoin have give I 
 the flasket ere we come to the perron : I spake in a loud voice , and 
 it sound wild and hard in the goodly hall : my lady , I say , thou 
 art look but pale now , and sick and downcast . drink now to I out 
 of this precious flasket , and thou shalt be whole and well . 

 and therewith I hold the flasket aloft ; but her face change 
 horribly ; she spring up in her chair and reach out her arm to 
 clutch at the flasket , scream like an eagle therewith . but I 
 thrust she back into the chair with my left hand ; and therewith arise 
 Baudoin and Arthur , and catch she by the shoulder , and bind she 
 fast to the chair with cord that they have get thereto . but when 
 she get her breath she yell out : ah , now shall all tumble 
 together , my proudful house and I under it ! Loose I , traitor ! 
 loose I , fool ! and give I one draught of the water of might , and 
 then shall I tell you all , and ye shall go free with your thrall if 
 ye will . ah ! ye will not loose I ? ye will not ? well then , at least 
 ye , the fool , shall be under it , and they also , the she - traitor , 
 the scourged and torment fool that might not save themselves from 
 I . o loose I ! loose I ! thou in whose arm I have lie so many a 
 night , and give I to drink of the proud water of might ! 

 so she yell ; and now have all the fairness go from her body : 
 flaggy and yellow be her limb , and she look all over as she 
 face , a lump of stupid and cruel pride , and her word lose meaning 
 and change into mere bestial howling . but for I , since she so 
 desire that water , I know that it be good for we to drink , and I 
 take out the stopple and drank , and it be as if fire run through all 
 my vein , and I feel my strength three - fold straightway , and most 
 wondrous clear be my sight grow therewith ; and I raise my eye now 
 and look down the hall , and lo , there be Aurea , chain by the 
 ankle to the third pillar from the dai ; and over against she , 
 Viridis ; and next , to the fourth pillar , Atra . then I cry in a 
 loud voice that ring through the witch 's hall : lo what I see ! and I 
 run round the head of the board , and thrust and drag Baudoin and 
 Arthur along with I , cry out : come , come ! they be find ! they 
 be here ! and I come to my sweetling , and find she clothe but in her 
 white smock , which be fleck with blood all about , and her face be 
 wan and pin , and the tear begin to run when she see I , but no 
 word come from her lip though the kissing of they be sweet . 

 then I turn about to my two fellow , and they stand bewilder , not 
 know what be toward ; and I come to they and make they drink of 
 the flasket , and their eye be open and the strength of giant 
 come to they , and they run each to his sweetling ; but Baudoin , before 
 ever he kiss Aurea , catch hold of the chain that bind she to the 
 pillar , and by main force drag it out . Wise be that , meseeme , 
 for word be again come into the witch 's howl , and I hear she : 
 ah , long may ye be play with the chain , long ! for now the house 
 rumbleth toward its fall . ah , the bitch be loose ! Woe 's I ! to 
 die alone ! and once more she howl wordless , as both I and Arthur 
 have our love in our arm , and fall to follow Baudoin out on to 
 the perron and down into the fresh fragrant garden wherein now be 
 the moon begin to cast shadow . 

 stand we then aloof from the house , and the rumble whereof the evil 
 hag have howl wax into a thunder , and under our very eye the 
 great white wall and gold - adorn roof fall together , and a great 
 cloud of dust rise under the clear moonlit sky . 

 we look and wonder , and our love also , but no word they spake ; 
 but ere the other two have time to grieve thereat , I give Viridis to 
 drink of the water of might , and she fall to sweet speech 
 straightway , of such sort and such wise as I will not tell you . then 
 I do the same by Aurea and Atra , and forthwith the speech flow 
 from they to their friend . 

 full happy be we then in the early night - season , for the water of 
 might gave they strength also , as to we , and heal all the stripe 
 and wound their body have suffer of the foul witch , and make 
 their eye bright , and their cheek full and firm , and their lip 
 most sweet , and their hand strong and delicious . 

 now when we have stand gaze toward the melting of the beauteous 
 palace for a little , we take our darling in our arm again , whereas 
 the chain would have hinder their walking , and go down to the 
 lip of the water whereas lie the Sending Boat , so that we might be 
 anigh our ferry in case of need ; for we know not what might betide 
 the isle now its mistress have perish . then we fall to and saw 
 off the chain from the dear ankle with our sword , and take 
 Birdalone 's lending from the mail . and Aurea have her gown again , 
 and Viridis her smock , and my green surcoat over it , and Atra wear 
 the battle - coat of the Black Squire . as for their bare foot   for 
 Atra would not have hers dight prouder than her sister ' , we so clad 
 they with kiss that they be not ill - cover belike . 

 so gat we aboard our ferry , and do blood - offering to the wight 
 thereof , and so speed merrily and lovingly over the wide lake back on 
 our homeward road . and we say : this hath the dear Birdalone do 
 for we . 

 and now , my Viridis , I will that thou fill up the tale by tell to 
 Birdalone , as ye tell we , how it fare with you three and the evil 
 one from the time that ye speed Birdalone on her way till the moment 
 when mine eye first behold you make fast to the pillar of the 
 palace which have crumble into dust . 



 CHAPTER X. how it fare with the three lady after the ESCAPE of 
 birdalone 



 Viridis take up the word without more ado , and say : I will do my 
 good herein , and ye , sister , must set I right if I err . when we 
 have see the last of you , dear Birdalone , that early morning , we 
 turn back again to the house as speedily and as covertly as we 
 might , lest the witch might espy our disarray and question we 
 thereover . then we go to the wonder - coffer , and gat thereout 
 raiment for that which we have give away , which be easy for we to 
 do , whereas the witch - mistress be so slothful that she have give to 
 we the word of might wherewith to compel the coffer to yield , so 
 that we might do all the service thereof , and she not to move hand or 
 foot in the matter . so when we be clothe , and the time be come , we 
 go into the hall , by no mean well assure of our mistress . 

 when we come before she , she look on we in surly wise , as she will not 
 be , and say nought for a while ; she star on we and knit she 
 brow , as if she strove to call to mind something that run to and fro 
 in her memory ; and I note that , and for my part I tremble before 
 she . but she spake at last : Meseemeth as if there be a woman in the 
 isle besides you three ; some misdoer that I be minded to punish . 
 tell I , you ! be there not a naked one who come into this hall a 
 while ago , one whom I threaten with pining ? Atra , who be the 
 bold of we , bow the knee before she , and say : Nay , our lady , 
 since when do stranger woman come naked into thine hall , and dare 
 thee there ? 

 say the witch : yet have I an image of a naked woman stand down 
 there before I ; and if I have it in mine eye , so should ye . tell I 
 therefore , and beware , for we be not bid to hold our hand from 
 you if we take you in misdeed . 

 if I quake before , now much more I quake , till my leg well - nigh 
 fail I for fear ; but Atra say : great lady , this image will 
 belike be of that one whom a while ago ye have strip and tie to a 
 pillar here , and torment while ye feast . 

 the lady look on her hard , and again seem strive to gather up 
 the thrum of some memory , and then her face become smooth again , and 
 she spake lightly : all that may well be ; so do ye go about your due 
 service , and trouble our rest here no long ; for we love not to look 
 on folk who be not wholly our own to pine or to spare , to slay or let 
 live , as we will ; and we would that the wind and the wave would 
 send we some such now ; for it be like to live all alone to have but 
 such as you with we , and none to cower before we and entreat we of 
 mercy . so begone , I bid you . 

 thus for that time be we save from the witch 's cruelty ; but our 
 time come before long . the day wear heavily , nor keep we count of 
 they lest we should lose heart for the weariness of waiting . but on 
 a day as we stand on the step of the perron and serve my lady with 
 dainty , of a hot afternoon , come two great white dove a - flying , 
 who pitch down right before our mistress 's foot ; and each have a 
 gold ring about his neck , and a scroll tie thereto , and the witch 
 bade we take the dove and take off the scroll and give they unto 
 she ; and she look on the gold ring which the dove bore , and for a 
 moment on the scroll , and then she say : take ye the dove and 
 cherish they , lest we have need of they ; take also the two scroll 
 and keep they till to - morrow morning , and then give they into our 
 hand . and look ye to this , that if ye give they not unto Us it will 
 be treason against we , and we shall have a case against you , and your 
 body will be Ours . 

 then she rise up slowly , and bid I to she that she might lean upon 
 my shoulder and be help upstairs , so slothful a beast as she be ; 
 and as we go up I hear she say softly to herself : weary on it , 
 now must I drink a sup of the Water of Might , that I may remember and 
 do and desire . but dear be my sister , and without doubt she hath 
 matter of import to tell I by these dove . 

 so when we be together alone I tell the other hereof , and we 
 talk it over ; and they deem the tiding ill , even as I do ; for 
 we might not doubt but that the dove be a sending from the witch- 
 sister who dwell at the House under the Wood ; and sore we misdoubte 
 that they be speed to our mistress to tell she of thee , Birdalone , 
 and mayhappen of the Quest , so wise as we know she be . as to the 
 two scroll , forsooth , they be open , and not seal ; but when we 
 look on they we could make nought of it ; for though they be writ 
 fairly in Latin script , so that we read they , yet of the word no 
 whit might we understand , so we fear the bad . but what might we 
 do ? we have but two choice , either to cast ourselves into the water , 
 or abide what should befall ; and this last one we choose because of 
 the hope of deliverance . 

 next morning , therefore , we come before our mistress in the hall , and 
 we find she pace up and down before the dais ; though she will not be 
 at that hour to be sit in her throne of gold and ivory , lie 
 back on the cushion half asleep . 

 so Atra go up to she , and knelt before she and give she the 
 scroll , and she look on her grimly , and smile evilly , and say : 
 Kneel there yet ; and ye other kneel also , till I see what befitteth 
 you . so do we , and indeed I be fain to kneel , for I might scarce 
 stand up for terror ; and all of we , our heart die within we . 

 but the witch read those scroll to herself , sit in her throne , 
 and spake not a long while ; then she say : come hither , and grovel 
 before we , and hearken ! even so we do ; and she say again : our 
 sister , who hath be so kind unto you , and save you from so many 
 pain , here telleth Us , by the message of the two dove , that ye have 
 betray Us and she , and have steal her thrall and her Sending Boat , 
 and send she an errand for our destruction ; and therewith she 
 delivereth you into our hand , and ye be ours henceforward ; nor be 
 it to be think that ye may escape we . now , for your treason , some 
 would slay you outright here and now , but we will be merciful , and 
 let you live , and do no more than chastise you sharply now ; and 
 thereafter shall ye be our very thrall to do as we will with : 
 thereafter , that be to say , when they whom ye have send our sister 's 
 thrall to fetch have come hither   as belike I may scarce stay they , 
 and I have foil they and use they , and send they away empty . now 
 I tell you , that meanwhile of their come shall ye suffer such 
 thing as we will ; and when they be here we will not forbid you to be 
 anigh they ; but we shall see that there will be little joy to you in 
 that nighness . yea , ye shall know now to what market ye have bring 
 your ware , and what the price of treason be therein . 

 verily then we suffer at her hand what she would , whereof it would 
 shame I to tell more as at this present ; and thereafter do she 
 chain we to those three pillar of the hall whereas ye find we 
 chain ; and we be feed as dog be , and serve as dog , but we 
 endure all for the sake of hope ; and when we durst , and deem the 
 witch would not hear we , we spake together and enheartene each 
 other . 

 but on the fourth day of our torment come the witch to we , and give 
 we to drink a certain red water from out of a leaden flasket ; and 
 when I drink I deem it be poison , and be glad , if gladness might 
 be in I at such a tide ; and when I have drunk I feel an icy chill go 
 through all my body , and all thing swam before my eye , and deadly 
 sickness come over I . but that pass away from I presently , and I 
 feel helpless and yet not feeble ; all sound hear I clear than 
 ever yet in my life ; also I see the hall , every arch and pillar and 
 fret , and the gleam on the pavement from the bright sun that might 
 not enter ; and the witch I see walk up and down the hall by the 
 dais ; but my sister I see not when I look across to their pillar . 
 moreover , I might not see myself when I reach out my hand or my 
 foot , though I see the chain which make my ankle fast to the pillar ; 
 and withal , when I set my hand on my face , or any other part of my 
 body , or what else I might touch , I feel there what I look to feel , 
 be it flesh or linen , or the cold iron of my fetter , or the 
 polished face of the marble pillar . 

 now I know scarce if I be alive or dead , or if I be but begin 
 to be dead ; but there come upon I the desire of life , and I strove 
 to cry out to the sister , but though I form the word in my mouth , 
 and do with my throat as when one cry out aloud , yet no sound of a 
 voice come from I , and more helpless do I feel than erst . 

 but even therewith I see the witch come toward I , and therewith all 
 my body feel such fear of she that I know I be not dead . then she 
 come before I and say : o shadow of a thrall , whom none can see but 
 they unto whom wisdom hath give eye to see wonder withal , now have 
 I tiding for thee and thy sister , to wit , that your lover and 
 seeker be at hand ; and presently I shall bring they into this hall , 
 and they shall be so nigh unto you that ye might touch they if I do 
 not forbid it ; but they shall not see you , but shall wonder where I 
 have hide you , and shall go seek you to - day and many day , and 
 shall find you not at all . so make ye the most of the sight of they , 
 for in they henceforward ye have no other part or lot . 

 Therewith she spit out at I , and go over to my sister , and say 
 word of like import to those which she have say unto I . and 
 presently she go out of the hall ; and not long afterwards I hear 
 voice speak on the perron , and know one for the voice of the 
 witch , and the other for the voice of my lord Baudoin ; and then again 
 wear a little while , and I see the witch come through the great door 
 of the hall lead Sir Arthur by the hand , as if she be his dear 
 friend , and Baudoin and Hugh , my man , follow they . and the say 
 witch be clothe full fair , and have lay by her sloth and stupid pride , 
 as meseeme ; and her limb be grow rounder and sleeker , and her 
 skin fairer , so that to they that know she not she might well seem to 
 be a goodly woman . 

 now they sit to meat as my man hath tell you , and then depart from 
 the hall , and the witch also . but after a while she come back again 
 and loose we , and grimly bid we go with she , and need must we , 
 though we could not so much as see our own foot upon the floor . and 
 she set we to task about the house , and stand by while we toil for 
 she , and mock we not without stripe , and in all way be as rough 
 and cruel and hard with we as she have be smooth and debonair to our 
 lord ; but after noon she bring we back and chain we to our 
 pillar again . and when the evening come and the banquet be , it be 
 we who be the unseen player of the string - play ; and we might play 
 no other melody than what the witch bid we ; else belike , could we 
 have hold converse , we might have play such tune as would have 
 smite the heart of our love , and tell they that we be anigh . 
 to make a short story of it , thus do she day by day , and no comfort 
 or converse might we sister have of each other , or of aught else 
 save the sight of our beloved one , and a glimmer of hope therewith . 
 and , forsooth , for as grievously as my heart be wring by the 
 yearning of I for my love , yet be it a joy unto I to think that he 
 go there desire I , and that whom he desire be not the poor 
 wretched creature chain there in her nakedness , with her body 
 spoil by torment and misery , but the glad maiden whom he have so 
 often call fair and lovesome . 

 so pass the day , and at last hope have grow so pale and wan , that 
 she be no more to be see by we than we be by our lord ; and now 
 it seem to I that death be come , so feeble and wretche as I 
 grow . but the witch would not let we die , but sustain we from time 
 to time with some little draught of a witch - drink that revive we . 

 so wear the time till that evening , when come hope together with the 
 fulfilment of hope , so that one minute we durst hope for deliverance , 
 and the next we be deliver . 

 nor be there more to tell , Birdalone , my dear , save that we come 
 safely to the Isle of the Young and the Old in the full morning - tide ; 
 and as our ferry draw nigh the green shore , there be the two 
 youngling whereof thou didst tell we await our landing , and when 
 we step ashore they come to we bear cake and fruit in a fair 
 basket , and they make much of we and we of they . and so we come to 
 the old man , who be exceed fain of we , and grand and courteous , 
 till he become a little drunk , and then he be somewhat over - kind to 
 we woman . nevertheless , there in that pleasant isle we rest we for 
 three day , that we might somewhat calm and refresh our spirit with 
 what be small and of little account . and when we depart , the old 
 man follow we down to the strand , and lament our departure , as he 
 have do with our lord erewhile ; only this time yet great be his 
 lamentation , and need must we kiss he , each one of we , or never have 
 he be do . so he turn up landward , bewail the miss of we , 
 but presently , before we have see the last of he , be cheerful again 
 and sing . 

 so we go on our way ; and we also , we maiden , in our turn , see 
 those woeful image of the Isle of Queens and the Isle of king ; and 
 we come to the Isle of Nothing , and abode warily by our ferry , and so 
 come away safe , and thus , as thou wott , home to the castle to hear 
 evil tiding of thee . now be this all my tale . 

 birdalone sit shyly and hush when all be do ; and then all they 
 do somewhat to comfort she , each after their own fashion ; and now 
 sorrow for the slain man be make soft and sweet for they , 
 whereas they have to lose not two fellow , but one only . yet , despite 
 of all , trouble and care be on Birdalone 's soul betwixt the joy of 
 love and be belove , and the pain and fear of rob a friend 
 of her love . for Atra 's face , which she might not hate , and scarce 
 might love , be a threat to her day by day . 



 CHAPTER XI . BIRDALONE and the black SQUIRE TALK together in the hall 
 of the CASTLE . 



 now within a few day be the body of Baudoin lay in earth in the 
 chapel of the castle ; and in the solemn of fashion be the burial 
 do . when it be over , the two knight and Sir Aymeris turn they 
 heartily to dighte the war against the Red Hold , and less than a 
 month thereafter be the hosting at the Castle of the Quest , and if 
 the host be not very many   for it go not above sixteen hundred 
 of man all tell , yet the man be of the choicest , both of knight 
 and sergeant and archer . there then they hold a mote without the 
 castle , whereas Arthur the Black Squire be choose for captain , and 
 in three day they be to depart for the Red Hold . 

 now this while Birdalone have see but little of Arthur , who be ever 
 busy about many matter , and never have she have any privy talk with 
 he , though sore she long for it ; yet indeed it be more by she 
 will than his that so it be . but when it be come to the very last 
 day before the departure , she say that she must need see he before 
 he go , and he perchance never to come back again . so when man be 
 quiet after dinner she go into the hall and find he there , pace 
 up and down the floor . for indeed she have send a word to he by 
 Leonard the priest that he should be there . 

 so she go up to he , and all simply she take he by the hand and 
 lead he into a shot - window and set he down by she ; and he , all 
 tremble for love and fear of she , might not forbear , but kiss she 
 face and her mouth many time ; and she grow as hot as fire , and 
 somewhat she weep . 

 then she spake after a while : dear friend , I have it in my mind to 
 say to thee many thing that meseem be sage , but now neither will 
 the thought of they come into my mind , nor the word into my mouth . 
 and this be a short hour . and therewith she fall to kiss he , 
 till he be well - nigh beside himself betwixt desire and joy and the 
 grief of departure , and the hardness of the case . 

 but at last she forbore and say : will it not be when thou art go 
 to - morrow as it be when ye be away upon the Quest , and I know not 
 how to bear myself , so heavy lie all the world and its doing and its 
 fashion upon I ? it will be hard to I , he say ; evil and grim will 
 be the day . she say : and yet , even now in these last day , when I 
 see thee oft , every day my soul be wear with grief , and I know not 
 what to do with myself . I shall come back , he say , and bear my love 
 with I , and then belike we shall seek some remedy . she be silent a 
 while , and then she say : meanwhile of thy coming , and I see thee 
 not at all for many day , how will it be with my grief then ? Quoth 
 he : More than enough of grief no soul may bear ; for either death 
 come , or else some dullness of the pain , and then by little and 
 little the pain weareth . then she say : and how would it be if thou 
 come not back and I see thee never again , or if when thou come back 
 thou find I not , for that I be either dead or go away out of thy 
 reach ? he say : I know not how it would be . when thou say thou 
 shalt die , dost thou wholly believe it in thy sense or thy body 
 otherwise than Holy Church would ? I will tell thee , she say , that 
 now I be sit by thee and see thy face and hear thy voice , 
 it be that only which I believe in ; for I may think of nought else of 
 either grief or joy . yea , when I weep e'en now , it be not for 
 sorrow that I weep , but for I can not rightly tell what . and she take 
 his hand and look fondly upon he . 

 but presently she look on his hand , and say : and now meseemeth 
 that we twain be grow to be such close friend that I may ask thee 
 what I will , and thou be neither angry , nor wonder thereat . I see on 
 thy finger here the ring that I bring with I from the Isle of 
 Increase , and which thereafter thou hadst of I when I give thee back 
 also the shoon which be lend unto I . tell I how thou hadst it 
 back from Atra , as I suppose thou gav it unto she . but how now 
 art thou angry ? for I see the blood come up in thy face . Nay , 
 belove , say he , I be not angry , but whenso I hear of Atra , or think 
 of she closely , shame come on I and confusion , and maybe fear . but 
 now will I answer thee . for even in those hour which we wear on the 
 Isle of the Young and the Old , when all we should have be so happy 
 together , she divine somewhat of my case , or indeed , why do I not 
 say it out , all thereof . and she spake to I such word   for she be 
 both tender and wise and strong of heart   that I cower before she 
 and her grief and pain ; and she give I back the said ring , which 
 forsooth I give to she in the Sending Boat in the first hour that the 
 Isle of Increase lie astern of we . and I wear it now as a token of 
 my grief for her grief . see now , love , since I have answer thee 
 this question without anger or amaze , thou need not fear to ask I 
 any other ; for this of all thing lie close to my heart . 

 birdalone droop her head , and she spake in a low voice : lo now ! 
 the shadow of parting and the shadow of death could not come between 
 our present joy ; but this shadow of the third one cometh between we 
 and be present between we . Woe 's I ! how little do I think of this 
 when thou wert away and I be sick of longing for the sight of thee , 
 and deem that that would heal it all . 

 he spake not , but take her hand and hold it ; and presently she look 
 up again and say : thou art good , and wilt not be angry if I ask 
 thee something else ; this it be : why wert thou so grim with I that 
 other day when ye find I in that evil plight in tow of the Red 
 Tyrant , so that I deem that thou of all other hadst cast I off ? 
 that be bad to I than the witch 's stripe , and I keep think to 
 myself : how simple be my trouble once , and now how tangle and 
 weary ! 

 then he might not refrain he , but throw himself upon she , and 
 clip she and kiss she all he might , and she feel all the 
 sweetness of love , and lack nought of kindness and love to he . 
 and thereafter they sit still awhile , and he say , as if her question 
 have but that moment leave her lip : this , forsooth , be the cause 
 that I look grim on thee : first , that from the time I first see 
 thee and hear thy tale , and of thy deed , I have deem thee wise 
 above the wisdom of woman . but this go forth of thee to the Black 
 Valley , whereof come the slaying of Baudoin , seem unto I a mere 
 folly , till again I have hear thy tale of that also ; and then the 
 tale and thy speech overcome I . but again , though I be grieve and 
 disappointed hereat , belike that have pass from I speedily , but 
 then there be this also which would not let my soul rest , to wit , 
 that I fear concern that slain knight whose head the Red One have 
 hang about thy neck ; for how else , methought , might he have be so 
 wroth with he and thee ; and meseeme , moreover , that thou wert kind 
 in thine heart to the dead man , even when we be come to thee ; and 
 then , seest thou , my desire for thee and the trouble of Baudoin 's 
 slaying , and the black trouble aforesaid . Lo now , I have tell thee 
 this . when wilt thou cease to be angry with I ? 

 she say : I cease to be grieve with thine anger when thine anger 
 die ; yet strange , meseemeth , that thou shouldst trust I so little 
 when thou lov I so much ! 

 and she lean against he and caress he gently , and again be he 
 at point to take she in his arm , when lo ! the sound of man come 
 unto the screen of the hall ; so then those two stand up and go to 
 meet they , and there be the speech of their sundering do . yet 
 belike for a little while both those twain be happy . 



 CHAPTER XII . the KNIGHTS and their fellows betake they to the 
 assaulting of the RED hold 



 on the morrow , when the day be yet young , the knight be ready for 
 departure , and in the very gate they bid farewell to the lady , who 
 kiss they kindly one and all , and Viridis weep sore ; and Atra 
 constrain herself to do even as the other do ; but pale she be 
 and quake when she kiss Arthur and watch he get a - horseback . 

 but the knight bid their lady be of good cheer , for that they 
 would send they tiding of how they speed every seven day at least , 
 whereas it be no long way thence to the Red Hold , save there be 
 battle on the road , and they deem their host which should beset the 
 Hold would be enough to clear all the way behind it . for that same 
 cause withal they have Sir Aymeris with they , nor leave a many man 
 behind they , and they under the rule of three squire , whereof two 
 be but young , and the third , who be make the captain of the 
 castle , be an old and wise man of war , who have to name Geoffrey of 
 Lea . there , withal , be the priest Sir Leonard , who go about now 
 much hush and abash , and seem to fear to give a word to 
 birdalone ; albeit she deem of he that his thought of she be the 
 same as erst they have be . 

 so now when the knight be depart , and all the host be go out 
 of sight , it be heavy time indeed in the Castle of the Quest till 
 they should hear tiding of they again . both Aurea and Atra keep 
 much to themselves , and do I know not what to wear away the time ; 
 for now it be not to be look for that they should venture out - a- 
 gate . but as for Viridis , she wax of well cheer after a while , 
 but whatever betid she would not sunder herself from Birdalone ; nay , 
 not for an hour ; and Birdalone take all her kindness kindly , though 
 forsooth it be somewhat of a pain unto she ; it shall be tell 
 wherefore ere long . 

 Withal , as if to wear the time , Birdalone betake she diligently to 
 her needlework , and fall to the cunningest of broidery ; so that 
 Viridis and the other wonder at she , for when they be do it 
 seem indeed that the flower and creature and knot have grow of 
 themselves upon the cloth , such wondrous work it be . 

 moreover , to his great joy , the very first day of the departure of 
 the host she call Sir Leonard unto she , and pray to go on again 
 with the learn her fair scribe - craft ; and therein also be she 
 diligent hour of every day ; and Viridis would sit beside she 
 wonder at the deftness of her finger , and cry out for joy as 
 the page grow fair and well - learn under they . 

 thus wear a week , and at the end thereof come a messenger from the 
 host and tell how they have come before the Red Hold and have summon 
 they thereof to yield , which they have utterly deny to do , but 
 defy the host ; wherefore the host have now beset the Hold , and more 
 folk be daily flock unto they ; but that the say hold would be 
 hard to win by plain assault , whereas it be both strong and well- 
 man ; but few of the host have be slay or hurt as yet , and of the 
 chieftain not one . 

 right glad be they of the castle because of these tiding ; though , 
 forsooth , the man - at - arm know well enough that the time would soon 
 come when some fierce assault would be make , and then , forsooth , 
 would be sore peril of life and limb unto the chieftain . 



 CHAPTER XIII . birdalone bethink she to fulfil the promise make unto 
 ATRA 



 again wear a week , and once more come the messenger , and do they of 
 the castle to wit that there have be nought more do at the Red 
 Hold , save skirmishing at the barrier , wherein few be hurt on 
 either side ; and also that the engine for batter the wall be 
 now well - nigh all dight , and they would begin to play upon the Hold , 
 and in especial one which hight Wall - wolf , which have be set up by 
 the craft of Greenford . 

 this tiding also be deem good by all , save it might be by Atra , 
 who , as Birdalone deem , pined and fret herself at the delay , and 
 would fain that , one way or other , all be over . Atra spake but 
 little to Birdalone , but watch she closely now ; oft would she gaze 
 on she wistfully , as if she would that Birdalone would speak unto 
 she ; and Birdalone note that , but she might not pluck up heart 
 thereto . 

 wear a third week , and again come the messenger , and tell how three 
 day ago , whenas Wall - wolf have sorely batter one of the great 
 tower which hight the poison - jar , and overthrow a pan of the wall 
 there beside , they have try an assault on the breach , and hard have 
 be the battle there , and in the end , after fierce give and take , 
 they of the Hold have do so valiantly that they have thrust back the 
 assailant , and that in the hot brunt the Black Squire have be 
 hurt in the shoulder by a spear - thrust , but not very grievously ; but 
 withal that he send , in so many word , forbid the lady to make 
 any account of so small a matter . and , quoth the sergeant , most like 
 my lord will wear his armour in four day ' time ; also now we have 
 rear another great slinger , which we call stone - fretter , and soon , 
 without doubt , we shall be stand victorious within that den of 
 thief . 

 now though these tiding be not so altogether ill , yet be those 
 lady sore troubled thereby , and especially Atra , who swoon 
 outright when she have hear the last word thereof . 

 as for Birdalone , she make as little semblance of her trouble as she 
 might , but when all be quiet again she go to find Viridis , and 
 bring she to her chamber and spake to she , say : Viridis , my 
 sister , thou hast be piteous kind unto I from the first minute 
 that thou saw I naked and helpless , and flee from evil unto 
 bad evil ; nowise might thou have do well by I hadst thou 
 be verily my sister of blood ; and I know it that thou wouldst be 
 loth to part from I . 

 Viridis weep and say : why dost thou speak of parting from I , when 
 thou know it would break my heart ? 

 say birdalone : to say it as short as may be , because the parting 
 must now come to pass . Viridis wax pale and then red , and she 
 stamp her foot and say : it be unkind of thee to grieve I thus , 
 and thou doest wrong herein . 

 Hearken , dear sister , say birdalone : thou know , for thou thyself 
 wast the first to tell I thereof , that I be the supplanter in our 
 fellowship , and that I have undo Atra 's hope . this I do not of 
 mine own will , but it come unto I ; yet of mine own will I can do the 
 good I may to amend it ; and this be the good , that I depart hence 
 before the Red Hold be take and my lord come back ; for if they come 
 back and I see my lord Arthur , so fair and beauteous as he be , before 
 I , never shall I be able to go away from he . and lo thou , I have 
 promise Atra by all the kindness she do I when we be come to the 
 Wailing Tower , and I naked and quaking and half - dead with terror , 
 that if occasion serve I would do my utmost to help she , even if it 
 be to my own grief . now behold this that now be , be the occasion , 
 and there will not be another ; for when my love come home hither and 
 beholdeth I , think thou how all the desire which have be gather 
 in his heart this while will blossom and break forth toward I ; and 
 mayhappen he will make but little semblance of it before other folk , 
 for proud and high of heart be he ; but he will seek occasion to find 
 I alone , and then shall I be with he as the lark in the talon of 
 the sparrow - hawk , and he will do his pleasure of I , and that with 
 all the good - will of my heart . and then shall I be forswear to Atra , 
 and she will hate I , as now she doth not , and then be all the 
 fellowship riven , and that by my deed . 

 yet be Viridis wrath , and she say : Meseemeth this be fool 's talk . 
 will not the fellowship be all the more riven if thou depart and we 
 see thee no more ? 

 o nay , say Birdalone ; for when I be go thy love shall be no less 
 for I , though as now thou art angry ; and Atra will love I for that 
 I shall have hold to my promise to mine own scathe ; and thy man and 
 Aurea will lay it to I that I have do valiantly and knightly . and 
 Arthur , how can he choose but love I ; and maybe we shall yet meet 
 again . 

 and therewithal she do at last bow down her head and fall to 
 weeping , and Viridis be move by her tear and fall to kiss and 
 caress she . 

 after a little birdalone lift up her head and spake again : 
 moreover , how can I dare to abide he ? didst thou not see how grim he 
 be to I when they deliver I and bring I back ? and he with his 
 own lip tell I so much , that it be because he doubt that I have 
 do amiss ; and now if I do amiss again , even if it be at his 
 bidding , will it not be so that he will speedily weary of I , and 
 curse I and cast I off ? what sayest thou , Viridis mine ? 

 what be to say , say Viridis , save that thou hast break my heart ? 
 but thou mayst heal it if thou wilt take thy word back , and tell I 
 that thou wilt not sunder thee from we . 

 but birdalone brake out weeping and lament aloud , and she cry 
 out : Nay , nay , it may not be ; I must depart , and Atra hath smite 
 I amidst of my friend . and Viridis know not what to say or to do . 

 at last come Birdalone to herself again , and she look sweetly on 
 Viridis and smile on she from out her tear , and say : Thou seest , 
 sister , how little a loss thou wilt have of I , a mere wild woman . 
 and now nought availeth either I or thee but I must begone , and that 
 speedily . let it be to - morrow then . and when the messenger come at 
 the end of this week , send word by he of what I have do ; and look 
 thou to it but both our lord will praise I for the deed . 

 say Viridis : but whither wilt thou , or what wilt thou do ? to 
 Greenford first , say Birdalone , and after whither the Good Lord 
 shall lead I ; and as for what I will do , I be now deft in two 
 craft , script and broidery to wit ; and , wheresoever I be , folk shall 
 pay I to work herein for they , whereby I shall earn my bread . 
 Hearken also , my sister , canst thou give I any deal of money ? for 
 though I wot little of such matter , yet I wot that I shall need the 
 same . and I ask this whereas , as e'en now I say , I deem our lord 
 shall praise my deed , and that , therefore , they would not that I 
 should depart hence as an outcast , wherefore they shall not begrudge 
 it to I . moreover , for the same cause I would thee speak to the old 
 squire Geoffrey of Lea , and tell he that I have an errand to 
 Greenford , and crave of he that he lend I one of the two 
 youngling , Arnold or Anselm , and two or three man - at - arm to bring 
 I safely thither ; since now , forsooth , I need no more adventure on 
 the road . 

 she smile as she spake ; and now all the passion of anguish seem to 
 have leave she for that while ; but Viridis cast her arm about her 
 neck and weep upon her bosom , and say : Woe 's I ! for I see that 
 thou wilt go whatsoever I may say or do ; I strove to be angry with 
 thee , but I might not , and now I see that thou constrainest I as 
 thou dost all else . I will go now straightway and do thine errand . 

 thus then they part for that time ; but it be not till the day 
 after the morrow that Birdalone be alboun . Viridis tell of she 
 departure both to Aurea and Atra ; and Aurea lament it , but would 
 not do aught to stay she ; for she be waxen weary and listless since 
 the death of her man . as for Atra , she spake but little concern 
 it , but to Viridis praise Birdalone 's valiance and kindness . yet 
 unto herself she say : verily she understand my word that I spake to 
 she about the occasion of her helping . yet woe 's I ! for she shall 
 carry his love with her whithersoever she wendeth ; and a happy woman 
 be she . 

 but when Geoffrey the squire know that the lady , all three , be at 
 one with Birdalone as to her departure , he doubt nothing , but bade 
 Arnold , his mate , take four good man with he , and bring the Lady 
 birdalone unto Greenford and do she bid there . albeit , he deem 
 no less but they would bring she back again . 



 CHAPTER XIV . birdalone leave the CASTLE of the quest 



 on the morrow morn , then , Birdalone spake farewell both to Aurea and 
 Atra ; but as for Viridis , she send her word that she have no heart 
 thereto , and yet she send she a word of comfort , to wit , that she 
 deem that they would one day meet again . Aurea , in her parting 
 word , part praise she , part chid she ; say that she do well and 
 kindly and valiantly , as she will not be . yet , say she , when all be 
 say , thou might have abide this tangle and trouble , which at the 
 bad have not be so evil as death between we . yea , sister , say 
 Birdalone , but might not death have come of my abiding ? 

 as she spake , in come Atra , with her head somewhat droop , meek and 
 humble , her cheek red , her hand tremble ; and she say : wilt thou 
 take now my word of farewell and blessing , and the kiss of peace 
 betwixt we , and bear away the memory of our kindness together ? 

 birdalone stand up proud and straight , and be somewhat pale as she 
 suffer Atra to kiss her cheek and mouth , and say : now hast thou 
 forgive I that weird drag I in betwixt thy love and thy 
 goodhap ; and I have forgive thee that I be lead away by weird into 
 the waste and the wilderness of love . farewell . Therewith she go 
 her way to the gate , and the other follow she not . 

 without abode her Arnold and the four man - at - arm , and her palfrey 
 and a sumpter - horse bear two goodly coffer , wherein Viridis have 
 let load raiment and other having for she ; and Arnold come up to her 
 smile , and say : my lady Viridis hath give I a pouch wherein be 
 money to bear for thee to Greenford and hand over to thee there when 
 we be safe ; and she hath bid I to be in all wise obedient unto 
 thee , lady , which need not , whereas now and from hence forth be I 
 by mine own will thy very servant to do thy pleasure always and 
 everywhere . 

 she thank he and smile on he kindly , so that his heart beat fast 
 for joy and love of she ; and therewith she gat into the saddle and 
 they ride their way together , and Birdalone look back never till 
 the Castle of the Quest be shut from their eye by the ness of the 
 little hill . 


 here end the Fifth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which be 
 call the Tale of the Quest 's Ending , and begin the Sixth Part of 
 the said tale , which be call the Days of Absence . 




 the sixth part : the day of ABSENCE 




 CHAPTER I. birdalone rid to GREENFORD and there takes leave of 
 ARNOLD and his MEN 



 on the road to Greenford nought befell to tell of ; they come thither 
 when the sun be at point to set , for they have ride diligently all 
 day . 

 as they ride the street of the good town , they note of they , that 
 though it be evening wherein folk do much disport they abroad , there 
 be woman and child enough in the street or stand at their 
 door , but of carle very few , and they for the more part grey - head . 

 now do Arnold bring Birdalone to the town hall , wherein yet sit the 
 deputy of the burgrave , who himself be in the leaguer at the Red 
 Hold ; this man , who be old and wise and nothing feeble of body , make 
 much of Birdalone and her folk , and be glad of they when he know 
 that they have the seal and let - pass of Geoffrey of Lea ; wherefore he 
 give they to eat and drink , and lodge they in his own house , and 
 make they the good of cheer . 

 but betime on the morrow do Birdalone send back Arnold and the four 
 man - at - arm , with no tale but that such be her will ; and bidding 
 farewell to the said Arnold , she suffer he to kiss her hand , and 
 give he a ring from off her finger , so that he go on his way 
 rejoice . 

 so soon as she see he and his man well on the road , she go to the 
 old man , the vice - ruler of the town , who be of the aldermen thereof , 
 and do he to wit that she would wage two or three carle who could 
 deal with horse and beast , and withal handle weapon if need be , 
 to be both as servant and guard for she , as she have errand in that 
 country - side , and belike might well have to go from town to town 
 thereabout . he take she ask kindly , but say it be none so easy 
 to find man who for any wage would fare forth of Greenford at that 
 stour , whereas well - nigh all their fighting - man be lie before the 
 Red Hold as now . Howsoever , ere noontide he bring before her a man 
 of over three score , but yet wayworthy , and two stout young man , his 
 son , and tell she that these man be trusty and would go with she 
 to the world 's end if need be . 

 she take these man readily , and agree with they for a good wage ; and 
 whereas each one have bow and arrow and short sword , she have but to 
 buy for they jack , sallet , and buckler , and they be well armed 
 as for their condition . Withal she buy they three good horse and 
 another sumpt - horse ; which last be load with sundry ware that 
 she deem that she need , and with victual . then she take leave of 
 the alderman , thank he much for his good - will , and so depart 
 from Greenford at all adventure , when the day be yet young . 

 the alderman have ask her whither away , and she have tell he that 
 she be boun for Mostwyke first , and thereafter for shifford - on - the- 
 Strand ; whereas she have hear talk of these two town as be on one 
 and the same highway , and Mostwyke about a score of mile from 
 Greenford ; but when she be well out - a - gate she come to a little 
 road on the right hand which turn clean away from Mostwyke , and she 
 take the said road ; and when she have follow it some three mile , 
 she ask the old carle whither it lead . he look on she and smile 
 somewhat , and she on he in turn ; and she say : wonder not , my 
 friend , that I be not clear about my way , for I shall tell the sooth 
 that I be a damsel adventurous , and be but seek some place where I 
 may dwell and earn my livelihood till well day come ; and this be 
 the whole truth , and thou shalt know it at once , to wit , that I be 
 indeed flee , and be fain to hide the footstep of I , and I bid 
 you three to help I therein . but ye must know that I be flee , 
 not from my foe , but from my friend ; and , if ye will , as we go by 
 the way , I will tell you all the story of I , and we will be friend 
 while we be together , yea , and thereafter if it may be . 

 now she say this because she have look carefully on these man , and 
 herseeme that they be good man and true , and not dull of wit . 
 Forsooth the old man , who hight Gerard of the Clee , be no weakling , 
 and be nought loathly to look on , and his two son be goodly and 
 great of fashion , clear - eye , and well - carven of visage ; they hight 
 Robert and Giles . 

 now spake old Gerard : Lady , I thank thee heartily of thy much grace 
 unto I ; now would I get off my nag and kneel to thee in the highway 
 therefor , but that I see that thou wert fain to make as much way as 
 may be to - day ; wherefore , by thy leave , I will tarry my homaging till 
 we rest our horse by the wayside . she laugh , and praise his 
 wisdom ; and the young man look on she and worship she in their 
 heart . Forsooth , the fellowship of these good and true folk be 
 soft and sweet to she , and soothe the trouble of her spirit . and 
 she enforce herself to talk cheerfully with they , and ask they 
 many thing , and learn much of they . 

 but now go on Gerard to say : Lady , if thou wilt hide thy way from 
 whomsoever it may be , thou hast happen on no ill way ; for though 
 this road be good to ride , it be but a byway through the sheep - walk 
 that folk may drive their wain hereby in the wet season of winter 
 and spring ; and for a great way we shall come to but little save the 
 cot of the sheep - carle ; scarce a hamlet or two for the space of two 
 day ' riding ; and on the third day a little town , hight Upham , where 
 be but few folk save at the midsummer wool - fair , which be now go 
 by . 

 now there be a highway cometh into this road from out of the tilled 
 country and Appleham , a good town , and goeth through it toward the 
 tillage , and the City of the Bridges and the liberty thereof ; and 
 all the land be much builded and plentiful ; but , if thou wilt , we 
 will not take either highway , but wend over the downland which lieth 
 north - east of Upham , and though it be roadless , yet be it not ill- 
 go , and I know it well and its watering - place , little dale and 
 water therein all run north - east , wherein be certain little 
 thorp here and there , which shall refresh we mightily . over that 
 downland we may wend a four day , and then the land will swell up 
 high , and from the end of that high land we shall behold below we a 
 fair land of tillage , well water and woode , and much build ; and 
 in the midst thereof a great city with wall and tower , and a great 
 white castle and a minster , and lovely house a many . in that city 
 mayst thou dwell and earn thy livelihood if thou canst do aught of 
 craft . and if thou mayst not , then may we find somewhat to swink at 
 for a wage , and so maintain thee and we . but the say city be call 
 the City of the five Crafts , and the land round about it be the frank 
 thereof ; and oftenest , frank and city and all , it be call the five 
 craft all simply . now what sayest thou hereof , my lady ? 

 she say : I say that we will go thither , and that I thank thee and 
 thy son of thy good - will , and so may God do to I as I reward you 
 well therefor . but tell I , good Gerard , how it be that thou art so 
 willing to leave kith and kin to follow a gangrel wife along the 
 way ? say Gerard : Dame , I think that the face and body of thee 
 might lead any man that yet have manhood in he to follow thee , even 
 if he leave house and all to go with thee . but as for we , we have no 
 long a house or gear , whereas they of the Red Hold lift all my 
 bestial , and burn my house and all that be therein a month ago . 
 Yea , say Birdalone , and how befalleth it , then , that ye be not 
 before the Red Hold to avenge thee ? Dame , say he , when the muster 
 be I be deem somewhat over old , wherefore the sheriff take I 
 not , but suffer my son also to abide behind to earn a living for 
 I ; may God be good to he therefor , and St. Leonard ! but as to my 
 kindre , I must tell thee that I be not kinne hereabout , but in a 
 good town hight Utterhay , and that when our alderman send for I to 
 bring I to thee , I be more than half - minded to get I back thither . 
 now sooth it be that the good way thither , though it may be indeed 
 the safe rather than the short , lie through the five craft ; 
 for the road go thence to Utterhay a three score mile or so , 
 make the long of it , as it skirteth ever some way off a perilous 
 forest , a place of sore dread and devilish , which hight Evilshaw , on 
 the edge whereof lieth Utterhay , a merry cheaping - stead and a 
 plenteous , and the home of my kindre . wherefore now be the City of 
 the five craft handy to we ; because when thou hast do with we , as 
 I hope it may be long first , then be we other nigh home , and may 
 all simply wend our way thither . 

 birdalone thank he again full heartily ; but therewithal as they 
 ride along there seem to stir in she some memory of the early of 
 her day in the witch 's house , and she begin to have a longing to 
 betake she to Utterhay and the skirt of Evilshaw . 



 CHAPTER II . of birdalone and her fellowship , their faring over the 
 downland 



 thus ride they along and loiter not , though they talk blithely 
 together ; and Birdalone wonder to herself that she might so much as 
 hold up her head for bitter thought of the day and the longing but 
 late pass away , but so it be , that it be only now and again that 
 they sting she into despair and silence , and for the most part she 
 hearken to the talk of the old man and the lad about the day of 
 Greenford and the alarm of lifting and unpeace , and the way of the 
 chapman and the craftsman . 

 an hour after noon they rest in a little dale of the downland where 
 be a pool and three thorn - bush thereby ; and when they have light 
 down , the old man kneel before Birdalone and take her hand , and swore 
 himself her man to do she will , whatso it be ; and then he stand up 
 and bade his son do likewise ; so they two knelt before she in turn , 
 somewhat shy and abash , for all that they be such stout , bold 
 fellow , and find it hard to take her hand , and then when they have 
 it in theirs , hard to let it go again . 

 a score of mile and five they ride that day , and have no roof over 
 they at night save the naked heaven , but to Birdalone that be but 
 little scathe : they make a shift to have some fire by they , and the 
 three man sit long about it that even while Birdalone tell they 
 somewhat of her life ; and as she tell of the House under the Wood and 
 the Great Water , Gerard have some inkling of whereabouts it be ; but 
 be nought so sure , because , as abovesaid in this tale , seldom do 
 any from the world of man venture in Evilshaw , or know of the Great 
 Water from its bank that give unto the forest . 

 in like wise they ride the next day , and come at eventide to a thorp 
 in a fair little dale of the downland , and there they gueste with 
 the shepherd - folk , who wonder much at the beauty of Birdalone , so 
 that at first they scarce durst venture to draw nigh unto she until 
 Gerard and his son have have some familiar converse with they ; then 
 indeed they exceed in kindness toward they , in their rough upland 
 fashion , but ever find it hard to keep their eye off Birdalone , and 
 that the more after they have hear the full sweetness of her voice ; 
 whereas she sing to they certain song which she have learn in the 
 Castle of the Quest , though it make her heart sore ; but she deem 
 she must need pay that kindly folk for their guestful and blithe 
 way . and thereafter they sing to the pipe and the harp their own 
 downland song ; and this she find strange , that whereas her eye 
 be dry when she be sing the song of love of the knighthood , 
 the wildness of the shepherd - music draw the tear from she , would 
 she , would she not . Homelike and dear seem the green willowy dale 
 to she , and in the night ere she sleep , and she lie quiet amidst of 
 the peaceful people , she could not choose but weep again , for pity of 
 the bitter - sweet of her own love , and for pity of the wide world 
 withal , and all the way of its many folk that lie so new before she . 



 CHAPTER III . they come to the city of the five CRAFTS , and birdalone 
 MEETS with the POOR - WIFE 



 they make not so much way that they come to the five craft on the 
 fourth day , but lie under the bare heaven in a dale below the big 
 swell of the downland , whereof Gerard spake . but betime in the 
 morning Birdalone arise and stir up her man , and they gat to 
 horse , and ride the hill before they till they come on to the crest 
 thereof . then Birdalone cry aloud with joy to see the lovely land 
 before she , and the white wall and the tower of the great city , 
 whereas Greenford be but small beside it . 

 so they ride down into the frank , and enter the gate of the city a 
 little after noon , and again be birdalone in all amaze at the going 
 to and fro in the street and the thronging of the market , and the 
 diver folk , as chapman and man - at - arm , and craftsman and lord , who 
 use the said city ; and to say sooth , somewhat her heart sink within 
 she , and it seem to she that it would be hard and troublous to have 
 to deal with so much folk , and that they must need go past she on 
 the right hand and the left without heed her life . 

 Howsoever , Gerard , who know the city , bring she to a fair hostel , 
 where she be well lodge , she and her man . Straightway , then , 
 before she go out into the street again , she fall to get 
 together what she have of fine broider work and of fair script , and 
 to finish what she have unfinishe . and she send forth Gerard and 
 his son to find out where be the market for such good , and if she 
 would have leave to sell the same therein , or anywhere in the town ; 
 and Gerard find the hall of the embroiderer , and therein the master 
 of the craft , and he receive the carle courteously when he hear 
 that there be fine work come to town , and do he to wit that none 
 in any such craft might have freedom of the market save by leave of 
 the guild of the craft ; but , say he , the guild be open - handed and 
 courteous , and be nowise will not to refuse the said leave , be the 
 work good and true ; and he bid Gerard withal tell his mistress that 
 she be good to bring sampling of her work to the Guildhall so soon 
 as she might . so the very next day go Birdalone thither , and find 
 the master a well - look tall man of some five - and - forty winter , who 
 look on she from the first as if he deem it be no ill way of 
 wear the time . to this man she show her work , and though he 
 find it not easy to take his eye off Birdalone herself , yet when he 
 look at her handiwork , he find it well than very good , and he 
 say to she : Damsel , here be what will be seek for at a great 
 price by the great lord and lady of the land , and the rich 
 burgess , and especially by the high prelate ; and so much of it as 
 thou hast a mind to do be so much coin gold unto thee ; and now I 
 see thee what thou art , I be fain that thou gather good to thee . 
 but as diligent as thou mayst be , thou hast but one pair of hand , 
 wonderful soothly , and yet but one pair . he break off at that word , 
 for he be verily star at her hand , and long to see more of 
 her arm than the wrist only , so that he scarce know what he be 
 say . then he turn red and say : soothly I wot that no other 
 hand save thine may do such needlework , or make the draught for 
 they . but thou wilt need woman - servant to help thee , both in 
 dighte the house for thee   for this big old carle here will be 
 scarce meet thereto   and as apprentice to help thee about the work 
 itself ; and if thou wilt , I shall seek the good one out for thee . 
 moreover I must tell thee , that though I know for sure how that no 
 woman in the world may work such needlework as thine , yet while 
 there cometh hither a woman of middle age , a woman wear by trouble , 
 pious , meek , and kind ; and by St. Lucia ! now I look on thee again , 
 she might be somewhat like unto thee , be she young and fresh- 
 look and strong as thou art . now this woman I say , and thereat I 
 marvel , doeth needlework that be somewhat after the manner of thine , 
 and which seem to we excellent till I have see thine . good 
 livelihood she earneth thereby , and be diligent therein ; but she hath 
 no heart to get apprentice , or be make one of our guild , both of 
 which be lawful to she as to thee , lovely damsel . but now I shall 
 counsel she to be make of our guild along with thee , if thou wilt 
 have it so , and then may ye both have three apprentice each , and may 
 make in our city a goodly school , so that our guild shall be 
 glorify thereby , for there will be none such work in the world . 
 how sayest thou ? 

 she thank he much , and yeasaid he , and think in her heart that 
 such work which would keep her hand and her head both busy , would 
 solace the grief of her heart , and wear away the time , that she might 
 live till hope might peradventure arise in she . 

 then say the master : there be one thing else , that is , thy 
 dwelling - place ; and if thou wilt I shall hire thee a house in the 
 street of the Broiderers , a goodly one : sooth to say , that same be 
 mine own , so thou mayst deem that I tell thee hereof to mine own 
 gain ; and that may be   and he redden therewith ; but there be this 
 in it , that if thou lack money I shall let thee live therein 
 without price till thou shalt have earn more than enough to pay I . 

 birdalone thank he well , but she do he to wit that she be 
 nowise penniless ; and presently she depart well pleased , though she 
 deem that the say master be well - nigh more friendly than might be 
 look for . and the next day he come to she in the hostelry , and 
 without more ado bring she to the house in the street of the 
 Broiderers , and she find it fair and well plenishe , and so she fall 
 to work to get all thing ready . 

 now the next week be the day appoint when she should be receive 
 into the broiderer ' guild , and the day before come the master 
 aforesaid to see Birdalone . sooth to say , he have not fail to come 
 to see she every day , on one pretence or another , since the first day 
 they have meet , but ever he do to she with all honour and simply . but 
 on this day he bring with he the woman skilful of her hand , to 
 show she unto Birdalone , who receive she gladly , and thereafter 
 Master Jacobus leave they alone together . 

 the say woman look worn and aged indeed , but be not of more than 
 five - and - forty winter even by seem , after the first look at she ; 
 she be somewhat tall and well - knit , her face well shapen , and her 
 hair yet goodly . there be a kind look in the eye of she , as if she 
 might love anyone with whom she live that would be kind to she . 
 Meek , or rather over - meek , of mien she be , and it seem of she that 
 she have be sore scared and oppress one while or another . 

 so when Master Jacobus be go , Birdalone set she down on the settle 
 beside she , and spake to her full sweetly and kindly , and the woman 
 spake little in turn save answer simply to her question . 
 birdalone ask where she be kinne , and she answer : in Utterhay . 
 then say birdalone : within these last few day I have hear that 
 town name twice or thrice , and never before , as meseemeth ; and yet , 
 hear the name from thy mouth , it seemeth to stir something in I , 
 as if I have be there one time and long to be there again . be 
 there aught in the place whereof folk tell wide about , so that I 
 might have hear it tell of and not note it at the time ? Nay , lady , 
 say the dame , save perchance that it be on the verge of a very great 
 and very evil wood , otherwise it be once a merry town and of much 
 resort from the country - side . 

 birdalone look on she , and see that the tear be come from her 
 eye and run down her cheek as she spake ; so she say to she : 
 why dost thou weep , mother ? be there aught I may do to assuage thy 
 grief ? say the dame : thou art so kind to I , and thy voice be so 
 dear and sweet , that I can not choose but weep . Meseems it be because 
 love of thee hath take mine heart , and therewith be blend memory 
 of past sorrow of mine . Thou askest I if thou mayest do aught to 
 assuage my grief ; dear lady , I be not grieve now , that have go by ; 
 nay , now I be more than not grieve , I be make happy , because I be 
 with thee . but since thou art so debonair with I , I will ask thee 
 to do somewhat for I ; and that be , to tell I of thy life go by ; I 
 mean , sweet young damsel , of thy life when thou wert a little child . 

 then Birdalone kiss she and say : it go to my heart that thou 
 lov I ; for soon as I set eye on thee my heart go out to thee ; 
 and now belike we shall be dear friend ; and that be a thing that 
 shall avail I much , to have a friend who be so much old than I , so 
 that nought can come between we , of the love of man and other grief . 
 Yea , now , say the dame , smile somewhat sadly ; now do I see the 
 water stand in thine eye , and thy voice quaver . be it so , thou 
 lovely kind damsel , that thou hast be grieve by love of a man ? 
 who then may prevail in love if thou prevail not ? and she fall to 
 fondle Birdalone 's hand ; but birdalone say : it be over - long to 
 tell of all my life , mother , though I be so young ; but now I will do 
 as thou badest I , and tell thee somewhat of my day when I be 
 little . 

 and therewith she fall to tell she of her day in the House under 
 the Wood , and the witch and her surliness and grimness , and of her 
 love of the wild thing , and how she wax there . and she spake a 
 long while , for the memory of those day seem to lead she along , as 
 though she verily be alive now in they ; and the woman sit before 
 she , gaze on her lovingly , till Birdalone stay her tale at last 
 and say : now have I tell thee more than enough of a simple matter , 
 and a life that be as that of a wild creature of the wood . now 
 shalt thou , mother , tell I somewhat of thee , and what be thy grief 
 of Utterhay : for thou shalt find that the telling thereof shall 
 solace thee . ah ! so think young folk , say the woman sadly , because 
 there be many day leave for they to hope in . but though the telling 
 of my sorrow be a fresh sorrow to I , yet shalt thou hear it . it be 
 but of the loss of my babe ; but she be of all babe the fairest and 
 the sweetest . 

 then she fall to tell Birdalone all that concern the witch at 
 Utterhay and the poor - wife that ye have hear in the beginning of 
 this book , until the time when she leave the house to buy meat for the 
 witch ; for she herself be the said poor - wife . and then she tell how 
 she come back again and find her guest go and the child withal ; 
 and though she have weep for love of Birdalone , she weep not at 
 telling of this grief , but tell it as a tale which have befall some 
 other one . and she say : and so when I have do run up and down 
 like a wild thing , and ask of the neighbour with lack of breath 
 and fierceness of speech who have take my child away from I ; and 
 when I have go up to the wood and even some way into it , and when I 
 have wander up and down again , and night be fall , I come back at 
 last again to my poor house so weary with my woe , that I scarce know 
 what have befall I . and there upon the board lie the victual and 
 drink which I have bring , and the money which the witch have give 
 unto I ; and despite of grief , hunger flame up in I at the sight , 
 and I throw myself on to it and eat and drank , and so come to myself , 
 that be , to my grief . but the next day I run about hither and 
 thither , and weary folk with my asking and my woe ; but it be all 
 of none avail . the child be go away from I . there be little 
 more to tell of I , sweet lady . if I be to live , need must I take 
 the poor price of my little one , to wit , the witch 's money , and deal 
 with folk for my livelihood ; wherefore I buy I cloth and silk , 
 have now the wherewithal , and set to work on broidery , for even 
 then be I a cunning needle - woman . so be God and the saint good 
 to I , and incline the folk to I , that they be good and piteous , 
 and I lack not work nor due livelihood ; but after a while I weary 
 of Utterhay , where my dear child should have be run about 
 before my foot ; and have by this time get a little money 
 together , and be exceed deft in my craft , I come on hither to 
 live , and , praise be to St. Ursula ! I have find it easy to live : 
 and praise be to all - hallows withal that I have find thee , who art 
 so kind and lovely ; and thou by seem of the very age my child 
 should be if she be live : or how old art thou , dear lady ? 

 birdalone lay her hand on her breast , and she be turn pale , but 
 she say in a low voice : I deem that I be of twenty summer . 

 then they both sit silent , till Birdalone might master the fluttering 
 of her heart , and she say : now meseem I have a memory even early 
 than those I tell thee erst . a woman take I out of a basket and set 
 I on the back of an ass , and I look about , and I be in a grassy 
 lawn of the wood ; and I see a squirrel run up a tree - trunk before 
 I , and wind round the tree and hide he ; and then I stretch out my 
 hand and cry out to he ; and then come the woman unto I , and give 
 I wood - strawberry to eat out of her hand . 

 Brake out the poor - wife thereat , pale and trembling : tell I now , my 
 child , hast thou any memory of what the woman be who set thee on the 
 ass and give thee the strawberry ? birdalone look on she , and 
 scan her face closely , and then shake her head , and say : nay , it 
 be not thou , mother . Nay , surely ; nay , surely , say the woman ; but 
 think again . Said Birdalone , speak slowly : be it my mistress 
 then ? she be a tall woman , somewhat thin and bony , with goodly red 
 hair and white - skin , but thin - lipped . Quoth the poor - wife : no , 
 no ; it be of no use ; nought such be she . then Birdalone look up 
 and say eagerly : yea , but it be her other shape belike : therein 
 be she a tall woman , dark - haired , hook - nosed , and hawk - eye , as if 
 of thirty summer ; a stark woman . Hast thou see such ? dost thou 
 remember she ? 

 the woman spring up and cry out , and be like to have fall , but 
 birdalone arise and hold she in her arm and comfort she , and set 
 she in her seat again and knelt before she ; and presently the poor- 
 wife come to herself and say : my child , thou sayest do I remember 
 she ; how shall I ever forget she ? she be the thief who steal my 
 child . 

 Therewith she slide from off her seat , and kneel by Birdalone , and 
 stoop low down on the floor as if the tall maiden be but a little 
 one , and she fall to kiss she and pat she , her face and her 
 hand , and all about ; and say , sob and yet smile : suffer I a 
 little , my child , mine own lovely child ! for in good sooth I be thy 
 mother , and it be long since I have see thee : but hearken , when I 
 come quite to myself I shall pray thee not to leave I yet awhile , 
 and I shall pray thee to love I . 

 birdalone clip and kiss she , and say : I love thee dearly , and 
 never , never shall I leave thee . 

 then they stand up , and the mother take Birdalone by the shoulder , 
 and hold she a little aloof , and devour she with her eye ; and she 
 say : yea , thou hast grow tall , and belike wilt grow no tall : 
 and how fair and lovely thou hast grow ; and thou that wert bear in a 
 poor man 's house ! no wonder that any should covet thee . and I , I 
 wonder if ever I be as fair as thou art ; forsooth many call I 
 fair for a little while ; and now behold I ! Nay , child and darling , 
 let not thy face grow downcast , for now shall I know nought more of 
 fear and grief ; and be it not like that I shall grow fair of flesh , 
 and shapely , in the happy day we shall dwell together ? and 
 therewith she take she to her arm , and it seem as if she might 
 never have enough of clip and embrace she ; and she would look 
 at Birdalone 's hand and her foot and her arm , and stroke they and 
 caress they ; and she wonder at her body , as if she have be a young 
 mother eat up with the love of her firstborn . and as for 
 Birdalone , she be as glad of her mother as might be ; and yet in her 
 heart she wonder if perchance one of the fellowship might stray 
 that way , and be partaker in her joy of this newfound dear friend ; 
 and she say , might it be Viridis ; but in her inmost heart , though 
 she tell it not to herself , she long that the Black Squire might 
 find she out at last . 



 CHAPTER IV . of the love of GERARD 's son and of jacobu for 
 birdalone 



 now dwelt Birdalone in rest and peace when she have be take into 
 the guild along with her mother , and they have take the due 
 apprentice to they ; and they begin to gather much of good to they , 
 for of fine broidery there be little do in the five craft , and 
 none at all that could be put beside their work , either for beauty of 
 the draught of it , or for skill of handiwork . she declare unto all 
 folk how that the poor - wife   who have to name Audrey   be her very 
 mother , from whom she have be steal in her young day ; but she 
 tell none any tale of how she be steal . and the twain dwelt 
 together in the great loving - kindness ; and it be with Audrey as 
 she have forecast , that now her day be happy , and she live in all 
 ease and content , that the goodliness of her youth come back to she , 
 and she become a fair woman as for her year ; and therewith it grow 
 to be clear that the two be so much alike one to the other , that 
 all might see that they be mother and daughter . 

 Gerard and his two son she maintain yet as her man ; and not only 
 be they of much use to she in fetching and carry , but also true 
 it be that her beauty be so manifest , that she while need a stout 
 lad weapone at she back when she be in the street or amidst the 
 throng of the market ; and many be they , and while of the high , 
 who crave love of she , some with honour , and some with lack of it . 

 of these , forsooth , be but two that anywise trouble she ; and the 
 most trouble be this , that she might not fail to see that the love 
 of she have enter into the heart of the two Gerardsons , Robert and 
 gile ; so that time be when she deem she must even send they 
 away , but when it come to the point she have not the heart thereto ; 
 though none other remedy there seem , so sorely as their soul be 
 wound by long for she . it be not to be say that they ever 
 spake to she thereof , or wittingly weary she with sign of love ; 
 but they could not so easily cover it up but that it be ever before 
 her eye . but she suffer it all for friendship 's sake and for 
 their true service , and in all friendliness do what she might to 
 solace their grief . Forsooth so good and true she find that father- 
 kind , and the young man so goodly and kind , that she say to herself , 
 have she not another man lie in her heart , she might well have 
 choose one of those twain for her very speech - friend and true lover . 

 the second wooer that trouble she be the master , Jacobus , who , when 
 but three month be wear of her dwelling in her house , do all 
 openly crave her love and offer her marriage , he be a man 
 unwedded . Sore be her heart that she must need gainsay he , so 
 kind and courteous as he have be to she at their first come 
 together ; though this indeed be sooth , that straightway , so soon as 
 he see she , he fall into the captivity of her love . Howsoever , 
 gainsay he she need must , and he take the naysay so hardly that he 
 be scarce like a man before she , and weep and pray and lament 
 many time over , till she weary of it , and well - nigh fall to 
 loathe he . so that it come to this at last , that one day she 
 spake to he and say that she might no long bear it , but must seek 
 another house and leave his . there then be the to - do , for he fall 
 on his knee before she , and kiss her foot , would she , would she 
 not , and cry out in his grief , till at last for pure weariness of 
 his folly she give way unto he , and say that she would still abide 
 there ; whereon he rise up from she and go away with all the grief 
 run off he for that time , and as glad a man to look on as you might 
 see on a summer 's day . 

 but the next morning he come unto she again , and she think all be 
 begin afresh , make he no glad countenance ; but he stand up before 
 she and spake friendly , and say how that she be in the right of it , 
 and that if they both dwelt in one house together they be like to 
 have but a weary time of it , both she and he . but , say he , I will 
 not that thou shouldst depart out of this house , for a goodly one it 
 be , and full meet for thee ; it be for I to depart , and not for thee . 
 I tell thee , forsooth , that I have from the first mean this house as 
 a gift from I to thee . and therewith he draw from his pouch a 
 scroll , which be a deed of gift of the said house , duly seal and 
 attest , and he give it into her hand ; but she be sore moved 
 thereat , and at the demeanour of he that morning , and she let the 
 scroll fall to the floor and weep for pity of he , and reach out 
 both her hand , and he kiss they , and then her lip also , and 
 sithence he sit down beside she . but she say : alas ! that thou wilt 
 give I what I may not take , and wouldst have of I what I may not 
 give . 

 but now he wax hotter , and say : this once I command thee to do my 
 will , and take my gift . it will be nought to my gain if thou take it 
 not ; for I may not live in this house when thou art go from it ; and 
 I swear by all - hallow that I will not let any have it to hire , nor 
 will I sell it , since thou hast make it holy by dwell therein . 

 yet be she sore move by his generous fashion , and she say : I will 
 take thy gift then , and live here in honour of thee and thy 
 friendship ; for well I wot thou hadst no mind to buy I with thy 
 gift . 

 so she spake , and he stand up stark and stern , and so depart , and 
 kiss she not again ; though meseem she would have suffer he have 
 he offer it . Nay , belike have he at that moment press his wooing 
 somewhat masterfully , it be not so sure but she might have yeasaid 
 it , and suffer he to we d she and lead she to bed ; though it would 
 have go ill both with he and with she thereafter . 

 Thenceforth dwelt Birdalone with her mother and her maiden and her 
 man in that house , and it become famous in the five craft because of 
 her beauty and her wisdom , which minishe not , but wax day by day ; 
 but therewithal as the time wear , wax her longing and sadness . but 
 all this she hide in her own heart , and be debonair to all about she , 
 and so good to poor folk that none have a word save of blessing on her 
 beauty and her wisdom . 



 CHAPTER V. of the death of AUDREY , mother to birdalone . SHE be 
 warn in a dream to seek the black SQUIRE , and be MINDED to DEPART 
 the city of the five CRAFTS , and seek again the castle of the quest 



 thus dwelt birdalone in the five craft in such rest and peace as her 
 heart would let she ; and dear and good friend she have about she ; her 
 mother first , whose love and desire for love of she make all thing 
 soft and dear unto she . Gerard and the Gerardsons be next , who 
 be ever faithful and true unto she , and deft both of hand and of 
 mind , so that they work many thing for her avail . then come the 
 master , Jacobus , who hold himself unwedded for her sake , and though 
 he no long dwelt in the same house with she , might scarce endure to 
 miss the sight of she for two day run : a dear friend she deem 
 he , as forsooth he be , though while he torment and weary she , 
 and belike have weary she more , but for the sorrow which lie on her 
 own heart , whereof it come that she might not think of any man as of 
 one who might be a lover , and so feel safe even with so kind a friend 
 and so stubborn in his love as be this one . moreover he never again 
 crave love of she in so many word , but only in his going and 
 coming so do , that it be clear how he have she , and the love of 
 she , ever in his heart . 

 wear thus a five year ; and then come a sickness on the city , and 
 many die thereof ; and the say sickness enter into Birdalone 's 
 house , and slay Audrey her mother , but spar all else therein . 
 thereby at the first be Birdalone so overwhelmed that she might heed 
 nought , neither her craft nor her friend , nor the day to come on 
 the earth for she . and moreover when she come more to herself , which 
 be not for many day , and ask why her friend Jacobus have not be 
 to see she the last day , she be tell that he also be dead of the 
 pestilence ; and she sorrow for he sorely , for she love he much , 
 though not in the way he would . 

 and now do the city and land of the five craft begin to look 
 unfriendly to Birdalone , and she fall to think that she must need 
 depart thence , as she well might do , whereas she have foison of good : 
 and at first it be in her mind to go with Gerard and his son unto 
 Utterhay ; but then she deem the thought of her mother , and how she 
 would be ever think of the loss and the gain , and the loss once 
 more stand in the way ; and she turn one thing and another over in 
 her mind , and might not face it . 

 on a night , as she sleep , come to her dream of her day in the House 
 under the wood   as very seldom betid , and the witch - wife be 
 speak to she in friendly fashion   as for she   and blame she for 
 flee away , and be taunt she with the failure of her love , and 
 therewith tell she how fair a man and lovesome be the Black 
 Squire , and what a loss she have of he ; and Birdalone be hearken 
 and weep for tenderness ' sake , while the witch be unto she 
 neither fearful nor irksome , and forsooth nought save a mouthpiece 
 for word that both grieve Birdalone and yet be an eager pleasure 
 unto she . but in the midst thereof , and ere the dream have time to 
 change , Birdalone awake , and it be an early morning of later spring , 
 and the sky be clear blue and the sun shin bright , and the bird 
 singing in the garden of the house , and in the street be the sound 
 of the early market - folk pass through the street with their ware ; 
 and all be fresh and lovely . 

 she awake sobbing , and the pillow be wet with her tear , and yet she 
 feel as if something strange and joyous be go to betide she , and 
 for joy of the love of life the heart beat fast in her bosom . 

 she arise all darle naked as she be , and go to the window and 
 look out on the beauty of the spring , while the sound of the 
 market - wain bring to her mind the thought of the mead , and the 
 stream of the river , and the woodside beyond the city ; and she fall 
 a - longing for they , as a while she kneel on the window - seat , half 
 dream and asleep again , till the sun come round that way , and its 
 beam fall upon her bosom and her arm ; and she stand up and look 
 on the fairness of her body , and a great desire take hold of her 
 heart that it might be love as it deserve by he whom she desire . 
 and thus she stand there till she become ashamed , and hasten to do 
 on her raiment ; but even as she be about it , it come upon she that 
 what she have will to do be to seek to the Castle of the Quest , and 
 find out where be her love if there he be not , and so to seek he 
 the world over till she find he . and such a flood of joy possess 
 she when she think this , and so eager to begone she be , that she 
 deem every minute waste till she be on the road . 

 nevertheless , in a while , when her mind be steady , she know that 
 she have somewhat to do ere she might be go , and that here , as oft , 
 it would be more haste less speed . 

 so she abode a little , and then come into her hall duly dight , and 
 find Gerard and his son there to serve she ; and she brake she fast , 
 and bid they sit by she at table , as oft she do ; and she spake to 
 they of this and that , and Gerard answer lightly again ; but the two 
 gerardson look at one another , as though they would speak and ask 
 a question from time to time , but forbore because they durst not . 
 but Gerard look on they , and deem he wotte what be in their 
 mind ; so at last he spake : our lady , both I , and meseemeth my son 
 also , deem that there be some tiding toward which be great unto 
 thee ; for thine eye sparkle , and the red burn in thy cheek , and 
 thine hand may not be quiet , nor thy foot abide in one place ; 
 wherefore I see that thou hast something in thy mind which strive to 
 be forth of it . now thou wilt pardon we , our dear lady , that we ask 
 concern this , because it be in our love for thee that we speak , 
 lest there be some change toward which shall be a grief to some of 
 we . 

 my man , say Birdalone , flush red , sooth it be that there be a 
 change at hand , and I shall tell you straightway what it be . year 
 ago I tell you that I be flee from my friend ; now the change 
 hath betid that I would seek they again ; and need must I leave the 
 five craft behind to do so . and moreover there be this ill word to 
 be say , which I will say at once , to wit , that when I be but a 
 little way go from the five craft I must wend the other deal of my 
 journey birdalone , as my name be . 

 all those three sit silent and aghast at that word , and the young man 
 grow pale ; but after a while spake Gerard : our lady most well- 
 beloved , this word which thou hast speak , to wit , that thou needest 
 we no long , I have look to hear any time this five year ; and 
 praise be to the saint that it hath come late and not soon . now 
 there be no more to be say but that thou tell we what be thy will 
 that we should do . 

 birdalone hang her head awhile for sorrow of sunder from these 
 man ; then she look up and say : it seemeth , my friend , as if ye 
 deem I have do you a wrong in sunder our fellowship ; but all I 
 may say hereon be to pray you to pardon I , that I need must go 
 alone on my quest . and now what I would have you do , be first of all 
 to fetch hither a notary and scrivener , that he may draw up a deed of 
 gift to you , Gerard and Gerardsons , of this house and all that be 
 therein , save what money I may need for my journey , and gift such 
 as I shall bid you to be give to my workwomen . Ye must need yeasay 
 this , or ye be forsworn of your behest to do my will . but 
 furthermore , I will have you to let the workwoman of mine   and the 
 head one ruling   to hire the aforesaid house , if so they will ; for 
 now be they skilled , and may well earn good livelihood by the work . 
 but the next work be simple ; it be to furnish for I the array of a 
 young man , with such armour as I may easily bear , to dight I for my 
 road . Forsooth ye wot that not unseldom do woman use the custom of 
 go array like man , when they would journey with hidden head ; and 
 ye may happen upon such gear as hath be make for such a woman 
 rather than any man ; but thou shalt get I also a short bow and a 
 quiver of arrow , for verily these be my proper weapon that I can 
 deal with deftly . now my last command be that , when all be do , 
 maybe to - morrow , or maybe the next day , ye bring I out of the city 
 and the frank of the Five craft , and bring I somewhat on my way 
 over the down , for loth be I to part from you ere need must . then 
 they knelt before she and kiss her hand , and they be full of 
 grief ; but they see that so it have to be . 

 thereafter Gerard spake with his son apart , and in a while come to 
 Birdalone , and say : our lady , we will do your will in all wise ; but 
 we shall tell thee , that the five craft will look but strange to we 
 when thou art go , and that we have a mind to betake we to Utterhay 
 and the land of our kindre . wherefore we pray thee to give this 
 house that hath be so dear to we unto thy workwoman and her mate ; 
 for we need it not , nor the hire thereof , but shall do well enough 
 with what money or good thou mayst give we . be this accord to thy 
 will , or have I speak rashly ? 

 she say : Ye be good and ungreedy , and I bless you for it ; be it as 
 ye will ; and this the more , as I be fain that ye go to Utterhay ; 
 for while I have deem that I myself be draw thitherward , 
 wherefore it may be that we shall meet again in that place . 

 and when she have so speak , she might not refrain her tear ; and the 
 Gerardsons turn away , for they be ashamed , both that they should 
 see her weep , or she they . but at last she call to they and say : 
 now make we the speedy end we may of this , for sorry work be the 
 tarrying of farewell ; so I pray you , my friend , to go about the work 
 I have bid you . 

 so all be do as she would , and the day after the morrow be 
 birdalone abide the coming of Gerard and his son with the horse ; 
 and despite of the sundering of friend and the peril that belike 
 lie before she , the world seem fair to she , and life begin 
 anew . and she make no doubt that she would soon be at the Castle of 
 the Quest , and there find all thing much as she have leave they ; and 
 there at least would be the welcome of her dear friend Viridis . 



 CHAPTER VI . of the sundering of birdalone from GERARD and his son 



 presently be the horse come with Gerard and his son , and 
 birdalone gat to horse amongst they . she be arm in a light 
 hauberk , and over it a long and loose surcoat that come down beneath 
 the knee of she ; and a sallet she have upon her head , wide but light , 
 so that not very much of her face be to be see . she have make up 
 her mind to this tale upon the road , when she be among folk , that 
 she be under a vow not to do off her helm for a seven day ' space . 
 Withal she have cover up the lovely shapeliness of her leg with 
 long boot of deer - leather , and her surcoat be wide - sleeve ; she be 
 well hide , and whereas she be a tall and strong woman , she might 
 well pass for a young man , slender and fair - faced . she be girt with 
 a good sword , and Gerard have get she a strong horseman 's bow and a 
 quiver full of arrow , wherewith , as aforesaid , she know well how to 
 deal ; wherefore she be by no mean without defence . 

 so they go their way through the street and out - a - gate ; and it 
 must be say , that be not Birdalone 's thought turn toward the 
 Castle of the Quest , and what she should meet there , her heart have 
 be somewhat sore at leave the city which have cherish she so 
 well these year past ; nay , as it be , the shadow of the southern 
 gate , as she past thereunder , smite somewhat cold upon she , and she 
 silently bade farewell to the City of the five Crafts with some 
 sorrow , though with no fear . 

 forth they ride then through the frank and up on to the shepherd 
 country , and whereas their horse be of the good , and they have no 
 sumpt - beast with they till they come to Upham , where they must 
 need have victual , they make but five day of it to the place where 
 the road turn aside from the country of Mostwyke . there then they 
 draw rein , and Birdalone light down from her horse , and they all , 
 and they lie upon the grass and eat and drink together . 

 but when they be do , spake Birdalone and say : dear friend , 
 this be the hour and the place when we must need part ; for ye shall 
 go back again to five craft , and do what I have bid of you , and 
 do your will , and wend your way with your livelihood unto Utterhay . 
 but as for I , I must go my way first unto Greenford , and thence to 
 seek my friend from whom erst I be flee when ye first become my 
 friend . now perchance ye will say that I have take you up in my 
 need , and cast you aside at my pleasure ; but I may only say that 
 there be at present two deal of my life , and of one of they have ye 
 be partaker , and of the other ye may not be . Forsooth that be a 
 grief unto I , as I suppose unto you be it a great one . but unto 
 I also be it heavy but that my heart tell I it shall not ever 
 be so ; for as I say to you some day agone , I have a hope that we 
 shall yet meet again , be it in Utterhay or in some other place . and 
 now I pray you to pardon I wherein I may have do amiss unto you , 
 and begrudge it not that there be other , who indeed be first- 
 comer in regard to you , and whom I love well than you ; for of your 
 truth and your good - will and loving - kindness will I bear witness 
 wheresoever I may be . 

 then spake Gerard : do ye speak , my son ; for I have no grudge 
 against she , nor aught to bewail I as to she , save , it may be , that 
 I be now so well on in year that it may well befall that I shall not 
 live till the time of the meeting in Utterhay . but I will pray thee 
 this , dear lady , that if thou come to the place where I lie dead thou 
 wilt kiss my burial - stone , and sing due mass for I . Nay , she 
 say , but this be the bad shall betide betwixt we . 

 then spake Robert Gerardson : I be not deft of speech , but this 
 parting make I bold to say this : that from the time when first I 
 set eye on thee I have love thee in such wise that never mayst thou 
 love I as much as I love thee , if thou hast anywhere , as I deem thou 
 hast , a lover of thy body , whom thou lovest . now I have see that 
 for a long while thou hast know this , and hast ever because of it 
 be as meek and kind with I as thou mightest be . and this hath 
 partly grieve I the more , because it hath eke my longing for thee ; 
 and yet it hath comfort I the more , because it hath make I deem 
 well of thee , and deem thee worthy of worship and holy ; 
 therefore have thou all my blessing for it . and now I know that thou 
 sunderest from we that thou mayst go seek thy very bodily lover ; and 
 I say , that if the sundering have be for any light cause , grieve 
 at heart should I have be ; but since it be even so , once more I 
 bless thee , and ever shall I be happy in the thought of thee ; and if 
 ever we meet again , still shalt thou find I as now I be in heart and 
 in soul . 

 she turn to he , not dry - eye , and say : I know that what thou 
 sayest be sooth ; and thou hast guess right as to my going ; and I 
 take thy blessing with love and joy . 

 then be they silent ; but Giles Gerardson be struggle with word , 
 for he be slow to speech ; at last he say : I say much as saith my 
 brother : but see thou , our lady , how ill it have go if thou hadst 
 love one of we with an equal love ; woe worth the strife then ! but 
 now I will crave this of thee , that thou kiss I on the lip , now 
 whena we part ; and again , that thou wilt do as much when first we 
 meet again hereafter . and I tell thee right out , that if thou 
 gainsay this , I shall deem it unfriendly in thee , and that those 
 lovely word which thou didst speak e'en now be but word alone , 
 and that thou art not as true as I have deem thee . 

 she laugh amidst her tear , and say : dear lad , doom I not till I 
 have be find guilty ! I shall nowise naysay thee this , for I love 
 thee , and now and ever shalt thou be unto I as a brother , thou and 
 Robert also ; for even so have ye do by I . but thou wottest , dear 
 lad , that while and again must sister sunder from brother , and even 
 so it have to be now . 

 then they sit silent all four ; and thereafter Birdalone arise and do 
 off her sallet , and kiss and embrace Gerard and his son , and bade 
 they farewell , and she and the young man weep . then she arm 
 herself and gat to horse , and go her way towards Greenford , have 
 nought with she but the raiment and arm that her body bore , and her 
 horse , and some gold piece and gem in a little pouch . so ride she ; 
 and the other turn back sadly toward the five Crafts . 



 CHAPTER VII . BIRDALONE COMETH to GREENFORD , and hear of the wasting 
 of the CASTLE of the quest 



 now come birdalone rid into Greenford an hour before sunset on a 
 day of the latter end of May ; and she have no doubt but to go straight 
 to the hostelry , and that the less as she have not abide there 
 before , as hath be tell . to they that serve she she tell the tale 
 of her vow , that she might not do off her sallet that seven day ; and 
 some trowe she , and some deem she a woman , but whereas she seem 
 by her raiment to be of condition none meddle with she . moreover , 
 as she tell her intent to ride on betime in the morning , it matter 
 the less unto they : withal she give out that she come from foreign 
 part , as sooth it be . 

 in the evening she sit in the hall , and with she be three chapman 
 travel with their ware , and two good man of the town sitting ; 
 and they be talk together , and be courteous and blithe , and 
 amidst their talk they throw many a glance at the slim and fair young 
 squire , as Birdalone seem , and be fain to speak unto he , but 
 refrain they for courtesy 's sake . for her part , Birdalone long 
 sore to ask they somewhat of the Castle of the Quest , but the word 
 clave to her throat for very fear ; and she sit restless and ill at 
 ease . however at last say a townsman to a chapman : art thou for 
 the Red Hold , Master Peter , when thou art do here ? birdalone 
 turn very pale at that word ; and Master Peter spake : Yea , surely , 
 neighbour , if the folk leave aught in my pack for other to buy . he 
 spake in a jovial voice , as if he be merry , and the other all 
 laugh together , as though they be well pleased and in good 
 contentment . and now , deem Birdalone , would be her time to speak 
 if she would learn aught ; so she constrain herself at last , and 
 spake , though in a quavering voice : meseem then , master , this good 
 town be thrive as now ? this I ask because I be a stranger in these 
 part this long while , and now I be come back hither fain be I to 
 find the land in good peace ; for I may chance to take up my abode 
 hereby . 

 the goodman turn to she and smile kindly when they hear the 
 sweetness of her voice ; and one of they say : Sir of the sallet , ye 
 shall be content with the peace in this land , and the thriving of its 
 folk ; the very villein hereabout live as well as franklin in most 
 land , and the yeoman and vavassour be clothe as if they be knight 
 of a good lord 's household . Forsooth their house be both goodly 
 and easy to enter ; and well be that , whereas there lack never good 
 meat and drink on the board therein . and moreover their woman be 
 for ever seek whatso be fair and goodly , whatso be far - fetched and 
 dear - buy , whereof we chapman also thrive , as thou mayst well deem . 
 ah ! it be a goodly land now ! 

 the other nod and smile . but birdalone spake , harden her 
 heart thereto for very need : belike then there be a change of day 
 here , for when I last know of the land there be little peace 
 therein . and that will not be so long agone , say a townsman , 
 smile , for I doubt we should see no grey hair in thine head if thy 
 sallet be off it . birdalone redden : it will be some five year 
 agone , say she . yea , yea , say the townsman , we be begin to 
 end the unpeace then , and it be the dark hour before the dawn ; 
 for five year agone we and the good knight of the Castle of the 
 Quest be lie before the wall of the Red Hold . Forsooth we 
 clear out that den of devil then and there . what betid unto it 
 after ye win it ? say Birdalone , and she tremble withal . say the 
 townsman : hear ye never of the Black Squire , a very valiant knight , 
 since thou sayest that thou hast know this country - side ? she bow 
 a yeasay , for this time she find it hard to speak . 

 well , say the townsman , we hold garrison in the Red Hold for some 
 three month , and thereafter we crave of he to come and be our 
 captain therein ; for , even after the Hold be win , there be yet a 
 sort of runagate that haunt the country - side , man who have no craft 
 save lifting and slay . and forsooth we know this Lord Arthur for 
 the keen and deftest of man - at - arm ; so he yeasaid our asking , and 
 do all he might herein , and forsooth that be all there be to do ; 
 for he be ever in the saddle , and at the work . Forsooth he be not 
 a merry man , save when he be at his busy ; and little he spake in 
 hall or chamber , else have he be well beloved . but at least by no 
 man well might the land have be serve . 

 there be silence a little , and Birdalone wax deadly pale ; then she 
 strove with herself and say : Thou sayest he be and he be ; be he 
 dead then ? say the townsman : not to our knowledge . when he have 
 bring the land into good peace , which be some three year and a 
 half agone , he go his way from the Red Hold all alone , and we see 
 he no more . but some folk deem that he hath enter into religion . 

 Birdalone 's heart sicken , and she think to herself that now all 
 be to begin again ; yet she feel that the bad be over since he be 
 not dead , and she be able to think what she should do . so she say : 
 mayhappen he hath go back to the Castle of the Quest ? Nay , nay , 
 say the townsman , that may not be ; for waste be that house now ; 
 there be none dwelleth there , save , it may be , now and again a 
 wandering carle or carline abideth there a day or two . say 
 birdalone : how hath that befall ? or where be go Sir Hugh , the 
 Green Knight ? say the townsman : we know the Green Knight well ; 
 frank and free and joyous be he ; all man love he ; and his lady and 
 speech - friend , none ever see a lovelier , and as kind as be he . but 
 we might not keep they with we ; they be go into their own country . 
 Sir Hugh leave the Castle of the Quest some three month after the 
 Black Squire come to we for captain , and he give over the castle to 
 Sir Geoffrey of Lea , an old and wise man of war . but not many month 
 thereafter we hear that he also have depart , leave it ungarnishe 
 of man ; and we deem that the cause thereof be that something uncouth 
 be see and hear therein , which folk may not endure . be it not so , 
 my master ? 

 they all yeasaid that , and the talk go on to other matter . as for 
 Birdalone , though her hope to come amongst friend be so utterly 
 overthrow , yet she see not what to do save to go her way to the 
 Castle of the Quest , and see if perchance she might find any tiding 
 there . and she say to herself , that if the bad come to the bad , 
 she would herself dwell there as an hermit of love ; or , maybe , to 
 face those uncouth thing and see if any tiding might be compel 
 out of they . 



 CHAPTER VIII . birdalone COMETH to the castle of the QUEST , heareth 
 the TALE THEREOF from LEONARD , and DEPARTETH THENCE by the SENDING 
 BOAT 



 she arise betime on the morrow , and be out of Greenford so soon as 
 the gate be open , and at first make all speed that she might 
 toward the Castle of the Quest ; and nothing hinder she , for the 
 land be verily in good peace , and she might have come there if she 
 would before sunset , for all whom she meet further she . but as the 
 day wan her courage wan with it , so that at last she stay some 
 six mile short of the house , and crave shelter at a yeoman 's stead 
 there , which be grant she with all kindness ; and they make much of 
 she , and she tell they her vow of the sallet , and they deem nought 
 save that she be a young man . 

 she depart early in the morning with their God - speed , and while the 
 day be yet young come into the meadow before the castle , and see 
 the tower thereof rise up before she : then she check her horse , 
 and ride on no fast than a foot 's pace ; yet as slow as she might 
 ride , need must she get to the gate while the day be yet young . 

 so come Birdalone by that bower wherein she have sleep that first 
 night she come to the castle ; and she rein up to look on it ; and as 
 she sit there gaze , come a man out from it clothe as a man of 
 religion ; and her heart beat quick , and she be like to fall from her 
 horse , for there come into her mind what the townsman have say , that 
 the Black Squire have go into religion . but the hermit come towards 
 she with a cup of water in his hand , and he cast his hood aback from 
 he , and she see at once that it be Leonard the priest , and though 
 it be not the friend whom she seek , yet be she glad that it be a 
 friend ; but he come and stand by she , and say : hail , wayfarer ! wilt 
 thou drink of our well and rest thee a while ? so she take the cup 
 and drink of the water , look kindly on he , while he wonder at 
 the beauty of her hand , and misdoubte he . then she give he back 
 the cup and light down off her horse , and take the sallet from her 
 head , and spake : I may not pass by a friend without a word ; think if 
 thou hast not see I before ? 

 then he know she , and might not refrain he , but cast his arm about 
 she and kiss she , weeping ; and she say : it be sweet to I to find 
 a friend after what I have be tell of yonder house . Yea , say he , 
 and art thou go up thither ? certe , say she , and why not ? say 
 he : they be go , and all go ! how and whither ? say she . but I 
 must full certainly go thither at once ; I will go afoot with thee ; do 
 thou tether my horse till thou comest back . 

 he say : but wilt not thou come back ? I know not , she say : I know 
 nought save that I would go thither ; let it be enough that I suffer 
 thee to go with I , and on the way thou shalt tell I what thou canst 
 of the tale . 

 then go Leonard and tether the horse , and they go together 
 afoot to the gate ; and Birdalone tell what she have hear of Arthur 
 and Hugh ; and Leonard say : this be true , and there be not much else 
 to be say . when the Black Squire come back from the leaguer of the 
 Red Hold , and have hear before of thy departure , he be heavy of mood 
 and few - speak , and wander about as one who might find no rest ; yet 
 be he not stern with Atra , who for her part be no less heavy- 
 hearte : soothly a sad company we be , and it be somewhat well 
 when my Lord Arthur go his way from we ; and indeed eager he be to 
 be go ; and it could be see of he that he be fain of the toil and 
 peril which they of Greenford offer he . then in some four month 
 spake my lord Hugh that he also would be go to a place where be 
 both a land and folk that would look friendly on he ; so he go with 
 my lady Viridis and my lady Aurea , and they have Atra also with they ; 
 and I also they would have have , but my heart fail I to leave the 
 place where I have be so glad and so sorry with thee ; death have be 
 well ; wherefore in yonder bower as in an hermitage I serve God and 
 abide my time . but though I wot nought of where be go the Black 
 Squire , I know whereto those four be go , and it be but a seven 
 day ' ride hence , and the land be goodly and peaceable , and if they 
 be not dead , most like they be there yet . how sayest thou then , thou 
 dearest and kind , wilt thou thither to they ? for if so , I may 
 well lead thee thither . 

 birdalone shake her head . Nay , she say , I deem that I be draw 
 elsewhither , but soon I shall tell thee . Lo now the gate . but ere 
 we enter , tell I of Sir Geoffrey of Lea , and why it be that they 
 might not abide the uncouth thing , or if there be any such . spake 
 Leonard : thing uncouth there be , and I be call upon to lay 
 they , and I do as biddeth Holy Church in all wise , but prevail not 
 against they , and still be they see and hear , till folk might 
 endure it no long . 

 and what like be these thing ? say Birdalone , and be they yet 
 see and hear ? say Leonard : strange it be , but last night I go 
 into the great hall where they mostly betid , and lay I down there , 
 as while I do , for I fear they not , and would see if they yet 
 appear ; but all night come nothing at all . as to the likeness of 
 they . . . then he stop , but say presently : hard it be to tell 
 thee of they , but need must I. there be two of these thing ; and 
 one be an image of a tall woman of middle - age , red - haired , white- 
 skin , and meagre , and while she have a twiggen rod in her hand , 
 and while a naked short sword , and while nought at all . but the 
 voice of she be curse and blaspheming and ill - saying . 

 say birdalone : this be then a fetch of my witch - mistress of whom I 
 tell thee erst , and the image of she ; what be the other ? say 
 Leonard : I be fain not to tell thee . yet need must thou , say 
 Birdalone . dear lady , say Leonard , the other be an image of thee , 
 and even most like unto thee ; but while clothe in a scanty grey coat 
 and barefoot , and while clothe in a fair green gown goodly broider , 
 and broidered shoon ; and while all mother - naked . 

 and what voice cometh from mine image ? say Birdalone , smile , yet 
 somewhat pale withal . say Leonard : one while a voice of sweet 
 singing , as of a bird in the brake , and that be when thou art clothe ; 
 and again , when thou art naked , a voice of shrieking and wail , as 
 of one endure torment . 

 Spake Birdalone : and when do these wonder begin ? say he : not 
 till after Sir Hugh and thy she - friend be go hence . 

 Pondered Birdalone a little ; then she say : I see herein the malice 
 of my witch - mistress ; she would not send these fetch while Hugh be 
 here , lest he should turn to seek I with all his might . but when 
 they depart , she would have the castle waste , and then she send 
 they , wotte that thereby she would rid she of Sir Geoffrey of Lea ; 
 while , on the other hand , I be nought so much unto he that he would 
 spend all his life seek I . but now I deem I know so much of she 
 that I may bid thee to look on she as dead if these fetch come not 
 again within a little while . then mayst thou send and do Sir 
 Geoffrey to wit thereof , and belike he will come back again ; and fain 
 be I thereof for it will be merry if the Castle of the Quest be 
 dwelt in once more . 

 Yea , verily , say Leonard ; but far merry yet wert thou to dwell 
 there . Nay , she say , but now I see that it be not fat for I . 
 let we go in , for I would get to what I would do . 

 so therewith they pass under the shadow of the archway , and 
 birdalone stay not but go straightway into the hall , and through 
 it ; and the priest , who lag somewhat behind her speedy foot , cry 
 out unto she : whither wilt thou ? what chamber wilt thou visit first ? 
 but she stay not , and spake to he over her shoulder as she go : 
 follow I if thou wilt ; I have but one place only to come to ere I 
 leave the Castle of the Quest , save I must need turn back on my 
 footstep . 

 then Leonard come up with she , and she go her way out of the hall , 
 and out on to the waterswale of the castle , and so to the little 
 haven of the water - gate . there Birdalone look about she eagerly ; 
 then she turn to Leonard and point with her finger and say : lo 
 thou ! there yet lieth my ferry of old time , the Sending Boat ; now wot 
 I wherefore I be draw hither . and her eye glitter and her body 
 quiver as she spake . 

 Yea forsooth , say Leonard , there it lieth ; who of all folk in the 
 castle have durst to touch it ? but what hath it to do with thee , O 
 kind lady ? 

 friend , she say , if this day weareth , and I be yet within these 
 wall , then meseemeth there must I abide for evermore ; and there 
 perchance shall I meet that seem of myself , maybe for this night , 
 maybe for ever , till I die here in this castle void of all that I 
 love , and I over - young for it , friend . and I know now that there be 
 hope within I ; for I bethink I of a dear friend over yonder water 
 of whom I have never tell any , nor will tell thee now , save this , 
 that she be the wisdom of my life . 

 wherefore now I will try this ferry and wot if the wight thereof will 
 yet obey the voice of the speaker of the spell , who have shed of her 
 blood to pay therefor . put not forth a hand therefore nor speak a 
 word to let I , but take this farewell of I , with my pity and such 
 love as I may give thee , and let I go , and think kindly of I . 

 then she go up to he , and lay her hand upon his shoulder , and 
 kiss he , and turn about without more ado and step into the 
 boat ; then she sit down and strip her arm of its sleeve , and draw 
 forth a knife and let blood of her arm , and then arise and smear 
 stem and stern therewith , and then sit down with her face to the 
 stern and sing : 


 the red raven - wine now 
 Hast thou drunk , stern and bow ; 
 wake then and awake 
 and the Northward way take : 
 the way of the Wenders forth over the flood , 
 for the will of the Senders be blent with the blood . 


 then she abode a little , while Leonard stand star on her 
 speechless with grief and blind with his bitter tear , till the 
 boat begin to move under she , and presently glide out of the little 
 haven into the wide lake ; then she turn her face back unto he and 
 wave her hand , and he kneel down and bless she , weeping . and so 
 she vanish away from before he . 



 CHAPTER IX . BIRDALONE FINDETH the isle of nothing GREATLY BETTERED , 
 and be KINDLY ENTREATED there 



 now it be scarce noon when she depart , and the dark night come 
 upon she in the midst of the water ; and she fall asleep in the boat 
 ere the night have grow very old , and wake up in the morning , not 
 exceed early , maybe about six o'clock ; then she look ahead and 
 think presently to see the ill - favour blotch of the Isle of 
 nothing on the bosom of the blue water , whereas it be a fair and 
 cloudless morning of latter May . sure enough she see land ahead , and 
 it lie low down on the water , but she deem from the first that it 
 be green of hue , and as she near it she see that it be verily as 
 green as emerald . thereat she be a little troubled , because she 
 think that mayhappen the Sending Boat have go astray , and that if 
 the wight thereof be not wend the old road , maybe he be not 
 make for the old haven . for now indeed she tell herself right out 
 that her will be to go back again to the House under the Wood , and 
 see what might betide there , and if she and the wood - mother together 
 might not overcome the witch . 

 but whatever might happen nought could she do but sit in her place 
 and wend as the Sending Boat would ; and in an hour 's space she be 
 right under the lee of the land , and she see that it be shapen even 
 as the Isle of Nothing have be aforetime . but this make her wonder , 
 that now the grass grow thick down to the lip of the water , and all 
 about from the water up be many little slim tree , and some of they 
 with the May - tide blossom yet on they , as though it be a fair and 
 great orchard that she be near ; and moreover , beyond all that she 
 see the thatched roof of house rise up . 

 presently then the Sending Boat have bring she to the land , and she 
 step ashore , but be wary , and gat her bow bent and set an arrow 
 thereto she begin to go up from the water . yet she think within 
 herself , it will be nought ill if I be come amongst folk , so long as 
 they be peaceful , or else how might I live the journey out to all the 
 isle and so home to the House under the Wood ? 

 so she turn her face to where she have see those roof , which now 
 she see no long because of the thick leaf of the little tree , 
 and so go along a narrow path , which grow to be more and more 
 closely beset with tree , and be now no long apple and pear and 
 quince and medlar , but a young - grow thicket of woodland tree , as 
 oak and hornbeam and beech and holly . 

 at last as she go she hear voice before she , so she steal warily 
 to the edge of the copse , finger on shaft ; and presently could see 
 clear of the sapling and out on to a wide space of greensward , 
 beyond which be a homestead of many house and bower , like unto 
 that of a good yeoman in peaceful land , save that the main building 
 be long , though it be low . but amidst the say greensward be a 
 goodly flock of sheep that have be but of late wash for the 
 shearing , and along with the sheep four folk , two carle and two 
 quean , all of they in their first youth , not one by seem of over 
 a score and two of summer . these folk be clothe but simply , man and 
 woman , in short coat of white woollen   but the woman 's coat a 
 little long than the man 's , without shoon or hosen ; they have 
 garland of green leaf on their head , and be wholly unarmed , 
 save that one of the man bear an ashen wand in his hand . as for 
 their body , they be goodly of fashion , tan indeed by the sun 's 
 burning , but all sweet of flesh be they , shapely and trim , clean- 
 make , and light and slim . 

 Birdalone 's heart yearn toward they , and she step straightway 
 from out of the cover of the coppice , and the sun flame from her 
 sallet and glitter in the ring of her hauberk , so that the folk 
 might not fail to see she ; the sheep flee bundle from her past 
 their keeper , who stand firm , but seem somewhat scared , and move 
 not toward Birdalone . she give they the sele of the day and stand 
 still herself ; but the man with the ash - wand say : hail , thou man ; 
 but we would have thee come no nearer a while , though thy voice be 
 sweet : for we know what thing they be which thou bearest , and that 
 thou art a warrior . wilt thou hurt we ? 

 birdalone laugh as sweetly as the blackbird sing , and she do off 
 her sallet and shake the plenteous hair down over she , and then draw 
 forth her sword and dagger and cast they to earth , and lay her bow 
 and quiver of arrow upon they , and say : now will I come to you , or 
 ye shall come to I , whereas I be unweapone , and no warrior , but a 
 woman , and ye be four to one , and two of you carle ; wherefore now 
 ye may bind I or slay I if you will ; but in any case I pray you 
 first to give I a mouthful of meat . 

 when she have do her speech , she go up to the fairest of the woman 
 and kiss she ; but the two carle make no more ado but come to 
 Birdalone and kiss she one after other , and that as man who need 
 nought to compel they therein , and each thereafter take a hand of she 
 and hold it and caress it . but the other woman have run into the 
 house as soon as Birdalone speak , and come back again with a treen 
 bowl full of milk and a little loaf , not white but brown ; and there 
 blunder about her leg as she come a little lad of some three 
 winter old , naked and brown , who be shy of the gleaming new - comer , 
 and hide he behind the woman one while , and the other while come 
 forth to see the new thing . but the woman say : dear woman , here be 
 for thee some of the ewe ' milk , and a bite of bread , and a little 
 deal of cheese ; the say milk be yet warm , so that it be not yet 
 clottere ; but if thou wilt come with we thou mayest speedily drink 
 cow ' milk , and we be now at point to go milk they . 

 birdalone thank she with a heart full of content , and be not ill- 
 pleased to get her hand free from the two carle ; so she sit down 
 and eat her breakfast while they talk with she , and tell she of 
 diverse work of theirs ; as to how their tree be wax , and new 
 tillage they have do the past spring , and how it befell to the kine 
 and the goat ; of their child also they spake , and how there be 
 already four thereof , and one of the woman , the meat - bringer , already 
 quicken with child once more . so that ere we die , quoth the carle 
 who be speak , we look to see many grandchild , and shall have 
 some stout carle and quean here . and by that time will some of the 
 tree be well grow , so that we may fall timber and make we some keel 
 that will wend the lake , and help we a - fishing ; or we may go to other 
 land ; or while folk may come to we , even as thou hast , thou dear- 
 handed , sweet - voice woman . but wilt thou abide here ever ? 

 Yea , say the other , but that be look forward a long while , that 
 building of ship . what be near and well to think of be , that 
 these apple and pear tree be so well fruit , small as they be , that 
 this harvest we shall be able to make we cider and perry ; yea , and no 
 little deal thereof . but art thou mind to abide with we ever ? 
 that be dear to we ; and belike thou would bear us child , thou 
 also . 

 then spake the meat - fetch woman and laugh withal : Nay , thou 
 also lookest aloof a pretty deal ; whereas what be now to do be to go 
 milk the kine , and to take this guest with we , so that she may drink 
 somewhat well than ewe ' milk though the cider be not ready to 
 hand . but tell I , our dear guest , art thou verily go to abide 
 with we a long while ? that be sweet to we , and we will do all we 
 may to pleasure thee . 

 Nay , say Birdalone , it will no well be but that I depart on the 
 morrow ; and all thank do I give you for your kindness . 

 the woman kiss she , and she arise , and all they go together to 
 the milking of the kine some half mile inland ; and they pass 
 through much of orchard , and some deal of tillage , wherein the wheat 
 be already grow high ; and so come they to a wide meadow through 
 which run a little stream , and therein be a goodly herd of kine . so 
 they fall to the milking , and make Birdalone drink of the sweet cow ' 
 milk , and then go and lie down under the shade of the little young 
 tree , and talk and be merry together . but the man be both of 
 they somewhat willing at first to kiss Birdalone and toy with she , 
 but when she let they know that she desire it not they refrain 
 they without grudge . 

 all this while of their talk they ask Birdalone nought of whence 
 and whither , and she would not ask they , lest it might stir their 
 asking , and then she would have to tell they some deal of her story ; 
 and tell it be now become unto her somewhat weary work . 

 in a while they arise all , and the man and one woman go their way 
 to deal with the acre - land , but the meat - fetcher go back with 
 birdalone into the house ; and she show she all that be therein , 
 which be for the more part , forsooth , the four babe aforesaid . the 
 other come back in the eventide , bear with they foison of blue 
 hare - bell , and tell joyously how they have find they anigh the 
 coppice edge in such a place : and thereafter they be merry , and 
 sing and talk the evening away , and show Birdalone at last to a 
 fair little chamber wherein be a bed of dry grass , where she lay 
 down and sleep in all content . 



 CHAPTER X. of BIRDALONE 's flitting from the isle of nothing 



 on the morrow birdalone arise betime , and would not tarry despite 
 all the kindness of that folk and the change which have come over the 
 Isle of nothing ; so the friend see she down to the boat all 
 together , and bear down with they a deal of bread and cheese and late 
 apple of the last year , for her provision on the road , and a pail of 
 milk withal ; and man and woman they kiss she at departure , and the 
 meat - fetcher say : if by any mean thou mayst find a keel which will 
 carry thee hither , at some time , I would thou wouldst come ; for even 
 if thou be old , and we pass away , yet here shall be our child or 
 our grandchild to welcome thee ; and we will tell they the tale of 
 thee that they remember it and long for thee . 

 then Birdalone kiss she again , and make much of she , and so step 
 into the boat , and fall to her sacrifice to the wight thereof ; and 
 those other star at she and wonder , and spake nought unto she 
 till she be go glide over the face of the water ; but as they 
 walk back to the house , they spake amongst themselves that this 
 must be some goddess   for of Holy Church they know nought   who have 
 come to visit they in her loveliness ; and in after time , when this 
 folk wax a many , and till all the isle and make ship and spread 
 to other land and become great , they yet have a memory of Birdalone 
 as their own very lady and goddess , who have come from the fertile and 
 wise land to bless they , when first they begin to engender on that 
 isle , and have break bread with they , and sleep under their roof , and 
 then depart in a wonderful fashion , as might be look for of a 
 goddess . 

 but as for Birdalone , she come not back ever , nor see that folk 
 again , and now she speed over the water toward the Isle of king . 



 CHAPTER XI . come to the isle of king birdalone findeth THERE A 
 SCORE and two of fair damsel who would FAIN have she company 



 Birdalone come ashore at the say isle at the day - dawn , and see but 
 little change in the isle when it grow light , and still the castle 
 stand look down awfully on to the meadow . but when she have set 
 foot on the land , she handle her bow lest the bad might befall , 
 and look about she , deeming that this time she would not go she 
 way to the dread show that be array in the castle , if forsooth 
 those dead folk yet abode there . 

 so now as she look across the meadow , she see one with light and 
 flutter raiment come forth from the tree , and look toward she 
 whereas she stand flash and gleam in the sun like an image of 
 the God of Love turn warrior . now Birdalone deem for sure that 
 this be a woman ; she see she come a little nigh to she , and then 
 stand look at she under the sharp of her hand ; then she turn 
 about and run back to the brake whence she come ; and presently 
 birdalone hear the sound of voice come thence , and in a little 
 while thereafter come forth from the say brake a rout of woman   one 
 score and two as they be tell thereafter   and walk over the 
 meadow straight unto she . she stand where she be , so as to be nigh 
 unto her ferry in case they will her unpeace ; for though they be 
 weaponless by seem , they be a many . 

 when they be come near they stand about she in a half ring , 
 whisper and laugh each to each . birdalone see that they be 
 all young , and that none of they might be call ungoodly , and some 
 be full fair . they be bright and fine of array . Most bore gold 
 and gem on finger and neck and arm ; they be clothe in light , or it 
 may be say wanton raiment of diverse colour , which have only this of 
 their fashion in common , that they none of they hide over - much of 
 their bare body ; for either the silk slip from the shoulder of 
 she , or dance away from her flank ; and she whose foot be shod , 
 spar not to show knee and some deal of thigh ; and she whose gown 
 reach unsheared from neck to heel , wear it of a web so thin and 
 fine that it hide but little betwixt heel and neck . 

 birdalone stand gaze on they and wonder , and she have a mind to 
 think that they be some show send by her old mistress the witch for 
 her undoing , and she loosen her sword in its sheath and nock an 
 arrow . 

 but then run forward two of the damsel and knelt before she , and 
 each take an hand of she and fall to kiss it , and she feel their 
 hand that they be firm and their lip that they be soft and 
 warm , and they be doubtless alive and real . then spake one of they 
 and say : hail our lord ! how can word say how we rejoice in thy 
 come this happy morn ! now do all we give ourselves to thee as thy 
 slave to do as thou wilt with . yet we pray thee be merciful to we 
 and our longing . 

 Therewith all the sort of they kneel down on the grass before 
 birdalone and join their hand as pray to she . and birdalone 
 be full ill at ease , and wotte not where she be . but she say : 
 Hail ! and good day and fulfilment of wish unto you , fair damsel ! 
 but tell I , be this the Isle of king , as I deem ; for strange it 
 be for I to see ye womenfolk here ? 

 say she who have speak afore : yea verily this be the Isle of king ; 
 but long ago be the king dead , and yet they sit dead in the great 
 hall of the castle yonder , as thou mayst see if thou , who art a man 
 and a valiant warrior , durst follow up yon mountain path thereto ; but 
 we , weak woman and little - hearted , durst not go anigh it ; and we 
 tremble when while a - night cometh down thence the sound of clash 
 sword and clatter shield , and the cry of man in battle . but , 
 praise be to the God of Love , nought cometh down from thence unto we . 
 therefore do we live peaceful life and pleasant here , lack nought 
 but thee , lord ; and lo now thou hast come unto we , and we be happy 
 in our inmost heart . 

 now be Birdalone perplex and know not what to do ; but at last she 
 say : gentle maiden , I pray you pardon I , but I must depart 
 straightway ; for I have an errand , and life or death lieth on it . in 
 all else than my abiding here may ye have your will . 

 Therewith do she move a little way toward her ferry ; but forthwith 
 all they brake out weeping and wail and lament , and some of 
 they come up to Birdalone and cast themselves down before she , and 
 clasp her knee , and take hold of her skirt , and besought she 
 piteously to abide with they . but she put they aside as well as she 
 might , and step aboard the Sending Boat , and stand amidst it 
 wait on their departure ; but they go not , and stand along on the 
 lip of the land cry out and beseech with much clamour . 

 then Birdalone wax somewhat wrath at their noise and tumult , and 
 she draw forth her knife and bar her arm and let blood from it . 
 but when they see the whiteness and roundness of it , and how fine and 
 sleek it be , straightway they change their tune , and cry out : a 
 woman , a woman , a fool of a woman ! and they laugh in scorn and 
 mockery . and the speaker of they say : now there be but one thing 
 for thee to do , and that be to come forth from thy boat and strip off 
 thy steal raiment , and we shall make thee as fine as ourselves , and 
 thou shalt come with we , and with we abide the coming of our lord . 
 Nay , thou art so fair and lovely , that thou shalt be the Lady and 
 Queen of we , and we will do after thy command , and thou mayst 
 chastise we if we fail therein . but now if thou wilt not come forth 
 of the boat uncompelle , we shall pluck thee forth of it . 

 and therewith she set her foot on the gunwale of the boat , and two or 
 three other do the like . but now have Birdalone her sword naked in 
 her hand , and she wax as red as blood , and cry out : Forbear I 
 bid you ! yea verily I be a woman ; but I will not take this offer 
 either , whereas I have an errand , as I tell you . and so stern it be , 
 that if ye now let my departure I will not spare to smite with this 
 sword whoso first cometh aboard my ferry , and though I be not a man , 
 yet shall ye find that in this matter I shall be little bad , 
 whereas I be armed and ye be naked . 

 then they draw back and stand gibe and jeer at she ; but she 
 heed it no whit , but reddened stem and stern of the Sending Boat , 
 and sing she spell , and forth glide the ferry , while the damsel 
 stand and star astonish . as for Birdalone , as she speed on she 
 way she might not refrain her laughter . thus she wend the wet 
 highway . 



 CHAPTER XII . birdalone COMETH again to the ISLE of QUEENS , and 
 FINDETH a perilous adventure therein 



 it be not yet daybreak when Birdalone come ashore again , and the 
 moon be down , and it be dark ; wherefore she durst not go up on the 
 land , but lie down in the ferry and fall asleep there . when she wake 
 again it be broad daylight , the sun be up , and a little ripple be 
 run over the face of the water . she step ashore straightway , 
 and look up the land and to the right hand and the left , and see at 
 once that it be indeed the Isle of Queens , and the house stand trim 
 and lovely as of old time ; then she long somewhat to tread the 
 green meadow a little , for yet young be the day , and she see nought 
 stirring save the throstle and a few small beast . however , she say 
 to herself that she would go nowhere nigh to the goodly house wherein 
 abode those image of death . yet her body long so sore for the 
 springtide freshness of the grass , and be so bewooed of the flowery 
 scent thereof , that though she durst not go unarmed , she do off her 
 footgear and go steal softly barefoot and with naked leg over 
 the embroidered greensward , say aloud to herself : if run for the 
 ferry I need must , light shall I run so dight . 

 nonetheless , she have go but a little way ere a terror take hold of 
 she , though she see no child of Adam anigh , and she turn and run 
 back swiftly to her old place and sit down under a twisted oak - tree 
 hard by the Sending Boat , and abode there pant and quaking , and 
 scarce dare to look up from the grass for a while . then her heart 
 come back to she , and she laugh , and say to herself : I be a fool , 
 for I need fear nought on this Isle of Queens save woman like myself . 

 yet she sit there a little while long without stir ; then she 
 stand up and look keenly around , and , as aforesaid , exceed far- 
 sight she be ; but still she see neither man nor maid nor suckle 
 child . 

 then her eye seek the lip of the lake , and rest on a little 
 bight some stone 's throw ahead of the Sending Boat , where , a little 
 back from the water , slim willow make a veil betwixt the water of 
 the meadow ; and she look , and see how pleasant a place it be for 
 a one to stand and look on the ripple just leave , while the water 
 drip from the clear body on to the grass . and her bare foot fall 
 to tell she clothe side of the sweet coolness of the water , and 
 wait for no naysay , but lightly bear she toward the willowy bight . 
 and when she be there , she do off her sallet and ungirt she , and 
 lay her sword on the grass , and do off her surcoat and hauberk , and 
 so be a woman again in one white coat above her smock . then she 
 look heedfully betwixt the willow - bough , and see no more than 
 before , nought but a little whitethorn brake , now white indeed with 
 blossom , some fifty yard landward from where she stand . so she 
 laugh , and do off her other raiment , and slide swiftly into the 
 water , that embrace her body in all its fresh kindness ; and as for 
 Birdalone , she reward it well for its past toil by sporting and 
 swim to her full . 

 then she come forth from the water , and clothe herself in no great 
 haste , and do on her hauberk and sallet and sword , and so go back 
 to her place , and sit down and begin to do on her foot - gear . 

 but as she look up from her work a moment , lo ! a tall man come 
 toward she , and just about the willow whereby she have bath . her 
 heart beat quick and her face change , yet she hasten , and be shod 
 and stand up in knightly array by then he stay his step some five 
 pace from she , and give she the sele of the day in courteous wise ; 
 and she strove to think that he have not see she , or at least note 
 her otherwise dight ; yet her heart misgave she . 

 he be a grizzle - haired man of over fifty summer by seem , but 
 goodly enough and well - knit ; he be clothe in a green coat more than a 
 little worn , but make after the fashion of knighthood ; he have nought 
 on his head but an oak - chaplet , and no weapon but a short sword by 
 his side and a stout staff in his hand . 

 she give back his greeting in a quavering voice ; and he say : 
 welcome again , young man . art thou come to dwell with we ? truly 
 thou art trim now , but ere some few month thine attire will be not 
 so much fair than ours , and thine hauberk will be rust , for here 
 be no joyous tilting nor deed of arm , and no kind lady to give 
 the award of honour , so that if we fight amongst ourselves it will be 
 because we have fall out , and spitefully . yet   and he laugh , 
 mockingly , as she think   thou mayst bring we luck , and draw some 
 fair damsel unto we , for that be what we await in this isle , which 
 be barren of their fair body , despite of its deceitful name . 

 Thereat Birdalone redden , deeming that he divine her womanhood , 
 but she enforce she to speak hardily , and as manly as she might , and 
 say : yea , fair sir , and if I be the God of Love , as thou deemest , 
 and not merely a poor squire   Louis Delahaye , at thy service , how 
 many damsel shall I send thee if there must need be one to each man 
 of you ? Quoth he : Thou must make up the tale to a score or more , or 
 some of we must lack . sooth to say , at this time thou needest not 
 haste overmuch for all the tale , whereas there be but one other of 
 the company near at hand , a mere foolish young man ; the other be 
 go to the leeward side of the isle , to fetch we venison and fish , 
 both of which be more plenty there than here ; wherefore be we two 
 somewhat lonesome in this stead , all the more as we be over - nigh to 
 the sorcery in the great house , which we durst not enter ; for though 
 nought cometh out thence down unto we , yet hear we a - night - tide , 
 first song , and then cry and shriek , come out therefrom . 

 then he stay his speech , and draw a little nigh to Birdalone , and 
 then grin , and say : Forsooth we can spare he , we twain . and he 
 look on her hard , and the colour come into her cheek , and she 
 laugh uneasily , as a dainty lady when she heareth some unmeet tale . 

 but again the old carle draw nigh to she , and say : Thou seemest 
 to have a good bow and store of arrow ; if thou wouldst lend they to 
 I for a little , and come with I into the wood hard by , I might 
 shoot thee some venison with little toil to thee ; whereas , forsooth , 
 thou look scarce like one who be meet for over - much toil . again 
 she redden , and spake nought this time ; and he say : deem not 
 there be no deer this end of the isle because I say that the other 
 be go to fetch home venison ; only the deer be tame there and 
 more , and we have but evil shooting - gear , whereas thou art well find 
 therein . wilt thou not come ? we shall have merry feast after the 
 hunt . 

 now have Birdalone come to her wit again , and she answer like a 
 merry youth , with a flavour of mockery in her speech : Fair sir , thou 
 shalt not deem that I need much help in slay the dun deer ; for I 
 do thee to wit that I shoot not ill in the bow ; neither be I heavy- 
 footed . but I will not hunt in your park to - day , for I have an 
 errand which calleth I away , so that I shall depart hence presently . 
 besides , wise elder , there be thine errand to see to ; and if I be the 
 God of Love , as thou sayest , I must not keep thee and thy valiant 
 fellow languish mateless ; so with thy leave I will now depart , 
 that I may send you a score of fair damsel for your company . 

 and she turn about and make a step toward her boat ; but the carle 
 draw nearer , laugh ; and he say : truly sayest thou that thou art 
 not heavy - footed , for never see I foot light or fair than glide 
 over the meadow e'en now ; nor a fair body than come like rosy- 
 tint pearl fresh out of the water while I lie hide in yonder 
 thorn - brake that while . wherefore trouble not thyself to bring any 
 more damsel than thyself , fairest Goddess of Love , for thou art 
 enough for I . 

 and therewith he run forward , and stretch out a hand to she ; but in 
 that nick of time have she her sword naked in her hand , and the carle 
 draw back before the glitter thereof , and cry out : Ho , ho ! be it 
 to be battle , my mistress ? Deemest thou that thou wilt slay I as 
 lightly as the dun deer , and thou with thy bow unstrung at thy back ? 
 now shall I show thee a trick of fence ; but fear not that I shall 
 hurt thee to spoil thee . 

 he advance on she with his staff aloft , and her heart fail she , 
 and she quake , and lightly he beat down her guard and do the sword 
 out of her hand ; and again he turn on she to take she , but she 
 spring aside and run from he , but run landward perforce , as he be 
 betwixt she and the boat ; and he follow heavily , and have nought to 
 do in the race . 

 but she have not go a two - score yard ere she hear a great shout , 
 and another man come run over the meadow ; a slim young man be 
 this , and bad of attire than the old carle , for so tattered be his 
 raiment that he be half naked ; but he be goodly of fashion , fresh- 
 coloured and black - haired . birdalone stay her foot when she see 
 he , for though she doubt not to outrun he , yet whither should she 
 run , since her ferry be behind she ? 

 so the young man come up to she , and the old carle meet he all 
 panting , and the young man say : how now , Antony ! what battle be 
 this ? and wherefore art thou chase this fair knight ? and thou , 
 fair sir , why fleest thou this grey dastard ? 

 Said Antony : thou art but a young fool , Otter , this be no man , but a 
 woman , and I have take she , and she be mine . 

 well , say Otter , I say she be as much mine as thine ; nay , more , if 
 she will give herself unto I . but if she will not , she shall go 
 whither she will in thy despite . or art thou a woman ? 

 yea , yea , say Birdalone ; and I pray thee , by thy mother 's head , 
 suffer I to depart ; for heavy and full of need be the errand that I 
 be about . 

 go thou shalt then , say Otter ; lead back to thy place , and I will 
 walk with thee . so do they : and Birdalone go beside the young 
 man quaking ; but he put out no hand unto she ; and sooth to say , she 
 deem that she have seldom see so fair a young man , but it be 
 Arthur or Hugh . 

 now he , as Antony , be girt with a short sword , but he let it be in 
 its sheath ; and as they go , Antony draw his blade again , and hove 
 it up to smite Otter , but as it befell Birdalone see he , and turn 
 round sharp upon he and gat hold of his wrist , and therewith Otter 
 turn also , and catch the old carle by the nape as he turn away , 
 and put a foot before his and shove mightily , so that he go 
 nosele to the earth . 

 then turn Otter about again , laugh , and he say to Birdalone : 
 by Saint Giles ! thou art well - nigh too valiant for a woman , and I 
 would that we two might be together ; and then between we we might 
 achieve the adventure of the dead lady up yonder . she hang her 
 head , and say : Fair sir , it may not anywise be ; yet I thank thee , I 
 thank thee . 

 so come they to the water - side and the Sending Boat , and Birdalone 
 stay her foot there , and the young man say : what be this keel , 
 that seemeth unto I as if it be a ferry for malefactor wend to 
 a death of torment , so grey and bleared and water - log and sun- 
 bleach as it be , and smear over with stain of I know not what ? 

 say birdalone : such as it be , it be my ferry over the water to 
 where I would be . strange ! say Otter ; to my mind it be like to our 
 fortune on this isle , we who be once knight and merry squire and 
 be now as gangrel man , and of ill condition , think of nought 
 save our first desire , even those which we share with the wolf and 
 the kite . 

 she say : but art thou of evil condition , thou who hast just 
 deliver I from trouble ? he smile grimly : Damsel , say he , I 
 have not deliver thee yet from I , though I have from he . but 
 tell I , art thou a sorceress ? not a black one , say Birdalone ; but 
 I will tell thee at once that I have be breed by a witch most 
 mighty , and some deal of lore have I learn . and therewith she tell 
 he of the Sending Boat , and how she would have to speed it on the 
 way . 

 he look on she a little and then turn away , and see her sword 
 lie on the grass ; so he go to it and pick it up and bring it 
 to she , and say : thou mayst yet need this keen friend . so she take 
 it and thrust it back into the scabbard , quake somewhat because of 
 he ; so feeble and frail as she feel before he . then he say : if 
 thou deem thou hast somewhat to reward I for , I have a boon to 
 ask of thee , and grant that , we shall be quit again . yea , she 
 say faintly , and what be the boon ? he say : art thou press to 
 depart now , this minute ? Nay , say Birdalone , not for an hour if 
 there be no peril here from other man , and . . . and . . . and if I 
 be true to thee and will let thee go ? say he , laugh ; hah ! be that 
 not thy word ? fear not , I swear by thine eye that thou shalt depart 
 whenso thou wilt . now then , the boon I crave be , that thou wilt sit 
 down here beside I and tell I the tale of thy life that have be . 
 say she : it weary I to think thereof ; yet hast thou a right to 
 crave somewhat of I , and this be not hard to grant . 

 and she sit down by he ; but he say : do this also for I , take off 
 thine headpiece , since now that we know thee for a woman it serveth 
 thee nought . so do she , and begin her tale straightway , and tell 
 he all thereof , save as to the wood - wife , and he sit hearken and 
 watch her face ; and when she have make an end , he say : now shall 
 I ask none other boon of thee , though I long sore for it ; but good it 
 be that we sunder straightway , else maybe I might yet be for 
 hinder thee . 

 Therewith he stand up , and Birdalone also , and he look on she 
 eagerly , and say : I be now to bid thee farewell , and it be most 
 like that I shall never see thee again , wherefore I will ask thee yet 
 to let one thing come from thy mouth ; for I deem thee the dearest of 
 all woman I have ever see . what shall I say ? say Birdalone , 
 smile on he kindly ; must thou need put the word in my mouth ? 
 Thou hast be friendly with I here when need be to I of 
 friendliness ; wherefore I say , I would I might see thee again , and 
 thou well bestead than now thou art . 

 the young man 's face brighten , and he say : Spake I not that thou 
 wert the dearest of all ? this be even the word I would have put in 
 thy mouth . but now see thou , one goeth on from one thing to another , 
 and I must now ask thee , be there aught which thou hast a mind to 
 give I ere I depart , some keepsake which I durst not ask for ? 

 she flush red and say : I will with a good heart give thee my bow 
 and arrow for a keepsake ; whereas the old carle tell I that ye be 
 ill furnish of shooting - gear . 

 and she would have take her bow from her back , but he laugh aloud , 
 and say : Nay , nay , I will not have that ; for there be those who 
 gird they to a sword and know not how to use it , but few will cumber 
 their shoulder with bow and quiver who can not shoot therewith ; I 
 deem it like that thou art a fell bowman . keep thy bow therefore , 
 and if thou wilt go without any other gift , even so be it . 

 and he make as if he would turn away ; but she put forth both her 
 hand and take his in they , and lift up her face and kiss he 
 kindly , and then turn away to her ferry ; while Otter stand still 
 and say in a merry voice : now be it well than well , for thou art 
 in all way what I would have thee , and there be nought like unto 
 thee . and therewith he turn away and depart ere Birdalone have 
 step into the Sending Boat , and she blushing like a rose the 
 while . then she do due sacrifice to the wight of the witch - ferry , 
 and speed on her way without any hindrance . 



 CHAPTER XIII . come to the ISLE of the YOUNG and the OLD , birdalone 
 findeth it people with child 



 Midst all this have wear some hour , but yet it be barely noon ; 
 wherefore it be yet dark by then Birdalone make the Isle of the 
 Young and the Old ; so she step out of the boat , and lie down on 
 the grass and abode the dawn sleep . and she awake with the 
 clatter of shrill voice , and she rise up and look , and lo a 
 multitude of child all about she , both man and woman child , 
 and , as it seem , from five year old upward to fifteen . they cry 
 and crow merrily when they see she stand up , and press on she to 
 see she the nearer and to touch her hand or her raiment . they be 
 but little clad , and the young one not at all , but be goodly 
 youngling and merry . so great be the noise they raise , that loud 
 be the thunder which have not be hush thereby ; and birdalone 
 stand look on they , smile , and know not what to do . Anon she 
 turn to a tall thin lad of some fifteen winter , and say unto he : 
 Wilt thou now take I unto the house , and the place where dwelleth 
 the old man ? Quoth he : I neither know of an old man , nor rightly 
 what it mean , the word . be not I old enough for thee ? I be the 
 old of these here . but belike thou art hungry ; wherefore if thou 
 come to the place where we sleep a - night , and where we shelter we 
 from the storm and the rain when need be , I will give thee to eat ; 
 for we have both bread and milk and cheese , and raisin of the sun . 

 so he take her hand and lead she along , and ask she by the way 
 concern her armour and weapon , and of the fashion of battle , and 
 she tell he thereof what she would . 

 thus come they to the place where erst have be the cot under the 
 ruin of the great ancient house ; but now be go all that ruin and 
 the great grey wall , though the cot be leave ; and all about it be 
 low bower build of small wood and thatch undeftly . but the lad 
 smile when he see it , as if the sight thereof make he happy ; and he 
 say : all these have we make since I have dwelt here , and no other 
 home have I know . 

 and he lead she into the cot , and set she down to eat and to drink , 
 and through the open door she could see the child swarm , and 
 they that be nigh thrust each other this way and that to 
 catch a sight of she . 

 now she say : fair child , how gatt thou this victual if there be 
 no old folk to help you ? say he : we dig the ground and sow it , 
 and the wheat come up , and we reap it in harvest , and make bread of 
 it ; and we have goat and kine , and we milk they , and turn the milk 
 with a little blue flower , which be fair to see . and there be in 
 this isle little hill where the grape grow plenty ; and some we eat 
 and some we dry for store . Lo thou , such be our way for victual . 
 but tell I , say he , thou sayest old , and I know not the word ; art 
 thou old ? she laugh : not very , say she , yet old than thou . 

 say the lad : thou art fair and dear to look on , and thy voice be 
 sweet ; wilt thou not abide with we , and teach we what it be to be 
 old ? Nay , say she , I may not , for I have an errand which driveth I 
 on ; wherefore I must be go within this hour . 

 Forsooth , she be grow eager now to be do with her journey and 
 come to the House under the Wood , whatever should befall she there . 
 moreover she deem it would not be restful to she to abide among all 
 these restless child , with their ceaseless cry and yelping : if 
 rest she might , she would rest , she deem , in the Isle of Increase 
 Unsought , if there be no ill thing abide there . 

 wherefore now she arise , when she have sit hearken the sound of the 
 lad 's prattle for a while , for as to the sense thereof she might not 
 heed it over - much . the youngling would not leave she , but lead she , 
 hold her hand , down to her ferry again ; she kiss he in thank 
 for his meat , and he redden thereat but say nought . all the whole 
 rout of little one have follow she down to the water , and now they 
 stand , as thick as bee on a honeycomb , on the bank , to watch she 
 departure . but if they be keen to see her doing before , how much 
 keener be they when it come to the baring of her arm and the 
 smearing of the Sending Boat . to be short , so keen be they , and 
 push and shove each other so sturdily , that more than one or two 
 fall into the water , and Birdalone be fright lest they should 
 drown ; but they swam like duck , and get on to the land when they 
 would , which be not so very soon , for some of they hang unto the 
 gunwale of the boat , and hove their face up to look over into it , 
 and leave not hold till the ferry be fairly under weigh and beginning 
 to quicken its speed . 

 so leave Birdalone the isle , and nought befell she on the way to the 
 Isle of Increase Unsought . 



 CHAPTER XIV . the SENDING BOAT DISAPPEARETH from the ISLE of increase 
 UNSOUGHT , and birdalone seeketh to escape THENCE by SWIMMING 



 it be as before that birdalone come to the shore of the isle while 
 it be yet night ; but the wizard keel be so loathsome to she , that 
 she step out of it and lay she down on the land for what be leave 
 of the night ; yet hard she find her bed , and neither grassy nor 
 flowery . 

 for all that , she sleep , for she be weary , and it be broad day and 
 not very early when she awake . she stand up tremble , for she 
 forebode evil , so near as she be to the dwelling of her old 
 mistress ; and she look up to where in time past be the fair and 
 wicked house , and see that all be change indeed ; for no long be 
 the isle goodly with meadow and orchard and garden , but be waste and 
 bare , and nought grow on it save thin and wiry grass , already seed 
 even ere June be bear , and here and there hard and ugly herb , with 
 scarce aught that might be call a flower amongst they . tree there 
 be yet , but the most of they stark dead , and the good die fast . 
 no beast she see , nor fowl ; nothing but lizard and beetle , and now 
 and again a dry grey adder coil up about a sun - burn stone . but 
 of great carrion fly , green and blue , be there a many , and while 
 they buzz about her head till she sicken with loathing of they . 
 all this she find on her way as she go up toward the place where 
 erst be the great perron . but when she come to the top there be no 
 sign either of the stair or the house , or aught that ever be 
 build ; there be nought but the bare bent top , ungrassed , parch 
 by wind , scorch by sun , wash by rain . 

 she wander about the isle , to place where she have not be 
 herself , but which she deem she might have know by the telling of 
 the Green Knight 's tale , have there be no change since those day ; 
 but now be all change , and the whole isle be a mere waste , and 
 withal poisonous of aspect to her mind , as if many corps lay 
 underneath the wretched stone of it . nevertheless , though it seem 
 so evil unto Birdalone , she linger on it , wander about till she 
 be to - weary , for she have no will to depart at such time as she 
 would be like to come to her old abiding - place by night and cloud ; 
 wherefore she dally with the time , and come not back to the haven 
 of her ferry till it be nigh sunset , and the westere sun be in 
 her eye when she come there ; and she say to herself that this be 
 the cause why she might not see the Sending Boat . 

 so she clear her eye and look on the thin grass awhile , and then 
 down over the edge of the land , and still she see not her boat . she 
 turn pale , and a pang of anguish go to her heart ; but she walk 
 a little east , deeming that perchance she have err as to the place 
 of the haven on that dull and empty shore ; but yet there be no boat . 
 then she turn back wild with terror , and seek where erst she have 
 miss it , and find neither boat nor the world 's end . and she 
 deem that there might be some devilish malice of the wight of the 
 Sending Boat , to torment she with fear , and she walk along the 
 land 's edge up and down , and down and up , far each time , and 
 still there be no boat . 

 then she stand still and strove to think , and might not , nor might 
 she do aught , but spread abroad her hand and moan in her agony ; 
 for now indeed she feel herself in the trap ; and she say that all 
 her past life of hope and desire and love and honour be all for 
 nought , and that she be but bear to die miserably in that foul ruin 
 of an isle envenom with the memory of bygone cruelty and shame . 

 but in a little while she come somewhat to herself , and she say : at 
 least this hideous land shall not mock my die anguish ; I will give 
 myself to the water and let it do with I as it will . 

 Therewith she cast off her helm and hauberk first , and her weapon , 
 and her pouch with the treasure that could buy nought for she now , 
 and thereafter all her raiment , till she be as naked as when she 
 first come aland there that other time . again she moan , and put up 
 her hand to her bosom and feel a little gold box lie there betwixt 
 the fragrant hill of her breast , which hang to a thin golden thread 
 about her neck ; and a thought come into her mind , and she stoop 
 adown and draw from her pouch flint and fire - steel , and then open 
 the say golden box and draw thence the tress which Habundia the 
 wood - wife have give to she those year agone , and all tremble she 
 draw two hair from it , as erst she do on the Isle of Nothing , and 
 strike fire and kindle tinder and burn the said hair , and then 
 hang the golden box with the tress therein about her neck again ; and 
 she say : o wood - mother , if only thou couldst know of I and see I , 
 thou wouldst help I ! 

 thereafter she seek along the bank for bread which she have take 
 from her store that morning , and she find it , and compel herself 
 to eat of it for the strengthening of her body , and then she stand 
 and abode tiding ; and by then the sun have just sink below the rim of 
 the lake , and the star begin to twinkle , for the night be 
 cloudless , and exceed fair , and very warm . 

 no visible token come to she , but her heart grow strong , and she 
 seem to see herself yet alive and in hope on the other side of the 
 water ; and she say : who wotteth what Weird may do , or where the 
 water may bear I ? and there be no swimmer strong than I. 

 so then without more ado Birdalone slip into the water , which lay 
 before she as calm and plain as a great sheet of glass , and fall to 
 row with her arm and her leg as though she be but swim 
 from Green Eyot to the mainland , as so oft she have do in the other 
 day . 



 CHAPTER XV . BIRDALONE lacketh little of drowning , but COMETH 
 LATTERLY to the GREEN eyot 



 on swam Birdalone , not as one who have a mind to drown she for the 
 forgetting of trouble , but both strongly and wisely ; and she turn 
 over on to she back , and look on the star above she , and steer 
 herself by they thitherward whereas she deem be the land under the 
 wood . when she have be go from the evil isle for an hour or so , 
 there rise a fair little wind behind she , which help she forward , 
 but scarce raise the water more than a little ripple . 

 still she swam on , and it be some three hour she begin to weary , 
 and then she float on her back and let the wind and water have its 
 way with she ; and now the night be as dark as it would be ere dawn . 

 thus it go for another hour , that while she swam on and while she 
 float ; and now her heart begin to fail she , and the great water be 
 no long unto she a wet highway , but a terrible gulf over which she 
 hang faint . 

 nevertheless she do not give up do what she might : she float 
 supine a long while , and then , when she have gather a little 
 strength , turn over again and strike out , still steer she by the 
 star . but she have scarce make three stroke ere her arm meet 
 something hard and rough ; and at first in her forlornness she deem 
 she have happen on some dread water monster , and for terror of it 
 she sink down into the deep , but come up presently blind and 
 breathless , and spread abroad her arm , and again they come on the 
 thing aforesaid , and this time find that it be nought alive , but 
 the bole of a tree sit high out of the water . so she clomb up on 
 to it with what might she have leave , and sit she down , and see in the 
 dim light that it be big , and that there be a fork betwixt two 
 limb reach up into the air , and she thrust herself in between 
 these two limb and embrace one of they , so that she might scarce 
 tumble off ; and a great content and happiness come over she that she 
 have thus escape from the death of the deep ; but therewithal 
 weariness overcome she , and she sleep , whether she would or not ; and 
 the bole go on over the water no slow than might have be 
 look for , whether it be by the pushing on of the south wind , or 
 by the hand of Weird that would not have she die . 

 long she slumber , for when she awake it be broad day and the sun 
 be shin high in the heaven , and she clear her eye and look 
 around , and see before she the land , but yet blue in the offing . and 
 the tree - bole be yet speed on towards the shore , as if it be 
 be draw there by some bidding of might . 

 now indeed grow Birdalone happy , and she think if any have help 
 she it must have be the wood - mother once again ; and she say to 
 herself that she should soon meet with that helper ; nor heed she 
 that she be naked and unfurnished of any good , whereas she deem 
 indeed that it be but to ask and have of her friend . 

 for a while indeed she know not whither she be wend , and if she 
 face be verily turn toward the land under the wood ; but as the 
 morning wear the blue distance begin to grow green , and then she see 
 that a great wood be indeed before she , and thereafter , as it 
 clear yet more , she know the land she be near for the meadow 
 of the House under the Wood , and it be not long thence ere she see 
 clear and close Green Eyot and Rocky Eyot , though the house be yet 
 hide from she by the green shore of the first of those two isle . 

 shortly to tell it , her tree - bole float with she past the outer 
 ness of Green Eyot , and come ashore in that same sandy bight where 
 erst she be wonte to make her body ready for the water . she 
 step ashore all glad to feel the firm warm sand underneath her 
 foot - sol , and as one drunk with joy she be when the tall flowery 
 grass of the latter May be caress her leg as they shake the 
 seed - dust off the bent , and smite the fragrance out of the blossom ; 
 and she might scarce at first lift her eye from their familiar 
 loveliness . glad she be indeed , but exceed wear and weary with 
 the long voyage , and all the longing and fear and hope which have 
 encompass she that while . she lift up her eye but once , and see 
 the witch 's house standing where it be will not , but no shape of man 
 move about it ; then she turn aside to a little brake of thorn and 
 eglantine in the meadow hard by , and lay she down on the grass in 
 the shade thereof , and almost before her head touch the ground she 
 fall asleep , and sleep there long and peacefully . 



 CHAPTER XVI . BIRDALONE FINDETH HER WITCH - MISTRESS dead 



 it be some while after noon when she waken , and the sun be 
 shin bright and hot . somewhat she feel the burden of fear upon 
 she , even before she be fully come to herself , and know not what it 
 be that she fear ; but when she call to mind that it be even the 
 meeting with her old mistress , her flesh quake indeed with the 
 memory of bygone anguish , but valiantly she arise and face the 
 dwelling of the witch despite her naked helplessness . as she go 
 she look up unto it , and see no smoke come from the chimney , but 
 marvel little thereat since it be not yet cook - time and the 
 weather hot . she draw nigh , and see someone sit on the bench 
 without the door whereas the witch be wonte ; and her heart beat 
 quick , for she see presently that it be none other than her 
 mistress . moreover , near to she stand three of the milch - kine lowing 
 uneasily and as in reproach , even as such beast use when their 
 udder be full and they desire to be milk . 

 birdalone stay a minute , and her leg nigh fail she for fear , and 
 then because of the very fear she hasten on till she come within 
 ten pace of the say witch ; and sore she miss her bow and arrow , 
 and the cutting blade of her feigned squirehood , lest the carline 
 should arise and come rag and shriek at she . 

 then spake Birdalone in no feeble voice , and say : Dame , I be come 
 back unto thee , as thou seest , in even such plight as I flee from 
 thee ; and I have a mind to dwell in this land : what sayest thou ? 
 the witch neither move nor spake at her word ; and the kine , who have 
 hold silence when she first come up , and have turn from she , fall to 
 their peevish lowing again . 

 birdalone draw a step nigh , and say : dost thou hear I , dame , or 
 art thou exceed wroth with I , and art ponder what vengeance 
 thou wilt take on I ? still no answer come from the carline , and the 
 kine keep on lowing now and again . once more birdalone draw nigh , 
 and spake loudly and say : tell I at least , be it peace between we 
 or unpeace ? 

 but now when she look she see that the eye of the witch be open 
 and star , and her lip white , and her hand hard writhen ; and she 
 cry out and say : be she dead ? or will she waken presently and 
 beat I ? surely she be dead . and she put forth her hand and touch 
 her face , and it be stone - cold ; and she find that she be dead 
 beyond any question . 

 then be a great weight lift off her heart , and she turn about 
 and look on the meadow and up to the tree of the wood and down to 
 the ripple stream before she , and fair and sweet and joyous be 
 they get unto she ; and she look at the kine who be draw up 
 towards she , and she laugh merrily , and go to the out - house hard 
 by and take forth a milking - pail and a stool and fall to milk they 
 one after the other , and the beast go off down the meadow lowing 
 in a change voice , for joy to wit , this time . but Birdalone kneel 
 down and drink a long draught of the sweet warm milk , and then arise 
 and go swiftly into the house , and see nought change or worsen 
 so far as she could see . there be her own bed in the corner , and 
 the mistress 's , great and much fair , over against it ; and the 
 hutch by the door wherein the victual be keep : she open it now , 
 and find three loaf there on the shelf , and a meal - tub down below , 
 and she take a loaf and break it and fall to eat it as she walk 
 about the chamber . there be her bow stand in a nook beside the 
 hutch , and the quiver of arrow hang on the wall above it . there 
 be the settle lie athwart from the hearth ; and she smile , and 
 fit her wrist to the back of the carven bear which make its 
 elbow , whereto the witch be will not to tie they when she chastise she . 

 then she go to the coffer that stand against the wall behind it , 
 and throw up the lid of one of they , and find therein a smock or two 
 of her own , yellow by the lapse of time , and her old grey coat , 
 rag as it be when last she wear it , and now somewhat moth - eat 
 withal ; and she draw forth both smock and coat and lay they on the 
 settle . then she open another coffer , and therein be gay and 
 gaudy gown and gear of the witch 's wear ; but lie amongst they , as 
 if the witch have wear they also , her green gown and shoon which she 
 own hand have broider . but she say : Nay , ye have be in ill 
 company , I will wear you not , though ye be goodly , at least not till 
 ye have be fumigate and hallow for I . 

 Therewith she turn back to the settle and do on her her old smock 
 and her ragged grey coat , and say : to - day at least will these be 
 good enough for to - day 's work . and she knit her brow withal , and 
 walk with a firm step out - a - door and stand a while gaze on the 
 dead corpse of her enemy ; and she think how that here be that 
 which once be so great a thing unto she for the shaping of her life- 
 day , and which so oft come to her wake thought after she have 
 escape from her hand ,   though , as aforesaid , she seldom dream of 
 her a - night - time , and moreover an hour ago she yet fear it so sore 
 that she scarce might stand for the fear of it ; and now it be nought 
 but a carven log unto she . 

 but she tell herself that the work be to be do ; so she drag the 
 body away thence , and across the brook , and a little way into the 
 meadow , and then she go back and fetch mattock and spade from the 
 outhouse , where she know they lay , and so fall to dig a grave for 
 the corpse of her dead terror . but howso hard she might toil , she 
 be not through with the work ere night begin to fall on she , and she 
 have no mind to go on with her digging by night . wherefore she go 
 back into the house , and lighted candle , whereof be no lack , and 
 make her supper of the bread and the milk ; and then sit ponder on 
 her life that have be till the passion arise in her bosom , and the 
 tear burst out , and long she weep for desire of other and pity for 
 herself . then she go to the bed she have be erst will not to , and 
 lay she down and fall asleep . 

 and her mistress walk not , nor meddle with her peace ; nor do 
 birdalone so much as dream of she , but of her mother and Master 
 Jacobus in the fair city of the five Crafts ; and in her sleep she 
 weep for thinking of they . 



 CHAPTER XVII . BIRDALONE LAYETH to EARTH the body of the WITCH , and 
 findeth the SENDING BOAT BROKEN UP 



 when morning be , Birdalone awake , and feel a weight upon her heart , 
 and call to mind the task which lie before she . so she arise and 
 clothe herself , and go straight to the grave begin , and toil hard 
 till she have digge it out deep , and sithence she drag the witch 
 thereinto and heap the earth upon she . then she bath she in the 
 nighest pool of the brook , and go back into the house and make she 
 breakfast on the bread and milk , and it be then about mid - morning . 
 thereafter she go about the house , and see to the baking of bread , 
 and so out to the meadow to see to the kine and the goat , and then 
 store the milk for make butter and cheese , and do in all wise as 
 if she be to dwell long in that stead ; but thereafter she rest 
 her body , while her thought go wide about . but she say to 
 herself that she would not go up to the Oak of Tryst to meet the 
 wood - mother that day , but would abide the night , in case aught befell 
 that she should tell she . 

 but when the sun be get low she rouse herself and go out , and 
 walk about the meadow , and hearken to the bird ' song , and 
 watch the kine and the goat as they feed down the pasture ; and now 
 a soft content come over she , that all this be free unto she to hold 
 in peace , and to take her pleasure in , as much as one lone child of 
 Adam might do . 

 at last she wander down to the sandy bight of the lake and stand 
 gaze on Green Eyot , where the osier and willow be grow wild 
 and long in all these year , and she say that she would swim over to 
 it on the morrow . but now her foot take her eastward thence toward 
 the haven of the Sending Boat amongst the alder ; for in her heart 
 she would fain know if there be any tiding for she . 

 so she go softly along the path by the water , where she have speed so 
 swiftly that last time , and come at last to the creek - side , and 
 look down on to the water somewhat timorously . there then she see 
 what she deem be the very boat itself lie as she have know it ; 
 but when she look again she see that it lie from stem to stern all 
 loose stave with the water betwixt , and the thwart and rib all 
 sunder and undo , so that never again might it float upon the 
 wave . then she say in a soft voice : art thou dead then , as thy 
 mistress be dead ? be it not so that thou wert at the point of death , 
 and she also , when thou failedst I at the Isle of Increase Unsought ? 
 no voice come to she as she spake ; and she say again : must I then 
 bury thee as I have bury thy mistress ? Nay , that will I not until 
 thou compell I ; belike in a short while little of the stave of 
 thee shall be leave now that the life be out of thee . let thy ghost 
 and hers foregather if ye will . 

 as she spake the last word , she see a stir about the stern which lay 
 furth in up the creek , and while she quake with fail heart , 
 lo ! a big serpent , mouldy and hairy , grey and brown - flecked , come 
 forth from under the stern and go into the water and up the bank 
 and so into the dusk of the alder - wood . birdalone stand awhile pale 
 and heartsick for fear , and when her foot feel life in they , she 
 turn and steal away back again into the merry green mead and the 
 low beam of the sun , ponder whether this evil creature be the 
 fetch of the wight who drave the ferry under the blood of the sender . 

 so she hasten back again to the house , and light a fire on the 
 hearth , and fall to cook she somewhat of grout to her supper ; and 
 she watch the fire , think withal : now if some poor soul be 
 abroad , they may see the smoke and seek hither , and I may comfort 
 they with food and shelter and converse ; or when night darken , they 
 may see the litten window and come to I ; wherefore shall the fire 
 burn yet and the candle be light , for as warm as be the evening , 
 even as if it be yule - tide and the snow deep without , and the wind 
 howl in the woodland tree . and therewith she weep for longing of 
 they that she love . 

 but in a little she dry her tear , and reproach herself for her 
 much softness ; and she eat her supper when she have light a candle 
  for it be now dark , and again sit look at the hearth , till she 
 say : now be I get soft again , and who know but my softness may 
 tempt the ghost to come in to I . I will give my hand somewhat to 
 do . 

 Therewith her eye catch sight of the rent and rag of her old grey 
 gown , and she smile somewhat ruefully as she call to mind her 
 gallant knight 's array , which lie now on the shore of the evil and 
 ruin isle ; and her goodly attire of the day of the five craft ; 
 and the rich raiment wherein her friend of the Castle of the Quest 
 have clothe she . then she arise and seek needle and thread and some 
 remnant of green cloth , and do off the ragged coat and fall to 
 patch and mend it , and so sit at her work in smock - sewing till 
 the night be old and she be weary and sleep overcome she , and she 
 lie down in her bed and sleep dreamlessly till the sun be high next 
 morning . 



 CHAPTER XVIII . the wood - MOTHER COMETH to birdalone and heareth she 
 STORY 



 now Birdalone arise and bath she and break she fast , and then go 
 about her work with the beast and the dairy ; but all that time 
 seem long to she till she have bow in hand and quiver on back , and 
 be wend her way to the Oak of Tryst ; and swift be her foot and 
 her heart beat quick with hope of pleasure . 

 Forsooth no long tarrying have she , for scarce have she set she down 
 beneath the oak , ere the wood - mother come forth from the thicket even 
 as the first time when Birdalone see she , and presently she have she 
 arm about Birdalone and be kiss and clip she . then they sit 
 down together in the shade of the great tree , and the wood - mother 
 make much of her friend with few word and those but simple , while 
 birdalone weep for joy . 

 at last spake birdalone : wood - mother , my dear , I look in thy face , 
 and I see thee that thou art nowise change , so that thou call to 
 my mind the birdalone that meet thee here when she be stray from 
 the House of Captivity like to a bird with a string to its leg . 

 Habundia smile on she and say : so it be that now thou look 
 old than I. Rounder and fuller be thy body , and thy limb great 
 and fairer , and thy flesh sleeker ; lovely art thou in all wise , and 
 such as I have think of thee during these year , save that thy face 
 be grow wise and sad than might be look for . Mother , she 
 say , I be grow old than I should be by the tale of the year , for 
 I have have joy and grief , and grief and joy , and grief again ; and now 
 that the year have wear , the grief abideth and the joy hath 
 depart , save this joy of thee and the day of the meeting I have so 
 often think of . 

 say the wood - wife : be I to hear the story of thee , I deem it most 
 like that I would fain buy thy joy with thy grief , both that which 
 have be and that which be to come . and now I will ask thee right 
 out to tell I all thy tale , as much as thou canst ; and all thou 
 canst tell to I , who be thine other self : and I wot moreover that 
 thou hast not tell of I to any whom thou hast meet in the world since 
 we be last together : be it not so ? in faith and in troth so it 
 be , say Birdalone . say Habundia , after she have look hard on 
 birdalone a while : now there be this I find in thee , that though 
 thou call I wood - mother still , thou art not my daughter as thou 
 wert erewhile , nor I thy mother ; and I know not whether to be glad or 
 sorry thereof , since thou art even as much my friend as ever thou 
 wert . but much do I rejoice herein that thou hast not tell any one 
 soul of I . 

 say birdalone : I must tell thee that part of the tale I shall tell 
 thee be how I have find my mother in the flesh , and love she 
 sorely ; and then I lose she again , for she be dead . 

 Quoth the wood - wife , smile on her lovingly : then should I be even 
 more thy mother than erst I be : there will be something else in thy 
 tale , sweetle . 

 then Birdalone flush very red , and she smile piteously in 
 Habundia 's face ; but then she put up her hand to hide the change 
 therein which the anguish of longing wrought , and her shoulder shake 
 and her bosom heave , and she weep bitterly ; but the wood - wife still 
 look on her smiling , and say softly at last : Yea , how sweet it 
 be to be grieve with thy pain . 

 but in a while birdalone grow calm again and the very smile blossom 
 out in her face , and they kiss together . then Habundia rise up and 
 look on she , and say at last and laugh out withal : one thing I 
 must need say , that thou hast not fetch thee raiment of price from 
 the knighthood and the king ' house ; or have I not see thy grey 
 coat of old time , while thou wert live amidst the witch 's cruelty ? 
 Yea forsooth , say Birdalone ; thou need not to ask this . verily 
 not , say Habundia , nor why thou art not clothe in the fair green gown 
 which thou didst broider ; for while I have see the witch flaunt 
 it on the wooden ugly body of she , and thou wouldst not wear it after 
 she have curse it with her foulness . be it not so ? yea , it be even 
 so , say Birdalone ; dost thou love I the less therefor ? Habundia 
 laugh again : be I a man of Adam 's son , say she , I might make 
 thee many word on the seemliness of thy short coat , and the kindness 
 of it , that it will be for ever slip off one or other of thy 
 shoulder . but now be I at least enough thy mother , and thou art 
 dwelling even so much in my house , that the next time we meet   and 
 that shall be to - morrow   I shall fetch thee raiment which shall make 
 we forget that thou camest back again to this land as naked as thou 
 didst depart thence . 

 birdalone redden and hang down her head , but the wood - mother sit 
 down beside she and kiss she and say : but now forget all save thy 
 tale , and tell all as closely as thou mayest , for I would lose nought 
 thereof . Yea , say Birdalone ; and where shall I begin ? say 
 Habundia : I know nought thereof save the beginning , that thou fledst 
 away naked and escape the witch ; and the ending , to wit , that the 
 Sending Boat fail thee at the last of the Wonder Isles , and that 
 thou calledst on I not wholly in vain , whereas the witch be dead , 
 and therefore there be nought to stay I from send thee one of my 
 tree and the wight thereof   whom belike I may show to thee one day 
 to save thee from the bottom of the deep water . 

 at that word Birdalone throw herself on the wood - wife and clip and 
 kiss she , and thank she for the helping with all the dear 
 word she might . but the wood - mother laugh for joy , and stroke 
 her cheek and say : now I deem thee my daughter again , whereas thou 
 thank I with such sweet passion for do to thee as a kind 
 mother need must without any thought thereof . and I bid thee , my 
 dear , never again to go so far from I as that I may not easily help 
 thee and comfort thee from out of my realm wherein I be mighty . and 
 now tell I all in thy dear speech . 

 Therewith Birdalone begin her story without more ado , even as ye have 
 hear it afore . yea and many more thing than we can set down do 
 she tell , for full fill she be with the wisdom of the wood . and 
 between while the wood - mother feed she with dainty meat and drink , 
 such as Birdalone have never erst taste the like of . and by then she 
 have get so far as her flight from the Isle of Increase Unsought , the 
 sun be set and the twilight begin . and the wood - wife say : now 
 shalt thou go home to thine house ; and have no fear of witch or evil 
 thing , for I be not far from thee and will watch over thee . Sweet be 
 thy tale , my daughter , and dear be thy she - friend ; and if ever it 
 may be that I may do they any pleasure , fain be I ; and that 
 especially to thy Viridis , who meseemeth be both sweet and wise even 
 as thou thyself art . Nay , dost thou begrudge my love she ? Nay , 
 nay , say Birdalone , laughing ; but I rejoice in it . and hereafter 
 when I tell thee how sorely they pay for help I , I will bid thee 
 to love they yet more than now thou dost . therewith they part , and 
 birdalone come to her house ; and on the way she make as it be a 
 feign tale in mockery of her old trouble , that there would be the 
 witch - mistress await she to whip she . so that when she come to 
 the door she be half fright with her own mock , lest the witch 
 might now at last have take to walk . 

 but all be quiet when she enter with the last of the twilight , and 
 she rest that night in all peace , as in the good of her day in the 
 Five Crafts . 



 CHAPTER XIX . HABUNDIA HIDETH BIRDALONE 's NAKEDNESS with faery 
 raiment 



 next morning Birdalone tarry about the house as little a while as 
 she might , and then go hasten up to the wood ; and when she come 
 within sight of the Trysting Tree , lo ! there be Habundia before she , 
 and the hand of her busy turn over goodly raiment , so that it be 
 well - nigh as if the day have go back to the time of the Captivity , 
 and the sitter under the oak be Birdalone herself deal with her 
 half - finish gown . 

 joyously they meet and embrace each other , and then spake the wood- 
 wife : now , thou darling of the world , I have be no bad than my 
 word , and if thou durst wear web of the Faery thou shalt presently be 
 clothe as goodly as ever thou wert down there amongst the knighthood ; 
 and then thy tale , my dear , and , if it may be , the wisdom of the 
 barren wood - wife set thereto . 

 and therewith she lay on Birdalone 's outstretche arm the raiment 
 she have bring with she , and it be as if the sunbeam have thrust 
 through the close leafage of the oak , and make its shadow nought a 
 space about Birdalone , so gleam and glow in shifty brightness the 
 broidery of the gown ; and Birdalone let it fall to earth , and pass 
 over her hand and arm the fine smock sew in yellow and white 
 silk , so that the web thereof seem of mingle cream and curd ; and 
 she look on the shoon that lie beside the gown , that be do so 
 nicely and finely that the work be as the feather - robe of a 
 beauteous bird , whereof one scarce can say whether it be bright or 
 grey , thousand - hue or all simple of colour . birdalone quiver for 
 joy of the fair thing , and crow in her speech as she kneel before 
 Habundia to thank she : then in a twinkling have she do off her 
 beggar 's raiment , and then the smock clung about her darling 
 nakedness , and next the gown be shimmer all over she , and the 
 golden girdle embrace her loin as though it love they worthily ; 
 and Birdalone look to the wood round about she and laugh , while 
 Habundia lie in her place and smile upon she with gentle loving- 
 kindness . 

 but in a little while be birdalone sober ; for the thought of how 
 fair she should look to the eye of her beloved when she be show 
 unto he on the day of day , thrust her light and eager pleasure 
 aside ; and she take up her shoe from the ground   for she have not 
 do they on , and sit down beside the wood - wife and fall a - toy 
 with the marvel of they ; and thus without more ado begin her tale 
 again , whereas she have leave it last even , when she have tell of how 
 the Sending Boat be speed she over the water toward the Isle of 
 the Young and the Old . 



 CHAPTER XX . birdalone telleth habundia of her love for ARTHUR , and 
 GETTETH from her promise of help therein 



 long they sit there that day , and until the sun be down , and by then 
 have Birdalone little to tell of her story , for she be get therein 
 to the day of the five craft . many time have she weep and turn 
 to Habundia for solace as she tell , not without shame , but without 
 any covering up , all the tale of her love for Arthur the Black 
 Squire , and how she be surprise by the love of he , and of his 
 wisdom and grace and loveliness . and the wood - mother be ever as 
 sweet and kind unto she as could be ; yet might another than a lover 
 have see that much of all this be strange unto she , and she look 
 upon Birdalone as a child who have break her toy , and be hard to 
 comfort for the loss of it , though there be a many more in the world . 
 but when it grow dusk as aforesaid , and it be time to part , she 
 spake to Birdalone , and say : true it be , my child , that thou hast 
 live long in these six year time ; neither do I wonder at the 
 increase of thy beauty , and the majesty thereof ; for fair be the life 
 thou hast live , although thou hast be grieve and torment by it 
 at while . and now I know what it be for which thou long ; and 
 herein again will I play the mother unto thee , and seek about to 
 fetch thee that thou wouldst have ; so be not over - anxious or 
 trouble ; and thou mayest be good herein , as my fair child should be ; 
 for this I have note in thee , that love be not so tyrannous a master 
 but that his servant may while think of other matter , and so 
 solace their soul , that they may live despite of all . 

 now be Birdalone arise , and stand before her friend confused and 
 blushing . but Habundia put she two hand on her shoulder and kiss 
 she , and say : go home now and sleep , and come again to - morrow and 
 let we hear the last of thy tale ; and when that be do , maybe I 
 shall be able to do something for thine avail . 

 so they part , and on the morrow birdalone come again and tell the 
 remnant of her story , which be not so long now that the Black Squire 
 be out of it . and when she have do , Habundia keep silence awhile , 
 and then she say : one thing I will tell thee , that whereas erewhile 
 it be but seldom indeed that any son of Adam might be see in the 
 woodland here , of late , that is , within the last three year , there 
 be many such amongst we ; and to our deeming they be evil beast , more 
 pitiless and greedy than any bear ; and but that we have nought to do 
 with they , for they fear we and flee from we , we should have 
 destroy they one and all . and now that I have hear all thy story , 
 it seemeth unto I not so unlike but these may be the remnant of the 
 band of the Red Hold , and that they have drift hither flee 
 before the might of thy friend of the knighthood . wherefore now , 
 trust I that I will look into this , but I must need be away from 
 here for a little ; so hold thy soul in patience though hear thou 
 nought of I , and dwell quietly at home for seven day ' space , and 
 then come hither and find I , farewell now , my child ! 

 so they kiss and depart ; and Birdalone go home to the house , 
 and wear the day thereafter do what be needful about the stead , 
 and wander through the meadow , and swim the water about 
 Green Eyot ; and the day be not unrestful unto she . 



 CHAPTER XXI . how the wood - WIFE enter the COT , and a wonder that 
 BEFELL THEREON 



 but when it be the sixth day since those two have meet , Birdalone 
 arise in the morning and stand in the door of the house , and she 
 look toward the bent which go up to the wood and see one come 
 down it , and know it for Habundia clothe in her huntress ' raiment and 
 bear something over the left arm , for her bow be in her right 
 hand . so Birdalone run to meet she , and embrace and kiss she , and 
 be merry over she , and say : dear mother , thou farest far from thy 
 fastness to - day . say Habundia : there be nought in the meadow now 
 save the neat and the goat and thou ; of none of that folk be I 
 afraid . but mayhappen thou shalt be afraid to come with I into the 
 depth of the wildwood , for thither would I lead thee . I will be 
 afraid of nought with thee beside I , say Birdalone . but come now 
 and look upon the house that I have win for I . and she take she 
 hand and lead she along ; and the wood - wife say no more till they be 
 across the brook and standing by the porch . 

 then say birdalone : Thou hast a green gown over thine arm ; be that 
 also for I ? Yea , certe , say Habundia ; the old rag which thou hast 
 on thee , and which thou lov so sore , be not fine enough for my 
 company ; and the glitter - gown I give thee may be too fine for the 
 thorn and the briar , and moreover thou mayst be over - easily see if 
 thou bear that broider sunshine mid the bough . wherefore go in 
 now and do on this other coat , though the faery have make it , and 
 then come out to I with thy bow and thy quiver , and I shall find 
 thee sandal - shoon and girdle withal . 

 Nay , wood - mother , say Birdalone , hallow my house by enter it , and 
 eat a morsel with I and drink the wine of the horn folk ere we go 
 our way . 

 Habundia shake her head and knit she brow somewhat as she look 
 hard on the house ; then she say : I know not , Adam 's daughter ; I 
 have little to do with house , and doubt if a house be safe for I . 
 and this one that the witch build ! and belike she bury some human 
 be at one of its four corner . tell I , fair child , saw thou 
 ever here at night - tide the shape of a youngling crown with a 
 garland stray about the house ? 

 Nay , never at all , say Birdalone . say the wood - wife : then maybe 
 thou hast hallow it with the wisdom and love of thee , and I may 
 venture ; and moreover I note that it be all build of tree and the 
 grass of the earth ; and thou art free to use they by my leave . but 
 if aught befall of my come under thy roof , hee it not too much , 
 but think , whatsoever my aspect may be , I be thy wood - mother and 
 wisdom - mother that loveth thee . and I bid thee also wish with all 
 thy might that my aspect may not change to thee . also , if I eat , 
 thou wert well not to sign the meat as Adam 's son be will not . lead in 
 then ; for now be I grow wilful , and will enter whatever betide . 

 birdalone marvel at those word , but she fall to wish strongly 
 that her friend might not lose her lovely youthful shape either then 
 or ever , and she take her hand , which tremble somewhat , and lead she 
 over the threshold ; and when they be under the roof herseeme that 
 the wood - mother dwindle in a wondrous way , though her face be as 
 sweet and her limb as shapely as ever ; and she laugh shrilly yet 
 sweetly , and spake in a thin clear voice : birdalone , my dear , wish 
 strongly , wish strongly ! though thou shalt see nothing bad of I 
 than this . and she be scarce three foot high , but as pretty as a 
 picture . 

 thereat indeed be birdalone affright , but she wish all she 
 might , and stoop down to kiss this little creature ; and therewith 
 again the wood - wife seem to wax again as great and tall as ever she 
 be , and her voice come full and strong again , as she laugh and 
 say : now be it all over for this time , and I see how well thou 
 lov I ; and I pray thee love I no less for this wonder thou hast 
 see in I . but now it be well that I never go under a roof 
 again . and she take her arm about Birdalone and clip she 
 lovingly ; and glad be birdalone to feel her so strong and solid 
 again . 

 then they sit to the board and eat a simple meal of bread and cheese 
 and wood - berry , and drink milk withal ; and the wood - mother be 
 merry , and the smile dance over her face as she look on Birdalone 
 with all love - kindness , so that Birdalone wonder what be toward ; 
 but so light - hearted and happy she grow , that she deem it might be 
 nought save good . 

 but when they have eat , then Birdalone do off her old coat , which 
 she say be meet enough for her daily toil , and do on the fair 
 green hunting - gown and the sandal - shoon , and girt she with the fair 
 girdle which Habundia have fetch she , and draw up the lap of she 
 gown therethrough till her leg be all free of the skirt . and 
 Habundia look on she , and laugh and say : now be these white 
 and smooth leg as bad as the gleam - gown for the lie hid ; but it 
 may no well be , and thou must draw thy skirt down and stumble , if 
 need must be , when we come to the ambushment . 

 birdalone redden as she laugh at the word , and take down her bow 
 and hang her quiver at she back and thrust her sharp knife into her 
 girdle , and forth they go both of they , and be presently past the 
 bent which go up from the meadow and in amongst Habundia 's tree . 



 CHAPTER XXII . BIRDALONE WENDETH the wildwood in fellowship with 
 habundia 



 now as they go their way lightly through the wood , spake Habundia 
 and say : Birdalone , my child , fair be the gold ring with the 
 sapphire stone that the third finger of thy right hand beareth ; 
 seldom have I see so fair a stone as that deep blue one ; hangeth any 
 tale thereby ? say birdalone : do I not tell thee thereof , wood- 
 mother , how that my beloved who be lose give it unto I the very last 
 time I see he , woe worth the while ? Nay , say Habundia , I mind not 
 the tale . but deem thou he would know it again if he see it ? 
 yea , surely , say Birdalone , hang her head ; for when first he give 
 it , the gift be not to I , but to another woman . and she hold she 
 peace , and go on with hang head and all the glee fade out of 
 she a while . 

 at last she turn to Habundia , and say : I have now bethought I to 
 ask thee whither we be go and on what errand ; for at first I be 
 so glad at heart , I know not why , and it be so merry to be wend 
 the wood with thee freely , that I have no thought in I as to whither 
 and wherefore . but now wilt thou tell I ? 

 say the wood - wife : how if I be to tell thee we be go a- 
 hunting ? birdalone say : then I should ask thee what like the 
 quarry be . and suppose it be man ? say the wood - wife . birdalone 
 turn somewhat pale . my mother , she say , if we be go against 
 some of those man of the Red Bands , I be not happy over it . I be no 
 warrior , and fear stroke . say Habundia , laugh : yet art thou a 
 fall archer ; and thou mayest shoot from an ambush of the thick 
 leaf , since June be in to - day . but neither would I slay or hurt 
 any man , say Birdalone , but it be to save I from present death . 

 Habundia look on she with a sly smile and say : well maybe though 
 we take cover and get within wind of our quarry thou shalt not need 
 to speed an arrow to he . have patience therefore . for this be a 
 strange beast which I have mark down ; he be not ill to look on , and 
 his voice , which we may well hearken , for while he singeth , be 
 rather sweet than surly . what mean thou , mother ? say Birdalone , 
 grow red and then paler yet ; what man be it ? since thy call he 
 a beast be a jest , be it not ? 

 Nay , say Habundia , I neither name he nor know he ; only I deem he 
 by no mean to be one of the Red Band . for the rest , he may be a man 
 in a beast 's skin , or a beast in a man 's skin , for aught I know ; 
 whereas he seem , so far as I have see he , to be not wholly man- 
 like or wholly beast - like . but now let we hold our peace of he till 
 we be come nigh to his haunt . 

 so they go on their way , and Birdalone say but little , while the 
 wood - wife be of many word and gay . they make all diligence , for 
 birdalone be not soon weary , and moreover as now she be anxious 
 and eager to see what would befall , which she might not but deem 
 would be something great . 

 they go without stay till past noon , when they be come to a 
 little shady dale wherethrough run a clear stream ; there they rest 
 and bath they , and thereafter sit under the bough and eat the 
 dainty meat which the wood - wife provide , howsoever she come by it ; 
 and when they have rest a while , the wood - wife turn the talk once 
 more unto Arthur the Black Squire , and would have Birdalone tell she 
 all nicely what manner of man he be ; and Birdalone be nothing loth 
 thereto ; for have she she will she have talk of he day - long . 



 CHAPTER XXIII . the wood - wife bringeth birdalone to the SIGHT of 
 arthur in the wildwood 



 now they go on again , no less speedily than before , and rest but 
 little , until it be hard on an hour before sunset . and now Habundia 
 begin to go warily , as if they be come anigh to their journey 's end 
 and the thing that they seek . they be come by now to a long bent 
 of the forest well grow with big - bole oak - tree , not very close 
 together , so that short fine greensward be all underneath they ; and 
 Habundia go heedfully from bole to bole , as if she would be ready 
 to cover herself if need be ; and Birdalone go after she , and be 
 now flush of face , and her eye glitter , and her heart beat fast , 
 and her leg tremble under she , as she go run from tree to 
 tree . 

 so come they nigh to the crown of the bent , and before they be the 
 oak - tree sparser and small as they go down the further side , 
 which seem by their sudden shortening to be steep than the hither 
 side ; and betwixt they show the topmost of thorn and whitebeam and 
 logwood , intertwine with eglantine and honeysuckle and the new 
 shoot of the traveller 's joy . there the wood - wife put forth her 
 hand to bid Birdalone stay , who come up to her friend and stand 
 before her eager and quivering : and anon come the sound of a man 's 
 voice singing , though they could hear no word in it as yet amidst 
 the rustle of the tree and the tumult of song which the blackbird 
 and throstle raise in the dale below they . 

 then spake the wood - wife softly : Hearken , we be right and the time 
 be good , our beast be give tongue : now below we be the bent - side 
 steep , and goeth down into a very little dale with a clear stream 
 run amidst ; and therein be the very lair of the thing that we be 
 hunting . wherefore now let we slip warily down between the bush 
 till we get close to the bottom , and then belike we shall see the 
 very creature quite close , and we shall then consider and think what 
 we shall do with he . 

 birdalone have no voice wherewith to answer she , but she steal quietly 
 along by her side till they come to the bank of the dale and plunge 
 into the thicket that flourish there , and fall to thread it , 
 make they as small as might be . but ere they have go but a little 
 way the wordless song of what be below have cease , and they hear 
 the sweet tingle of the string - play , and the wood - wife stay she to 
 hearken , and the smile go ripple over her face and she beat time 
 with her finger ; but Birdalone , she star wildly before she , and 
 would have scramble down the bank straightway at all hazard , for 
 that string - play be a melody of the Castle of the Quest , but 
 Habundia withhold she by the arm . and then suddenly the music die , 
 and there come up a voice of wail and lament , and Birdalone put 
 her hand and hold the palm tight against her ear , and be at point 
 to cry out aloud herself ; but Habundia draw a hand of she down and 
 whisper into her ear : child , child , make thyself strong and 
 forbear , and then perchance joy may come to thee ; hold thy peace and 
 come softly along with I ! 

 so Birdalone forbore , and strove with her passion , though the sob 
 rent her bosom for a while ; and by then the loud lamenting wan and 
 be do , and the sound of sobbing come up from below , as it have be 
 an echo of Birdalone 's grief . 

 then Habundia draw she on again till they see the level of the dale 
 and its stream piecemeal betwixt the leaf , and they have a glimpse 
 of a man on the hither side of the stream ; and again they go lower , 
 till they be well - nigh on a level with the greensward of the dale ; 
 and as Birdalone kneel with head bent low , and her hand cover her 
 eye , the wood - wife put away from before she the thick leaf of a 
 hazel - bush , and whispering say : child , child ! look forth now and 
 see what be before thee , and see if thou know he , or if he be 
 strange to thee , and thy mother hath do nought for thee when all be 
 say . 

 birdalone look up , pale and wild - eye , and into the dale , and see a 
 man sit on the grass by the stream - side with his head bow down 
 on to his knee and his face cover with his hand ; he be clothe but 
 in two or three deerskin hang about he , with a strip of skin for a 
 girdle , wherein be thrust a short sword ; his brown hair hang down 
 long and shaggy over his face . close by his side lie a little harp , 
 and far off a short spear roughly heft with an ash - staff . he 
 be beat the earth with his foot and writhe he about over they . 
 and Birdalone look , and her breath well - nigh fail she . for 
 presently he sit more quietly , and lift up his head , and she see 
 his face that it be Arthur , her beloved ; and now she durst not move 
 lest he should spring up and flee away ; and the mingled pain and 
 longing within she be sweet indeed , but well - nigh deadly . 

 now his hand seek round to his harp , and he take it in his arm and 
 fondle it as it be , and his finger go among the string , and 
 anon the voice of it come forth , and it be nought change from the 
 last time it spake , and birdalone hearken breathlessly , till the 
 melody die again and Arthur look about he and raise his face as 
 a dog when it fare to howl . 

 then Birdalone give a great cry , and leapt forth out of the thicket 
 and stand on the greensward with nought betwixt they two , and she 
 stretch out her arm to her beloved and cry out : o ! no , no , no ! 
 do it not , I beseech thee , lest I deem that thou art all change , and 
 that the man and the dear heart belove of thee have go out of thee 
 and leave thee but a beast in a man 's shape ! 

 he leap up as she spake , and thrust forward his head and look 
 fierce at she , and cry out : what ! art thou come again ? this be 
 the second time I have see thee , thou image of she that hath 
 torment I so long ; of she that leave I in my most need and hide 
 herself away from I . hah ! a man , sayest thou ? do I not strive 
 with it , and hold my manhood so long as I might ; and at last it might 
 no long be , and I become a beast and a man - slayer ? but what avail 
 it to talk with thee , since thou art but the image of she that hath 
 waste my life . yet perchance of the image I may make an end since I 
 may not lay hand on the very destroyer herself ; and , woe 's me , how I 
 love she ! yea , and do still ; but not thee , o false image ! 

 and forthwith he draw the blade from his girdle and spring forward at 
 Birdalone ; and she cower and cringe , but move not else . but 
 therewithal the wood - wife come leap through the bush , and she 
 nock an arrow on her bended bow , and threaten he therewith , and 
 cry out : thou man - beast , I will slay thee if thou hurt my child 
 and my dear ; so forbear ! Nay , I tell thee more , unless thou make she 
 as glad at the sight of thee as I mean she to be , I will in the long 
 run slay thee ; so look to it . 

 he laugh and say : what ! there be another image of the love that 
 waste I , be there ! nay , but by the Hallows , this new - comer be the 
 first one , and the one who chatter at I be the second . or be it 
 this , that all woman now have the semblance of the evil one that have 
 undo I , and there be nought else leave ? 

 and he stand star at Birdalone and move not a while ; and she 
 stand with her hand before her face cringe before he . then he 
 raise his arm and cast the weapon far into the bush of the bank- 
 side , and then come forward and stand before Birdalone , and draw down 
 her hand from her face and star in the eye of she , hold she by 
 the two arm ; and he say : Thou hast forget now , belike , how fair 
 a life we two might have live if thou hadst not flee from I and 
 spoil I . 

 and thou ! by the look of thee , for thou art sleek and fair , though 
 this moment thou art pale for fear of I , thou hast live a happy 
 life through all these year , with many a merry thing to think of : 
 and dost thou deem that my life be happy , or that I think of any 
 merry thing , or of anything save my sorrow ? dost thou doubt it ? go 
 ask the good spear of Greenford , or the Riders of the Red Hold , and 
 the field of the slaughter ! if there be little joy there , less be 
 there elsewhere . 

 he leave go of her therewith and stand tremble before she , and she 
 bow down and put palm to palm and hold they out to he as one who 
 pray ; and she know not what she do . 

 then he cry out with a lamentable cry and say : o woe 's I ! for I 
 have fright she and scar the wit out of she , so that she know 
 not who I be nor what I would ; and I would pray to she and beseech 
 she to pity I , and not depart from I again or mock I with image 
 of herself . 

 then he go down on his knee to she , and he also join his hand 
 to pray to she ; but it seem as if she be stricken to stone , so 
 wholly she move not . but for he , he sink his forehead to earth , 
 and then he roll over and his limb stretch out , and his head 
 turn aside and blood gush out from his mouth . but Birdalone 
 shriek out and cast herself on his body , and cry : I have find 
 he , and he be dead ! he be dead , and I have slay he , because I be 
 a timorous fool and fear he ; and he be come to his right mind 
 and know I for what I be ! 

 but Habundia come and stand over they , and draw up Birdalone , and 
 say : Nay , nay , be comfort ! for now he be thus , and the strength 
 be go out of he for a while , we may deal with he . Abide , and I 
 will fetch the blood - staunch herb and the sleepy herb , and then we 
 will heal he , and he will come to his right mind and be a man again . 

 Therewith she hasten away and be go but a little ; and meanwhile 
 birdalone kneel down by her love and wipe the blood from he , and 
 caress his sword - harden hand and moan over he . but when the 
 wood - wife come back she put Birdalone aside once more , and kneel down 
 by the squire and raise his head , and lay the blood - stauncher to 
 his mouth and his heart , and mutter word over he , while Birdalone 
 look over her shoulder with her pale face ; then the she - leech 
 fetched water from the stream in a cup which she draw from her 
 wallet , and she wash his face , and he come somewhat to himself , so 
 that she might give he drink of the water ; and yet more he come to 
 himself . so then she take the sleepy herb and bruise it in her 
 hand and put in his mouth and again say word over he , and 
 presently his head fall back and his eye close and he sleep 
 peacefully . 

 she stand up then and turn to Birdalone and say : now , my child , 
 have we do all that we may do , save that we shall bring he to a 
 place where the dew and the sun shall not torment he and sicken he ; 
 for he shall lie thus till the sun come up to - morrow , or long ; and 
 fear nor , for when he awaketh he shall be in his right mind , and 
 shall know thee and love thee . this I swear to thee by the earth and 
 the sun and the woodland . 

 Said Birdalone , tremble yet : o mother , but may I kiss he and 
 caress he ? yea , surely , say the wood - mother , smile in her face , 
 but be not too long over it , for lo ! the last of the sun , and it be 
 well that he be under cover ere the twilight fall . 

 birdalone kneel down by her love quietly at that word , and fall to 
 kiss he softly , and lay she cheek to his , and call he gentle 
 name such as none can tell again without shame , till the wood - wife 
 lay her hand on her shoulder and say kindly and sweetly : rise up 
 now , for thou must make it enough for this present ; thou shalt have 
 time enough hereafter for more and much more . 

 so Birdalone arise and say : how shall we bear he to his place ? 
 shall I not take he by the shoulder and thou by the leg ? for I be 
 strong than thou after all these year . 

 laugh the wood - wife : Nay , little one , say she ; thou know I 
 not utterly as yet . Thou shalt not bear he at all , nor any part of 
 he ; I be strong enough for more than that ; see thou ! and she 
 stoop down and take he up in her arm as if he be a little 
 child , and step off lightly with he ; but look back over her 
 shoulder and say to Birdalone : but thou may walk by I and hold 
 a hand of he as we go , though it will hinder I somewhat ; but I know 
 thine heart and would pleasure thee , my child . 

 birdalone run up to she and thank she and kiss she , and take 
 Arthur 's left hand , while Habundia bear he on down the dale and out 
 of it , and still along the stream till they come to a place where it 
 be narrow on either side thereof , and a sheer rock come down so near 
 to the water that there be but a strip of greensward three yard 
 wide betwixt water and rock ; and in the face of the rock be a cave 
 wide enough for a man to enter by stoop somewhat . therein the 
 wood - wife lightly bore Arthur , and Birdalone follow ; and they find 
 the cave dry and roomy within ; there be a bed therein of dry heather 
 and bracken , and thereon Habundia lay her burden , and say : now , my 
 child , there be nought to do but abide till he come to himself 
 again , which may be some time to - morrow ; and be of good cheer , for he 
 will come to his right self , but he will be weak and humble ; but I 
 shall have meat and drink ready for he . now if thou wilt be rule 
 by I , thou wilt keep out of the way when he awaken ; moreover , be 
 thou not scared if I meet his awakening with another shape than that 
 which thou hast know of I ; for sure it be that it will trouble his 
 wit over - much if again he seeth the two of we alike . but fear not ; 
 for thy sake , my child , I will take no ugly shape , though it may well 
 be less beauteous than thine . 

 I will do what thou wilt , mother , say Birdalone , for I see that thou 
 art help I all thou mayest ; yet I beseech thee let I sit by he 
 till the time of his awakening draweth nigh . 

 the wood - wife smile and nod yeasay on she , and they sit down , 
 both of they , beside the sleep man , and the day die into the 
 night as they sit hearken to the ripple of the brook and the song 
 of the nightingale . 



 CHAPTER XXIV . the wood - MOTHER CHANGETH she form to that of a woman 
 STRICKEN in YEARS 



 when the morrow come , there yet lie Arthur sleep peacefully , and 
 birdalone awake from the slumber which have at last fall on she , and 
 look about she and see not Habundia in the cave ; so she arise and 
 bent over Arthur and kiss he , and so go forth and stand in the 
 door and look about she . and she be still dim - eyed with she just 
 depart slumber and the brightness of the morning sunlight , and she 
 scarce know whether it be a part of a dream , or a sight that be 
 verily before she , that she seem to see one come across the brook 
 toward she , step heedfully from stone to stone thereof : a woman 
 stricken in year , but slim and trim and upright , clothe in a gown of 
 green cloth , with a tippet of some white fur . when she be come on 
 to the greensward she spake to Birdalone in a sweet voice , but thin 
 with eld , and give she the sele of the day ; and Birdalone be 
 somewhat afraid to see a newcomer , but she greet she , draw back 
 a little from she shyly . but the old woman say : what maketh thee 
 here , my daughter ? dost thou not know that this be my land and my 
 house , and that I be say not to be unmighty in these wood ? 

 I pray thee pardon I if I have do amiss , say Birdalone ; but here 
 have I a sick friend , a young man , and I would pray thee suffer he 
 to abide here in this cave a little long ; for there hath be also 
 another friend , a woman , but she hath go out while I sleep , belike 
 to gather simple , for she be wise in leechcraft , and be tend the 
 sick man . I pray thee humbly to suffer we lest we lose our friend . 

 as she spake , she hear the carline chuckle softly , and at last she 
 say : why , Birdalone , my dear , dost thou not know I after all these 
 year ? look on I again , look ! and thou shalt see that I be not so 
 much change from what thou sawest I last night . I be still thine 
 image , my dear , only I be the image of what thou wert , and now I the 
 image of what thou shalt be when two score year and ten of happy 
 life have wear for thee . tell I , be I now aught like to thy mother 
 in the flesh ? 

 how hast thou fright I , mother , say Birdalone ; I think that my 
 friend have forsake I , and that perchance the new - comer be another 
 witch like unto the old one , and that I be never to be at rest and 
 happy . but as to my mother in the flesh , nay , thou art not now 
 wholly like unto she ; and sooth to say I shall be fainer when thou 
 hast thine own shape of I young back again , for I love thee not so 
 much as now thou art . 

 the wood - wife laugh : well , she say , thou shalt not see over - much 
 of I in this shape ; and that the less because of something I shall 
 now tell thee , to wit , that I have be think the matter over , and 
 I would have thee leave we twain together alone before the young man 
 awaketh . I would have thee get thee home and abide he there ; it 
 shall not be long I promise thee ; and this also , that he shall come 
 home to thee sound in body and whole in limb . 

 Birdalone 's countenance fall , and she say : why this second mind , 
 mother ? why , I pray thee ? say Habundia : I fear for thy love lest 
 he be not strong enough to open his eye upon thy face ; but after he 
 hath be a day in the wood , and I have speak to he diversely and 
 cheer he with the hope of meet thee , he may well be strong 
 enough to seek thee for a mile 's length , and find thine house first 
 and then thee . so now wilt thou obey I ? Nay , if thou must need 
 weep , I will be go into the thicket till thou hast do , thou 
 wilful ! birdalone smile through her tear , and say : I pray thee 
 pardon my wilfulness , mother , and I will depart without turn back 
 into the cave . Nay , say Habundia , there be no need for so much 
 haste as that : I will in now , and do my leechdom with the sick man . 
 but do thou go across the stream , thou barefoot , and thou wilt find 
 on the other side , by the foot of the quicken - tree yonder , honeycomb 
 and white bread and a bicker of wild goat ' milk . bathe thee then if 
 thou wilt , and bring those matter over hither ; and then shalt thou 
 go in and kiss thy mate 's sick face with thy fresh one , and 
 thereafter shall we sit here by the ripple of the water and break our 
 fast ; and lastly , thou shalt go in and kiss again and then take to 
 the road . but tell I , deemest thou surely that thou canst find it 
 again ? yea , surely , mother , say Birdalone ; I be wood - woman enough 
 for that ; and now I will do all thy will . and therewith she step 
 out lightly on to the greensward and seek up the stream till she 
 find a smooth - ground pool meet for her bath , and when that be 
 do , she fetch the victual and come back to the wood - wife ; then 
 they two sit down together , and eat and drank while the water ripple 
 at their foot . but when they be do , birdalone gat she into the 
 cave again , and kiss the sleep man fondly , and come forth 
 lightly and stand a moment before the wood - wife , and say : tell I 
 this at least , mother , when shall he be there ? to - morrow quoth the 
 wood - wife ; and , for my part , I would keep thee within door and abide 
 he there , lest there be trouble ; for he may not yet be as strong as 
 the strong . birdalone hang down her head and answer not , but 
 say presently : Farewell , wood - mother , and be thou blessed . then 
 she take up her bow and betook she lightly to the woodland way , and 
 the wood - wife stand look at she till the thicket have hide she , 
 and then turn back and go into the cave . 



 CHAPTER XXV . the wood - wife HEALETH and TENDETH the black SQUIRE 



 she stand over Arthur for a minute or two , and then stoop down and 
 whisper a word in his ear , and presently he stir on the bed and 
 half open his eye , but straightway turn on his side , as if to 
 gather sleep to he , but she take he by the shoulder and say in a 
 clear voice : Nay , knight , nay ; hast thou not sleep enough ? be there 
 nought for thee to do ? he sit up in the bed and rub his eye , and 
 his face be come to its wholesome colour , and his eye look out 
 quietly and calmly as he look about the cave and see the wood - wife 
 stand by he ; and he spake in a voice which be somewhat weak , but 
 wherein be no passion of rage or woodness : where be I then ? and who 
 art thou , dame ? she say : thou art in a cave of the woodland , and I 
 be for one thing thy leech , and meseemeth thou desir to eat and to 
 drink . he smile and nod his head ; and she fetch he the milk , 
 and he drink a long draught , and sigh thereafter , as one who be 
 pleased ; and she smile on he , and fetch he the bread and the 
 honey , and he eat and drink again , and then lie down and fall fast 
 asleep . and she suffer his slumber for two hour or so , and then 
 awake he again ; and again he ask where he be and what be she , 
 but she say as before . and say she : the next thing thou hast to 
 do be to arise , as thou well mayest , and take this raiment , which be 
 fair and clean , and go wash thee in the brook and come back to I ; 
 and then we will talk , and thou shalt tell I of how it be with 
 thee , and peradventure I may tell thee somewhat of how it shall be 
 with thee . as she speak she go to a coffer which stand in a nook 
 of the cave , and draw forth from it a shirt and hosen and shoon , and 
 a surcoat and hood of fine black cloth , and a gilded girdle and a 
 fair sword , red - sheathe , and say : these may serve thy turn for the 
 present , so take they and don they , and thou shalt look like a squire 
 at least , if not a knight . 

 so he arise as one in a dream and go out ; but as he pass by she 
 she see something gleam on his breast , and note that it be 
 Birdalone 's fair sapphire ring which hang about his neck ; so she 
 smile , and say under her breath : Crafty be my dear daughter ! but 
 that shall save I some word at least . and she abide his return . 

 Anon he cometh back clothe in the fair raiment , with the sword by his 
 side ; and the wood - wife smite her palm together and cry out : now 
 indeed thou art fair and well - liking , and a fair lady might well take 
 pleasure in behold thee . 

 but his brow be knit , and he look sullen and angry , and he say : 
 what be all this play ? and where gatt thou this ring which I find 
 e'en now about my neck ? and who art thou , and why have I be 
 bring hither ? 

 his eye look fiercely on she as he spake , hold out his palm 
 with the ring lie thereon . but the wood - wife answer : many 
 question , fair youth ! but I will tell thee : the play be for thine 
 healing and pleasure , whereas both sick hast thou be and sorry . as 
 to the ring , it be thou hast get it and not i. but I will tell thee 
 this , that I have see it on the finger of a fair damsel who haunteth 
 the woodland not far hence . as to what I be , that be a long tale 
 to tell if I tell it all ; but believe this meanwhile , that I be the 
 lady and mistress of hereabout , and be not without power over my 
 folk and my land . and as to why thou wert bring hither , I bring 
 thee because I have no well house handy for a sick man to lie in . 

 then Arthur stand a long while consider the ring that lie on his 
 palm , and at last he put his hand on the wood - wife 's shoulder , and 
 look into her face beseechingly , and say : o mother , if thou be 
 mighty be merciful withal , and have pity on I ! Thou callest I a 
 youth , and so I may be in regard to thee ; but I tell thee it be five 
 long year and there hath be no other thought in my heart but what 
 be loathsome to I , and it hath wear and waste my youth , so that it 
 waneth and withereth and be nought . o , if thou be mighty , bring I 
 to she that I may see she at least one time before I die . and 
 therewith he fall down on his knee before she , and kiss the hem of 
 her gown , and weep . but she draw he up and look on he with the 
 merry countenance of a kind old woman , and say : Nay , nay , I be not 
 so hard to be win to thy help that thou needest pray so sore and 
 weep : here need we tarry no long , and if thou wilt come with I we 
 shall go seek the damsel who bear this ring , though how it should 
 come to thee why should I know ? neither do I know if the said ring- 
 bearer be the one woman whom thou needest . but I will tell thee at 
 once that she be a dear friend of mine . 

 then Arthur throw his arm about she , and kiss her cheek and 
 bless she , while she laugh on he and say : Nay , fair sir , if 
 thou wilt do so much with the withered branch , what wilt thou with 
 the blossom of the tree ? and he be abash before she , but hope 
 make his heart to dance . 

 so the wood - wife take up her bow , sling her quiver at she back , and 
 girt her short sword to she , and then lead he forth , and so into the 
 thicket out of the dale and forth into the oaken bent , and lightly 
 she lead he thereafter through the woodland . 



 CHAPTER XXVI . the black squire TELLETH the wood - wife of his doing 
 since BIRDALONE go from the castle of the quest 



 as they go Habundia say to Arthur : now shalt thou talk and tell 
 for the shortening of the way , and let we know somewhat of thy story . 
 but first I must tell thee , for thou mayest not know it , so witless 
 as then thou wast , that yesterday we find thee down in the dale 
 yonder , play the string - play sweetly indeed , but otherwise dight 
 like a half beast more than a man , so that we wonder at thee and 
 pity thee . 

 Arthur knit his brow as if he strove with some memory and might not 
 master it ; then he say : Thou sayest we , who then be the other ? 
 say Habundia : I have a dear friend with I . Quoth he : and do she 
 pity I also ? yea , say the wood - wife , else scarce have she be a 
 friend to I . o let we on swiftly , say Arthur , so long as the time 
 may be ! and they quicken their pace and eat up the way speedily . 

 presently spake the wood - wife again : now for the tale of thee , fair 
 sir ; yet will I shorten it somewhat by tell thee that I know thy 
 name , that thou art Arthur the Black Squire of the Castle of the 
 Quest . he star at that word , and say : how knew thou this ? how 
 couldst thou guess it , who hast never see I erst ? a friend tell 
 I , say she ; too long it be as now to tell thee thereof . rather 
 do thou tell I how thou didst fare when ye find thy friend go 
 from the castle that time ye come home from the winning of the Red 
 Hold . 

 Arthur star astonished , and say : what be it ? dost thou verily 
 know my love ? or art thou a sorceress and know somewhat of I by 
 spell - work ? I be somewhat more than a sorceress , may - happen , say 
 the wood - wife ; but heed it not , since I be thy friend to - day , but 
 tell I what I ask , that I may have all the tale of thee ; it will 
 serve for the shortening of the way . Said Arthur : and who but I 
 needeth it as short as may be ? so stand we not loiter here , and I 
 will talk as we wend on speedily . 

 on they speed therefore , and say Arthur : how do I fare ? as one 
 stun , mother , and know not what have happen ; and when I hear 
 their babble of how she have do wrong here and right there , I be 
 drive half mad by it , so that I hasten back to the Red Hold , and 
 become the captain of Greenford , to hunt down their scattered foeman ; 
 for I say to myself that need must I rage and slay , and that be 
 worse amongst my friend than mine unfriend . what then ? that 
 business come to an end ; though all the ill man be not slain , but 
 all be drive away from the part of Greenford ; and sooth to say 
 they durst not come anywhere nigh where they hear of I . then 
 become each day like every other , and the thought of my hope and my 
 despair eat mine heart out , and I be of no avail unto any . now it 
 so happen , amidst my many battle and chase , I have hunt the 
 band of the Red Hold into the northw march of the woodland ; and 
 I note that even they , howsoever hard bestead , and the bad of man 
 to boot , would scarce at the first be drive into the thicket 
 thereof , though at last , whether or no they have make covenant with 
 the devil , there I know not , they have betake they to the depth of 
 the wood and have bear off woman from the dwelling and get child 
 on they , and be like to breed an evil folk . that then I note that 
 this Evilshaw be a dwelling loathe and desert , and little like it 
 be that any would meddle with I there . three year have wear since 
 I be cast away at the Castle of the Quest by she that love I , who 
 must need sacrifice both she and I to the busy devil of folly ; and 
 I also deem that if I seek for she I should not find she ; and yet 
 more forsooth , that if I find she she would be as hard unto I as 
 when she flee from I . and as for I , I be get hard and crab , 
 and no man , if his heart would let he , would have aught to say to 
 I . so I gat I away from the Red Hold , as I have from the Castle of 
 the Quest , and I give out that I would enter into religion , and 
 forbid any man to follow I . neither do any desire it . first of 
 all I set I down at the very outskirt of the woodland , and raise 
 I a bower there , rude and ill - shapen . few folk come anigh I , and 
 yet some few , charcoal - burner , and hunter of the edge of the wood , 
 and suchlike . these deem I a holy man , whereas I be but surly . 
 somewhat also they fear I , whereas in some of their hunting or 
 going and coming after prey I have put forth all my strength , eke 
 out by the lore of knighthood , which be strange to they . one man 
 there be of they who be fashion of the minstrel craft by nature , 
 and who forgather with I specially , till we become friend , and he 
 be a solace to I , with his tale and his song of a rougher people 
 than I have be will not to deal with . but when I have be in that place 
 for two year he die of a sickness , and I be leave lonely , and my 
 soreness of heart fall upon I till I scarce know what next I should 
 do . so I fare away yet deep into the wildwood , take with I the 
 harp which my friend have give I before he die . it be summer , and 
 I wander about ever deep into the wood , until belike I have scarce 
 be able to win out of it if I have try . at last , when the autumn 
 come , I build myself again some sort of a bower in a clearing of the 
 wood wherein be water , and the resort of plenteous venison . 

 what befell next ? my mind be not over - clear concern it all , for I 
 be now become more of a beast than a man . but this I know , that 
 some man of the band whom I have chase happen on I . they know I 
 not for their old foeman , but of their kind it be to torment and 
 slay any man whom they might lightly overcome . yet be not the 
 battle so over - light but that I slew and hurt diver of they ere they 
 get I under and strip I and bind my hand and torment I , 
 after the manner that the devil shall do with they when they shall 
 go to their reward . yet somehow I live , though they deem I dead , 
 and I crawl away thence when they be go ; and somehow I be 
 heal of my body , but I be confused of my wit thereafter , and now 
 can call to mind but little of what befell I as I stray from place 
 to place , save that I remember I be hapless and heart - sore ever : 
 and also meseemeth that I see vision at while , and those who have 
 be in my life before these thing , their image would come before 
 I to mock I as I sit sing while and while play the string- 
 play   for my harp I bear ever with I ; and while I bewail I , and 
 call for help on they that would not or might not help I . and now 
 I may not even tell the year of my abiding in the desert , how many 
 they be . but I pray thee let we on more swiftly yet . 

 say the wood - wife : Thou hast tell I but little of thy life , black 
 Squire , but it be enough maybe ; and I see that thou mayst not tell I 
 more because thou hast thy mind set on what may betide thee when this 
 day be over . but thou must know that thou hast come into the wood of 
 Evilshaw , wherein , besides those savage man who quell thee and 
 their like , there be uncouth thing no few , and wight that be not of 
 the race of Adam ; wherefore no great marvel be it that thou saw 
 vision , and image of they that be not by thee . Yea , say he , but 
 one vision have I that confuse and overcome I more than all other , 
 and meseemeth that come to I not long ago . for first I see the 
 shape of she that my soul desireth ever , and it weep and lament for 
 I ; and then for a little I seem as if I be come forth from my 
 confusion of wit ; when lo ! there issue from the thicket another 
 image of my beloved and blame I and threaten I . God wot good 
 cause there be of the blame . but tell I , mother , since thou 
 call thyself wise , what may this portend ? 

 the wood - wife laugh : since I be wise , say she , I will foretell 
 thee good day . and now we will talk no more of thee or thy love or 
 thy sorrow , but since thou wilt so fiercely devour the way , I will 
 tell thee a tale or two of this wood and its wight to save we from 
 over - much weariness . 

 so do she , talk and tell as they go ; and she go on a pace 
 before he , and howsoever long or hardly he might stride he might not 
 overgo she . and so fast they go , that they be within a little 
 way of the Oak of Tryst a good while before the sun have set , though 
 they have set out from the cave three hour after the hour when 
 Birdalone and the wood - wife have leave the House under the Wood on the 
 yesterday . they have come to a steep rock that rise up from a water 's 
 side , and the wood - wife bade stay , whether Arthur would or no , and 
 she make he eat and drink , bring the victual and wine from out of 
 a cleft in the said rock . and she hold he there till the night be 
 come and there be a glimmer of the rise moon in the east , and he 
 be ill at ease and restless ; but still she hold he there till the 
 moon rise high and shine upon they , and the shadow of the oak - bough 
 lie black all around . 

 then she bid he arise , and let he on to the Oak of Tryst , yea and 
 somewhat beyond it toward the great water . then she spake to he : 
 Black Squire , I be now come home , and will lead thee no far ; I 
 be deeming that we should have sleep in the wood a good way from 
 this , and then would I have bring thee on thy way to - morrow 
 morning ; but the eagerness of thine heart hath make thy foot so 
 speedy , that we be here somewhat rathe , and yet I be not ill - please 
 therewith . then she turn he about and say : look down the bent 
 and tell I what thou seest . he say : I see the bole of goodly 
 tree , and betwixt they the gleaming of a great water . she say : go 
 thitherward then while the moon be yet at she bright , and thou 
 shalt presently come to wide mead lie along the water , and a 
 stream run through they . enter then into the mead and look 
 about thee , and thou shalt see a little house   there be none other 
 nigh   stand just across the said stream ; go up thither boldly and 
 crave gueste from whomsoever thou shalt find there , and maybe 
 thing shall go after thy mind . More than this I may not do for 
 thee . farewell then , and if thou wilt thou mayst meet I again ; that 
 be to say , that which be verily I : but it be like that this shape 
 which hath be stride on with thee daylong thou shalt not see any 
 more . 

 he look on her wondering , for she seem to grow goodly and stately 
 before his eye . but even as he stretch forth his hand to take 
 her , she turn about suddenly and fare into the wood out of his 
 sight , wend full as swiftly as might have be look for . then 
 he draw his sword and turn his face from the wood , and go down 
 toward the water . 



 CHAPTER XXVII . SIR ARTHUR COMETH to the HOUSE under the wood 



 so come Arthur into the meadow , and go eagerly but warily over the 
 dewy grass . and here and there a cow rise before he and go 
 bundle down the mead a little way , and the owl cry out from 
 behind he , and a fox bark from the thicket 's edge . then he find 
 himself on the stream - side , and he stay and look from side to 
 side , and lo ! on the other side of the stream a little house that 
 look familiar to he as a yeoman 's dwelling in the build land , 
 and the thatch thereon shine under the moon and its window be 
 yellow with candle - light ; and so homely it seem to he , that he 
 thrust his sword into the sheath and lightly cross the brook , and 
 come to the door and lay his hand upon the latch and lift it and 
 shove the door , and all be open before he . 

 his eye , come from the night , dazzle with the bright light of the 
 candle , but he see a fair woman rise up in her place , and he say : 
 may a traveller in the woodland be welcome here to - night , deal 
 with all in all honour ? 

 but the woman come toward he hold out her two hand , and ere he 
 could cry out that he know she , she have throw herself upon he , and 
 have cast her arm about he and be kiss his face , and murmur : 
 o welcome indeed ! welcome , welcome , and welcome ! and so sore do his 
 past grief and his desire move he , that he be weak before she , and 
 hold down his hand and let she do . and both those be breathless 
 with wonder and joy and longing ; and they stand aloof a little in a 
 while and look on each other , she with heave bosom and streaming 
 eye , and he with arm stretch forth and lip that strove with his 
 heart 's word and might not utter they ; but once more she give 
 herself to he , and he take she in his arm strongly now , so that she 
 be frail and weak before he , and he lay his cheek to her cheek and 
 his lip to her lip , and kiss her eye and her shoulder and 
 murmur over she . and then again they stand apart , and she take he 
 by the hand and lead he to the settle , and set he down by she , and 
 herself by he ; and a while they say nought . then she spake as one 
 who have come to herself and be calm , though her heart be aflame for 
 love : tell I , love , when thine hand be on the latch didst thou 
 look to find I here in this house ? for thine hand it be that wake 
 I ; I hear not thy foot before the threshold , for I be weary and 
 slumber . alas ! that I lose the sound of thy foot ! he spake , and 
 his voice sound false unto he , as if it come from another 's mouth : 
 I wot not ; the woman that lead I nearby seem to bid I hope . then 
 he say : Nay , the sooth be that I should have die if I have not 
 find thee here ; I have be sick so long with hop . 

 again be they silent till she say : I would that I have hear thee 
 cross the brook . but the wood - wife bid I look for thee no 
 early than to - morrow ; else have I time enough ; and I would have make 
 the house trim with the new green bough , and dighte our bed with 
 rise bloom ; and I would have do on I my shin gown that the 
 wood - wife give I . for indeed she be but clothe in her scanty smock 
 and nought else . 

 but he lay his head on her bosom and kiss she all about , and say : 
 Nay , my own love , it be well , it be well . and she murmur over 
 he : o friend , my dear , think not that I have will to hide I from 
 thee . all that be here of I be thine , and thine , and thine . 

 and she take his hand and they arise together , and she say : O 
 friend , I flee from thee once and leave thee lonely of I because I 
 deem need drave I to it ; and I fear the strife of friend , and 
 confusion and tangle . now if thou wilt avenge thee on I thou 
 mayest , for I be in thy power . yet will I ask thee what need will 
 drive thee to leave I lonely ? 

 he say : the need of death . but she say : mayhappen we shall lie 
 together then , as here to - night we shall lie . 



 CHAPTER XXVIII . fair day in the HOUSE of LOVE 



 on the morrow it be sweet time betwixt those twain , and what be 
 hard and fierce of their love they seem to have put behind they . a 
 dear joy it be to Birdalone that day to busy herself about the 
 housekeeping , and to provide whatsoever seem now , or have seem to 
 she in her early day , to be dainty of their meadow and woodland 
 husbandry , as cream and junket and wood - fruit and honey , and fine 
 bread make for that very occasion . 

 Withal she be careful as a mother with a child that he should not 
 over - weary himself with the sun of the early summer , but rather to 
 follow the brook up into the wood and lie adown in the flecked shadow 
 and rest he wholly , as if there be nought for he to do but to 
 take in rest all that be do for his service , both by the earth and 
 by the hand and nimble foot of Birdalone . and as she be wilful in 
 other way of her cherishing , so also in this , that for nought in 
 that daylight would she go anywise disarray , nay not so much as to 
 go barefoot , though he pray she thereof sorely , and tell she that 
 fair and sweet she be in her smock alone than in any other 
 raiment . for in the morning she go in her woodland green let down 
 to her heel , and when the day wear towards evening , and the wind 
 come cool from over the Great Water , then she do on her wonder- 
 raiment which the wood - wife have give she , and lead Arthur over the 
 meadow here and there , and go gleam by the side of the black- 
 clothe man along the water 's lip . and they look forth on to Green 
 Eyot and Rock Eyot , and stand by the shallow bight where she have 
 bath those time ; and they go along to the dismal creek where the 
 Sending Boat be will not to lie , and where yet lie the scattered stave 
 of it ; and then along the meadow - land they go from end to end , 
 rest oft on the flowery grass , till the dew begin to fall and the 
 moon cast shadow on the greensward . then home they fare to the 
 house ; and again on the way must birdalone feign for their disport 
 that the witch be come back again , and be await she to play the 
 tyrant with she ; and Arthur fall in with her game , and kiss she and 
 clip she , and then draw his sword and say : by all - hallow I 
 shall smite off her head if she but lie a finger on thee . 

 so they play like two happy child till they come to the door of 
 the house , and Birdalone shove it open , and they two look in 
 together and see nought worse therein save the strange shadow that 
 the moon cast from the settle on to the floor . then Birdalone draw 
 in her love , and go about light the candle and quicken a 
 little cooking fire on the hearth , till the yellow light chase the 
 moon away from the bed of their desire . 



 CHAPTER XXIX . those TWAIN will seek the wisdom of the wood - wife 



 again next day be their life such as it have be the day before ; and 
 as they lie in cool shadow of a great oak , Birdalone fall to tell 
 Arthur all the whole story of her dealing with the wood - wife , and 
 how that she have so love she and holpen she , that through her love 
 and her help she have escape the witch and her snare , who would have 
 turn she into a half - devil for the undoing of manfolk . and how 
 that the say wood - wife have never appear to she but as an image and 
 double of herself , save on the time when she play the leech to he . 
 then she tell he how all have go when the wood - wife have seek he 
 out for the fulfilment of their love , and of the dreadful day when 
 they have come upon he out of his wit and but little manlike . 

 then she ask , would he , within the next day or two , that they 
 should go see the wood - wife together and thank she for her help , and 
 bring he within the ring of her love and guard ; and he yeasaid it 
 with a good will . 

 after this she would have he tell she of how thing have go with 
 he since that evil day when he have come home from the Castle of the 
 Quest and find she go . so he tell she somewhat , and of his dole 
 and misery , and his dealing with the foeman of Greenford ; but yet 
 scantly , and as one compel ; and at last he say : 

 dear love , since thou art cossette I with all solace of caress , 
 I pray thee remember my trouble and grief , how sore they be , and do 
 with I as with a sick man get well , as I wot surely thou 
 would do ; and do thou that which be at this present the softest 
 and merriest to I , and that forsooth be , that thou shouldest talk 
 and tell , and I should hearken the sweetness of the music , and only 
 here and there put in a word to rest thee and make thy tale the 
 sweeter . 

 she laugh with love on he , and without more ado fall to tell 
 everything she might think of , concern her day in the House of 
 Captivity , both when she be but a bairn , and when she be grow to 
 be a young woman ; and long be she about the tale , nor be it all 
 do in one day ; and a multitude of thing she tell he which be not 
 set down in this book . 

 in the evening when they be go again to and fro the mead , it 
 be other talk they fall on , to wit , of their fellow of the Quest , 
 both of Sir Hugh and the three lovely lady : and now be Arthur 
 nought but kind when he spake of Atra , nor spake Birdalone otherwise ; 
 but she say : I shall now say a hard word , yet must thou bear it , my 
 loveling , since we twain be now become one , and have but one joy 
 together and one sorrow . Deemest thou that Atra be yet alive ? Sooth 
 it be , say Arthur , it may well be that I have slay she . and what 
 may we do by she if ever we fall in with her alive ? say Birdalone . 
 I wot not , say Arthur ; some would say that we have do penance for 
 our fault , both thou and I ; and what other penance may we do , save 
 sunder from each other ? and by God above I will not . by thine 
 head and thine hand I will not , say Birdalone . 

 so say they ; but therewith their eye tell tale of the fair eve and 
 the lovely meadow , and the house , the shrine of the dear white bed 
 no less sweet to they than erst ; but then presently Birdalone stay 
 her love , and take her arm about he , and each feel the sweetness of 
 the other 's body , and joy blossom anew in their heart . then fall 
 Arthur to telling of the deed and the kindness of Baudoin , whom 
 never again they should see on the earth ; and they turn back home 
 to the house , and on the way spake birdalone : this be what I would 
 we should do : whereas I have seek thee and thou I , and we have 
 find each other , whereas ye seek I when I go astray in the 
 Black Valley of the Greywethers , and before , when ye three seek 
 your own love , now I would that we should seek our fellow and have 
 joy in they , and thole sorrow with they as in day go by . 

 Spake Arthur : Dear be the rest with thee in this wilderness ; yet 
 be it a deed of fame , and would bring about a day of joy , might we 
 find our friend again , and knit up the link of the fellowship once 
 more . but thou the wise and valiant ! belike thou hast in thine head 
 some device whereby this might be set about . 

 birdalone say : Simple be my device , to wit , that we ask one who be 
 wise than I. let we tarry not , but go to - morrow and see the wood- 
 wife and talk with she concern it . then she smile upon he and 
 say : but when thou seest she , wilt thou be aghast if she come 
 before we in my shape of what I be five year agone , or six ? 

 Nay , nay , he say , thou art not so terrible as that ; not very far do 
 I run from thee now . and therewith they kiss and embrace , and so 
 enter the House of Love . 



 CHAPTER XXX . they have speech with habundia concern the GREEN 
 KNIGHT and his fellows 



 when the morrow be they arise and go their way toward the wood , 
 and Birdalone in her hunter 's coat , quiver at back and bow in hand . 
 they come to the Oak of Tryst , and Birdalone be at point to call on 
 the wood - wife by the burning of a hair of her , when she come lightly 
 from out the thicket , clothe as Birdalone , and her very image . she 
 stand before they with a glad countenance , and say : welcome to the 
 seeker and finder . but Arthur step forth and knelt before she , 
 and take she right hand and kiss it , and say : here I swear 
 allegiance to thee , o Lady of the Woods , to do thy will in all 
 thing , and give thee thank from my heart more than my tongue can 
 say . 

 Quoth the wood - wife : I take thine allegiance , fair young man , and 
 mine help shalt thou have henceforward . then she smile and her eye 
 dance for merriment , and she say : yet thy thank meseemeth for 
 this while be more due to the wise carline who bring thee through 
 the wood two day ago , and only leave thee when the way be easy and 
 clear to thee . 

 Lady , say Arthur , I know now how great be thy might , and that thou 
 canst take more shape than this only ; and humbly I thank thee that 
 for we thou hast take the shape that I love the good of all on the 
 earth . 

 say the wood - wife : stand up , Black Squire , and consider a little 
 what thou wouldst have I do for thee , while I have speech with mine 
 image yonder . and therewith she come up to Birdalone , and draw she a 
 little apart , and fall to stroke her cheek and pat her hand 
 and diversely caress she , and she say to she : how now , my child , 
 have I do for thee what I promise , and art thou wholly happy now ? 
 o yea , say birdalone ; if nought else befell we in this life but to 
 dwell together betwixt the woodland and the water , and to see thee 
 oft , full happy should we be . 

 nevertheless , say Habundia , art thou not come hither to ask somewhat 
 of I , that ye may be happy ? so it be , wise mother , say 
 birdalone ; grudge not against I therefor , for more than one thing 
 drive I thereto . I will not grudge , say the wood - wife ; but now I 
 will ask thy mate if he have think what it be that he will have of 
 I . and she turn to Arthur , who come forth and say : Lady , I have 
 hear thee , and herein would we have thee help we : there be erst 
 six fellow of we , three carie and three quean , to whom be add 
 this sweetle here ; but one of they , to wit the Golden Knight , be 
 slain , and for the rest . . . yea , I know , say the wood - wife ; my 
 child here hath tell I all ; and now ye wot not where they be or if 
 they be yet alive , all or any of they . now be it not so that ye 
 would seek these friend , if it be but to greet they but once , and 
 that ye would ask of the wise wood - wife help to find they ? be there 
 any more of the tale ? Nay , lady , say Arthur . 

 say she : well then , that help shall ye have , be it but for the 
 sake of that little Viridis whereof my child hath tell I . wherefore 
 abide tiding of I for a fourteen day , and seek not to I ere then ; 
 and meantime fear not , nor doubt I , for many messenger I have , and 
 ever may I do somewhat if the end of the tale be to be tell in these 
 woodland : and I deem these friend will not be hard to draw hither , 
 for it be most like that they be think of you and long for you , 
 as ye for they . and now I will depart on my business , which be 
 your , and do ye be happy to - day in the woodland , and to - morrow in 
 the meadow and by the water ; and let no trouble weigh down your 
 happy day . 

 Therewith she flit away from they , when she have kiss they both . 
 but when she be go they fare away together deep into the wood , 
 and be exceed merry disport they , and on their return they 
 gat they venison for their meat , and so come back to the House of 
 Love when the moon be up and shin brightly . 



 CHAPTER XXXI . HABUNDIA COMETH with tiding of those DEAR friend 



 wear the day thenceforth merrily ; and one day it be delight in the 
 wide mead , and another they go a long way west along the water- 
 side , and so into another meadow - plain , small than their home- 
 plain , which Birdalone have never erst come into ; and three eyot lay 
 off it , green and tree - beset , whereto they swam out together . then 
 they go into the wood thereby in the heat of the afternoon , and so 
 wear the day , that they deem themselves belate , and lie there 
 under a thorn - bush the night through . 

 another day birdalone take her mate over on to Green Eyot and Rock 
 Eyot , and show he all the place she be use to haunt . and they 
 have their fishing - gear with they , and angle off the eyot a good 
 part of the day , and have good catch , and swam back therewith merrily . 
 and Birdalone laugh , and say that it seem to she as if once 
 again she be ransom her skin of the witch - wife by that noble 
 catch . 

 diver time also they fare into the wood , and thrice they lie out 
 the night there in some woodlawn where be water ; and on one of these 
 time it happe that Arthur awake in the grey dawn , and lie open - eye 
 but not move for a little ; and therewith he deem he see the gleam 
 of war - gear in the thicket . so he keep as still as he might , but gat 
 his sword out of its sheath without noise , and then leapt up 
 suddenly , and spring thitherward whereas he have see that token , and 
 again see armour gleam and hear some man crash through the 
 underwood , for all be go in one moment . so he wake up Birdalone , 
 and they bend their bow both of they , and search the thicket 
 thereabout heedfully , arrow on string , but find nought fiercer than 
 a great sow and her farrow . so come the full day , and they gat they 
 back to their meadow and their house ; but thereafter be they 
 wary in go about the woodland . 

 in all joyance then wear the day till the fifteenth , and in the 
 morning early they go their way to the Oak of Tryst , and have no 
 need to call Habundia to they , for presently she come forth out of 
 the thicket , with her gown gather up into her girdle and bow in 
 hand . but she cast it down and run up to Birdalone , and kiss she 
 and clip she , and then she take a hand of Arthur and a hand of 
 Birdalone , and hold they both and say : my child , and thou dear 
 knight , have ye still a longing to fall in with those friend of 
 your , and to run all risk of whatsoever contention and strife there 
 may be betwixt you thereafter ? yea , certe , say Arthur ; and even so 
 say Birdalone . well be that then , say the wood - wife ; but now and 
 for this time , ere I help you , I shall put a price upon my help , and 
 this be the price , that ye swear to I never wholly to sunder from 
 I ; that once in the year at least , as long as ye be alive and 
 wayworthy , ye come into the Forest of Evilshaw , and summon I by the 
 burning of a hair of mine , that we may meet and be merry for a while , 
 and part with the hope of meet once more at least . and if ye will 
 not pay the price , go in peace , and ye shall yet have my help in all 
 other matter that may seem good unto you , but not in this of join 
 your fellowship together . how sayest thou , Birdalone , my child ? how 
 sayest thou , Black Squire , whom , as meseemeth , I have deliver from 
 a fate bad than death , and have bring out of wretchedness into 
 bliss ? 

 Spake Birdalone : have I dare , I would have bid thee to swear to 
 I even such an oath , to wit , that thou wouldst never wholly sunder 
 thee from I . how then may I not swear this that thou bidd I , 
 and that with all joy and trustiness ? 

 Spake Arthur : Lady , have I no will to swear oath for thy sake , yet 
 with a good will would I swear it for my true - love 's sake who loveth 
 thee . yet verily of mine own will would I swear it joyfully , be it 
 for nought else save to pleasure thee , who hast do so kindly by I , 
 and hath give I back my manhood and my love , which else I have 
 miserably lose . 

 spake the wood - wife : it be well again . join hand then , and swear 
 as I have bid you by the love ye bear each other . 

 even so they do , and then the wood - wife kiss they both and say : 
 now do I deem you earth 's very child and mine , and this desire of 
 yours be good , and it shall be do if I may bring it about ; yet 
 therein the valiance and wisdom of you both may well be try . for 
 this have I find out by my messenger and other , that your friend 
 be alive , all of they ; and they have think of you in their inmost 
 heart , and have long determine that they must need go seek you if 
 they be to live life happy and worthy . furthermore , their quest 
 hath draw they hither to Evilshaw   nor say I that I have be 
 nothing therein , and they be even now in the wood . but ye shall 
 know that peril encompass they ; for they fare but a few , and of 
 those few be there two traitor who be minded to deliver they to the 
 man of the Red Company , unto whom three woman as fair as your she- 
 friend be a prize indeed . wherefore the Red Folk be dog 
 they , and will fall upon they when they find the occasion . but I 
 shall see to it that the occasion shall be in time and place where 
 they shall not be unholpen . now what ye have to do for your part , 
 be to waylay the waylayer , and keep watch and ward anigh the road 
 they must need take , and to fall on when need be . but this again I 
 shall see to , that your onset fail not . 

 but now ye may say : since thou art mighty , why shouldst not thou 
 thyself take our friend out of the hand of these accurse , as thou 
 couldst well do , and we to take no part therein ? my friend , this 
 might indeed well be ; but thou , Birdalone , hast tell I the whole 
 tale , and how that there be wrong to be forgive which can not be 
 make right , and past kindness to be quicken again , and coldness to 
 be kindle into love , and estrangement into familiar friendship ; and 
 meseem that the sight of your body and your hand make manifest to 
 the eye of they may do somewhat herein . yet if otherwise ye think , 
 then so let it be , and go ye back to the House under the Wood , and in 
 three day ' time I will bring you your friend all safe and sound . 

 now they both say that they would not for aught that they should 
 have no hand in the deliverance of they ; so the wood - wife say : come 
 with I , and I shall lead you to the place of your ambush . 

 then all they go on together , and fare a long way west , and toward 
 the place where erst they two have find Arthur ; and at last , two 
 hour before sunset , they come to where be a glade or way between 
 the thicket , which be as it be a little beat by the going of 
 man - folk . and the wood - wife do they to wit , that the evil folk 
 aforesaid have so use it and beat it , that it might just look as if 
 folk be will not to pass that way , whereas it be not very far from 
 their chief haunt and stronghold . a little on the north side of 
 this half - blind way , and some ten yard through the thicket , the 
 ground fall away into a little dale , the bottom whereof be plain and 
 well grassed , and water by a brook . 

 Thither the wood - wife bring the twain ; and when they all stand 
 together on the brook - side , she say to they : dear friend , this be 
 your woodland house for this time , and I rede you go not forth of it , 
 lest ye happen upon any of those evil man ; for nought have ye to fear 
 from any save they . here amidst these big stone , which make , see 
 ye , as it be a cavern , have I stow victual for you ; and armour 
 therewithal , because , though both of you be in a manner armed , yet 
 who knoweth where a shaft draw at a venture may reach . 

 and from the say stone she draw forth two very fair armour , helm 
 and hauberk , and leg and arm ward ; and they be all of green , and 
 shone but little , but be fashion as no smith of man - folk could 
 have do the like . 

 this be thine , Sir Arthur , say the wood - wife , and thou wilt wear it 
 like as it be silk ; and this thine , my child , and thou art strong 
 enough to bear such light gear . and I charge you both to do on this 
 gear presently , nor do it off till ye have achieve the adventure . 
 and now this be the last word : here be a horn of oliphant which thou 
 shalt wear about thy neck , Birdalone ; and if thou be sore bestead , or 
 thy heart faileth thee , blow in it , yet not before the onfall ; and 
 then , whether thou blow much or little , thou shalt be well holpen . 

 now be not downcast if nought befall to - night or to - morrow , or even 
 the day after ; but if the third day be tidingless , then at sunset 
 burn a hair of my head , Birdalone , and I will come to you . and now 
 farewell ! for I have yet to do in this matter . 

 with that she kiss Birdalone fondly and embrace Arthur , and go 
 her way ; and those twain abode in the dale , and sleep and watch by 
 turn , and all be tidingless till the morrow 's dawn ; neither be 
 there aught to tell of on that day and the night that end it . 



 CHAPTER XXXII . of the fight in the forest and the RESCUE of those 
 friend from the MEN of the RED COMPANY 



 Light be grow on the dawn of the next day , and the colour of 
 thing could be see , when Birdalone , who be hold this last watch 
 of the night , stand still and hearken , deeming that she could hear 
 some noise that be neither the morning wind in the tree - bough nor 
 the going of the wild thing anear they in the wood . 

 so she do off her helm to hear the well , and stand thus a little ; 
 then she turn about and stoop down to Arthur , who be yet 
 sleep , and put forth a hand to rouse he . but or ever she touch 
 he , break forth a sound of big and rough voice and laughter , and 
 amidst it two shriek as of woman . 

 Arthur hear it , and be on his foot in a moment , and helm , and he 
 catch up his bended bow and cast on the quiver   for Birdalone be 
 already weapone , and without more word they go forth swiftly up 
 the bank and through the thicket till they be look on the half- 
 blind way , but under cover , and there be nothing before they as yet . 

 there they stay and hearken keenly . there be no more shriek 
 of woman , nor hear they any weapon clash , but the talk and 
 laughter of man go on ; and at last they hear a huge and grim whoop 
 of many man together ; and then thereafter be less sound of talking , 
 but come the jingle as of arm and harness ; and Arthur whisper in 
 Birdalone 's ear : stand close ! they have get to horse , and will be 
 come our way . Nock an arrow . and even so do he . 

 Therewith they hear clearly the riding of man , and in less than five 
 minute ' space they see three big weapone man rid together , clothe 
 in red surcoat , and they be so nigh that they hear the word of 
 their speech . one say to the other : how long shall the knight hold 
 out , think ye ? oh , a week maybe , say the other . Meseems it be 
 scathe that we stay not a while to pine he , say the first man . 
 Nay , say the second , we be over - heavy laden with bed - gear to tarry . 
 and they all laugh thereat , and so go on out of hearing . 

 but then come four on together , whereof one , a gaunt , oldish man , be 
 say : it be not so much how long we shall be get there , but 
 what shall betide when we get there . for this be not like lift a 
 herd of neat , whereof sharing be easy , but with this naked - skin , 
 two - legged cattle , which forsooth ye can eat and yet have , there may 
 well be strife over the sharing . and look to it if it hath not begin 
 already : we must need dismount three of our good man that these 
 white - skin bitch forsooth may each have a horse to herself , or 
 else would they be fight as to which should have a damsel of they 
 before he on the saddle : curse the fool ! 

 laugh out they who be about he , and one young man cast a jeer at 
 he the meaning whereof they might not catch , and again they laugh ; 
 and that deal pass on . and next come a big rout , a half score 
 or so , and they also laugh and jeering ; but amidst they , plain to 
 see rid a - straddle , their ankle twist together under the 
 horse ' belly , their hand bind behind they , first Atra , black- 
 clothe as erst ; then Aurea , in a gown of wheat - colour ; then Viridis , 
 green - clad . Atra ride upright , and look straight before she ; 
 Aurea hang her head all she might , and her long red hair fall about 
 her face ; but Viridis have swoon , and be hold up in the saddle by 
 one of the caitiff on each side of she . they be but little 
 disarray , save that some felon have tear the bosom of Viridis ' gown , 
 and drag down the cloth so that her left shoulder be bare . 

 Arthur look , and draw at the caitiff who go afoot beside Atra , 
 and birdalone at he who go by Viridis , for she wotte whitherward 
 Arthur 's shaft would be turn . the loose of the two bow make but 
 one sound ; both man fall stark dead , and the other huddle together 
 a moment , and then run toward the thicket on either hand , and they 
 who run north , two of they see not Arthur , because of his green 
 armour , ere they feel the death which lie in his sword . and then he 
 brake out amidst they , and there be three of they on he , yet for 
 no long while , whereas their weapon bit not on the armour of the 
 Faery , and his woodland blade shear leather and ring - mail to the 
 flesh and the bone : mighty be his stroke , and presently all three 
 be wallow on the earth . 

 even therewith the seven who have pass on have turn back and be 
 come on he a - horse - back ; and hard have it go with he , despite of 
 his might and his valour and the trustiness of Habundia 's mail . but 
 meanwhile Birdalone have run to Viridis , who have fall a dead weight 
 aside of her horse , and lie half hang by the bond of her ankle . 
 birdalone swiftly cut the cord both of her foot and her hand , and 
 draw she off her horse as good she might , and lay she down on the 
 grass ; and then run to Arthur sword aloft , just as his new battle be 
 at point to begin . 

 but as she run it come into her mind in a twinkling that her sword 
 would be but weak , and the horn hang about her neck . then she stay 
 her foot , and set the horn to her lip and blew ; and the oliphant 
 give forth a long singing note which be strange to hear . but while 
 it be yet at her lip one of the caitiff be upon she , and he cry 
 out : hah the witch , the accurse green witch ! and fetch she a 
 great stroke from his saddle , and smite she on the helm ; and though 
 his sword bit not on that good head - burg , she fall to the ground 
 unwitting . 

 yet be not the wood - wife 's promise unavaile , for even while the 
 voice of the horn be in the air , the way and thicket be alive 
 with man - at - arm , green - clothe as those twain , who straightway fall on 
 the caitiff , and with Arthur to help , leave not one of they alive . 
 then go some to Viridis , and raise she up , and so deal with she 
 that she come to herself again ; and the like they do by Birdalone , 
 and she stand , and look about confusedly , but yet see this , that 
 they have get the victory . some go withal to Aurea , and cut she 
 bond and take she off her horse and set she on the ground ; and she 
 be all bewilder , and know not where she be . 

 but Arthur , when he see Birdalone on her foot , and unhurt by seem , 
 go to Atra , and cut her bond and loose she , and set she on the 
 earth , all without a word , and then stand before she shyly . come the 
 colour back into her face therewith , and she flush red , for she 
 know he despite his outlandish green war - harness , and she reach 
 out her hand to he , and he kneel before she and take her hand and 
 kiss it . but she bent over he till her face be anigh his , and he 
 lift up his face and kiss her mouth . and she draw aback a 
 little , but yet look on he earnestly , and say : Thou hast save 
 my life , not from death indeed , but from a loathsome hell ; I may well 
 thank thee for that . and o , if my thank might be fruitful to thee ! 
 and her bosom heave , and the sob come , and the tear begin to run 
 down her cheek . and he hang his head before she . but in a while 
 she leave weeping , and turn about her face and look round the 
 field of deed ; and she say : who be yonder slim green warrior who 
 hath even now kneel down by Viridis ? be it not a woman ? Arthur 
 redden : Yea , say he ; it be Birdalone . Thy love ? she say . he 
 say swiftly : yea , and thy friend , and this time thy deliverer . so 
 it be , she say . it be five year since I behold she . my heart 
 yearn for she ; I shall rejoice at the meeting of we . 

 she be silent , and he also a while ; then she say : but why tarry we 
 here in idle talk when he be yet bind , and in torment of body and 
 soul ; he the valiant , and the kind and the dear brother ? come , tarry 
 for no question . and she step out swiftly along the green road 
 go westward , and Arthur beside she ; and as they go by Viridis , 
 lo ! Aurea have wander unto they , and now be birdalone unhelmed and 
 kissing and comfort she . then cry out Atra : keep up thine 
 heart , Viridis ! for now we go to fetch thee thy man safe and sound . 

 so they go but a little way on the green road ere they come to Sir 
 Hugh bind hard and fast to a tree - bole , and he nake in his shirt , 
 and hard by lie the body of two stout carle with their throat 
 cut ; for these honest man and the two felon who have betray they 
 be all the following wherewith the Green Knight have enter 
 Evilshaw . and as it fall , the traitor have be set to watch while 
 the other sleep ; and sleep the caitiff find they , and slay the 
 say man - at - arm at once , but bind Hugh to a tree that he might be 
 the long a - dying ; since none look for any but their own folk to 
 pass by that way . all this they hear afterwards of Hugh . 

 but now the say Hugh hear man go , and he open his eye , and 
 see Atra and a man - at - arm with she ; and he cry out : hah , what be 
 this now , sister ? a rescue ? yea , she say , and look thou on the face 
 of the rescuer ; and there be another hard by , and she be a woman . 

 Therewith be Arthur on he and cut his bond , and when he be 
 loose they fall into each other 's arm , and Hugh spake : now then at 
 last doth life begin for I as I will it ! and hast thou my sweet 
 she - fellow , Birdalone , with thee ? Yea , say Arthur . how good be 
 that ! say Hugh . and yet , if it might but be that Baudoin be yet 
 alive for we to seek ! then he laugh and say : these be but sorry 
 garment wherewith to wend along with dear and fair lady , brother ! 
 Nay , say Arthur , that may soon be amend , for yonder , where sword 
 meet sword , lieth raiment abundantly on the grass . fie on it ! say 
 Hugh , laughing ; shall I do on I the raiment of those lousy traitor ? 
 not I , by the rood ! Thou must seek far for my array , dear lad ! 
 so they all laugh , and be glad to laugh together . but Atra say : 
 it be easy even than that , for thine own fair garment and weapon 
 shall we find if we seek they . Sooth to say there be none leave to 
 bear they off , save it be this man , or birdalone his mate . 

 with that word she look kindly on Arthur , and again they laugh 
 all three ; though forsooth they be well - nigh weeping - ripe ; one for 
 joy , and that be hugh ; one for memory of the day go by ; and one 
 for the bitterness of love that should never be reward ; albeit dear 
 even unto she be the meeting of friend and the glory of forgiveness 
 and the end of enmity . 



 CHAPTER XXXIII . VIRIDIS TELLETH the TALE of their seeking 



 now come they back to where be the three other , and Viridis be 
 quite come to herself and run to meet her man , and he take she in his 
 arm and caress she sweetly ; and then he turn to Birdalone , and 
 spar no sign of friendly love to she ; and Arthur , for his part , do 
 so much for Aurea and Viridis . no long tale there be between they 
 for that while , for they would busk they to be go . but first they 
 dig a grave for those two poor man who have be slay by the felon , 
 and pray for they . as for the caitiff who lie slain there , one 
 score and two of they , they leave they for the wolf to devour , and 
 the tearing of the kite and crow ; nor meddle they with any of 
 their gear or weapon . but they speedily find Hugh 's raiment , and 
 his pouch , wherein be money good store ; and they find also ring 
 and ouche and girdle , which have be tear from the damsel in the 
 first rage of their taking . 

 first though , when they have gather together such horse as they 
 need , and let the rest run wild , Birdalone bring she she - friend 
 down into the dale , and do they to bathe in a pool of the stream , 
 and tend they as if she be their tire - woman , so that they be 
 mightily refresh ; and she make garland for they of the woodland 
 flower , as eglantine and honeysuckle ; and herself , she bath she , 
 and do not on her battle - gear again , but clothe her body in her 
 woman 's array . 

 then she bring forth victual and wine from Habundia 's store , and 
 set it out on the stream - side ; and thereafter she go up the bent to 
 the green way and fetch down Hugh and Arthur , and bring they to 
 the lady , and bid they note how trim and lovely they be get 
 again , and again it could scarce be but that kiss and caress be 
 toward ; and in all content and love they take their breakfast , though 
 bitter - sweet unto Atra have be the holding of her hand by Arthur and 
 the kissing of her cheek , albeit not for world have she foregone it . 

 so there they abode merrily for some three hour , whereas the day be 
 yet young ; and they ask and tell each other much , so that the whole 
 tale , both of the seeker from the world and of the seeker from the 
 water - side , come out little by little . now of the last ye have hear 
 what there be to tell , but for the other Viridis take up the tale , 
 as erst she do with the dealing of the Knights of the Quest in the 
 Isle of Increase Unsought ; and it seem by her tale that Hugh and 
 the lady , though they be live happily and prosperously in the 
 land of the Green Mountains , wherein Hugh have wealth enow , yet the 
 thought both of Arthur and of Birdalone would not out of their mind , 
 and often it be that they think of they , not as friend think of 
 friend of whom they be content to know that they be yet alive and 
 most - like thriving , but as friend think of friend whose absence 
 cut a shard out of their life , so that they long to see they day by 
 day . wherefore it come to this at last , after much talk hereof , that 
 Hugh leave his possession and his child   for he have two women- 
 bairn bear of Viridis   in the keeping of trusty folk , and take with 
 he Viridis his wife , and Aurea and Atra , and they set out to seek 
 those twain the world over till they should find they . and first by 
 the rede of Atra they fare to Greenford , and there tarry a month , 
 and seek tiding of many , and hear a word here and there whereby 
 they deem that Birdalone have pass therethrough some little time 
 before . so they go thence to the Castle of the Quest , and find it 
 in such plight as ye have hear , and it go sore to their heart to 
 behold it and to be there . but therewithal they happe upon Leonard 
 the priest , and he be rejoice beyond measure to see they , and tell 
 they all that ye have hear concern Birdalone 's come thither and 
 depart thence ; and he tell they therewith about those haunting 
 and sending in the hall of the castle , and that they come to an end 
 the very day that Birdalone depart thence in the Sending Boat . yet 
 for the last three day there have be vision therein ; but be 
 question he be loth to tell thereof , so they forbear he a while . 

 at these tiding they be sore move , and they talk the matter 
 over betwixt themselves   and Leonard also be in their rede , and 
 they must need deem that either Birdalone be cast away , or that she 
 have come to her old dwelling , the House under the Wood , and belike 
 have fall into the hand of the witch once more , and thereat be 
 they sore downcast ; and yet somewhat it be , that they have hear sure 
 tiding of she ; though meanwhile of Arthur have they hear nought . 

 while they talk this over , Atra , who have be somewhat silent , 
 spake and say : here be we bring to a stop with the first tiding 
 which we have hear , whereas we know no manner of wend the Great 
 Water . this seemeth evil , but let we not be cast down , or die 
 redeless . ye have hear of what sayeth Sir Leonard of these 
 haunting in the hall , and how that they have come back again , 
 wherefore why should we not sleep in the hall this night , those of we 
 at least who have not so much fear as not to note they well , to see 
 if we may draw any avail from they ? how say ye ? for my part I will 
 try the adventure , whatever may come of it . 

 now they all yeasaid it , though Aurea be somewhat timorous , albeit 
 she would not be part from the other ; so when night come there 
 they make their bed and lie down ; and the end of it be , that a 
 little before midnight Atra wake the other , and do they to wit 
 that by her deeming something be toward ; and presently they be all 
 four as wide awake as ever they be in their life ; and next , 
 without any sound that be strange , there come the image of a woman 
 on to the dai , clothe in green like to an huntress of ancient day , 
 her foot sandalle , her skirt gather up into her girdle , so that 
 her leg be naked ; she have a quiver at she back , and a great bow in 
 her hand . 

 now to all of they save Atra this appearance seem to be the image 
 of Birdalone ; but she tell her fellow afterwards , that to she it 
 seem not to be altogether Birdalone , but rather some other one most 
 like unto she , as it be her twin - sister . 

 gaze the image kindly and sweetly on they , so that they behold it 
 without fear ; and it seem to they that it give forth speech ; yet 
 not so much that the sound of word be in the air about and smote 
 their ear , as that the sense of word reach the mind of they . 
 and this be the tale of it : Ye , who be seek the lost , have do 
 well to come hither , and now shall ye do well to wend the straight 
 way to the dwelling of the wildwood , and that be by way of the 
 western verge of Evilshaw the forest . Greenford be on the way . way- 
 leader ye shall get ; be wise , yet not prudent , and take they , though 
 they be evil , and your luck may well avail . 

 Therewith the image vanish away as it have come , and Leonard , who 
 with the other take the appearance for an image of Birdalone , say 
 that it be such as he have see it the three last day . so they lay 
 not down again , but depart for Greenford without tarrying , and ride 
 the other end of the short night through till they come to Greenford . 
 but Leonard would not with they ; and Hugh behight he , if he live 
 and do well , to come back somehow to the Castle of the Quest , and so 
 redo it that it should be no long desolate . so to Greenford they 
 come , and spar not to do folk to wit that they would ride a 
 pilgrimage in Evilshaw , and be fain of way - leader ; and there they 
 dwelt a day or two , and many would let they of that journey , which , 
 say they , be rather deadly than perilous only . but on the third 
 day come to Sir Hugh two stout carle well weapone , who say that 
 they know well all the way that lead to Evilshaw , and the way that 
 go therethrough , and they offer themselves for a wage to Sir 
 Hugh . now these say carle be not over fair of favour , but seem 
 somewhat of ribald , nor would Sir Hugh have take they to service in 
 his house at home ; but he call to mind that it be more prudence 
 than wisdom to spoil his journey and lose the occasion of find his 
 dear friend for the hasty judgment of a man 's face and demeanour , 
 wherefore he wag these two man , and they set out for the western 
 edge of Evilshaw . 

 many town and thorp they pass through , and everywhere , when man 
 know whither they be bind , they lette they all they might in 
 word ; but little heed they pay thereto , whereas they be all fix 
 in their rede that nought be to be do save the finding of their 
 friend , and that their life - day be spoil if they find they 
 not . and moreover , each one of they , but especially Atra and 
 Viridis , have dream of the night from time to time , wherein they 
 seem to see the green - clothe woman , be she birdalone or another , 
 beckoning and bid they to enter the Wood of Evilshaw . 

 as to those two way - leader withal , whether it be that they get 
 use to their face , or that their way and manner be nought 
 uncourteous or fierce , they doubt they less and less as time wear ; 
 all save Viridis , whose flesh creep when they draw anigh she , as will 
 betide one who come across an evil - look creep thing . as for 
 Atra , she now begin to heed little the thing about she , as if her 
 heart be wholly set on the end of the journey . 

 but now at last be they come so far that they have no choice but to 
 use the say way - leader , for they be get to the edge of 
 Evilshaw . so they enter it , and those two lead they by half - blind 
 way and path amongst the thicket , and fumble never with the road . 

 five day they go thus , and on the fifth evening they lie down to 
 sleep in the wood , and it be the turn of those two hireling to keep 
 watch and ward , and they wake not the next morn save with the hand 
 of the Red Felons at their throat , so that Hugh be bind , and his 
 two trusty man who come with he from the Green Mountains be slay 
 before a stroke might be strike . 

 this be the end of Viridis ' tale , save that she tell how that it be 
 she that have utter those two shriek which Arthur and Birdalone have 
 hear from the thicket ; and that she have so do when the two false 
 way - leader lay hold of she to drag she away from her man , who stand 
 there before she bind to a tree that he might perish there , whereon 
 the two caitiff have smite she into unwit that they might have no 
 more of her cry . 

 now when all this have be tell , and they have abide awhile in the 
 fair little dale , and have say many kind endear word of 
 friendship , they go up on the green way again , and take what of the 
 horse they need and truss their good thereon   and birdalone 
 would not leave that brave armour which Habundia have give she , and 
 they dight other for their home - riding , and the rest they turn 
 loose into the wood , and so ride their way , Birdalone go ever 
 with Atra , and Arthur by Aurea ; but Viridis must need have Hugh 
 within reach of her hand all the way . 

 good speed they make , so that ere the night have fall on they , 
 though the sun be set , they ' have come to the House under the Wood ; 
 and there again be joy and wonder of the new - comer , and merry 
 feasting on such simple victual as be there , and good - night and 
 rest in all contentment in the house where erst have Birdalone thole 
 so many grief and fear . 


 here end the Sixth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles , which be 
 call the Days of Absence , and begin the Seventh Part , which be 
 call the day of return . 




 the SEVENTH PART : the day of return 




 CHAPTER I. SIR HUGH ASKETH birdalone where she would have the ABODE 
 of their fellowship to be 



 on the next day , they arise and be glad , and it be to they as if 
 the sun of the early summer have arise for nought save to shine on 
 their happy day . and they go about from place to place whereas 
 tiding have befall Birdalone ; and she serve they one and all as if 
 she be their handmaid , and they love she and caress she , and have 
 be fain to do all her will do they but know it . 

 in this wise wear day after day till June begin to wane , and then on 
 a time come Hugh unto Birdalone , and spake unto she and say : all we 
 have be talk together , and I be send to ask thee what be in thy 
 mind as to abide here or go elsewhither . for now that we be 
 come together again , not for all the kingdom of the world would we 
 sunder again ; and above all , none of we would leave thee , o my 
 sister . but if thou wilt come with I to our land under the Green 
 Mountains , there be for thee a pleasant place and a fair dwelling , 
 and honour from all folk , and our love that shall never leave thee ; 
 and I , and Arthur my brother , we shall win fame together amongst the 
 knighthood , and thou shalt be proud and glad both of he and of I . 

 she say : and if I may not go with thee thither , what other way be 
 there to escape the sundering ? say hugh : this , that thou choose in 
 the world what land liketh thee for a dwelling - place , and we will go 
 with thee and leave thee never , and thou shalt be our lady and queen . 
 then he laugh and say : yet , our lady , I have leave behind I under 
 the Green Mountains certain thing which I love , as two fair women- 
 child , and a squire or two whose father serve my father , and 
 whose child I would should serve my child . and moreover I have 
 leave there certain matter of avail , my wealth and livelihood to wit . 
 Wilt thou begrudge it if I must need go fetch these , and bring they 
 to the land where thou dwellest , through whatever peril we may have 
 to face ? 

 dear art thou , she say , and my very friend , but tell I : how sorry 
 wouldst thou be to leave thine own land and follow after I for the 
 sake of one who be neither thine own true love nor of thy kindred ? 
 say he : not so sorry that I should grudge against thee thereafter . 
 moreover if that much of sorrow come to I , I should deem it not ill , 
 lest I grow so over - happy that the luck rise up against I and undo 
 I . 

 she say , smile on he kindly : meseem that I be over - happy , 
 whereas I have such dear cherishing of noble friend . but now I will 
 tell thee all , and maybe thou wilt love I the less for the telling . 
 in these wood here , and lady and mistress of they , dwelleth one who 
 be not of the race of Adam . and she help and cherish I and give 
 me wisdom when I be torment and accurse , and she it be who save 
 I from the evil witch , and give I the good hap to meet your love 
 and to fetch you to their helping ; and twice hath she save I from 
 mortal peril otherwise . and she hath find I my love , thy brother 
 Arthur , and deliver he from unwit and wanhope ; and she it be who 
 draw all you hither unto we , and who deliver you from the felon 
 who have master you . and I have swear unto she that I would never 
 wholly sunder I from she ; and how shall I break mine oath and grieve 
 she , even have I the will thereto , as God wot I have not ? and she 
 weep therewith . 

 but Hugh kiss she and say : Birdalone , my dear , why weepest thou ? 
 didst thou not hear my word , that thy people should be my people , and 
 thy land my land , and that whither thou goest I will go ? dost thou 
 not trow I then ? or how deem thou I may tear thy friend Viridis 
 from thee , when she hath just find thee ? but tell I , hast thou in 
 thy mind any dwelling - place other than this ? 

 Yea , she say : I may not depart very far from this forest of 
 Evilshaw lest I grieve my wisdom - mother overmuch . but if one go 
 westward through the wood , he shall happen at last , when he cometh 
 forth of it , on a good town hight Utterhay , which lieth on the very 
 edge thereof . there be I bear , and there also I look to find three 
 dear and trusty friend to whom I owe return of their much kindness . 
 it be a noble town in a pleasant land , and thou and my lord Arthur 
 may well win both honour and worship and lordship there . and wholly 
 I trust in thy word that thou wilt not grudge against I for drag 
 thee thither . 

 Therewith she give he her hand , smile on he , though there be yet 
 trouble in her face . but he take the hand and hold it , and laugh 
 merrily and say : lo now ! how good it be for friend to take counsel 
 together ! what well may we do than go with thee thither ? and how 
 greatly will Viridis rejoice when she heareth of this . now will I go 
 and tell she and the other . 

 go then , dear lad , she say ; but as to the matter of thy fetch thy 
 child and livelihood hither , that may be not so hard nor so 
 perilous as thou deem ; and thou shalt go about it whenso thou 
 wilt , and the soon the well , and we shall abide thee here as long 
 as need may be . and therewith he go his way to tell Viridis and 
 the other of this rede which they have come to between they . 



 CHAPTER II . BIRDALONE taketh counsel with her wood - MOTHER concern 
 the matter of SIR HUGH 



 on that same day go Birdalone to the Oak of Tryst and call she 
 wood - mother to she , and she come glad and smile , and kiss and 
 embrace Birdalone , and say unto she : now I see that thou art well 
 content with this last matter I have do for thee , whereas thou art 
 come to crave a new gift of I . how know thou that ? say 
 Birdalone , laugh . say Habundia : 

 wouldst thou have come to I so soon otherwise from out of all that 
 happiness ? I have come to tell thee of my rede , say Birdalone , and 
 to ask thee if thou art like - minded with I thereon . say the wood- 
 wife : and what be thy rede , my child ? wood - mother , say Birdalone , 
 we deem that it be good for we all to go down into Utterhay where I 
 be bear , and to take up our abode therein . 

 say the wood - wife : this rede I praise , and even so would I have 
 counsel you to do ; but I abide to see if it should come from out 
 of thy breast , and now even so it hath do ; wherefore I understand 
 thy wisdom and rejoice in thee . and now crave thy boon , my child , 
 and thou shalt have it without fail . 

 Yea , say Birdalone , that will I , and the more that it be a simple 
 one and easy for thee to do . Thou know that Hugh the Green Knight 
 hath come with my she - friend seek we all the way from under the 
 Green Mountains , and he hath leave there good that he need must have 
 and folk whom he love ; and now he would go back thither , and fetch 
 all that away hither , and see to his matter as soon as may be . and 
 I would have thee counsel we what to do , whether to build a barque , 
 as perchance we may get it do , and sail the lake therein to the 
 Castle of the Quest or thereabout , and thence to ride to his land ; or 
 else to take thy guidance and safe - conduct through the wood , and to 
 bring his folk back the same way . 

 say the wood - wife : as to the way by water , I may help you little 
 therein , and meseemeth that way be many trap and wile and many 
 peril . wherefore I bid you try it not , but let the Green Knight 
 come up hither to this tree to - morrow before noon , all horse and 
 armed and array , and there shall he find three man arm in green 
 gear , horse well , and lead two sumpt - beast with they ; and they 
 shall be his until he giveth they back unto I . but if he doubteth 
 any thing betwixt the wood 's end and under the Green Mountains , let 
 he wage what folk he will besides , for these my man will have money 
 enough of his with they . but by no mean let he send they away till 
 he hath do with the wood altogether , both betwixt here and the 
 western dwelt - land , and here and Utterhay , save thou be with he . 
 but while these be with he , both he and whatsoever money he bringeth 
 shall be sure from all peril while they be in the wood . now , my 
 child , be not this the boon thou camest up hither to ask of I ? 

 yea verily , say Birdalone ; yet also I come up hither to praise thee 
 and thank thee and love thee . and she throw herself into Habundia 's 
 arm and kiss and caress she , and Habundia she in like wise . 

 spake the wood - wife : thou art the beloved child of my wisdom ; and 
 now I see of thee that thou wilt be faithful and true and love unto 
 I unto the end . and I think I can see that thou and thy man shall 
 do well and happily in Utterhay ; and the Green Knight also and thy 
 she - friend . and whatsoever thou wilt of I that I may do for thee 
 or thy friend , ask it freely , and freely shalt thou have it . but 
 this I will bid thee , that the while the Green Knight shall be go 
 about his matter , thou shalt come hither to I often ; and thy friend 
 also thou shalt bring to I , that I may see they and talk to they and 
 love they . and specially shalt thou bid Atra unto I ; for meseem 
 she be so wise already that I may learn she more wisdom , and put that 
 into her heart which may solace she and make she to cease from 
 fret her own heart , and from grief and long overmuch . and I 
 be fain to reward she in that she hath forborne to grudge against 
 thee and to bear thee enmity . for I know , my child , not from mine 
 own heart , but from the wisdom I have learn , how hardly the 
 child of Adam may bear to have that which they love take away 
 from they by another , even if they themselves might in the long last 
 have weary of it and cast it away their own self . go now , my 
 child , and do thy friend to wit what I will do for he . 

 Therewith they part , and Birdalone fare home to the house , and 
 find the fellowship of they all sit by the brookside , and 
 talk sweetly together in all joy and hope of what their life 
 should be in the new land whereto Birdalone would lead they . 
 Straightway then she tell they of Hugh and his journey , and how well 
 he should be guard in the wood both come and go . and they 
 think that right good , and they thank she and praise she , and 
 take she into their talk , and she sit down by they happily . 



 CHAPTER III . of the journeying through the forest of EVILSHAW unto 
 the town of UTTERHAY 



 on the morrow in due time Birdalone , go afoot , lead Sir Hugh , all- 
 armed and horse , to the Oak of Tryst , and there they find the three 
 man - at - arm , well - weapone and in green weed , abide they . they do 
 obeisance to Sir Hugh , and he greet they , and then without more ado 
 he kiss Birdalone and go his way with his way - leader , but 
 birdalone turn back to the house and her friend . 

 next day Birdalone bring she three she - friend unto the Trysting 
 Oak , and show they to the wood - mother , and she be kind and soft 
 with they ; and both Aurea and Viridis be shy with she , and as if 
 they fear she , but Atra be frank and free , and spake boldly . and 
 thereafter when Birdalone go to meet her wood - mother , Atra would go 
 with she if she be ask , and at last would go alone , when she 
 find that Habundia be fain of she come , so that there be not 
 many day when they meet not ; and the wood - wife fall to learn she 
 the lore of the earth , as she have do aforetime with Birdalone ; and 
 Atra wax ruddier and merry of countenance , whereof be birdalone 
 right glad , and Arthur yet more glad , and the other well content . 

 so wear the time till Hugh have be go for twenty and three day , 
 and as they walk the meadow anigh the house about undern , they see 
 a knight rid down the bent toward they , and presently they know 
 he for Hugh , and turn and hasten to meet he , so that he be 
 straightway amidst they , and on foot . dear then be the greeting 
 and caress betwixt they , and when it be over , and Birdalone have 
 lead away his horse and dight it for he , and have get he victual 
 and drink , and they be all sit on the grass together , he tell 
 they how he have fare . he have do all his matter in the Land under 
 the Green Mountains , and have give over his land and house to a man 
 of his lineage , his cousin , a good knight , and have take from he of 
 gold and good what he would . then he have take his two bairn and 
 their nurse , and an old squire and five sergeant , whereof one be 
 his foster - brother , and the other man somewhat stricken in year , 
 and have depart with they . sithence he have come his way to 
 Greenford , and have hold talk therein with the prior of a great and 
 fair house of Black Canons , and have give he no little wealth 
 wherewith to re - do the Castle of the Quest what be need , and for 
 livelihood of four canon to dwell there , and Leonard to be their 
 prior , that there they might remember Sir Baudoin their dear friend 
 daily in the office , and do good unto his soul . sithence he have 
 ride to the Castle of the Quest with the say Prior of St. Austin 
 of Greenford , and have find Leonard , and have settle all the business 
 how it be to be do . thereafter he have return to Greenford , and 
 gather his folk , and get he go , under the guidance of Habundia 's 
 folk , by castle and thorp and town the near way to the edge of 
 Evilshaw . and they have come to the forest , and ride it six day 
 without mishap ; and when they have come to the Oak of Tryst once more , 
 the way - leader say that it be well if all they together tarry 
 not much long in the forest ; wherefore they have bring they to a 
 fair wood - lawn , and there they encamp , and be there as now . and , 
 say Hugh , there be they abide I , and it be in my mind that this 
 very eve we go , all of we , and meet they there , if ye may truss your 
 good in that while ; but as to victual , we have plenty , and it 
 needeth not . and then to - morrow shall we wend our way as straight as 
 may be toward the good town of Utterhay . 

 all they yeasaid it , though in her heart maybe Birdalone have be 
 fain of abide a little long in her own land ; but she spake no 
 word thereof . and they all set to work to the trussing up of their 
 good , and then turn their back on the Great Water , and come up 
 into the woodland , and so to the camp in the wood - lawn . and there 
 have Viridis a joyful meeting with her babe , and she gladden the 
 heart of Sir Hugh 's man - at - arm by her kind greeting ; and they 
 rejoice in meet Aurea and Atra again , and they wonder at 
 Birdalone and her beauty , and their heart go out to she , both the 
 old man 's and the young one . but Habundia 's man look on it all 
 like image of warrior . 

 there then they feast merrily that evening . but when the morrow 
 be come they be speedily on the way toward Utterhay ; and the way- 
 leader guide they so well and wisely , that by noon of the fifth day 
 they be come forth of the wood and on to the bent that look down 
 upon the town of Utterhay . there turn to Hugh the three way- 
 leader , and spake : Lord , we have do thee the service which we 
 be bid ; if thou hast no further need of we , give we leave . 

 say Hugh : leave ye have , and I shall give you a great reward ere ye 
 go . say the chief of they : Nay , lord , no reward may we take , save 
 a token from thee that thou art content with we . what token shall it 
 be ? say Hugh . Quoth the way - leader : that each of we kiss the Lady 
 birdalone on the mouth , for she it be that be verily our mistress 
 under our great mistress . 

 laugh Hugh thereat , but the man laugh not ; then spake Hugh : this 
 must be at the lady 's own will . even so , say they . 

 then Hugh bring Birdalone thither and tell she what be toward , and 
 she consent to the kiss with a good will , and say to each of the 
 man after they have kiss she : Herewith goeth my love to the 
 mistress and queen of the wood ; do ye bear the same unto she . and 
 thereafter those way - leader fare back into the wood . 

 now they gather themselves together and go down toward Utterhay , and 
 make a brave show , what with the sumpt - horse , and the goodly array 
 of the four lady , and the glitter war - gear of the man - at - arm ; 
 and Sir Hugh and Sir Arthur display their pennon as they go . 

 all this see the warder on the wall of Utterhay ; and they tell the 
 captain of the porte , and he come up on to the wall , and a man with 
 he ; and when he see this bright company come forth from the wood , 
 he bid man to he , two score of they , all weapone , and he do on 
 his armour , and ride out - a - gate with they to meet those new - comer ; 
 and this he do , not because he do not see they to be but few , but 
 because they come forth out of Evilshaw , and then doubt if they 
 be trustworthy . 

 so he meet they two bowshot from the gate , and ride forward till he 
 be close to the wayfarer ; and when he behold the loveliness of the 
 woman , and especially of Birdalone , who wear that day the gleaming- 
 glitter gown which Habundia have give she , he be abash , and 
 deem yet more that he have to do with folk of the Faery . but he 
 spake courteously , and say , turn to Hugh , who ride the foremost : 
 Fair sir , would ye tell unto the man whose business it be to 
 safeguard the good town of Utterhay what folk ye be , and on what 
 errand ye ride , and how it be that ye come forth from Evilshaw safe , 
 in good case , with pennon display , as if the say wood be your 
 very own livelihood ? for , sooth to say , hitherto we have find this , 
 that all man dread Evilshaw , and none will enter it uncompelle . 

 Thereto answer Hugh : I hight Sir Hugh the Green Knight , and be 
 come from under the Green Mountain ; and this be Sir Arthur , call 
 the Black Squire , but a knight he be verily , and of great kindre and 
 a warrior most doughty . and he hath be captain of the good town of 
 Greenford west away through the wood yonder a long way , and hath do 
 the town and the frank thereof mickle good service in scatter and 
 destroy the evil company of the Red Hold , which hold we take by 
 force of arm from the felon who hold it for the torment and plague 
 of the country - side . 

 now as to our errand , we be minded to dwell in your good town of 
 Utterhay , and take our part with your folk , and we have wealth enow 
 thereto , so as to be beholden to none ; and as time go on we may 
 serve you in diver wise , and not least in this maybe , that with a 
 good will we shall draw sword for your peace and the freedom of they 
 of Utterhay . 

 when the captain hear these word , he make obeisance to Sir Hugh , 
 and say : Fair sir , though we be here a long way from Greenford , yet 
 have we hear some tale of the deed of you , and surely the porte and 
 all the folk shall be fain of your corning . yet I pray thee be not 
 wrath ; for there be a custom of the good town , that none may enter 
 its gate come from out of this Forest of Evilshaw , save he leave 
 some pledge or caution with I , be it his wealth , or the body of some 
 friend or fellow , or , if nought else , his very own body . wherefore 
 if thou , Sir Green Knight , wilt but give we some sure pledge , then 
 will I turn about and ride with you back and through the gate into 
 Utterhay ; and doubtless , when the mayor hath see you and speak with 
 you , the say pledge shall be render to you again . 

 Ere Hugh might answer , come Birdalone forth and say : Sir captain , 
 if I , who be the lady of the Black Squire here , be hostage good 
 enough , then take I , and if need be , chain I to make surer of I . 
 and she draw near unto he smile , and hold out her hand as if for 
 the manacle . 

 but when the captain see she thus , all the blood stir in his body 
 for joy of her beauty , and he might but just sit his horse for his 
 wonder and longing ; but he say : the saint forbid it , lady , that I 
 should do thee any hurt or displeasure , or aught save the most 
 worship I may . but thy hostage I will take , Sir Knight if thou be 
 content to yield she , whereas in an hour belike she shall be free 
 again . and now fare we all gateward again . 

 so then they all ride on together , birdalone by the captain 's left 
 hand ; and as they pass by the poor house without the wall , she 
 look and see the one which have be her mother 's dwelling , so oft 
 and so closely have she tell she all about it . 

 thus then they enter Utterhay , and the captain lead they straight to 
 the mote - house whereas the mayor and the porte be sit ; and much 
 people follow they through the street , wonder at they , and 
 praise the loveliness of the woman , and the frank and gallant 
 bearing of the man - at - arm . 

 so they light down at the mote - house and be bring to the mayor , 
 and when he have speak they but a little , and have come to himself 
 again from the fear and abashment that he have of they , he show 
 himself full fain of their come , and bid they welcome to the good 
 town , and take they into his own house to gueste , until folk might 
 dight a very goodly house which the porte do give unto they . 

 but some two hour afterwards , when they be house in all content , 
 as they sit in the hall of the mayor , which be great and goodly , 
 talk and devise with worthy of Utterhay , there enter two 
 fair and frank - looking young man , who go straight up to Birdalone , 
 and the first knelt down before she and kiss her hand , and say : O 
 our lady , and art thou verily come to we ! o our happiness and the 
 joy of this day ! 

 but when she see he and hear he and feel the touch of his hand , 
 she bend down to he and kiss he on the forehead , for she know he 
 that it be Robert Gerardson . 

 then the other man come up to she as if he also would have kneel to 
 she , but his purpose change , and he cast his arm about her body and 
 fall to kiss her face all over , weep the while , and then he 
 draw off and stand tremble before she and she , all blush like a 
 red rise and laugh a little , and yet with the tear in her eye , 
 say : o Giles Gerardson , and thou , Robert , how fain I be to see you 
 twain ; but tell I , be your father well ? yea , verily , our dear lady , 
 say Robert , and it will be unto he as a fresh draught of youth when 
 he wotteth that thou art come to dwell amongst we ; for so it be , O 
 lady belove , be it not ? say he . yea , forsooth , or even so I hope , 
 say Birdalone . but here be other friend that ye must need know , 
 if we come to dwell together here in peace ; and then go and fetch I 
 hither your father . 

 Therewith she present they unto Arthur and Hugh and the three 
 lady of the Quest , and all they greet they kindly and in all 
 honour ; and the Gerardsons love and worship they , and especially 
 the lovely lady , the she - friend of their lady . 

 and while they be about this , in cometh old Gerard himself , and 
 when Birdalone see he at the door , she arise and run to meet he , 
 and cast her arm about he as if she be his own daughter ; and most 
 joyful be the meeting betwixt they . 



 CHAPTER IV . of the abiding in UTTERHAY in LOVE and CONTENTMENT 



 now when seven day be wear , the mayor make a great feast at his 
 house , and thither be bid all the man of the porte and other 
 worthy , and great merchant who have come into their town ; and the 
 say feast be give in honour of these new - comer , and that day they 
 sit on the dai , and all the guest worship they and wonder at 
 their beauty ; and nought be speak of for many day save the glory 
 and hope that there be in this lovely folk . 

 but the next day after the feast be they bring to their house in 
 all triumph ; and it be as fair as might be think of , and there 
 they dwelt a while in rest and peace , and great recourse there be 
 there of Gerard and his son . 

 but ere the winter be over , be Hugh and Arthur and Gerard and his 
 son take to the freedom of Utterhay ; and thereafter spake the chief 
 man of the porte and the master of the craft unto the two knight 
 by the mouth of the mayor ; and he tell they , what already they partly 
 know , that the good town have of late get many enemy , whereas it 
 be wealthy and not very strong , and that now two such warrior 
 have come amongst they , they be minded to strengthen themselves , 
 if only they two would of their gentleness and meekness become their 
 war - duke to lead they against the foeman . but the two friend 
 answer that it be well their will to dwell there neighbourly , and 
 do they all the help they might , and that they would not gainsay the 
 worship they offer they nor the work that should go with it . 

 with that answer be all man well content and more : and then the 
 mayor say that the mind of the porte it be to strengthen the wall 
 and the gate , and to build a good and fair castle , meet for any 
 earl , join on to the wall by the face that look west , that be to 
 say , on to Evilshaw ; and that like the war - duke well . 

 so when spring come it be set about , but it be five year adoe , 
 and before it be all finish the war - duke enter into it , and 
 dwelt there with their wife and their friend in all honour . and a 
 little thereafter , whether they would or no , the man of Utterhay have 
 to handle weapon and fare afield to meet the foe with the valiant 
 man of the craft , and what of wag man they might get . and well 
 and valiantly be they lead by their duke , and they come to their 
 above , and gain both wealth and honour thereby ; and from that time 
 forward begin the increase of Utterhay under those two captain , who 
 be unto they as in old time the consul have be unto the roman 
 folk , save that they change they not year by year as the Romans be 
 will not . 

 so wear the day , and all those friend dwelt together in harmony and 
 joy ; though the wearing of time work change amongst they . for 
 Robert Gerardson begin in no long while to look on Aurea with eye of 
 love ; and at last he come to Birdalone and crave her leave to woo 
 the say lady , and she grant it with a good will , and be fain 
 thereof , whereas she see that Aurea sorely lack a mate ; and scarce 
 might she have a well than be Robert ; so in process of time they 
 two be wed and dwelt together happily . 

 Forsooth Birdalone have be fainer yet might she have see Giles 
 Gerardson and Atra draw together . but though they be dear friend 
 and there be much converse betwixt they , this betid not , so far as 
 we have hear . 

 the old Gerard dwelt happily amongst they all for fifteen year after 
 they have come to Utterhay , and then fall asleep , a very old man . 

 as to the wood of Evilshaw , it be not once a year only that 
 Birdalone and Arthur seek thither and meet the wood - mother , but a 
 half - score of time or more , might be , in the year 's circle ; and ever 
 be she kind and love with they , and they with she . 

 but of all those fellow it be Atra that have long dealing with 
 the wood - wife ; for while would she leave Utterhay and her friend 
 and fare lonesome up into Evilshaw , and find Habundia and abide with 
 she in all kindness holden for a month or more . and ever a little 
 before these departure betid would she fall moody and few - speak , 
 but she come back ever from the wood calm and kind and well - liking . 
 amidst all these coming and going somewhat wear off the terror of 
 Evilshaw ; yet never be it account other than a daring deed to 
 enter it alone without fellowship ; and most have liefer that some man 
 of religion be of their company therein , or they would bear about 
 they something holy or bless to hold the evil thing . 

 now when all this hath be say , we have no more to tell about this 
 company of friend , the most of whom have once haunt the land about 
 the Water of the Wondrous Isles , save that their love never sunder , 
 and that they live without shame and die without fear . so here be 
 an end .