THE wood beyond the world 



 CHAPTER I : of golden WALTER and his FATHER 


 awhile ago there be a young man dwell in a great and goodly city by 
 the sea which have to name Langton on Holm . he be but of five and 
 twenty winter , a fair - faced man , yellow - haired , tall and strong ; rather 
 wise than foolisher than young man be mostly will not ; a valiant youth , and 
 a kind ; not of many word but courteous of speech ; no roisterer , nought 
 masterful , but peaceable and know how to forbear : in a fray a perilous 
 foe , and a trusty war - fellow . his father , with whom he be dwell 
 when this tale begin , be a great merchant , rich than a baron of the 
 land , a head - man of the great of the Lineages of Langton , and a 
 captain of the Porte ; he be of the Lineage of the Goldings , therefore 
 be he call Bartholomew Golden , and his son Golden Walter . 

 now ye may well deem that such a youngling as this be look upon by all 
 as a lucky man without a lack ; but there be this flaw in his lot , 
 whereas he have fall into the toil of love of a woman exceed fair , 
 and have take she to wife , she nought unwilling as it seem . but when 
 they have be wed some six month he find by manifest token , that 
 his fairness be not so much to she but that she must seek to the 
 foulness of one worse than he in all way ; wherefore his rest depart 
 from he , whereas he hat she for her untruth and her hatred of he ; yet 
 would the sound of her voice , as she come and go in the house , make his 
 heart beat ; and the sight of she stir desire within he , so that he 
 long for she to be sweet and kind with he , and deem that , might it 
 be so , he should forget all the evil go by . but it be not so ; for 
 ever when she see he , her face change , and her hatred of he become 
 manifest , and howsoever she be sweet with other , with he she be hard 
 and sour . 

 so this go on a while till the chamber of his father 's house , yea the 
 very street of the city , become loathsome to he ; and yet he call to 
 mind that the world be wide and he but a young man . so on a day as he 
 sit with his father alone , he spake to he and say : " Father , I be on 
 the quay even now , and I look on the ship that be nigh boun , and 
 thy sign I see on a tall ship that seem to I nighest boun . will it 
 be long ere she sail ? " 

 " Nay , " say his father , " that ship , which hight the Katherine , will they 
 warp out of the haven in two day ' time . but why ask thou of she ? " 

 " the short word be good , father , " say Walter , " and this it be , that I 
 would depart in the say ship and see other land . " 

 " yea and whither , son ? " say the merchant . 

 " Whither she goeth , " say Walter , " for I be ill at ease at home , as thou 
 wottest , father . " 

 the merchant hold his peace awhile , and look hard on his son , for there 
 be strong love between they ; but at last he say : " well , son , maybe it 
 be good for thee ; but maybe also we shall not meet again . " 

 " yet if we do meet , father , then shalt thou see a new man in I . " 

 " well , " say Bartholomew , " at least I know on whom to lay the loss of 
 thee , and when thou art go , for thou shalt have thine own way herein , 
 she shall no long abide in my house . Nay , but it be for the strife 
 that should arise thenceforth betwixt she kindre and our , it should go 
 somewhat bad with she than that . " 

 say Walter : " I pray thee shame she not more than need must be , lest , so 
 doing , thou shame both I and thyself also . " 

 Bartholomew hold his peace again for a while ; then he say : " Goeth she 
 with child , my son ? " 

 Walter redden , and say : " I wot not ; nor of whom the child may be . " 
 then they both sit silent , till Bartholomew spake , say : " the end of it 
 be , son , that this be Monday , and that thou shalt go aboard in the small 
 hour of Wednesday ; and meanwhile I shall look to it that thou go not 
 away empty - handed ; the skipper of the Katherine be a good man and true , 
 and know the sea well ; and my servant Robert the Low , who be clerk of 
 the lading , be trustworthy and wise , and as myself in all matter that 
 look towards chaffer . the Katherine be new and stout - build , and 
 should be lucky , whereas she be under the ward of she who be the saint 
 call upon in the church where thou wert christen , and myself before 
 thee ; and thy mother , and my father and mother all lie under the chancel 
 thereof , as thou wottest . " 

 Therewith the elder rise up and go his way about his business , and 
 there be no more say betwixt he and his son on this matter . 




 CHAPTER II : GOLDEN WALTER TAKES ship to sail the sea 


 when Walter go down to the Katherine next morning , there be the 
 skipper Geoffrey , who do he reverence , and make he all cheer , and 
 show he his room aboard ship , and the plenteous good which his father 
 have send down to the quay already , such haste as he have make . Walter 
 thank his father 's love in his heart , but otherwise take little heed to 
 his affair , but wear away the time about the haven , gaze listlessly on 
 the ship that be make they ready outward , or unlading , and the 
 mariner and alien come and go : and all these be to he as the 
 curious image weave on a tapestry . 

 at last when he have wellnigh come back again to the Katherine , he see 
 there a tall ship , which he have scarce note before , a ship all - boun , 
 which have her boat out , and man sit to the oar thereof ready to tow 
 her outward when the hawser should be cast off , and by seem her 
 mariner be but abide for some one or other to come aboard . 

 so Walter stand idly watch the say ship , and as he look , lo ! folk 
 pass he toward the gangway . these be three ; first come a dwarf , 
 dark - brown of hue and hideous , with long arm and ear exceed great 
 and dog - tooth that stick out like the fang of a wild beast . he be clothe 
 in a rich coat of yellow silk , and bare in his hand a crooked bow , and 
 be gird with a broad sax . 

 after he come a maiden , young by seem , of scarce twenty summer ; fair 
 of face as a flower ; grey - eye , brown - haired , with lip full and red , 
 slim and gentle of body . Simple be her array , of a short and strait 
 green gown , so that on her right ankle be clear to see an iron ring . 

 last of the three be a lady , tall and stately , so radiant of visage and 
 glorious of raiment , that it be hard to say what like she be ; for 
 scarce might the eye gaze steady upon her exceed beauty ; yet must 
 every son of Adam who find himself anigh she , lift up his eye again 
 after he have drop they , and look again on she , and yet again and yet 
 again . even so do Walter , and as the three pass by he , it seem to 
 he as if all the other folk there about have vanish and be nought ; 
 nor have he any vision before his eye of any look on they , save 
 himself alone . they go over the gangway into the ship , and he see they 
 go along the deck till they come to the house on the poop , and enter it 
 and be go from his sight . 

 there he stand star , till little by little the throng people of the 
 quay come into his eye - shot again ; then he see how the hawser be cast 
 off and the boat fall to tug the big ship toward the harbour - mouth 
 with hale and how of man . then the sail fall down from the yard and be 
 sheet home and fill with the fair wind as the ship 's bow run up on 
 the first green wave outside the haven . even therewith the shipman cast 
 abroad a banner , whereon be do in a green field a grim wolf ramp up 
 against a maiden , and so go the ship upon her way . 

 Walter stand awhile star at her empty place where the wave run into 
 the haven - mouth , and then turn aside and toward the Katherine ; and at 
 first he be minded to go ask shipmaster Geoffrey of what he know 
 concern the say ship and her alien wayfarer ; but then it come into 
 his mind , that all this be but an imagination or dream of the day , and 
 that he be good to leave it untold to any . so therewith he go his 
 way from the water - side , and through the street unto his father 's house ; 
 but when he be but a little way thence , and the door be before he , him- 
 seem for a moment of time that he behold those three come out down 
 the step of stone and into the street ; to wit the dwarf , the maiden , and 
 the stately lady : but when he stand still to abide their come , and 
 look toward they , lo ! there be nothing before he save the goodly 
 house of Bartholomew Golden , and three child and a cur dog playing 
 about the step thereof , and about he be four or five passer - by go 
 about their business . then be he all confuse in his mind , and know not 
 what to make of it , whether those whom he have seem to see pass aboard 
 ship be but image of a dream , or child of Adam in very flesh . 

 Howsoever , he enter the house , and find his father in the chamber , and 
 fall to speech with he about their matter ; but for all that he love 
 his father , and worship he as a wise and valiant man , yet at that 
 hour he might not hearken the word of his mouth , so much be his mind 
 entangle in the thought of those three , and they be ever before his 
 eye , as if they have be paint on a table by the good of limner . and 
 of the two woman he think exceed much , and cast no wyte upon himself 
 for run after the desire of strange woman . for he say to himself 
 that he desire not either of the twain ; nay , he might not tell which of 
 the twain , the maiden or the stately queen , be clear to his eye ; 
 but sore he desire to see both of they again , and to know what they 
 be . 

 so wear the hour till the Wednesday morning , and it be time that he 
 should bid farewell to his father and get aboard ship ; but his father lead 
 he down to the quay and on to the Katherine , and there Walter embrace 
 he , not without tear and foreboding ; for his heart be full . then 
 presently the old man go aland ; the gangway be unship , the hawser 
 cast off ; the oar of the towing - boat splash in the dark water , the 
 sail fall down from the yard , and be sheet home , and out plunge the 
 Katherine into the misty sea and roll up the grey slope , cast 
 abroad her ancient withal , whereon be beat the token of Bartholomew 
 Golden , to wit a b and a g to the right and the left , and thereabove a 
 cross and a triangle rise from the midst . 

 Walter stand on the stern and beheld , yet more with the mind of he than 
 with his eye ; for it all seem but the double of what the other ship 
 have do ; and the thought of it as if the twain be as bead string on 
 one string and lead away by it into the same place , and thence to go in 
 the like order , and so on again and again , and never to draw nigh to 
 each other . 




 CHAPTER III : WALTER HEARETH tiding of the death of his FATHER 


 Fast sail the Katherine over the sea , and nought befell to tell of , 
 either to herself or her crew . she come to one cheape - town and then to 
 another , and so on to a third and a fourth ; and at each be buy and 
 selling after the manner of chapman ; and Walter not only look on the 
 doing of his father 's folk , but lend a hand , what he might , to help they 
 in all matter , whether it be in seaman 's craft , or in chaffer . and 
 the far he go and the long the time wear , the more he be ease 
 of his old trouble wherein his wife and her treason have to do . 

 but as for the other trouble , to wit his desire and longing to come up 
 with those three , it yet flicker before he ; and though he have not see 
 they again as one see people in the street , and as if he might touch 
 they if he would , yet be their image often before his mind 's eye ; and 
 yet , as time wear , not so often , nor so troublously ; and forsooth both to 
 those about he and to himself , he seem as a man well heal of his 
 melancholy mood . 

 now they leave that fourth stead , and sail over the sea and come to a 
 fifth , a very great and fair city , which they have make more than seven 
 month from Langton on Holm ; and by this time be Walter take heed and 
 joyance in such thing as be toward in that fair city , so far from his 
 kindre , and especially he look on the fair woman there , and desire 
 they , and love they ; but lightly , as befalleth young man . 

 now this be the last country whereto the Katherine be boun ; so there 
 they abode some ten month in daily chaffer , and in pleasure they in 
 behold all that there be of rare and goodly , and make merry with 
 the merchant and the town - folk , and the country - folk beyond the gate , 
 and Walter be grow as busy and gay as a strong young man be like to be , 
 and be as one who would fain be of some account amongst his own folk . 

 but at the end of this while , it befell on a day , as he be leave his 
 hostel for his booth in the market , and have the door in his hand , there 
 stand before he three mariner in the guise of his own country , and with 
 they be one of clerkly aspect , whom he know at once for his father 's 
 scrivener , Arnold Penstrong by name ; and when Walter see he his heart 
 fail he and he cry out : " Arnold , what tiding ? be all well with the 
 folk at Langton ? " 

 say Arnold : " evil tiding be come with I ; matter be ill with thy 
 folk ; for I may not hide that thy father , Bartholomew Golden , be dead , 
 God rest his soul . " 

 at that word it be to Walter as if all that trouble which but now have 
 sit so light upon he , be once again fresh and heavy , and that his past 
 life of the last few month have never be ; and it be to he as if he 
 see his father lie dead on his bed , and hear the folk lament about 
 the house . he hold his peace awhile , and then he say in a voice as of 
 an angry man : 

 " what , Arnold ! and do he die in his bed , or how ? for he be neither old 
 nor ail when we part . " 

 say Arnold : " yea , in his bed he die : but first he be somewhat sword- 
 bite . " 

 " Yea , and how ? " quoth Walter . 

 say Arnold : " when thou wert go , in a few day ' wearing , thy father 
 send thy wife out of his house back to she kindre of the Reddings with 
 no honour , and yet with no such shame as might have be , without blame 
 to we of those who know the tale of thee and she ; which , God - a - mercy , 
 will be pretty much the whole of the city . " 

 " nevertheless , the redding take it amiss , and would have a mote with we 
 golding to talk of booting . by ill - luck we yea - say that for the saving 
 of the city 's peace . but what betid ? we meet in our Gild - hall , and there 
 befell the talk between we ; and in that talk certain word could not be 
 hide , though they be none too seemly nor too meek . and the say 
 word once speak draw forth the whetted steel ; and there then be the 
 hewing and thrusting ! two of our be slay outright on the floor , and 
 four of theirs , and many be hurt on either side . of these be thy 
 father , for as thou mayst well deem , he be nought backward in the fray ; 
 but despite his hurt , two in the side and one on the arm , he go home 
 on his own foot , and we deem that we have come to our above . but well - a- 
 way ! it be an evil victory , whereas in ten day he die of his hurt . 
 God have his soul ! but now , my master , thou mayst well wot that I be not 
 come to tell thee this only , but moreover to bear the word of the 
 kindre , to wit that thou come back with I straightway in the swift 
 cutter which hath bear I and the tiding ; and thou mayst look to it , 
 that though she be swift and light , she be a keel full weatherly . " 

 then say Walter : " this be a bidding of war . come back will I , and the 
 redding shall wot of my coming . be ye all - boun ? " 

 " Yea , " say Arnold , " we may up anchor this very day , or to - morrow morn at 
 late . but what aileth thee , master , that thou starest so wild over my 
 shoulder ? I pray thee take it not so much to heart ! ever it be the will not 
 of father to depart this world before their son . " 

 but Walter 's visage from wrathful red have become pale , and he point up 
 street , and cry out : " look ! dost thou see ? " 

 " see what , master ? " quoth Arnold : " what ! here cometh an ape in gay 
 raiment ; belike the beast of some jongleur . Nay , by God 's wound ! ' tis a 
 man , though he be exceed mis - shapen like a very devil . yea and now 
 there cometh a pretty maid go as if she be of his meney ; and lo ! 
 here , a most goodly and noble lady ! yea , I see ; and doubtless she owneth 
 both the two , and be of the great of the folk of this fair city ; for 
 on the maiden 's ankle I see an iron ring , which betokeneth thralldom 
 amongst these alien . but this be strange ! for not thou not how the 
 folk in the street hee not this quaint show ; nay not even the stately 
 lady , though she be as lovely as a goddess of the gentile , and beareth 
 on her gem that would buy Langton twice over ; surely they must be over- 
 will not to strange and gallant sight . but now , master , but now ! " 

 " Yea , what be it ? " say Walter . 

 " why , master , they should not yet be go out of eye - shot , yet go they 
 be . what be become of they , be they sink into the earth ? " 

 " tush , man ! " say Walter , look not on Arnold , but still star down 
 the street ; " they have go into some house while thine eye be turn 
 from they a moment . " 

 " Nay , master , nay , " say Arnold , " mine eye be not off they one instant 
 of time . " 

 " well , " say Walter , somewhat snappishly , " they be go now , and what 
 have we to do to heed such toy , we with all this grief and strife on our 
 hand ? now would I be alone to turn the matter of thine errand over in 
 my mind . meantime do thou tell the shipmaster Geoffrey and our other 
 folk of these tiding , and thereafter get thee all ready ; and come hither 
 to I before sunrise to - morrow , and I shall be ready for my part ; and so 
 sail we back to Langton . " 

 Therewith he turn he back into the house , and the other go their 
 way ; but Walter sit alone in his chamber a long while , and ponder 
 these thing in his mind . and while he make up his mind that he would 
 think no more of the vision of those three , but would fare back to 
 Langton , and enter into the strife with the redding and quell they , or 
 die else . but lo , when he be quite steady in this doom , and his heart 
 be lighten thereby , he find that he think no more of the redding 
 and their strife , but as matter that be pass and do with , and that 
 now he be think and devise if by any mean he might find out in 
 what land dwelt those three . and then again he strove to put that from 
 he , say that what he have see be but meet for one brainsick , and a 
 dreamer of dream . but furthermore he think , Yea , and be Arnold , who 
 this last time have see the image of those three , a dreamer of wake 
 dream ? for he be nought wonte in such wise ; then think he : at least 
 I be well content that he spake to I of their likeness , not I to he ; 
 for so I may tell that there be at least something before my eye which 
 grow not out of mine own brain . and yet again , why should I follow they ; 
 and what should I get by it ; and indeed how shall I set about it ? 

 thus he turn the matter over and over ; and at last , see that if he 
 grow no foolisher over it , he grow no wiser , he become weary thereof , and 
 bestir he , and see to the trussing up of his good , and make all 
 ready for his departure , and so wear the day and sleep at nightfall ; and 
 at daybreak come Arnold to lead he to their keel , which hight the 
 Bartholomew . he tarry nought , and with few farewell go aboard ship , 
 and an hour after they be in the open sea with the ship 's head turn 
 toward Langton on Holm . 




 CHAPTER IV : storm befall the BARTHOLOMEW , and SHE be drive OFF her 
 course 


 now swift sail the Bartholomew for four week toward the north - west 
 with a fair wind , and all be well with ship and crew . then the wind 
 die out on even of a day , so that the ship scarce make way at all , 
 though she roll in a great swell of the sea , so great , that it seem 
 to ridge all the main athwart . moreover down in the west be a great 
 bank of cloud huddle up in haze , whereas for twenty day past the sky 
 have be clear , save for a few bright white cloud fly before the 
 wind . now the shipmaster , a man right cunning in his craft , look long 
 on sea and sky , and then turn and bade the mariner take in sail and be 
 right heedful . and when Walter ask he what he look for , and 
 wherefore he spake not to he thereof , he say surlily : " why should I 
 tell thee what any fool can see without tell , to wit that there be 
 weather to hand ? " 

 so they abode what should befall , and Walter go to his room to sleep 
 away the uneasy while , for the night be now fall ; and he know no more 
 till he be wake up by great hubbub and clamour of the shipman , and the 
 whipping of rope , and thunder of flap sail , and the tossing and 
 weltering of the ship withal . but , be a very stout - hearted young man , 
 he lie still in his room , partly because he be a landsman , and have no 
 mind to tumble about amongst the shipman and hinder they ; and withal he 
 say to himself : what matter whether I go down to the bottom of the sea , 
 or come back to Langton , since either way my life or my death will take 
 away from I the fulfilment of desire ? yet soothly if there hath be a 
 shift of wind , that be not so ill ; for then shall we be drive to other 
 land , and so at the least our home - come shall be delay , and other 
 tiding may hap amidst of our tarrying . so let all be as it will . 

 so in a little while , in spite of the ship 's wallowing and the tumult of 
 the wind and wave , he fall asleep again , and wake no more till it be 
 full daylight , and there be the shipmaster stand in the door of his 
 room , the sea - water all stream from his wet - weather raiment . he say 
 to Walter : " young master , the sele of the day to thee ! for by good hap 
 we have get into another day . now I shall tell thee that we have 
 strive to beat , so as not to be drive off our course , but all would not 
 avail , wherefore for these three hour we have be run before the 
 wind ; but , fair sir , so big hath be the sea that but for our ship be 
 of the stout , and our man all yare , we have all grow exceed wise 
 concern the ground of the mid - main . praise be to St. Nicholas and all 
 Hallows ! for though ye shall presently look upon a new sea , and maybe a 
 new land to boot , yet be that well than look on the ugly thing down 
 below . " 

 " be all well with ship and crew then ? " say Walter . 

 " yea forsooth , " say the shipmaster ; " verily the Bartholomew be the 
 darling of Oak Woods ; come up and look at it , how she be deal with 
 wind and wave all free from fear . " 

 so Walter do on his foul - weather raiment , and go up on to the quarter- 
 deck , and there indeed be a change of day ; for the sea be dark and 
 tumble mountain - high , and the white - horse be run down the 
 valley thereof , and the cloud drave low over all , and bear a scud of 
 rain along with they ; and though there be but a rag of sail on she , the 
 ship fly before the wind , roll a great wash of water from bulwark to 
 bulwark . 

 Walter stand look on it all awhile , hold on by a stay - rope , and 
 say to himself that it be well that they be drive so fast toward 
 new thing . 

 then the shipmaster come up to he and clap he on the shoulder and 
 say : " well , shipmate , cheer up ! and now come below again and eat some 
 meat , and drink a cup with I . " 

 so Walter go down and eat and drank , and his heart be light than it 
 have be since he have hear of his father 's death , and the feud await 
 he at home , which forsooth he have deem would stay his wandering a 
 weary while , and therewithal his hope . but now it seem as if he need 
 must wander , would he , would he not ; and so it be that even this feed his 
 hope ; so sore his heart clung to that desire of his to seek home to those 
 three that seem to call he unto they . 




 CHAPTER v : now they come to a new land 


 three day they drave before the wind , and on the fourth the cloud 
 lift , the sun shine out and the offing be clear ; the wind have much 
 abate , though it still blow a breeze , and be a head wind for sailing 
 toward the country of Langton . so then the master say that , since they 
 be bewilder , and the wind so ill to deal with , it be good to go 
 still before the wind that they might make some land and get knowledge of 
 their whereabout from the folk thereof . Withal he say that he deem 
 the land not to be very far distant . 

 so do they , and sail on pleasantly enough , for the weather keep on 
 mending , and the wind fall till it be but a light breeze , yet still foul 
 for Langton . 

 so wear three day , and on the eve of the third , the man from the topmast 
 cry out that he see land ahead ; and so do they all before the sun be 
 quite set , though it be but a cloud no big than a man 's hand . 

 when night fall they strike not sail , but go forth toward the land fair 
 and softly ; for it be early summer , so that the night be neither long 
 nor dark . 

 but when it be broad daylight , they open a land , a long shore of rock 
 and mountain , and nought else that they could see at first . nevertheless 
 as day wear and they draw nigh , first they see how the mountain fall 
 away from the sea , and be behind a long wall of sheer cliff ; and come 
 nigh yet , they behold a green plain go up after a little in green 
 bent and slope to the foot of the say cliff - wall . 

 no city nor haven do they see there , not even when they be far nigh 
 to the land ; nevertheless , whereas they hanker for the peace of the 
 green earth after all the tossing and unrest of the sea , and whereas also 
 they doubt not to find at the least good and fresh water , and belike 
 other bait in the plain under the mountain , they still sail on not 
 unmerrily ; so that by nightfall they cast anchor in five - fathom water 
 hard by the shore . 

 next morning they find that they be lie a little way off the mouth 
 of a river not right great ; so they put out their boat and tow the 
 ship up into the said river , and when they have go up it for a mile or 
 thereabout they find the sea water fail , for little be the ebb and 
 flow of the tide on that coast . then be the river deep and clear , 
 run between smooth grassy land like to meadow . also on their left 
 board they see presently three head of neat cattle go , as if in a 
 meadow of a homestead in their own land , and a few sheep ; and thereafter , 
 about a bow - draught from the river , they see a little house of wood and 
 straw - thatch under a woode mound , and with orchard tree about it . they 
 wonder little thereat , for they know no cause why that land should not 
 be build , though it be in the far outland . however , they draw their 
 ship up to the bank , think that they would at least abide awhile and 
 ask tiding and have some refreshing of the green plain , which be so 
 lovely and pleasant . 

 but while they be busy herein they see a man come out of the house , 
 and down to the river to meet they ; and they soon see that he be tall 
 and old , long - hoary of hair and beard , and clothe mostly in the skin of 
 beast . 

 he draw nigh without any fear or mistrust , and come close to they give 
 they the sele of the day in a kindly and pleasant voice . the shipmaster 
 greet he in his turn , and say withal : " old man , art thou the king of 
 this country ? " 

 the elder laugh ; " it hath have none other a long while , " say he ; " and 
 at least there be no other son of Adam here to gainsay . " 

 " thou art alone here then ? " say the master . 

 " Yea , " say the old man ; ' save for the beast of the field and the wood , 
 and the creep thing , and fowl . wherefore it be sweet to I to hear 
 your voice . " 

 say the master : " where be the other house of the town ? " 

 the old man laugh . say he : " when I say that I be alone , I mean 
 that I be alone in the land and not only alone in this stead . there be 
 no house save this betwixt the sea and the dwelling of the Bears , over 
 the cliff - wall yonder , yea and a long way over it . " 

 " yea , " quoth the shipmaster grinning , " and be the bear of thy country so 
 manlike , that they dwell in build house ? " 

 the old man shake his head . " Sir , " say he , " as to their bodily fashion , 
 it be altogether manlike , save that they be one and all high and big 
 than most . for they be bear only in name ; they be a nation of half wild 
 man ; for I have be tell by they that there be many more than that tribe 
 whose folk I have see , and that they spread wide about behind these 
 mountain from east to west . now , sir , as to their soul and 
 understanding I warrant they not ; for miscreant they be , trowe 
 neither in God nor his hallow . " 

 say the master : " trow they in Mahound then ? " 

 " Nay , " say the elder , " I wot not for sure that they have so much as a 
 false God ; though I have it from they that they worship a certain woman 
 with mickle worship . " 

 then spake Walter : " yea , good sir , and how know thou that ? dost thou 
 deal with they at all ? " 

 say the old man : " while some of that folk come hither and have of I 
 what I can spare ; a calf or two , or a half - dozen of lamb or hogget ; or 
 a skin of wine or cyder of mine own making : and they give I in return 
 such thing as I can use , as skin of hart and bear and other peltrie ; 
 for now I be old , I can but little of the hunting hereabout . while , 
 also , they bring little lump of pure copper , and would give I gold 
 also , but it be of little use in this lonely land . sooth to say , to I 
 they be not masterful or rough - handed ; but glad be I that they have be 
 here but of late , and be not like to come again this while ; for terrible 
 they be of aspect , and whereas ye be alien , belike they would not hold 
 their hand from off you ; and moreover ye have weapon and other matter 
 which they would covet sorely . " 

 Quoth the master : " since thou dealest with these wild man , will ye not 
 deal with we in chaffer ? for whereas we be come from long travel , we 
 hanker after fresh victual , and here aboard be many thing which be 
 for thine avail . " 

 say the old man : " all that I have be your , so that ye do but leave I 
 enough till my next ingathering : of wine and cyder , such as it be , I have 
 plenty for your service ; ye may drink it till it be all go , if ye will : 
 a little corn and meal I have , but not much ; yet be ye welcome thereto , 
 since the stand corn in my garth be do blossoming , and I have other 
 meat . cheese have I and dry fish ; take what ye will thereof . but as 
 to my neat and sheep , if ye have sore need of any , and will have they , I 
 may not say you nay : but I pray you if ye may do without they , not to 
 take my milch - beast or their engenderer ; for , as ye have hear I say , 
 the Bear - folk have be here but of late , and they have have of I all I 
 might spare : but now let I tell you , if ye long after flesh - meat , that 
 there be venison of hart and hind , yea , and of buck and doe , to be have on 
 this plain , and about the little wood at the foot of the rock - wall 
 yonder : neither be they exceed wild ; for since I may not take they , I 
 scare they not , and no other man do they see to hurt they ; for the Bear- 
 folk come straight to my house , and fare straight home thence . but I 
 will lead you the nighest way to where the venison be easy to be 
 get . as to the ware in your ship , if ye will give I aught I will 
 take it with a good will ; and chiefly if ye have a fair knife or two and 
 a roll of linen cloth , that be a good refreshment to I . but in any 
 case what I have to give be free to you and welcome . " 

 the shipmaster laugh : " friend , " say he , " we can thee mickle thank for 
 all that thou bidd we . and wot well that we be no lifter or 
 sea - thief to take thy livelihood from thee . so to - morrow , if thou 
 wilt , we will go with thee and upraise the hunt , and meanwhile we will 
 come aland , and walk on the green grass , and water our ship with thy good 
 fresh water . " 

 so the old carle go back to his house to make they ready what cheer he 
 might , and the shipman , who be twenty and one , all tell , what with the 
 mariner and Arnold and Walter 's servant , go ashore , all but two who 
 watch the ship and abode their turn . they go well - weapone , for both 
 the master and Walter deem wariness wisdom , lest all might not be so 
 good as it seem . they take of their sail - cloth ashore and tilt they 
 in on the meadow betwixt the house and the ship , and the carle bring 
 they what he have for their avail , of fresh fruit , and cheese , and milk , 
 and wine , and cyder , and honey , and there they feast nowise ill , and 
 be right fain . 




 CHAPTER VI : the OLD MAN tell WALTER of HIMSELF . WALTER see a SHARD in 
 the CLIFF - WALL 


 but when they have do their meat and drink the master and the shipman 
 go about the watering of the ship , and the other stray off along the 
 meadow , so that presently Walter be leave alone with the carle , and fall 
 to speech with he and say : " Father , meseemeth thou shouldest have some 
 strange tale to tell , and as yet we have ask thee of nought save meat 
 for our belly : now if I ask thee concern thy life , and how thou 
 cam hither , and abide here , wilt thou tell I aught ? " 

 the old man smile on he and say : " Son , my tale be long to tell ; and 
 mayhappen concern much thereof my memory should fail I ; and withal 
 there be grief therein , which I be loth to awaken : nevertheless if thou 
 ask , I will answer as I may , and in any case will tell thee nought save 
 the truth . " 

 say Walter : " well then , hast thou be long here ? " 

 " Yea , " say the carle , ' since I be a young man , and a stalwarth knight . " 

 say Walter : " this house , didst thou build it , and raise these garth , 
 and plant orchard and vineyard , and gather together the neat and the 
 sheep , or do some other do all this for thee ? " 

 say the carle : " I do none of all this ; there be one here before I , 
 and I enter into his inheritance , as though this be a lordly manor , 
 with a fair castle thereon , and all well stock and plenishe . " 

 say Walter : " didst thou find thy foregoer alive here ? " 

 " Yea , " say the elder , " yet he live but for a little while after I come 
 to he . " 

 he be silent a while , and then he say : " I slay he : even so would he 
 have it , though I bid he a well lot . " 

 say Walter : " didst thou come hither of thine own will ? " 

 " Mayhappen , " say the carle ; " who knoweth ? now have I no will to do 
 either this or that . it be will not that maketh I do , or refrain . " 

 say Walter : " tell I this ; why didst thou slay the man ? do he any 
 scathe to thee ? " 

 say the elder : " when I slew he , I deem that he be do I all 
 scathe : but now I know that it be not so . thus it be : I would need go 
 where he have be before , and he stand in the path against I ; and I 
 overthrow he , and go on the way I would . " 

 " what come thereof ? " say Walter . 

 " Evil come of it , " say the carle . 

 then be Walter silent a while , and the old man spake nothing ; but there 
 come a smile in his face that be both sly and somewhat sad . Walter 
 look on he and say : " be it from hence that thou wouldst go that 
 road ? " 

 " Yea , " say the carle . 

 say Walter : " and now wilt thou tell I what that road be ; whither it 
 go and whereto it lead , that thou must need wend it , though thy first 
 stride be over a dead man ? " 

 " I will not tell thee , " say the carle . 

 then they hold their peace , both of they , and thereafter get on to other 
 talk of no import . 

 so wear the day till night come ; and they sleep safely , and on the morrow 
 after they have break their fast , the more part of they set off with the 
 carle to the hunting , and they go , all of they , a three hour ' faring 
 towards the foot of the cliff , which be all grow over with coppice , 
 hazel and thorn , with here and there a big oak or ash - tree ; there it be , 
 say the old man , where the venison be most and well . 

 of their hunting need nought be say , save that when the carle have put 
 they on the track of the deer and show they what to do , he come back 
 again with Walter , who have no great lust for the hunting , and sorely 
 long to have some more talk with the say carle . he for his part 
 seem nought loth thereto , and so lead Walter to a mound or hillock 
 amidst the clear of the plain , whence all be to be see save where the 
 wood cover it ; but just before where they now lie down there be no 
 wood , save low bush , betwixt they and the rock - wall ; and Walter note 
 that whereas otherwhere , save in one place whereto their eye be 
 turn , the cliff seem wellnigh or quite sheer , or indeed in some 
 place beetle over , in that say place they fall away from each other 
 on either side ; and before this sinking be a slope or scree , that go 
 gently up toward the sinking of the wall . Walter look long and 
 earnestly at this place , and spake nought , till the carle say : " what ! 
 thou hast find something before thee to look on . what be it then ? " 

 Quoth Walter : " some would say that where yonder slope run together up 
 towards that sinking in the cliff - wall there will be a pass into the 
 country beyond . " 

 the carle smile and say : " yea , son ; nor , so say , would they err ; for 
 that be the pass into the Bear - country , whereby those huge man come down 
 to chaffer with I . " 

 " Yea , " say Walter ; and therewith he turn he a little , and scan the 
 rock - wall , and see how a few mile from that pass it turn somewhat 
 sharply toward the sea , narrow the plain much there , till it make a 
 bight , the face whereof look wellnigh north , instead of west , as do 
 the more part of the wall . and in the midst of that northern - look 
 bight be a dark place which seem to Walter like a downright shard in 
 the cliff . for the face of the wall be of a bleak grey , and it be but 
 little furrow . 

 so then Walter spake : " lo , old friend , there yonder be again a place that 
 meseemeth be a pass ; whereunto doth that one lead ? " and he point to 
 it : but the old man do not follow the pointing of his finger , but , 
 look down on the ground , answer confusedly , and say : 

 " maybe : I wot not . I deem that it also leadeth into the Bear - country by 
 a roundabout road . it leadeth into the far land . " 

 Walter answer nought : for a strange thought have come uppermost in his 
 mind , that the carle know far more than he would say of that pass , and 
 that he himself might be lead thereby to find the wondrous three . he 
 catch his breath hardly , and his heart knock against his rib ; but he 
 refrain from speak for a long while ; but at last he spake in a sharp 
 hard voice , which he scarce know for his own : " Father , tell I , I adjure 
 thee by God and all - hallow , be it through yonder shard that the road 
 lay , when thou must need make thy first stride over a dead man ? " 

 the old man spake not a while , then he raise his head , and look Walter 
 full in the eye , and say in a steady voice : " no , IT be not . " 
 thereafter they sit look at each other a while ; but at last Walter 
 turn his eye away , but know not what they behold nor where he be , but 
 he be as one in a swoon . for he know full well that the carle have lie 
 to he , and that he might as well have say aye as no , and tell he , that 
 it verily be by that same shard that he have stridden over a dead man . 
 nevertheless he make as little semblance thereof as he might , and 
 presently come to himself , and fall to talk of other matter , that have 
 nought to do with the adventure of the land . but after a while he spake 
 suddenly , and say : " my master , I be think of a thing . " 

 " Yea , of what ? " say the carle . 

 " of this , " say Walter ; " that here in this land be strange adventure 
 toward , and that if we , and I in especial , be to turn our back on 
 they , and go home with nothing do , it be pity of our life : for all 
 will be dull and deedless there . I be deeming it be good if we try 
 the adventure . " 

 " what adventure ? " say the old man , rise up on his elbow and star 
 sternly on he . 

 say Walter : " the wending yonder pass to the eastward , whereby the huge 
 man come to thee from out of the Bear - country ; that we might see what 
 should come thereof . " 

 the carle lean back again , and smile and shake his head , and spake : 
 " that adventure be speedily prove : death would come of it , my son . " 

 " Yea , and how ? " say Walter . 

 the carle say : " the big man would take thee , and offer thee up as a 
 blood - offering to that woman , who be their Mawmet . and if ye go all , 
 then shall they do the like with all of you . " 

 say Walter : " be that sure ? " 

 " dead sure , " say the carle . 

 " how know thou this ? " say Walter . 

 " I have be there myself , " say the carle . 

 " Yea , " say Walter , " but thou camest away whole . " 

 " art thou sure thereof ? " say the carle . 

 " thou art alive yet , old man , " say Walter , " for I have see thee eat thy 
 meat , which ghost use not to do . " and he laugh . 

 but the old man answer soberly : " if I escape , it be by this , that 
 another woman save I , and not often shall that befall . nor wholly be 
 I save ; my body escape forsooth . but where be my soul ? where be my 
 heart , and my life ? young man , I rede thee , try no such adventure ; but 
 go home to thy kindre if thou canst . moreover , wouldst thou fare alone ? 
 the other shall hinder thee . " 

 say Walter : " I be the master ; they shall do as I bid they : besides , they 
 will be well pleased to share my good amongst they if I give they a 
 writing to clear they of all charge which might be bring against 
 they . " 

 " my son ! my son ! " say the carle , " I pray thee go not to thy death ! " 

 Walter hear he silently , but as if he be persuade to refrain ; and 
 then the old man fall to , and tell he much concern this Bear - folk and 
 their custom , speak very freely of they ; but Walter 's ear be 
 scarce open to this talk : whereas he deem that he should have nought to 
 do with those wild man ; and he durst not ask again concern the country 
 whereto lead the pass on the northward . 




 CHAPTER VII : WALTER come to the shard in the ROCK - WALL 


 as they be in converse thus , they hear the hunter blow on their 
 horn all together ; whereon the old man arise , and say : " I deem by the 
 blow that the hunt will be over and do , and that they be blow on 
 their fellow who have go scatter - meal about the wood . it be now some 
 five hour after noon , and thy man will be get back with their 
 venison , and will be fain of the victual they have catch ; therefore 
 will I hasten on before , and get ready fire and water and other matter 
 for the cooking . wilt thou come with I , young master , or abide thy man 
 here ? " 

 Walter say lightly : " I will rest and abide they here ; since I can not 
 fail to see they hence as they go on their way to thine house . and it 
 may be well that I be at hand to command they and forbid , and put some 
 order amongst they , for rough playmate they be , some of they , and now 
 all heat with the hunting and the joy of the green earth . " thus he 
 speak , as if nought be toward save supper and bed ; but inwardly hope 
 and fear be contend in he , and again his heart beat so hard , that 
 he deem that the carle must surely hear it . but the old man take he 
 but accord to his outward seeming , and nod his head , and go away 
 quietly toward his house . 

 when he have be go a little , Walter rise up heedfully ; he have with he 
 a scrip wherein be some cheese and hard - fish , and a little flasket of 
 wine ; a short bow he have with he , and a quiver of arrow ; and he be 
 girt with a strong and good sword , and a wood - knife withal . he look to 
 all this gear that it be nought amiss , and then speedily go down off 
 the mound , and when he be come down , he find that it cover he from 
 man come out of the wood , if he go straight thence to that shard of 
 the rock - wall where be the pass that lead southward . 

 now it be no nay that thitherward he turn , and go wisely , lest the 
 carle should make a backward cast , and see he , or lest any straggler of 
 his own folk might happen upon he . 

 for to say sooth , he deem that do they wind he , they would be like to 
 let he of his journey . he have note the bearing of the cliff nigh the 
 shard , and whereas he could see their head everywhere except from the 
 depth of the thicket , he be not like to go astray . 

 he have make no great way ere he hear the horn blow all together 
 again in one place , and look thitherward through the leafy bough   for 
 he be now amidst of a thicket   he see his man throng the mound , and 
 have no doubt therefore that they be blow on he ; but be well 
 under cover he heed it nought , and lie still a little , see they go 
 down off the mound and go all of they toward the carle 's house , still 
 blow as they go , but not fare scatter - meal . wherefore it be 
 clear that they be nought troubled about he . 

 so he go on his way to the shard ; and there be nothing to say of his 
 journey till he get before it with the last of the clear day , and enter 
 it straightway . it be in sooth a downright breach or cleft in the rock- 
 wall , and there be no hill or bent lead up to it , nothing but a 
 tumble of stone before it , which be somewhat uneasy going , yet need 
 nought but labour to overcome it , and when he have get over this , and be 
 in the very pass itself , he find it no ill go : forsooth at first it 
 be little bad than a rough road betwixt two great stony slope , though 
 a little trickle of water run down amidst of it . so , though it be so 
 nigh nightfall , yet Walter press on , yea , and long after the very night 
 be come . for the moon rise wide and bright a little after nightfall . 
 but at last he have go so long , and be so wearied , that he deem it 
 nought but wisdom to rest he , and so lie down on a piece of greensward 
 betwixt the stone , when he have eat a morsel out of his satchel , and 
 drunk of the water out of the stream . there as he lay , if he have any 
 doubt of peril , his weariness soon make it all one to he , for presently 
 he be sleep as soundly as any man in Langton on Holm . 




 CHAPTER VIII : WALTER WENDS the WASTE 


 Day be yet young when he awake : he leap to his foot , and go down to 
 the stream and drink of its water , and wash the night off he in a 
 pool thereof , and then set forth on his way again . when he have go some 
 three hour , the road , which have be go up all the way , but somewhat 
 gently , grow steep , and the bent on either side lower , and lower , 
 till it sink at last altogether , and then be he on a rough mountain - neck 
 with little grass , and no water ; save that now and again be a soft place 
 with a flow amidst of it , and such place he must need fetch a compass 
 about , lest he be mire . he give himself but little rest , eat what he 
 need must as he go . the day be bright and calm , so that the sun be 
 never hide , and he steer by it due south . all that day he go , and 
 find no more change in that huge neck , save that while it be more and 
 while less steep . a little before nightfall he happen on a shallow 
 pool some twenty yard over ; and he deem it good to rest there , since 
 there be water for his avail , though he might have make somewhat more 
 out of the tail end of the day . 

 when dawn come again he awake and arise , nor spend much time over his 
 breakfast ; but press on all he might ; and now he say to himself , that 
 whatsoever other peril be athwart his way , he be out of the danger of 
 the chase of his own folk . 

 all this while he have see no four - footed beast , save now and again a 
 hill - fox , and once some outlandish kind of hare ; and of fowl but very 
 few : a crow or two , a long - wing hawk , and twice an eagle high up aloft . 

 again , the third night , he sleep in the stony wilderness , which still lead 
 he up and up . only toward the end of the day , himseeme that it have 
 be less steep for a long while : otherwise nought be change , on all 
 side it be nought but the endless neck , wherefrom nought could be see , 
 but some other part of itself . this fourth night withal he find no 
 water whereby he might rest , so that he awake parch , and long to 
 drink just when the dawn be at its cold . 

 but on the fifth morrow the ground rise but little , and at last , when he 
 have be go wearily a long while , and now , hard on noontide , his 
 thirst grieve he sorely , he come on a spring well out from under a 
 high rock , the water wherefrom trickle feebly away . so eager be he to 
 drink , that at first he heed nought else ; but when his thirst be fully 
 quench his eye catch sight of the stream which flow from the well , 
 and he give a shout , for lo ! it be run south . wherefore it be with 
 a merry heart that he go on , and as he go , come on more stream , all 
 run south or thereabout . he hasten on all he might , but in 
 despite of all the speed he make , and that he feel the land now go 
 down southward , night overtake he in that same wilderness . yet when he 
 stay at last for sheer weariness , he lie down in what he deem by the 
 moonlight to be a shallow valley , with a ridge at the southern end 
 thereof . 

 he sleep long , and when he awake the sun be high in the heaven , and 
 never be bright or clear morning on the earth than be that . he 
 arise and eat of what little be yet leave he , and drink of the water of 
 a stream which he have follow the evening before , and beside which he 
 have lay he down ; and then set forth again with no great hope to come on 
 new tiding that day . but yet when he be fairly afoot , himseeme that 
 there be something new in the air which he breathe , that be soft and 
 bore sweet scent home to he ; whereas heretofore , and that especially 
 for the last three or four day , it have be harsh and void , like the 
 face of the desert itself . 

 so on he go , and presently be mount the ridge aforesaid , and , as 
 oft happen when one climb a steep place , he keep his eye on the 
 ground , till he feel he be on the top of the ridge . then he stop to 
 take breath , and raise his head and look , and lo ! he be verily on the 
 brow of the great mountain - neck , and down below he be the hanging of 
 the great hill - slope , which fall down , not slowly , as those he have be 
 those day a - mount , but speedily enough , though with little of broken 
 place or sheer cliff . but beyond this last of the desert there be 
 before he a lovely land of woode hill , green plain , and little 
 valley , stretch out far and wide , till it end at last in great blue 
 mountain and white snowy peak beyond they . 

 then for very surprise of joy his spirit waver , and he feel faint and 
 dizzy , so that he be fain to sit down a while and cover his face with 
 his hand . presently he come to his sober mind again , and stand up and 
 look forth keenly , and see no sign of any dwelling of man . but he say 
 to himself that that might well be because the good and well - grass land 
 be still so far off , and that he might yet look to find man and their 
 dwelling when he have leave the mountain wilderness quite behind he : so 
 therewith he fall to go his way down the mountain , and lose little 
 time therein , whereas he now have his livelihood to look to . 




 CHAPTER IX : WALTER HAPPENETH on the first of those three CREATURES 


 what with one thing , what with another , as his have to turn out of his 
 way for sheer rock , or for slope so steep that he might not try the 
 peril of they , and again for bog impassable , he be fully three day 
 more before he have quite come out of the stony waste , and by that time , 
 though he have never lack water , his scanty victual be quite do , for 
 all his careful husbandry thereof . but this trouble he little , whereas 
 he look to find wild fruit here and there and to shoot some small 
 deer , as hare or coney , and make a shift to cook the same , since he have 
 with he flint and fire - steel . moreover the far he go , the surer 
 he be that he should soon come across a dwelling , so smooth and fair as 
 everything look before he . and he have scant fear , save that he might 
 happen on man who should enthrall he . 

 but when he be come down past the first green slope , he be so worn , 
 that he say to himself that rest be well than meat , so little as he 
 have sleep for the last three day ; so he lay he down under an ash - tree 
 by a stream - side , nor ask what be o'clock , but have his fill of sleep , 
 and even when he awake in the fresh morning be little fain of rise , 
 but lie betwixt sleep and wake for some three hour more ; then he 
 arise , and go far down the next green bent , yet somewhat slowly 
 because of his hunger - weakness . and the scent of that fair land come up 
 to he like the odour of one great nosegay . 

 so he come to where the land be level , and there be many tree , as oak 
 and ash , and sweet - chestnut and wych - elm , and hornbeam and quicken - tree , 
 not grow in a close wood or tangle thicket , but set as though in 
 order on the flowery greensward , even as it might be in a great king 's 
 park . 

 so come he to a big bird - cherry , whereof many bough hang low down laden 
 with fruit : his belly rejoice at the sight , and he catch hold of a 
 bough , and fall to pluck and eat . but while he be amidst of 
 this , he hear suddenly , close anigh he , a strange noise of roaring and 
 braying , not very great , but exceed fierce and terrible , and not like 
 to the voice of any beast that he know . as have be aforesaid , Walter 
 be no faint - heart ; but what with the weakness of his travail and hunger , 
 what with the strangeness of his adventure and his loneliness , his spirit 
 fail he ; he turn round towards the noise , his knee shake and he 
 tremble : this way and that he look , and then give a great cry and 
 tumble down in a swoon ; for close before he , at his very foot , be the 
 dwarf whose image he have see before , clothe in his yellow coat , and 
 grin up at he from his hideous hairy countenance . 

 how long he lie there as one dead , he know not , but when he wake again 
 there be the dwarf sit on his ham close by he . and when he lift 
 up his head , the dwarf send out that fearful harsh voice again ; but this 
 time Walter could make out word therein , and know that the creature 
 speak and say : 

 " how now ! what art thou ? whence com ? what wantest ? " 

 Walter sit up and say : " I be a man ; I hight Golden Walter ; I come from 
 Langton ; I want victual . " 

 say the dwarf , writhe his face grievously , and laugh forsooth : " I 
 know it all : I ask thee to see what wise thou wouldst lie . I be send 
 forth to look for thee ; and I have bring thee loathsome bread with I , 
 such as ye alien must need eat : take it ! " 

 Therewith he draw a loaf from a satchel which he bear , and thrust it 
 towards Walter , who take it somewhat doubtfully for all his hunger . 

 the dwarf yell at he : " art thou dainty , alien ? wouldst thou have 
 flesh ? well , give I thy bow and an arrow or two , since thou art lazy- 
 sick , and I will get thee a coney or a hare , or a quail maybe . ah , I 
 forgot ; thou art dainty , and wilt not eat flesh as I do , blood and all 
 together , but must need half burn it in the fire , or mar it with hot 
 water ; as they say my Lady do : or as the Wretch , the thing do ; I know 
 that , for I have see it eat . " 

 " Nay , " say Walter , " this sufficeth ; " and he fall to eat the bread , 
 which be sweet between his tooth . then when he have eat a while , for 
 hunger compel he , he say to the dwarf : " but what mean thou by the 
 Wretch and the thing ? and what Lady be thy Lady ? " 

 the creature let out another wordless roar as of furious anger ; and then 
 the word come : " it hath a face white and red , like to thine ; and hand 
 white as thine , yea , but whiter ; and the like it be underneath its 
 raiment , only whiter still : for I have see it - yes , I have see it ; ah 
 yes and yes and yes . " 

 and therewith his word run into gibber and yelling , and he roll about 
 and smote at the grass : but in a while he grow quiet again and sit still , 
 and then fall to laugh horribly again , and then say : " but thou , fool , 
 wilt think it fair if thou fallest into its hand , and wilt repent it 
 thereafter , as I do . oh , the mocking and gibe of it , and the tear and 
 shriek of it ; and the knife ! what ! say thou of my Lady ? - what Lady ? 
 o alien , what other Lady be there ? and what shall I tell thee of she ? it 
 be like that she make I , as she make the Bear man . but she make not the 
 Wretch , the thing ; and she hateth it sorely , as I do . and some day to 
 come - " 

 thereat he brake off and fall to wordless yell a long while , and 
 thereafter spake all pant : " now I have tell thee overmuch , and o if my 
 Lady come to hear thereof . now I will go . " 

 and therewith he take out two more loaf from his wallet , and toss 
 they to Walter , and so turn and go his way ; while walk upright , 
 as Walter have see his image on the quay of Langton ; while bound and 
 roll like a ball throw by a lad ; while scuttle along on all - four 
 like an evil beast , and ever and anon give forth that harsh and evil 
 cry . 

 Walter sit a while after he be out of sight , so stricken with horror and 
 loathing and a fear of he know not what , that he might not move . then he 
 pluck up a heart , and look to his weapon and put the other loaf 
 into his scrip . 

 then he arise and go his way wonder , yea and dread , what kind of 
 creature he should next fall in with . for soothly it seem to he that 
 it would be bad than death if they be all such as this one ; and that 
 if it be so , he must need slay and be slay . 




 CHAPTER X : WALTER HAPPENETH on another creature in the strange land 


 but as he go on through the fair and sweet land so bright and 
 sun - litten , and he now rest and fed , the horror and fear run off from 
 he , and he wander on merrily , neither do aught befall he save the 
 coming of night , when he lay he down under a great spread oak with 
 his draw sword ready to hand , and fall asleep at once , and wake not till 
 the sun be high . 

 then he arise and go on his way again ; and the land be no worse than 
 yesterday ; but even well , it might be ; the greensward more flowery , the 
 oak and chestnut great . Deer of diverse kind he see , and might 
 easily have get his meat thereof ; but he meddle not with they since he 
 have his bread , and be timorous of light a fire . withal he doubt 
 little of have some entertainment ; and that , might be , nought evil ; 
 since even that fearful dwarf have be courteous to he after his kind , 
 and have do he good and not harm . but of the happening on the Wretch 
 and the thing , whereof the dwarf spake , he be yet somewhat afeard . 

 after he have go a while and whenas the summer morn be at its 
 bright , he see a little way ahead a grey rock rise up from amidst of 
 a ring of oak - tree ; so he turn thither straightway ; for in this plain- 
 land he have see no rock heretofore ; and as he go he see that there 
 be a fountain gush out from under the rock , which run thence in a 
 fair little stream . and when he have the rock and the fountain and the 
 stream clear before he , lo ! a child of Adam sit beside the fountain 
 under the shadow of the rock . he draw a little nigh , and then he see 
 that it be a woman , clothe in green like the sward whereon she lay . she 
 be play with the welling out of the water , and she have truss up her 
 sleeve to the shoulder that she might thrust her bare arm therein . her 
 shoe of black leather lie on the grass beside she , and her foot and leg 
 yet shine with the brook . 

 belike amidst the splashing and clatter of the water she do not hear he 
 draw nigh , so that he be close to she before she lift up her face 
 and see he , and he behold she , that it be the maiden of the thrice - see 
 pageant . she redden when she see he , and hastily cover up her leg 
 with her gown - skirt , and draw down the sleeve over her arm , but 
 otherwise stir not . as for he , he stand still , strive to speak to 
 she ; but no word might he bring out , and his heart beat sorely . 

 but the maiden spake to he in a clear sweet voice , wherein be now no 
 trouble : " thou art an alien , art thou not ? for I have not see thee 
 before . " 

 " Yea , " he say , " I be an alien ; wilt thou be good to I ? " 

 she say : " and why not ? I be afraid at first , for I think it have be 
 the King 's Son . I look to see none other ; for of goodly man he have 
 be the only one here in the land this long while , till thy come . " 

 he say : " didst thou look for my come at about this time ? " 

 " o nay , " she say ; " how might I ? " 

 say Walter : " I wot not ; but the other man seem to be look for I , 
 and know of I , and he bring I bread to eat . " 

 she look on he anxiously , and grow somewhat pale , as she say : " what 
 other one ? " 

 now Walter do not know what the dwarf might be to she , fellow - servant or 
 what not , so he would not show his loathing of he ; but answer wisely : 
 " the little man in the yellow raiment . " 

 but when she hear that word , she go suddenly very pale , and lean she 
 head aback , and beat the air with her hand ; but say presently in a 
 faint voice : " I pray thee talk not of that one while I be by , nor even 
 think of he , if thou mayest forbear . " 

 he spake not , and she be a little while before she come to herself 
 again ; then she open her eye , and look upon Walter and smile kindly 
 on he , as though to ask his pardon for have scar he . then she rise 
 up in her place , and stand before he ; and they be nigh together , for 
 the stream betwixt they be little . 

 but he still look anxiously upon she and say : " have I hurt thee ? I 
 pray thy pardon . " 

 she look on he more sweetly still , and say : " o nay ; thou wouldst not 
 hurt I , thou ! " 

 then she blush very red , and he in like wise ; but afterwards she turn 
 pale , and lay a hand on her breast , and Walter cry out hastily : " o I ! 
 I have hurt thee again . wherein have I do amiss ? " 

 " in nought , in nought , " she say ; " but I be troubled , I wot not 
 wherefore ; some thought hath take hold of I , and I know it not . 
 Mayhappen in a little while I shall know what trouble I . now I bid 
 thee depart from I a little , and I will abide here ; and when thou com 
 back , it will either be that I have find it out or not ; and in either 
 case I will tell thee . " 

 she speak earnestly to he ; but he say : " how long shall I abide away ? " 

 her face be trouble as she answer he : " for no long while . " 

 he smile on she and turn away , and go a space to the other side of 
 the oak - tree , whence she be still within eyeshot . there he abode until 
 the time seem long to he ; but he school himself and forbore ; for he 
 say : lest she send I away again . so he abide until again the time 
 seem long to he , and she call not to he : but once again he forbore 
 to go ; then at last he arise , and his heart beat and he tremble , and he 
 walk back again speedily , and come to the maiden , who be still 
 stand by the rock of the spring , her arm hang down , her eye 
 downcast . she look up at he as he draw nigh , and her face change 
 with eagerness as she say : " I be glad thou art come back , though it be 
 no long while since thy departure "   sooth to say it be scarce half an 
 hour in all . " nevertheless I have be think many thing , and 
 thereof will I now tell thee . " 

 he say : " Maiden , there be a river betwixt we , though it be no big one . 
 shall I not stride over , and come to thee , that we may sit down together 
 side by side on the green grass ? " 

 " Nay , " she say , " not yet ; tarry a while till I have tell thee of 
 matter . I must now tell thee of my thought in order . " 

 her colour go and come now , and she plait the fold of her gown with 
 restless finger . at last she say : " now the first thing be this ; that 
 though thou hast see I first only within this hour , thou hast set thine 
 heart upon I to have I for thy speech - friend and thy darling . and if 
 this be not so , then be all my speech , yea and all my hope , come to an 
 end at once . " 

 " o yea ! " say Walter , " even so it be : but how thou hast find this out I 
 wot not ; since now for the first time I say it , that thou art indeed my 
 love , and my dear and my darling . " 

 " hush , " she say , " hush ! lest the wood have ear , and thy speech be loud : 
 abide , and I shall tell thee how I know it . whether this thy love shall 
 outlast the first time that thou holdest my body in thine arm , I wot 
 not , nor dost thou . but sore be my hope that it may be so ; for I also , 
 though it be but scarce an hour since I set eye on thee , have cast mine 
 eye on thee to have thee for my love and my darling , and my 
 speech - friend . and this be how I wot that thou lov I , my friend . now 
 be all this dear and joyful , and overflow my heart with sweetness . but 
 now must I tell thee of the fear and the evil which lieth behind it . " 

 then Walter stretch out his hand to she , and cry out : " yea , yea ! but 
 whatever evil entangle we , now we both know these two thing , to wit , 
 that thou lov I , and I thee , wilt thou not come hither , that I may 
 cast mine arm about thee , and kiss thee , if not thy kind lip or thy 
 friendly face at all , yet at least thy dear hand : yea , that I may touch 
 thy body in some wise ? " 

 she look on he steadily , and say softly : " Nay , this above all thing 
 must not be ; and that it may not be be a part of the evil which entangle 
 we . but hearken , friend , once again I tell thee that thy voice be over 
 loud in this wilderness fruitful of evil . now I have tell thee , indeed , 
 of two thing whereof we both wot ; but next I must need tell thee of 
 thing whereof I wot , and thou wottest not . yet this be well , that 
 thou pledge thy word not to touch so much as one of my hand , and that we 
 go together a little way hence away from these tumbled stone , and sit 
 down upon the open greensward ; whereas here be cover if there be spy 
 abroad . " 

 again , as she speak , she turn very pale ; but Walter say : " since it 
 must be so , I pledge thee my word to thee as I love thee . " 

 and therewith she kneel down , and do on her foot - gear , and then sprang 
 lightly over the rivulet ; and then the twain of they go side by side 
 some half a furlong thence , and sit down , shadow by the bough of a 
 slim quicken - tree grow up out of the greensward , whereon for a good 
 space around be neither bush nor brake . 

 there begin the maiden to talk soberly , and say : " this be what I must 
 need say to thee now , that thou art come into a land perilous for any 
 one that loveth aught of good ; from which , forsooth , I be fain that 
 thou wert get away safely , even though I should die of longing for 
 thee . as for myself , my peril be , in a measure , less than thine ; I mean 
 the peril of death . but lo , thou , this iron on my foot be token that I 
 be a thrall , and thou know in what wise thrall must pay for 
 transgression . furthermore , of what I be , and how I come hither , time 
 would fail I to tell ; but somewhile , maybe , I shall tell thee . I serve 
 an evil mistress , of whom I may say that scarce I wot if she be a woman 
 or not ; but by some creature be she account for a god , and as a god be 
 herie ; and surely never god be cruell nor cold than she . I she 
 hateth sorely ; yet if she hat I little or nought , small be the gain 
 to I if it be her pleasure to deal hardly by I . but as thing now 
 be , and be like to be , it would not be for her pleasure , but for her 
 pain and loss , to make an end of I , therefore , as I say e'en now , my 
 mere life be not in peril with she ; unless , perchance , some sudden 
 passion get the well of she , and she slay I , and repent of it 
 thereafter . for so it be , that if it be the least evil of her condition 
 that she be wanton , at least wanton she be to the letter . many a time 
 hath she cast the net for the catching of some goodly young man ; and her 
 late prey   save it be thou   be the young man whom I name , when first I 
 see thee , by the name of the King 's Son . he be with we yet , and I fear 
 he ; for of late hath he weary of she , though it be but plain truth to 
 say of she , that she be the wonder of all beauty of the World . he hath 
 weary of she , I say , and hath cast his eye upon I , and if I be 
 heedless , he would betray I to the uttermost of the wrath of my 
 mistress . for need must I say of he , though he be a goodly man , and 
 now fall into thralldom , that he hath no bowel of compassion ; but be a 
 dastard , who for an hour 's pleasure would undo I , and thereafter would 
 stand by smile and take my mistress 's pardon with good cheer , while 
 for I would be no pardon . seest thou , therefore , how it be with I 
 between these two cruel fool ? and moreover there be other of whom I 
 will not even speak to thee . " 

 and therewith she put her hand before her face , and weep , and murmur : 
 " who shall deliver I from this death in life ? " 

 but Walter cry out : " for what else be I come hither , I , I ? " 

 and it be a near thing that he do not take she in his arm , but he 
 remember his pledge word , and draw aback from she in terror , whereas 
 he have an inkling of why she would not suffer it ; and he weep with she . 

 but suddenly the Maid leave weeping , and say in a change voice : " Friend , 
 whereas thou speak of deliver I , it be more like that I shall 
 deliver thee . and now I pray thy pardon for thus grieve thee with my 
 grief , and that more especially because thou mayst not solace thy grief 
 with kiss and caress ; but so it be , that for once I be smite by 
 the thought of the anguish of this land , and the joy of all the world 
 besides . " 

 Therewith she catch her breath in a half - sob , but refrain she and go 
 on : " now dear friend and darling , take good heed to all that I shall say 
 to thee , whereas thou must do after the teaching of my word . and first , 
 I deem by the monster have meet thee at the gate of the land , and 
 refresh thee , that the Mistress hath look for thy coming ; nay , by thy 
 come hither at all , that she hath cast her net and catch thee . Hast 
 thou note aught that might seem to make this more like ? " 

 say Walter : " three time in full daylight have I see go past I the 
 image of the monster and thee and a glorious lady , even as if ye be 
 alive . " 

 and therewith he tell she in few word how it have go with he since 
 that day on the quay at Langton . 

 she say : " then it be no long perhaps , but certain , that thou art her 
 late catch ; and even so I deem from the first : and , dear friend , this 
 be why I have not suffer thee to kiss or caress I , so sore as I long 
 for thee . for the mistress will have thee for she only , and hath lure 
 thee hither for nought else ; and she be wise in wizardry   even as some 
 deal be I , and wert thou to touch I with hand or mouth on my naked 
 flesh , yea , or be it even my raiment , then would she scent the savour 
 of thy love upon I , and then , though it may be she would spare thee , she 
 would not spare I . " 

 then be she silent a little , and seem very downcast , and Walter hold 
 his peace from grief and confusion and helplessness ; for of wizardry he 
 know nought . 

 at last the Maid spake again , and say : " nevertheless we will not die 
 redeless . now thou must look to this , that from henceforward it be thee , 
 and not the King 's Son , whom she desireth , and that so much the more that 
 she hath not set eye on thee . remember this , whatsoever her seem may 
 be to thee . now , therefore , shall the King 's Son be free , though he know 
 it not , to cast his love on whomso he will ; and , in a way , I also shall 
 be free to yeasay he . though , forsooth , so fulfilled be she with malice 
 and spite , that even then she may turn round on I to punish I for do 
 that which she would have I do . now let I think of it . " 

 then be she silent a good while , and speak at last : " yea , all thing be 
 perilous , and a perilous rede I have think of , whereof I will not tell 
 thee as yet ; so waste not the short while by ask I . at least the 
 bad will be no bad than what shall come if we strive not against it . 
 and now , my friend , amongst peril it be grow more and more perilous 
 that we twain should be long together . but I would say one thing yet ; 
 and maybe another thereafter . Thou hast cast thy love upon one who will 
 be true to thee , whatsoever may befall ; yet be she a guileful creature , 
 and might not help it her life long , and now for thy very sake must need 
 be more guileful now than ever before . and as for I , the guileful , my 
 love have I cast upon a lovely man , and one true and simple , and a stout- 
 heart ; but at such a pinch be he , that if he withstand all temptation , 
 his withstanding may belike undo both he and I . therefore swear we 
 both of we , that by both of we shall all guile and all fall away be 
 forgive on the day when we shall be free to love each the other as our 
 heart will . " 

 Walter cry out : " o love , I swear it indeed ! thou art my Hallow , and I 
 will swear it as on the relic of a Hallow ; on thy hand and thy foot I 
 swear it . " 

 the word seem to she a dear caress ; and she laugh , and blush , and 
 look full kindly on he ; and then her face grow solemn , and she say : 
 " on thy life I swear it ! " 

 then she say : " now be there nought for thee to do but to go hence 
 straight to the Golden House , which be my Mistress 's house , and the only 
 house in this land   save one which I may not see , and lieth southward no 
 long way . how she will deal with thee , I wot not ; but all I have say of 
 she and thee and the King 's Son be true . therefore I say to thee , be 
 wary and cold at heart , whatsoever outward semblance thou mayst make . if 
 thou have to yield thee to she , then yield rather late than early , so as 
 to gain time . yet not so late as to seem sham in yield for fear 's 
 sake . hold fast to thy life , my friend , for in ward that , thou 
 ward I from grief without remedy . thou wilt see I ere long ; it may 
 be to - morrow , it may be some day hence . but forget not , that what I may 
 do , that I be do . take heed also that thou pay no more heed to I , or 
 rather less , than if thou wert meet a maiden of no account in the 
 street of thine own town . o my love ! barren be this first farewell , as 
 be our first meeting ; but surely shall there be another meeting well 
 than the first , and the last farewell may be long and long yet . " 

 Therewith she stand up , and he kneel before she a little while without 
 any word , and then arise and go his way ; but when he have go a space 
 he turn about , and see she still stand in the same place ; she stay 
 a moment when she see he turn , and then herself turn about . 

 so he depart through the fair land , and his heart be full with hope 
 and fear as he go . 




 CHAPTER XI : WALTER HAPPENETH on the mistress 


 it be but a little after noon when Walter leave the Maid behind : he 
 steer south by the sun , as the Maid have bid he , and go swiftly ; 
 for , as a good knight wending to battle , the time seem long to he till 
 he should meet the foe . 

 so an hour before sunset he see something white and gay gleaming through 
 the bole of the oak - tree , and presently there be clear before he a 
 most goodly house build of white marble , carve all about with knot 
 and imagery , and the carven folk be all paint of their lively 
 colour , whether it be their raiment or their flesh , and the housing 
 wherein they stand all do with gold and fair hue . Gay be the 
 window of the house ; and there be a pillare porch before the great 
 door , with image betwixt the pillar both of man and beast : and when 
 Walter look up to the roof of the house , he see that it gleam and 
 shine ; for all the tile be of yellow metal , which he deem to be of 
 very gold . 

 all this he see as he go , and tarry not to gaze upon it ; for he say , 
 belike there will be time for I to look on all this before I die . but 
 he say also , that , though the house be not of the great , it be 
 beyond compare of all house of the world . 

 now he enter it by the porch , and come into a hall many - pillare , and 
 vault over , the wall paint with gold and ultramarine , the floor 
 dark , and spangle with many colour , and the window glaze with knot 
 and picture . midmost thereof be a fountain of gold , whence the water 
 run two way in gold - line runnel , span twice with little bridge of 
 silver . long be that hall , and now not very light , so that Walter be 
 come past the fountain before he see any folk therein : then he look up 
 toward the high - seat , and himseeme that a great light shone thence , and 
 dazzle his eye ; and he go on a little way , and then fall on his 
 knee ; for there before he on the high - seat sit that wondrous Lady , 
 whose lively image have be show to he thrice before ; and she be clothe 
 in gold and jewel , as he have erst see she . but now she be not alone ; 
 for by her side sit a young man , goodly enough , so far as Walter might 
 see he , and most richly clothe , with a jewel sword by his side , and a 
 chaplet of gem on his head . they hold each other by the hand , and 
 seem to be in dear converse together ; but they spake softly , so that 
 Walter might not hear what they say , till at last the man spake aloud to 
 the Lady : " seest thou not that there be a man in the hall ? " 

 " Yea , " she say , " I see he yonder , kneel on his knee ; let he come 
 nigh and give some account of himself . " 

 so Walter stand up and draw nigh , and stand there , all shamefaced and 
 confused , look on those twain , and wonder at the beauty of the 
 Lady . as for the man , who be slim , and black - haired , and 
 straight - feature , for all his goodliness Walter account he little , 
 and nowise deem he to look chieftain - like . 

 now the Lady spake not to Walter any more than erst ; but at last the man 
 say : " why do thou not kneel as thou didst erewhile ? " 

 Walter be on the point of give he back a fierce answer ; but the Lady 
 spake and say : " Nay , friend , it matter not whether he kneel or stand ; 
 but he may say , if he will , what he would have of I , and wherefore he be 
 come hither . " 

 then spake Walter , for as wroth and ashamed as he be : " Lady , I have 
 stray into this land , and have come to thine house as I suppose , and if 
 I be not welcome , I may well depart straightway , and seek a way out of 
 thy land , if thou wouldst drive I thence , as well as out of thine 
 house . " 

 thereat the Lady turn and look on he , and when her eye meet his , he 
 feel a pang of fear and desire mingle shoot through his heart . this 
 time she speak to he ; but coldly , without either wrath or any thought of 
 he : " Newcomer , " she say , " I have not bid thee hither ; but here mayst 
 thou abide a while if thou wilt ; nevertheless , take heed that here be no 
 King 's Court . there be , forsooth , a folk that serveth I   or , it may be , 
 more than one , of whom thou wert well to know nought . of other I have 
 but two servant , whom thou wilt see ; and the one be a strange creature , 
 who should scare thee or scathe thee with a good will , but of a good will 
 shall serve nought save I ; the other be a woman , a thrall , of little 
 avail , save that , be compel , she will work woman 's service for I , 
 but whom none else shall compel . . . yea , but what be all this to thee ; 
 or to I that I should tell it to thee ? I will not drive thee away ; but 
 if thine entertainment please thee not , make no plaint thereof to I , but 
 depart at thy will . now be this talk betwixt we overlong , since , as thou 
 seest , I and this King 's Son be in converse together . art thou a King 's 
 Son ? " 

 " Nay , Lady , " say Walter , " I be but of the son of the merchant . " 

 " it matter not , " she say ; " go thy way into one of the chamber . " 

 and straightway she fall a - talk to the man who sit beside she 
 concern the singing of the bird beneath her window in the morning ; 
 and of how she have bath she that day in a pool of the woodland , when 
 she have be heat with hunting , and so forth ; and all as if there have 
 be none there save she and the King 's Son . 

 but Walter depart all ashame , as though he have be a poor man thrust 
 away from a rich kinsman 's door ; and he say to himself that this woman 
 be hateful , and nought love - worthy , and that she be little like to 
 tempt he , despite all the fairness of her body . 

 no one else he see in the house that even ; he find meat and drink duly 
 serve on a fair table , and thereafter he come on a goodly bed , and all 
 thing needful , but no child of Adam to do he service , or bid he 
 welcome or warning . nevertheless he eat , and drank , and sleep , and put 
 off thought of all these thing till the morrow , all the more as he hop 
 to see the kind maiden some time betwixt sunrise and sunset on that new 
 day . 




 CHAPTER XII : the wearing of four day in the wood beyond the world 


 he arise betime , but find no one to greet he , neither be there any 
 sound of folk move within the fair house ; so he but break his fast , and 
 then go forth and wander amongst the tree , till he find he a 
 stream to bathe in , and after he have wash the night off he he lie down 
 under a tree thereby for a while , but soon turn back toward the house , 
 lest perchance the Maid should come thither and he should miss she . 

 it should be say that half a bow - shot from the house on that side   i.e. 
 due north thereof   be a little hazel - brake , and round about it the tree 
 be small of kind than the oak and chestnut he have pass through 
 before , be mostly of birch and quicken - beam and young ash , with small 
 wood betwixt they ; so now he pass through the thicket , and , come to 
 the edge thereof , beheld the Lady and the King 's Son walk together 
 hand in hand , full lovingly by seem . 

 he deem it unmeet to draw back and hide he , so he go forth past they 
 toward the house . the King 's Son scowl on he as he pass , but the 
 Lady , over whose beauteous face flicker the joyous morning smile , take 
 no more heed of he than if he have be one of the tree of the wood . but 
 she have be so high and disdainful with he the evening before , that he 
 think little of that . the twain go on , skirt the hazel - copse , and 
 he could not choose but turn his eye on they , so sorely do the Lady 's 
 beauty draw they . then befell another thing ; for behind they the bough 
 of the hazel part , and there stand that little evil thing , he or 
 another of his kind ; for he be quite unclad , save by his fell of yellowy- 
 brown hair , and that he be girt with a leathern girdle , wherein be 
 stick an ugly two - edge knife : he stand upright a moment , and cast his 
 eye at Walter and grin , but not as if he know he ; and scarce could 
 Walter say whether it be the one he have see , or another : then he cast 
 himself down on his belly , and fall to creep through the long grass 
 like a serpent , follow the footstep of the Lady and her lover ; and 
 now , as he creep , Walter deem , in his loathing , that the creature be 
 liker to a ferret than aught else . he creep on marvellous swiftly , and 
 be soon clean out of sight . but Walter stand star after he for a 
 while , and then lie down by the copse - side , that he might watch the house 
 and the entry thereof ; for he think , now perchance presently will the 
 kind maiden come hither to comfort I with a word or two . but hour 
 pass by hour , and still she come not ; and still he lie there , and 
 thought of the Maid , and long for her kindness and wisdom , till he 
 could not refrain his tear , and weep for the lack of she . then he 
 arise , and go and sit in the porch , and be very downcast of mood . 

 but as he sit there , back come the Lady again , the King 's Son lead 
 she by the hand ; they enter the porch , and she pass by he so close 
 that the odour of her raiment fill all the air about he , and the 
 sleekness of her side nigh touch he , so that he could not fail to note 
 that her garment be somewhat disarrayed , and that she keep she right 
 hand   for she leave the King 's Son hold   to her bosom to hold the cloth 
 together there , whereas the rich raiment have be tear off from her right 
 shoulder . as they pass by he , the King 's Son once more scowl on 
 he , wordless , but even more fiercely than before ; and again the Lady 
 heed he nought . 

 after they have go on a while , he enter the hall , and find it empty 
 from end to end , and no sound in it save the tinkling of the fountain ; 
 but there be victual set on the board . he eat and drink thereof to keep 
 life lusty within he , and then go out again to the wood - side to watch 
 and to long ; and the time hang heavy on his hand because of the lack of 
 the fair Maiden . 

 he be of mind not to go into the house to his rest that night , but to 
 sleep under the bough of the forest . but a little after sunset he see a 
 bright - clothe image move amidst the carven image of the porch , and the 
 King 's Son come forth and go straight to he , and say : " thou art to 
 enter the house , and go into thy chamber forthwith , and by no means to go 
 forth of it betwixt sunset and sunrise . my Lady will not away with thy 
 prowling round the house in the night - tide . " 

 Therewith he turn away , and go into the house again ; and Walter 
 follow he soberly , remember how the Maid have bid he forbear . so 
 he go to his chamber , and sleep . 

 but amidst of the night he awake and deem that he hear a voice not far 
 off , so he creep out of his bed and peer around , lest , perchance , the 
 Maid have come to speak with he ; but his chamber be dusk and empty : then 
 he go to the window and look out , and see the moon shin bright and 
 white upon the greensward . and lo ! the Lady walk with the King 's Son , 
 and he clothe in thin and wanton raiment , but she in nought else save what 
 God have give she of long , crispy yellow hair . then be Walter ashame 
 to look on she , see that there be a man with she , and gat he back to 
 his bed ; but yet a long while ere he sleep again he have the image before 
 his eye of the fair woman on the dewy moonlit grass . 

 the next day matter go much the same way , and the next also , save that 
 his sorrow be increase , and he sicken sorely of hope defer . on 
 the fourth day also the forenoon wear as erst ; but in the heat of the 
 afternoon Walter seek to the hazel - copse , and lay he down there hard 
 by a little clearing thereof , and sleep from very weariness of grief . 
 there , after a while , he wake with word still hang in his ear , and 
 he know at once that it be they twain talk together . 

 the King 's Son have just do his say , and now it be the Lady beginning 
 in her honey - sweet voice , low but strong , wherein even be a little of 
 huskiness ; she say : " Otto , belike it be well to have a little 
 patience , till we find out what the man be , and whence he cometh ; it will 
 always be easy to rid we of he ; it be but a word to our dwarf - king , and 
 it will be do in a few minute . " 

 " Patience ! " say the King 's Son , angrily ; " I wot not how to have patience 
 with he ; for I can see of he that he be rude and violent and 
 headstrong , and a low - bear wily one . Forsooth , he have patience enough 
 with I the other even , when I rat he in , like the dog that he be , and 
 he have no manhood to say one word to I . soothly , as he follow after 
 I , I have a mind to turn about and deal he a buffet on the face , to see 
 if I could but draw one angry word from he . " 

 the Lady laugh , and say : " well , Otto , I know not ; that which thou 
 deemest dastardy in he may be but prudence and wisdom , and he an alien , 
 far from his friend and nigh to his foe . perchance we shall yet try 
 he what he be . meanwhile , I rede thee try he not with buffet , save he 
 be weaponless and with bounden hand ; or else I deem that but a little 
 while shalt thou be fain of thy blow . " 

 now when Walter hear her word and the voice wherein they be say , he 
 might not forbear be stir by they , and to he , all lonely there , 
 they seem friendly . 

 but he lie still , and the King 's Son answer the Lady and say : " I know 
 not what be in thine heart concern this runagate , that thou shouldst 
 bemock I with his valiancy , whereof thou know nought . if thou deem 
 I unworthy of thee , send I back safe to my father 's country ; I may look 
 to have worship there ; yea , and the love of fair woman belike . " 

 Therewith it seem as if he have put forth his hand to the Lady to caress 
 she , for she say : " Nay , lie not thine hand on my shoulder , for to - day 
 and now it be not the hand of love , but of pride and folly , and would - be 
 mastery . Nay , neither shalt thou rise up and leave I until thy mood be 
 soft and kinder to I . " 

 then be there silence betwixt they a while , and thereafter the King 's 
 Son spake in a wheedle voice : " my goddess , I pray thee pardon I ! but 
 canst thou wonder that I fear thy wearying of I , and be therefore 
 peevish and jealous ? thou so far above the Queens of the World , and I a 
 poor youth that without thee be nothing ! " 

 she answer nought , and he go on again : " be it not so , o goddess , 
 that this man of the son of the merchant be little heedful of thee , 
 and thy loveliness and thy majesty ? " 

 she laugh and say : " maybe he deem not that he have much to gain of 
 we , see thee sit by our side , and whereas we spake to he coldly 
 and sternly and disdainfully . Withal , the poor youth be dazzle and 
 shameface before we ; that we could see in the eye and the mien of he . " 

 now this she speak so kindly and sweetly , that again be Walter all 
 stir thereat ; and it come into his mind that it might be she know he 
 be anigh and hear she , and that she spake as much for he as for the 
 King 's Son : but that one answer : " Lady , didst thou not see somewhat 
 else in his eye , to wit , that they have but of late look on some fair 
 woman other than thee ? as for I , I deem it not so unlike that on the 
 way to thine hall he may have fall in with thy Maid . " 

 he speak in a falter voice , as if shrink from some storm that might 
 come . and forsooth the Lady 's voice be change as she answer , though 
 there be no outward heat in it ; rather it be sharp and eager and cold 
 at once . she say : " Yea , that be not ill thought of ; but we may not 
 always keep our thrall in mind . if it be so as thou deem , we shall 
 come to know it most like when we next fall in with she ; or if she hath 
 be shy this time , then shall she pay the heavy for it ; for we will 
 question she by the Fountain in the Hall as to what betid by the Fountain 
 of the Rock . " 

 spake the King 's Son , falter yet more : " Lady , be it not well to 
 question the man himself ? the Maid be stout - hearted , and will not be 
 speedily quell into a true tale ; whereas the man I deem of no account . " 

 " no , no , " say the Lady sharply , " it shall not be . " 

 then be she silent a while ; and then she say : " how if the man should 
 prove to be our master ? " 

 " Nay , our Lady , " say the King 's Son , " thou art jest with I ; thou and 
 thy might and thy wisdom , and all that thy wisdom may command , to be over- 
 master by a gangrel churl ! " 

 " but how if I will not have it command , King 's Son ? " say the Lady . " I 
 tell thee I know thine heart , but thou know not mine . but be at 
 peace ! for since thou hast pray for this woman - nay , not with thy 
 word , I wot , but with thy trembling hand , and thine anxious eye , and 
 knit brow - I say , since thou hast pray for she so earnestly , she 
 shall escape this time . but whether it will be to her gain in the long 
 run , I misdoubt I . see thou to that , Otto ! thou who hast hold I in 
 thine arm so oft . and now thou may depart if thou wilt . " 

 it seem to Walter as if the King 's Son be dumbfoundere at her word : 
 he answer nought , and presently he rise from the ground , and go his 
 way slowly toward the house . the Lady lie there a little while , and 
 then go her way also ; but turn away from the house toward the wood 
 at the other end thereof , whereby Walter have first come thither . 

 as for Walter , he be confuse in mind and shake in spirit ; and withal 
 he seem to see guile and cruel deed under the talk of those two , and 
 wax wrathful thereat . yet he say to himself , that nought might he do , 
 but be as one bind hand and foot , till he have see the Maid again . 




 CHAPTER XIII : now be the hunt up 


 next morning be he up betime , but he be cast down and heavy of heart , 
 not look for aught else to betide than have betid those last four day . 
 but otherwise it fall out ; for when he come down into the hall , there be 
 the lady sit on the high - seat all alone , clothe but in a coat of white 
 linen ; and she turn her head when she hear his footstep , and look 
 on he , and greet he , and say : " come hither , guest . " 

 so he go and stand before she , and she say : " though as yet thou hast 
 have no welcome here , and no honour , it hath not enter into thine heart 
 to flee from we ; and to say sooth , that be well for thee , for flee away 
 from our hand thou mightest not , nor might thou depart without our 
 furtherance . but for this we can thee thank , that thou hast abide here 
 our bidding and eaten thine heart through the heavy wearing of four day , 
 and make no plaint . yet I can not deem thee a dastard ; thou so well knit 
 and shapely of body , so clear - eyed and bold of visage . wherefore now I 
 ask thee , art thou willing to do I service , thereby to earn thy 
 gueste ? " 

 Walter answer she , somewhat falter at first , for he be astonish 
 at the change which have come over she ; for now she speak to he in 
 friendly wise , though indeed as a great lady would speak to a young man 
 ready to serve she in all honour . say he : " Lady , I can thank thee 
 humbly and heartily in that thou bidd I do thee service ; for these 
 day past I have loathe the emptiness of the hour , and nought well 
 could I ask for than to serve so glorious a mistress in all honour . " 

 she frown somewhat , and say : " thou shalt not call I Mistress ; there 
 be but one who so calleth I , that be my thrall ; and thou art none such . 
 thou shalt call I Lady , and I shall be well pleased that thou be my 
 squire , and for this present thou shalt serve I in the hunting . so get 
 thy gear ; take thy bow and arrow , and gird thee to thy sword . for in 
 this fair land may one find beast more perilous than be buck or hart . I 
 go now to array I ; we will depart while the day be yet young ; for so 
 make we the summer day the fair . " 

 he make obeisance to she , and she arise and go to her chamber , and 
 Walter dight himself , and then abode she in the porch ; and in less than 
 an hour she come out of the hall , and Walter 's heart beat when he see 
 that the Maid follow she hard at heel , and scarce might he school his 
 eye not to gaze over - eagerly at his dear friend . she be clothe even as 
 she be before , and be change in no wise , save that love trouble she 
 face when she first behold he , and she have much ado to master it : 
 howbeit the mistress heed not the trouble of she , or make no semblance 
 of heed it , till the Maiden 's face be all accord to its wo not . 

 but this Walter find strange , that after all that disdain of the Maid 's 
 thralldom which he have hear of the Mistress , and after all the threat 
 against she , now be the Mistress become mild and debonaire to she , as a 
 good lady to her good maiden . when Walter bow the knee to she , she 
 turn unto the Maid , and say : " look thou , my Maid , at this fair new 
 squire that I have get ! will not he be valiant in the greenwood ? and 
 see whether he be well shapen or not . Doth he not touch thine heart , 
 when thou think of all the woe , and fear , and trouble of the World 
 beyond the Wood , which he hath escape , to dwell in this little land 
 peaceably , and well - beloved both by the Mistress and the Maid ? and thou , 
 my squire , look a little at this fair slim Maiden , and say if she 
 pleaseth thee not : didst thou deem that we have any thing so fair in this 
 lonely place ? " 

 Frank and kind be the smile on her radiant visage , nor do she seem to 
 note any whit the trouble on Walter 's face , nor how he strove to keep his 
 eye from the Maid . as for she , she have so wholly master her 
 countenance , that belike she use her face guilefully , for she stand as 
 one humble but happy , with a smile on her face , blushing , and with she 
 head hang down as if shameface before a goodly young man , a stranger . 

 but the Lady look upon she kindly and say : " come hither , child , and 
 fear not this frank and free young man , who belike feareth thee a little , 
 and full certainly feareth I ; and yet only after the manner of man . " 

 and therewith she take the Maid by the hand and draw she to she , and 
 press she to her bosom , and kiss her cheek and her lip , and undo 
 the lacing of her gown and bar a shoulder of she , and sweep away her 
 skirt from her foot ; and then turn to Walter and say : " lo thou , 
 Squire ! be not this a lovely thing to have grow up amongst our rough oak- 
 bole ? what ! art thou look at the iron ring there ? it be nought , 
 save a token that she be mine , and that I may not be without she . " 

 then she take the Maid by the shoulder and turn she about as in sport , 
 and say : " go thou now , and bring hither the good grey one ; for need 
 must we bring home some venison to - day , whereas this stout warrior may 
 not feed on nought save manchet and honey . " 

 so the Maid go her way , take care , as Walter deem , to give no side 
 glance to he . but he stand there shameface , so confused with all this 
 openhearte kindness of the great Lady and with the fresh sight of the 
 darling beauty of the Maid , that he go nigh to think that all he have 
 hear since he have come to the porch of the house that first time be but 
 a dream of evil . 

 but while he stand ponder these matter , and star before he as one 
 mazed , the Lady laugh out in his face , and touch he on the arm and 
 say : " ah , our squire , be it so that now thou hast see my Maid thou 
 wouldst with a good will abide behind to talk with she ? but call to mind 
 thy word pledge to I e'en now ! and moreover I tell thee this for thy 
 behoof now she be out of ear - shot , that I will above all thing take thee 
 away to - day : for there be other eye , and they nought uncomely , that look 
 at while on my fair - ankled thrall ; and who know but the sword might be 
 out if I take not the well heed , and give thee not every whit of thy 
 will . " 

 as she speak and move forward , he turn a little , so that now the edge 
 of that hazel - coppice be within his eye - shot , and he deem that once 
 more he see the yellow - brown evil thing crawl forth from the thicket ; 
 then , turn suddenly on the Lady , he meet her eye , and seem in one 
 moment of time to find a far other look in they than that of frankness 
 and kindness ; though in a flash they change back again , and she say 
 merrily and sweetly : " so , so , Sir Squire , now art thou awake again , and 
 mayest for a little while look on I . " 

 now it come into his head , with that look of her , all that might befall 
 he and the Maid if he master not his passion , nor do what he might to 
 dissemble ; so he bend the knee to she , and speak boldly to she in her own 
 vein , and say : " Nay , most gracious of lady , never would I abide behind 
 to - day since thou far afield . but if my speech be hamper , or mine 
 eye stray , be it not because my mind be confuse by thy beauty , and the 
 honey of kind word which floweth from thy mouth ? " 

 she laugh outright at his word , but not disdainfully , and say : " this 
 be well speak , Squire , and even what a squire should say to his liege 
 lady , when the sun be up on a fair morning , and she and he and all the 
 world be glad . " 

 she stand quite near he as she speak , her hand be on his shoulder , and 
 her eye shine and sparkle . sooth to say , that excuse of his 
 confusion be like enough in seem to the truth ; for sure never 
 creature be fashion fair than she : clothe she be for the greenwood as 
 the hunting - goddess of the Gentiles , with her green gown gather unto 
 her girdle , and sandal on her foot ; a bow in her hand and a quiver at 
 she back : she be tall and big of fashion than the dear Maiden , 
 whiter of flesh , and more glorious , and bright of hair ; as a flower of 
 flower for fairness and fragrance . 

 she say : " thou art verily a fair squire before the hunt be up , and if 
 thou be as good in the hunting , all will be well than well , and the 
 guest will be welcome . but lo ! here cometh our Maid with the good grey 
 one . go meet she , and we will tarry no long than for thy take the 
 leash in hand . " 

 so Walter look , and see the Maid come with two couple of great hound 
 in the leash straining against she as she come along . he run lightly to 
 meet she , wonder if he should have a look , or a half - whisper from she ; 
 but she let he take the white thong from her hand , with the same half- 
 smile of shamefacedness still set on her face , and , go past he , come 
 softly up to the Lady , sway like a willow - branch in the wind , and 
 stand before she , with her arm hang down by her side . then the Lady 
 turn to she , and say : " look to thyself , our Maid , while we be away . 
 this fair young man thou needest not to fear indeed , for he be good and 
 leal ; but what thou shalt do with the King 's Son I wot not . he be a hot 
 lover forsooth , but a hard man ; and while evil be his mood , and perilous 
 both to thee and I . and if thou do his will , it shall be ill for thee ; 
 and if thou do it not , take heed of he , and let I , and I only , come 
 between his wrath and thee . I may do somewhat for thee . even yesterday 
 he be instant with I to have thee chastise after the manner of 
 thrall ; but I bid he keep silence of such word , and jeer he and 
 mock he , till he go away from I peevish and in anger . so look to 
 it that thou fall not into any trap of his contrivance . " 

 then the Maid cast herself at the Mistress 's foot , and kiss and 
 embrace they ; and as she rise up , the Lady lay her hand lightly on her 
 head , and then , turn to Walter , cry out : " now , Squire , let we leave 
 all these trouble and wile and desire behind we , and flit through the 
 merry greenwood like the gentile of old day . " 

 and therewith she draw up the lap of her gown till the whiteness of her 
 knee be see , and set off swiftly toward the wood that lie south of the 
 house , and Walter follow , marvel at her goodliness ; nor durst he 
 cast a look backward to the Maiden , for he know that she desire he , and 
 it be she only that he look to for his deliverance from this house of 
 guile and lie . 




 CHAPTER XIV : the hunting of the HART 


 as they go , they find a change in the land , which grow emptier of big 
 and wide - spread tree , and more beset with thicket . from one of 
 these they rouse a hart , and Walter let slip his hound thereafter and 
 he and the Lady follow run . exceed swift be she , and 
 well - breathe withal , so that Walter wonder at she ; and eager she be 
 in the chase as the very hound , heed nothing the scratching of briar 
 or the whipping of stiff twig as she speed on . but for all their eager 
 hunting , the quarry outrun both dog and folk , and gat he into a great 
 thicket , amidmost whereof be a wide plash of water . into the thicket 
 they follow he , but he take to the water under their eye and make 
 land on the other side ; and because of the tangle of underwood , he swam 
 across much fast than they might have any hope to come round on he ; 
 and so be the hunter leave undo for that time . 

 so the Lady cast herself down on the green grass anigh the water , while 
 Walter blow the hound in and couple they up ; then he turn round to 
 she , and lo ! she be weep for despite that they have lose the quarry ; 
 and again do Walter wonder that so little a matter should raise a 
 passion of tear in she . he durst not ask what ail she , or proffer she 
 solace , but be not ill apaid by behold her loveliness as she lay . 

 presently she raise up her head and turn to Walter , and spake to he 
 angrily and say : " squire , why dost thou stand star at I like a 
 fool ? " 

 " Yea , Lady , " he say ; " but the sight of thee maketh I foolish to do 
 aught else but to look on thee . " 

 she say , in a peevish voice : " Tush , Squire , the day be too far spend for 
 soft and courtly speech ; what be good there be nought so good here . 
 Withal , I know more of thine heart than thou deem . " 

 Walter hang down his head and redden , and she look on he , and she 
 face change , and she smile and say , kindly this time : " look ye , 
 Squire , I be hot and weary , and ill - content ; but presently it will be 
 well with I ; for my knee have be tell my shoulder that the cold 
 water of this little lake will be sweet and pleasant this summer noonday , 
 and that I shall forget my foil when I have take my pleasure therein . 
 wherefore , go thou with thine hound without the thicket and there abide 
 my coming . and I bid thee look not aback as thou goest , for therein be 
 peril to thee : I shall not keep thee tarrying long alone . " 

 he bow his head to she , and turn and go his way . and now , when he 
 be a little space away from she , he deem she indeed a marvel of woman , 
 and wellnigh forgat all his doubt and fear concern she , whether she 
 be a fair image fashion out of lie and guile , or it might be but an 
 evil thing in the shape of a goodly woman . Forsooth , when he see she 
 caress the dear and friendly Maid , his heart all turn against she , 
 despite what his eye and his ear tell his mind , and she seem like as 
 it be a serpent enfold the simplicity of the body which he love . 

 but now it be all change , and he lie on the grass and long for she 
 coming ; which be delay for somewhat more than an hour . then she come 
 back to he , smile and fresh and cheerful , her green gown let down to 
 her heel . 

 he spring up to meet she , and she come close to he , and spake from a 
 laugh face : " squire , hast thou no meat in thy wallet ? for , meseemeth , 
 I feed thee when thou wert hungry the other day ; do thou now the same by 
 I . " 

 he smile , and loute to she , and take his wallet and bring out thence 
 bread and flesh and wine , and spread they all out before she on the green 
 grass , and then stand by humbly before she . but she say : " Nay , my 
 Squire , sit down by I and eat with I , for to - day be we both hunter 
 together . " 

 so he sit down by her trembling , but neither for awe of her greatness , 
 nor for fear and horror of her guile and sorcery . 

 a while they sit there together after they have do their meat , and the 
 Lady fall a - talk with Walter concern the part of the earth , and 
 the manner of man , and of his journeying to and fro . 

 at last she say : " Thou hast tell I much and answer all my question 
 wisely , and as my good squire should , and that pleaseth I . but now tell 
 I of the city wherein thou wert bear and breed ; a city whereof thou hast 
 hitherto tell I nought . " 

 " Lady , " he say , " it be a fair and a great city , and to many it seemeth 
 lovely . but I have leave it , and now it be nothing to I . " 

 " Hast thou not kindre there ? " say she . 

 " Yea , " say he , " and foemen withal ; and a false woman waylayeth my life 
 there . " 

 " and what be she ? " say the Lady . 

 say Walter : " she be but my wife . " 

 " be she fair ? " say the Lady . 

 Walter look on she a while , and then say : " I be go to say that she 
 be wellnigh as fair as thou ; but that may scarce be . yet be she very 
 fair . but now , kind and gracious Lady , I will say this word to thee : I 
 marvel that thou ask so many thing concern the city of Langton on 
 Holm , where I be bear , and where be my kindre yet ; for meseemeth that 
 thou know it thyself . " 

 " I know it , I ? " say the Lady . 

 " what , then ! thou know it not ? " say Walter . 

 spake the Lady , and some of her old disdain be in her word : " dost thou 
 deem that I wander about the world and its cheape - stead like one of 
 the chap - man ? Nay , I dwell in the wood beyond the World , and nowhere 
 else . what hath put this word into thy mouth ? " 

 he say : " pardon I , Lady , if I have misdone ; but thus it be : mine own 
 eye behold thee go down the quay of our city , and thence a 
 ship - board , and the ship sail out of the haven . and first of all go 
 a strange dwarf , whom I have see here , and then thy Maid ; and then go 
 thy gracious and lovely body . " 

 the Lady 's face change as he speak , and she turn red and then pale , 
 and set her tooth ; but she refrain she , and say : " squire , I see of 
 thee that thou art no liar , nor light of wit , therefore I suppose that 
 thou hast verily see some appearance of I ; but never have I be in 
 Langton , nor think thereof , nor know that such a stead there be until 
 thou namedst it e'en now . wherefore , I deem that an enemy hath cast the 
 shadow of I on the air of that land . " 

 " Yea , my Lady , " say Walter ; " and what enemy might thou have to have 
 do this ? " 

 she be slow of answer , but spake at last from a quivering mouth of 
 anger : " know thou not the saw , that a man 's foe be they of his own 
 house ? if I find out for a truth who hath do this , the say enemy 
 shall have an evil hour with I . " 

 again she be silent , and she clench her hand and strain her limb 
 in the heat of her anger ; so that Walter be afraid of she , and all his 
 misgiving come back to his heart again , and he repent that he have tell 
 she so much . but in a little while all that trouble and wrath seem to 
 flow off she , and again be she of good cheer , and kind and sweet to he 
 and she say : " but in sooth , however it may be , I thank thee , my squire 
 and friend , for tell I hereof . and surely no wyte do I lay on thee . 
 and , moreover , be it not this vision which hath bring thee hither ? " 

 " so it be , Lady , " say he . 

 " then have we to thank it , " say the Lady , " and thou art welcome to our 
 land . " 

 and therewith she hold out her hand to he , and he take it on his knee 
 and kiss it : and then it be as if a red - hot iron have run through his 
 heart , and he feel faint , and bow down his head . but he hold her hand 
 yet , and kiss it many time , and the wrist and the arm , and know not 
 where he be . 

 but she draw a little away from he , and arise and say : " now be the day 
 wear , and if we be to bear back any venison we must buckle to the 
 work . so arise , Squire , and take the hound and come with I ; for not 
 far off be a little thicket which mostly harbour foison of deer , great 
 and small . let we come our way . " 




 CHAPTER XV : the slaying of the QUARRY 


 so they walk on quietly thence some half a mile , and ever the Lady 
 would have Walter to walk by her side , and not follow a little behind 
 she , as be meet for a servant to do ; and she touch his hand at while 
 as she show he beast and fowl and tree , and the sweetness of her body 
 overcome he , so that for a while he think of nothing save she . 

 now when they be come to the thicket - side , she turn to he and say : 
 " squire , I be no ill woodman , so that thou mayst trust I that we shall 
 not be bring to shame the second time ; and I shall do sagely ; so nock 
 an arrow to thy bow , and abide I here , and stir not hence ; for I shall 
 enter this thicket without the hound , and arouse the quarry for thee ; 
 and see that thou be brisk and clean - shooting , and then shalt thou have a 
 reward of I . " 

 Therewith she draw up her skirt through her girdle again , take her bent 
 bow in her hand , and draw an arrow out of the quiver , and step lightly 
 into the thicket , leave he longing for the sight of she , as he 
 hearken to the tread of her foot on the dry leaf , and the rustling of 
 the brake as she thrust through it . 

 thus he stand for a few minute , and then he hear a kind of gibber 
 cry without word , yet as of a woman , come from the thicket , and while 
 his heart be yet gather the thought that something have go amiss , he 
 glide swiftly , but with little stir , into the brake . 

 he have go but a little way ere he see the Lady stand there in a 
 narrow clearing , her face pale as death , her knee cleave together , her 
 body swaying and tottering , her hand hang down , and the bow and arrow 
 fall to the ground ; and ten yard before she a great - head yellow 
 creature crouch flat to the earth and slowly draw nigh . 

 he stop short ; one arrow be already notch to the string , and 
 another hang loose to the less finger of his string - hand . he raise 
 his right hand , and draw and loose in a twinkling ; the shaft fly close 
 to the Lady 's side , and straightway all the wood rung with a huge roar , 
 as the yellow lion turn about to bite at the shaft which have sink deep 
 into he behind the shoulder , as if a bolt out of the heaven have smite 
 he . but straightway have Walter loose again , and then , throw down 
 his bow , he run forward with his draw sword gleam in his hand , while 
 the lion welter and roll , but have no might to move forward . then 
 Walter go up to he warily and thrust he through to the heart , and 
 leapt aback , lest the beast might yet have life in he to smite ; but he 
 leave his struggling , his huge voice die out , and he lie there moveless 
 before the hunter . 

 Walter abode a little , face he , and then turn about to the Lady , and 
 she have fall down in a heap whereas she stand , and lie there all 
 huddle up and voiceless . so he kneel down by she , and lift up her 
 head , and bade her arise , for the foe be slay . and after a little she 
 stretch out her limb , and turn about on the grass , and seem to 
 sleep , and the colour come into her face again , and it grow soft and a 
 little smiling . thus she lie awhile , and Walter sit by she watch she , 
 till at last she open her eye and sit up , and know he , and smile on 
 he say : " what hath befall , Squire , that I have sleep and dream ? " 

 he answer nothing , till her memory come back to she , and then she 
 arise , tremble and pale , and say : " let we leave this wood , for the 
 Enemy be therein . " 

 and she hasten away before he till they come out at the thicket - side 
 whereas the hound have be leave , and they be stand there uneasy and 
 whining ; so Walter couple they , while the Lady stay not , but go away 
 swiftly homeward , and Walter follow . 

 at last she stay her swift foot , and turn round on Walter , and say : 
 " squire , come hither . " 

 so do he , and she say : " I be weary again ; let we sit under this quicken- 
 tree , and rest we . " 

 so they sit down , and she sit look between her knee a while ; and at 
 last she say : " why didst thou not bring the lion 's hide ? " 

 he say : " Lady , I will go back and flay the beast , and bring on the 
 hide . " 

 and he arise therewith , but she catch he by the skirt and draw he 
 down , and say : " Nay , thou shalt not go ; abide with I . sit down again . " 

 he do so , and she say : " thou shalt not go from I ; for I be afraid : I 
 be not use to look on the face of death . " 

 she grow pale as she speak , and set a hand to her breast , and sit so a 
 while without speak . at last she turn to he smile , and say : 
 " how be it with the aspect of I when I stand before the peril of the 
 Enemy ? " and she lay a hand upon his . 

 " o gracious one , " quoth he , " thou wert , as ever , full lovely , but I 
 fear for thee . " 

 she move not her hand from his , and she say : " good and true squire , I 
 say ere I enter the thicket e'en now that I would reward thee if thou 
 slewest the quarry . he be dead , though thou hast leave the skin behind 
 upon the carcase . ask now thy reward , but take time to think what it 
 shall be . " 

 he feel her hand warm upon his , and draw in the sweet odour of she 
 mingle with the woodland scent under the hot sun of the afternoon , and 
 his heart be cloud with manlike desire of she . and it be a near 
 thing but he have speak , and crave of she the reward of the freedom of 
 her Maid , and that he might depart with she into other land ; but as his 
 mind waver betwixt this and that , the Lady , who have be eye he 
 keenly , draw her hand away from he ; and therewith doubt and fear flow 
 into his mind , and he refrain he of speech . 

 then she laugh merrily and say : " the good squire be shameface ; he 
 feareth a lady more than a lion . will it be a reward to thee if I bid 
 thee to kiss my cheek ? " 

 Therewith she lean her face toward he , and he kiss she 
 well - favouredly , and then sit gaze on she , wonder what should betide 
 to he on the morrow . 

 then she arise and say : " come , Squire , and let we home ; be not abash , 
 there shall be other reward hereafter . " 

 so they go their way quietly ; and it be nigh sunset against they 
 enter the house again . Walter look round for the Maid , but beheld 
 she not ; and the Lady say to he : " I go to my chamber , and now be thy 
 service over for this day . " 

 then she nod to he friendly and go her way . 




 CHAPTER XVI : of the king 's son and the maid 


 but as for Walter , he go out of the house again , and fare slowly over 
 the woodlawn till he come to another close thicket or brake ; he enter 
 from mere wantonness , or that he might be the more apart and hide , so 
 as to think over his case . there he lie down under the thick bough , but 
 could not so herd his thought that they would dwell steady in look 
 into what might come to he within the next day ; rather vision of those 
 two woman and the monster do but float before he , and fear and desire 
 and the hope of life run to and fro in his mind . 

 as he lie thus he hear footstep draw near , and he look between the 
 bough , and though the sun have just set , he could see close by he a man 
 and a woman go slowly , and they hand in hand ; at first he deem it 
 would be the King 's Son and the Lady , but presently he see that it be 
 the King 's Son indeed , but that it be the Maid whom he be hold by 
 the hand . and now he see of he that his eye be bright with desire , 
 and of she that she be very pale . yet when he hear she begin to speak , 
 it be in a steady voice that she say : " King 's Son , thou hast threaten 
 I oft and unkindly , and now thou threaten I again , and no less 
 unkindly . but whatever be thy need herein before , now be there no more 
 need ; for my Mistress , of whom thou wert weary , be now grow weary of 
 thee , and belike will not now reward I for draw thy love to I , as 
 once she would have do ; to wit , before the coming of this stranger . 
 therefore I say , since I be but a thrall , poor and helpless , betwixt you 
 two mighty one , I have no choice but to do thy will . " 

 as she speak she look all round about she , as one distraught by the 
 anguish of fear . Walter , amidst of his wrath and grief , have wellnigh 
 draw his sword and rush out of his lair upon the King 's Son . but he 
 deem it sure that , so do , he should undo the Maid altogether , and 
 himself also belike , so he refrain he , though it be a hard matter . 

 the Maid have stay her foot now close to where Walter lie , some five 
 yard from he only , and he doubt whether she see he not from where 
 she stand . as to the King 's Son , he be so intent upon the Maid , and so 
 greedy of her beauty , that it be not like that he see anything . 

 now moreover Walter look , and deem that he behold something through 
 the grass and bracken on the other side of those two , an ugly brown and 
 yellow body , which , if it be not some beast of the foumart kind , must 
 need be the monstrous dwarf , or one of his kin ; and the flesh creep upon 
 Walter 's bone with the horror of he . but the King 's Son speak unto the 
 Maid : " sweetle , I shall take the gift thou giv I , neither shall I 
 threaten thee any more , howbeit thou givest it not very gladly or 
 graciously . " 

 she smile on he with her lip alone , for her eye be wander and 
 haggard . " my lord , " she say , " be not this the manner of woman ? " 

 " well , " he say , " I say that I will take thy love even so give . yet let 
 I hear again that thou lov not that vile newcomer , and that thou hast 
 not see he , save this morning along with my Lady . Nay now , thou shalt 
 swear it . " 

 " what shall I swear by ? " she say . 

 Quoth he , " thou shalt swear by my body ; " and therewith he thrust himself 
 close up against she ; but she draw her hand from his , and lay it on his 
 breast , and say : " I swear it by thy body . " 

 he smile on she licorously , and take she by the shoulder , and kiss 
 her face many time , and then stand aloof from she , and say : " now have I 
 have hansel : but tell I , when shall I come to thee ? " 

 she speak out clearly : " within three day at furth ; I will do thee to 
 wit of the day and the hour to - morrow , or the day after . " 

 he kiss she once more , and say : " forget it not , or the threat hold 
 good . " 

 and therewith he turn about and go his way toward the house ; and 
 Walter see the yellow - brown thing creep after he in the gathering 
 dusk . 

 as for the Maid , she stand for a while without move , and look after 
 the King 's Son and the creature that follow he . then she turn about 
 to where Walter lie and lightly put aside the bough , and Walter leapt 
 up , and they stand face to face . she say softly but eagerly : " friend , 
 touch I not yet ! " 

 he spake not , but look on she sternly . she say : " thou art angry with 
 I ? " 

 still he spake not ; but she say : " Friend , this at least I will pray 
 thee ; not to play with life and death ; with happiness and misery . dost 
 thou not remember the oath which we swear each to each but a little while 
 ago ? and dost thou deem that I have change in these few day ? be thy 
 mind concern thee and I the same as it be ? if it be not so , now 
 tell I . for now have I the mind to do as if neither thou nor I be 
 change to each other , whoever may have kiss mine unwilling lip , or 
 whomsoever thy lip may have kiss . but if thou hast change , and wilt 
 no long give I thy love , nor crave mine , then shall this steel "   and 
 she draw a sharp knife from her girdle   " be for the fool and the dastard 
 who hath make thee wroth with I , my friend , and my friend that I deem 
 I have win . and then let come what will come ! but if thou be nought 
 change , and the oath yet hold , then , when a little while hath pass , 
 may we thrust all evil and guile and grief behind we , and long joy shall 
 lie before we , and long life , and all honour in death : if only thou wilt 
 do as I bid thee , o my dear , and my friend , and my first friend ! " 

 he look on she , and his breast heave up as all the sweetness of she 
 kind love take hold on he , and his face change , and the tear fill 
 his eye and run over , and rain down before she , and he stretch out 
 his hand toward she . 

 then she say exceed sweetly : " now indeed I see that it be well with 
 I , yea , and with thee also . a sore pain it be to I , that not even now 
 may I take thine hand , and cast mine arm about thee , and kiss the lip 
 that love I . but so it have to be . my dear , even so I be fain to 
 stand here long before thee , even if we spake no more word to each other ; 
 but abide here be perilous ; for there be ever an evil spy upon my 
 doing , who have now as I deem follow the King 's Son to the house , but 
 who will return when he have track he home thither : so we must sunder . 
 but belike there be yet time for a word or two : first , the rede which I 
 have think on for our deliverance be now afoot , though I durst not tell 
 thee thereof , nor have time thereto . but this much shall I tell thee , 
 that whereas great be the craft of my Mistress in wizardry , yet I also 
 have some little craft therein , and this , which she hath not , to change 
 the aspect of folk so utterly that they seem other than they verily be ; 
 yea , so that one may have the aspect of another . now the next thing be 
 this : whatsoever my Mistress may bid thee , do she will therein with no 
 more nay - say than thou deem may please she . and the next thing : 
 wheresoever thou mayst meet I , speak not to I , make no sign to I , even 
 when I seem to be all alone , till I stoop down and touch the ring on my 
 ankle with my right hand ; but if I do so , then stay thee , without fail , 
 till I speak . the last thing I will say to thee , dear friend , ere we 
 both go our way , this it be . when we be free , and thou know all 
 that I have do , I pray thee deem I not evil and wicked , and be not 
 wroth with I for my deed ; whereas thou wottest well that I be not in 
 like plight with other woman . I have hear tell that when the knight 
 goeth to the war , and hath overcome his foe by the shearing of sword 
 and guileful trick , and hath come back home to his own folk , they praise 
 he and bless he , and crown he with flower , and boast of he before 
 God in the minster for his deliverance of friend and folk and city . why 
 shouldst thou be bad to I than this ? now be all say , my dear and my 
 friend ; farewell , farewell ! " 

 Therewith she turn and go her way toward the house in all speed , but 
 make somewhat of a compass . and when she be go , Walter kneel down 
 and kiss the place where her foot have be , and arise thereafter , and 
 make his way toward the house , he also , but slowly , and stay oft on 
 his way . 




 CHAPTER XVII : of the HOUSE and the pleasance in the wood 


 on the morrow morning Walter loiter a while about the house till the 
 morn be grow old , and then about noon he take his bow and arrow and 
 go into the wood to the northward , to get he some venison . he go 
 somewhat far ere he shoot he a fawn , and then he sit he down to rest 
 under the shade of a great chestnut - tree , for it be not far past the 
 hottest of the day . he look around thence and see below he a little 
 dale with a pleasant stream run through it , and he bethink he of 
 bath therein , so he go down and have his pleasure of the water and 
 the willowy bank ; for he lie naked a while on the grass by the lip of 
 the water , for joy of the flickering shade , and the little breeze that 
 run over the down - long ripple of the stream . 

 then he do on his raiment , and begin to come his way up the bent , but 
 have scarce go three step ere he see a woman come towards he from 
 downstream . his heart come into his mouth when he see she , for she 
 stoop and reach down her arm , as if she would lay her hand on her 
 ankle , so that at first he deem it have be the Maid , but at the second 
 eye - shot he see that it be the Mistress . she stand still and look on 
 he , so that he deem she would have he come to she . so he go to 
 meet she , and grow somewhat shamefaced as he draw nigh , and wonder at 
 she , for now be she clothe but in one garment of some dark grey silky 
 stuff , embroider with , as it be , a garland of flower about the 
 middle , but which be so thin that , as the wind drift it from side and 
 limb , it hide she no more , but for the said garland , than if water be 
 run over she : her face be full of smile joy and content as she 
 spake to he in a kind , caress voice , and say : " I give thee good day , 
 good squire , and well art thou meet . " and she hold out her hand to he . 
 he kneel down before she and kiss it , and abode still upon his knee , 
 and hang down his head . 

 but she laugh outright , and stoop down to he , and put her hand to 
 his arm , and raise he up , and say to he : " what be this , my squire , 
 that thou kneelest to I as to an idol ? " 

 he say falter : " I wot not ; but perchance thou art an idol ; and I fear 
 thee . " 

 " what ! " she say , " more than yesterday , whenas thou saw I afraid ? " 

 say he : " yea , for that now I see thee unhidden , and meseemeth there hath 
 be none such since the old day of the Gentiles . " 

 she say : " hast thou not yet bethink thee of a gift to crave of I , a 
 reward for the slaying of mine enemy , and the saving of I from death ? " 

 " o my Lady , " he say , " even so much would I have do for any other lady , 
 or , forsooth , for any poor man ; for so my manhood would have bid I . 
 speak not of gift to I then . moreover "   and he redden therewith , and 
 his voice falter , " didst thou not give I my sweet reward yesterday ? 
 what more durst I ask ? " 

 she hold her peace awhile , and look on he keenly ; and he redden 
 under her gaze . then wrath come into her face , and she reddened and knit 
 her brow , and spake to he in a voice of anger , and say : " Nay , what be 
 this ? it be grow in my mind that thou deem the gift of I 
 unworthy ! Thou , an alien , an outcast ; one endow with the little wisdom 
 of the World without the Wood ! and here I stand before thee , all 
 glorious in my nakedness , and so fulfil of wisdom , that I can make 
 this wilderness to any whom I love more full of joy than the kingdom and 
 city of the world - and thou ! - ah , but it be the Enemy that hath do 
 this , and make the guileless guileful ! yet will I have the upper hand at 
 least , though thou suffer for it , and I suffer for thee . " 

 Walter stand before she with hang head , and he put forth his hand as 
 if pray off her anger , and ponder what answer he should make ; for 
 now he fear for himself and the Maid ; so at last he look up to she , 
 and say boldly : " Nay , Lady , I know what thy word mean , whereas I 
 remember thy first welcome of I . I wot , forsooth , that thou wouldst 
 call I base - bear , and of no account , and unworthy to touch the hem of 
 thy raiment ; and that I have be over - bold , and guilty towards thee ; and 
 doubtless this be sooth , and I have deserve thine anger : but I will not 
 ask thee to pardon I , for I have do but what I must need . " 

 she look on he calmly now , and without any wrath , but rather as if she 
 would read what be write in his inmost heart . then her face change 
 into joyousness again , and she smite her palm together , and cry out : 
 " this be but foolish talk ; for yesterday do I see thy valiancy , and to- 
 day I have see thy goodliness ; and I say , that though thou might not 
 be good enough for a fool woman of the earthly baronage , yet art thou 
 good enough for I , the wise and the mighty , and the lovely . and whereas 
 thou sayest that I give thee but disdain when first thou cam to we , 
 grudge not against I therefor , because it be do but to prove thee ; 
 and now thou art prove . " 

 then again he kneel down before she , and embrace her knee , and again 
 she raise he up , and let her arm hang down over his shoulder , and her 
 cheek brush his cheek ; and she kiss his mouth and say : " Hereby be all 
 forgive , both thine offence and mine ; and now cometh joy and merry 
 day . " 

 Therewith her smile face grow grave , and she stand before he look 
 stately and gracious and kind at once , and she take his hand and say : 
 " thou might deem my chamber in the Golden House of the Wood 
 over - queenly , since thou art no masterful man . so now hast thou choose 
 well the place wherein to meet I to - day , for hard by on the other side 
 of the stream be a bower of pleasance , which , forsooth , not every one who 
 cometh to this land may find ; there shall I be to thee as one of the up- 
 country damsel of thine own land , and thou shalt not be abash . " 

 she sidle up to he as she speak , and would he , would he not , her sweet 
 voice tickle his very soul with pleasure , and she look aside on he 
 happy and well - content . 

 so they cross the stream by the shallow below the pool wherein Walter 
 have bath , and within a little they come upon a tall fence of 
 flake - hurdle , and a simple gate therein . the Lady open the same , and 
 they enter thereby into a close all plant as a most fair garden , with 
 hedge of rose and woodbine , and with linden - tree a - blossom , and long 
 way of green grass betwixt border of lily and clove - gilliflower , and 
 other sweet garland - flower . and a branch of the stream which they have 
 cross erewhile wander through that garden ; and in the midst be a 
 little house build of post and pan , and thatch with yellow straw , as if 
 it be new do . 

 then Walter look this way and that , and wonder at first , and try to 
 think in his mind what should come next , and how matter would go with 
 he ; but his thought would not dwell steady on any other matter than the 
 beauty of the Lady amidst the beauty of the garden ; and withal she be 
 now grow so sweet and kind , and even somewhat timid and shy with he , 
 that scarce do he know whose hand he hold , or whose fragrant bosom and 
 sleek side go so close to he . 

 so they wander here and there through the waning of the day , and when 
 they enter at last into the cool dusk house , then they love and play 
 together , as if they be a pair of lover guileless , with no fear for 
 the morrow , and no seed of enmity and death sown betwixt they . 




 CHAPTER xviii : the maid GIVES WALTER tryst 


 now , on the morrow , when Walter be awake , he find there be no one 
 lie beside he , and the day be no long very young ; so he arise , and 
 go through the garden from end to end , and all about , and there be 
 none there ; and albeit that he dread to meet the Lady there , yet be he 
 sad at heart and fearful of what might betide . Howsoever , he find the 
 gate whereby they have enter yesterday , and he go out into the little 
 dale ; but when he have go a step or two he turn about , and could see 
 neither garden nor fence , nor any sign of what he have see thereof but 
 lately . he knit his brow and stand still to think of it , and his heart 
 grow the heavy thereby ; but presently he go his way and cross the 
 stream , but have scarce come up on to the grass on the further side , ere 
 he see a woman come to meet he , and at first , full as he be of the 
 tide of yesterday and the wondrous garden , deem that it would be the 
 Lady ; but the woman stay her foot , and , stoop , lay a hand on her 
 right ankle , and he see that it be the Maid . he draw anigh to she , and 
 see that she be nought so sad of countenance as the last time she have 
 meet he , but flush of cheek and bright - eyed . 

 as he come up to she she make a step or two to meet he , hold out her 
 two hand , and then refrain she , and say smile : " ah , friend , belike 
 this shall be the last time that I shall say to thee , touch I not , nay , 
 not so much as my hand , or if it be but the hem of my raiment . " 

 the joy grow up in his heart , and he gaze on she fondly , and say : " why , 
 what hath befall of late ? " 

 " o friend , " she begin , " this hath befall . " 

 but as he look on she , the smile die from her face , and she become 
 deadly pale to the very lip ; she look askance to her left side , 
 whereas run the stream ; and Walter follow her eye , and deem for one 
 instant that he see the misshapen yellow visage of the dwarf peer 
 round from a grey rock , but the next there be nothing . then the Maid , 
 though she be as pale as death , go on in a clear , steady , hard voice , 
 wherein be no joy or kindness , keep her face to Walter and her back 
 to the stream : " this hath befall , friend , that there be no long any 
 need to refrain thy love nor mine ; therefore I say to thee , come to my 
 chamber   and it be the red chamber over against thine , though thou 
 knew it not   an hour before this next midnight , and then thy sorrow 
 and mine shall be at an end : and now I must need depart . follow I not , 
 but remember ! " 

 and therewith she turn about and flee like the wind down the stream . 

 but Walter stand wonder , and know not what to make of it , whether it 
 be for good or ill : for he know now that she have pal and be seize 
 with terror because of the upheaving of the ugly head ; and yet she have 
 seem to speak out the very thing she have to say . Howsoever it be , he 
 spake aloud to himself : whatever come , I will keep tryst with she . 

 then he draw his sword , and turn this way and that , look all about 
 if he might see any sign of the Evil Thing ; but nought might his eye 
 behold , save the grass , and the stream , and the bush of the dale . so 
 then , still hold his naked sword in his hand , he clomb the bent out of 
 the dale ; for that be the only way he know to the Golden House ; and when 
 he come to the top , and the summer breeze blow in his face , and he look 
 down a fair green slope beset with goodly oak and chestnut , he be 
 refresh with the life of the earth , and he feel the good sword in his 
 fist , and know that there be might and long in he , and the world 
 seem open unto he . 

 so he smile , if it be somewhat grimly , and sheathe his sword and go 
 on toward the house . 




 CHAPTER XIX : WALTER go to fetch home the LION 's HIDE 


 he enter the cool dusk through the porch , and , look down the 
 pillare hall , see beyond the fountain a gleam of gold , and when he come 
 past the say fountain he look up to the high - seat , and lo ! the Lady 
 sit there clothe in her queenly raiment . she call to he , and he 
 come ; and she hail he , and spake graciously and calmly , yet as if she 
 know nought of he save as the leal servant of she , a high Lady . 
 " squire , " she say , " we have deem it meet to have the hide of the 
 servant of the Enemy , the lion to wit , whom thou slewest yesterday , for a 
 carpet to our foot ; wherefore go now , take thy wood - knife , and flay the 
 beast , and bring I home his skin . this shall be all thy service for 
 this day , so mayst thou do it at thine own leisure , and not weary 
 thyself . may good go with thee . " 

 he bend the knee before she , and she smile on he graciously , but 
 reach out no hand for he to kiss , and heed he but little . 
 wherefore , in spite of himself , and though he know somewhat of her guile , 
 he could not help marvel that this should be she who have lie in his 
 arm night - long but of late . 

 Howso that might be , he take his way toward the thicket where he have 
 slay the lion , and come thither by then it be afternoon , at the hot 
 of the day . so he enter therein , and come to the very place whereas 
 the Lady have lain , when she fall down before the terror of the lion ; and 
 there be the mark of her body on the grass where she have lie that 
 while , like as it be the form of a hare . but when Walter go on to 
 where he have slay that great beast , lo ! he be go , and there be no 
 sign of he ; but there be Walter 's own footprint , and the two shaft 
 which he have shoot , one feather red , and one blue . he say at first : 
 belike someone hath be here , and hath have the carcase away . then he 
 laugh in very despite , and say : how may that be , since there be no 
 sign of drag away of so huge a body , and no blood or fur on the 
 grass if they have cut he up , and moreover no trampling of foot , as if 
 there have be many man at the deed . then be he all abash , and again 
 laugh in scorn of himself , and say : Forsooth I deem I have do 
 manly ; but now forsooth I shoot nought , and nought there be before the 
 sword of my father 's son . and what may I deem now , but that this be a 
 land of mere lie , and that there be nought real and alive therein save 
 I . yea , belike even these tree and the green grass will presently 
 depart from I , and leave I fall down through the cloud . 

 Therewith he turn away , and gat he to the road that lead to the Golden 
 House , wonder what next should befall he , and go slowly as he 
 ponder his case . so come he to that first thicket where they have lose 
 their quarry by water ; so he enter the same , musing , and bath he in 
 the pool that be therein , after he have wander about it awhile , and 
 find nothing new . 

 so again he set he to the homeward road , when the day be now wan , 
 and it be near sunset that he be come nigh unto the house , though it 
 be hide from he as then by a low bent that rise before he ; and there 
 he abode and look about he . 

 now as he look , over the say bent come the figure of a woman , who 
 stay on the brow thereof and look all about she , and then run swiftly 
 down to meet Walter , who see at once that it be the Maid . 

 she make no stay then till she be but three pace from he , and then she 
 stoop down and make the sign to he , and then spake to he 
 breathlessly , and say : " Hearken ! but speak not till I have do : I bid 
 thee to - night 's meeting because I see that there be one anigh whom I 
 must need beguile . but by thine oath , and thy love , and all that thou 
 art , I adjure thee come not unto I this night as I bade thee ! but be 
 hide in the hazel - copse outside the house , as it draw toward midnight , 
 and abide I there . dost thou hearken , and wilt thou ? say yes or no in 
 haste , for I may not tarry a moment of time . who knoweth what be behind 
 I ? " 

 " yes , " say Walter hastily ; " but friend and love - " 

 " no more , " she say ; " hope the good ; " and turn from he she run away 
 swiftly , not by the way she have come , but sideways , as though to reach 
 the house by fetch a compass . 

 but Walter go slowly on his way , think within himself that now at 
 that present moment there be nought for it but to refrain he from 
 do , and to let other do ; yet deem he that it be little manly to be 
 as the pawn upon the board , push about by the will of other . 

 then , as he go , he bethink he of the Maiden 's face and aspect , as 
 she come run to he , and stand before he for that minute ; and all 
 eagerness he see in she , and sore love of he , and distress of soul , all 
 blent together . 

 so come he to the brow of the bent whence he could see lie before he , 
 scarce more than a bow - shot away , the Golden House now gild again and 
 redden by the set sun . and even therewith come a gay image toward 
 he , flash back the level ray from gold and steel and silver ; and lo ! 
 there be come the King 's Son . they meet presently , and the King 's Son 
 turn to go beside he , and say merrily : " I give thee good even , my 
 Lady 's squire ! I owe thee something of courtesy , whereas it be by thy 
 mean that I shall be make happy , both to - night , and to - morrow , and many 
 to - morrow ; and sooth it be , that but little courtesy have I do thee 
 hitherto . " 

 his face be full of joy , and the eye of he shine with gladness . he 
 be a goodly man , but to Walter he seem an ill one ; and he hat he so 
 much , that he find it no easy matter to answer he ; but he refrain 
 himself , and say : " I can thee thank , King 's Son ; and good it be that 
 someone be happy in this strange land . " 

 " art thou not happy then , squire of my Lady ? " say the other . 

 Walter have no mind to show this man his heart , nay , nor even a corner 
 thereof ; for he deem he an enemy . so he smile sweetly and somewhat 
 foolishly , as a man luckily in love , and say : " o yea , yea , why should I 
 not be so ? how might I be otherwise ? " 

 " yea then , " say the King 's Son , " why didst thou say that thou wert glad 
 someone be happy ? who be unhappy , deemest thou ? " and he look on he 
 keenly . 

 Walter answer slowly : " say I so ? I suppose then that I be think 
 of thee ; for when first I see thee , yea , and afterwards , thou didst seem 
 heavy - hearted and ill - content . " 

 the face of the King 's Son clear at this word , and he say : " yea , so it 
 be ; for look you , both way it be : I be unfree , and I have sow the 
 true desire of my heart whereas it wax not . but now I be on the brink 
 and verge of freedom , and presently shall my desire be blossom . Nay 
 now , Squire , I deem thee a good fellow , though it may be somewhat of a 
 fool ; so I will no more speak riddle to thee . thus it be : the Maid hath 
 promise I all mine ask , and be mine ; and in two or three day , by 
 she help also , I shall see the world again . " 

 Quoth Walter , smile askance on he : " and the Lady ? what shall she say 
 to this matter ? " 

 the King 's Son redden , but smile falsely enough , and say : " Sir 
 Squire , thou know enough not to need to ask this . why should I tell 
 thee that she accounteth more of thy little finger than of my whole body ? 
 now I tell thee hereof freely ; first , because this my fruition of love , 
 and my freeing from thralldom , be , in a way , of thy doing . for thou art 
 become my supplanter , and hast take thy place with yonder lovely tyrant . 
 fear not for I ! she will let I go . as for thyself , see thou to it ! but 
 again I tell thee hereof because my heart be light and full of joy , and 
 tell thee will pleasure I , and can not do I any harm . for if thou 
 say : how if I carry the tale to my Lady ? I answer , thou wilt not . for I 
 know that thine heart hath be somewhat set on the jewel that my hand 
 holdeth ; and thou know well on whose head the Lady 's wrath would fall , 
 and that would be neither thine nor mine . " 

 " thou say sooth , " say Walter ; " neither be treason my will not . " 

 so they walk on silently a while , and then Walter say : " but how if the 
 Maiden have nay - say thee ; what hadst thou do then ? " 

 " by the heaven ! " say the King 's Son fiercely , ' she should have pay for 
 her nay - say ; then would I - " but he break off , and say quietly , yet 
 somewhat doggedly : " why talk of what might have be ? she give I her 
 yea - say pleasantly and sweetly . " 

 now Walter know that the man lie , so he hold his peace thereon ; but 
 presently he say : " when thou art free wilt thou go to thine own land 
 again ? " 

 " Yea , " say the King 's Son ; ' she will lead I thither . " 

 " and wilt thou make her thy lady and queen when thou com to thy 
 father 's land ? " say Walter . 

 the King 's Son knit his brow , and say : " when I be in mine own land I may 
 do with she what I will ; but I look for it that I shall do no otherwise 
 with she than that she shall be well - content . " 

 then the talk between they drop , and the King 's Son turn off toward 
 the wood , singing and joyous ; but Walter go soberly toward the house . 
 Forsooth he be not greatly cast down , for besides that he know that the 
 King 's Son be false , he deem that under this double tryst lay 
 something which be a - doing in his own behalf . yet be he eager and 
 troubled , if not down - hearte , and his soul be cast about betwixt hope 
 and fear . 




 CHAPTER XX : WALTER be BIDDEN to another tryst 


 so come he into the pillare hall , and there he find the Lady walk to 
 and fro by the high - seat ; and when he draw nigh she turn on he , and 
 say in a voice rather eager than angry : " what hast thou do , Squire ? 
 why art thou come before I ? " 

 he be abash , and bow before she and say : " o gracious Lady , thou 
 badest I service , and I have be about it . " 

 she say : " tell I then , tell I , what hath betide ? " 

 " Lady , " say he , " when I enter the thicket of thy swooning I find 
 there no carcase of the lion , nor any sign of the dragging away of he . " 

 she look full in his face for a little , and then go to her chair , and 
 sit down therein ; and in a little while spake to he in a soft voice , 
 and say : " do I not tell thee that some enemy have do that unto I ? and 
 lo ! now thou seest that so it be . " 

 then be she silent again , and knit her brow and set her tooth ; and 
 thereafter she spake harshly and fiercely : " but I will overcome she , and 
 make her day evil , but keep death away from she , that she may die many 
 time over ; and know all the sickness of the heart , when foe be nigh , 
 and friend afar , and there be none to deliver ! " 

 her eye flash , and her face be dark with anger ; but she turn and 
 catch Walter 's eye , and the sternness of his face , and she soften at 
 once , and say : " but thou ! this hath little to do with thee ; and now to 
 thee I speak : now cometh even and night . go thou to thy chamber , and 
 there shalt thou find raiment worthy of thee , what thou now art , and what 
 thou shalt be ; do on the same , and make thyself most goodly , and then 
 come thou hither and eat and drink with I , and afterwards depart whither 
 thou wilt , till the night have wear to its midmost ; and then come thou to 
 my chamber , to wit , through the ivory door in the gallery above ; and then 
 and there shall I tell thee a thing , and it shall be for the weal both of 
 thee and of I , but for the grief and woe of the Enemy . " 

 Therewith she reach her hand to he , and he kiss it , and depart and 
 come to his chamber , and find raiment therebefore rich beyond measure ; 
 and he wonder if any new snare lie therein : yet if there be , he see 
 no way whereby he might escape it , so he do it on , and become as the 
 most glorious of king , and yet lovely than any king of the world . 

 sithence he go his way into the pillare hall , when it be now night , 
 and without the moon be up , and the tree of the wood as still as 
 image . but within the hall shine bright with many candle , and the 
 fountain glitter in the light of they , as it run tinkle sweetly into 
 the little stream ; and the silvern bridge gleam , and the pillar shine 
 all round about . 

 and there on the dais be a table dight most royally , and the Lady 
 sit thereat , clothe in her most glorious array , and behind she the Maid 
 standing humbly , yet clothe in precious web of shimmer gold , but with 
 foot unshod , and the iron ring upon her ankle . 

 so Walter come his way to the high - seat , and the Lady rise and greet 
 he , and take he by the hand , and kiss he on either cheek , and sit 
 he down beside she . so they fall to their meat , and the Maid serve 
 they ; but the Lady take no more heed of she than if she be one of the 
 pillar of the hall ; but Walter she caress oft with sweet word , and 
 the touch of her hand , make he drink out of her cup and eat out of her 
 dish . as to he , he be bashful by seem , but verily fearful ; he take 
 the Lady 's caress with what grace he might , and durst not so much as 
 glance at her Maid . Long indeed seem that banquet to he , and long 
 yet endure the weariness of his abide there , kind to his foe and 
 unkind to his friend ; for after the banquet they still sit a while , and 
 the Lady talk much to Walter about many thing of the way of the 
 world , and he answer what he might , distraught as he be with the 
 thought of those two tryst which he have to deal with . 

 at last spake the Lady and say : " now must I leave thee for a little , and 
 thou wottest where and how we shall meet next ; and meanwhile disport thee 
 as thou wilt , so that thou weary not thyself , for I love to see thee 
 joyous . " 

 then she arise stately and grand ; but she kiss Walter on the mouth ere 
 she turn to go out of the hall . the Maid follow she ; but or ever she 
 be quite go , she stoop and make that sign , and look over her 
 shoulder at Walter , as if in entreaty to he , and there be fear and 
 anguish in her face ; but he nod his head to she in yea - say of the 
 tryst in the hazel - copse , and in a trice she be go . 

 Walter go down the hall , and forth into the early night ; but in the 
 jaw of the porch he come up against the King 's Son , who , gaze at his 
 attire glitter with all its gem in the moonlight , laugh out , and 
 say : " now may it be see how thou art rise in degree above I , whereas 
 I be but a king 's son , and that a king of a far country ; whereas thou art 
 a king of king , or shalt be this night , yea , and of this very country 
 wherein we both be . " 

 now Walter see the mock which lie under his word ; but he keep back his 
 wrath , and answer : " fair sir , art thou as well content with thy lot 
 as when the sun go down ? Hast thou no doubt or fear ? will the Maid 
 verily keep tryst with thee , or hath she give thee yea - say but to escape 
 thee this time ? or , again , may she not turn to the Lady and appeal to 
 she against thee ? " 

 now when he have speak these word , he repent thereof , and fear for 
 himself and the Maid , lest he have stir some misgiving in that young 
 man 's foolish heart . but the King 's Son do but laugh , and answer 
 nought but to Walter 's last word , and say : " yea , yea ! this word of 
 thine showeth how little thou wottest of that which lieth betwixt my 
 darling and thine . Doth the lamb appeal from the shepherd to the wolf ? 
 even so shall the Maid appeal from I to thy Lady . what ! ask thy Lady at 
 thy leisure what she will not hath be with her thrall ; she shall think it a 
 fair tale to tell thee thereof . but thereof be my Maid all whole now by 
 reason of her wisdom in leechcraft , or somewhat more . and now I tell 
 thee again , that the beforesaid Maid must need do my will ; for if I be 
 the deep sea , and I deem not so ill of myself , that other one be the 
 devil ; as belike thou shalt find out for thyself later on . yea , all be 
 well with I , and more than well . " 

 and therewith he swing merrily into the litten hall . but Walter go out 
 into the moonlit night , and wander about for an hour or more , and stole 
 warily into the hall and thence into his own chamber . there he do off 
 that royal array , and do his own raiment upon he ; he girt he with 
 sword and knife , take his bow and quiver , and steal down and out again , 
 even as he have come in . then he fetch a compass , and come down into 
 the hazel - coppice from the north , and lie hide there while the night 
 wear , till he deem it would lack but little of midnight . 




 CHAPTER XXI : WALTER and the MAID FLEE from the GOLDEN HOUSE 


 there he abode amidst the hazel , hearken every little sound ; and 
 the sound be nought but the night voice of the wood , till suddenly 
 there burst forth from the house a great wail cry . Walter 's heart 
 come up into his mouth , but he have no time to do aught , for follow 
 hard on the cry come the sound of light foot close to he , the bough 
 be thrust aside , and there be come the Maid , and she but in her white 
 coat , and barefoot . and then first he feel the sweetness of her flesh on 
 his , for she catch he by the hand and say breathlessly : " now , now ! 
 there may yet be time , or even too much , it may be . for the saving of 
 breath ask I no question , but come ! " 

 he dally not , but go as she lead , and they be lightfoot , both of 
 they . 

 they go the same way , due south to wit , whereby he have go a - hunting 
 with the Lady ; and while they run and while they walk ; but so fast 
 they go , that by grey of the dawn they be come as far as that coppice 
 or thicket of the Lion ; and still they hasten onward , and but little 
 have the Maid speak , save here and there a word to hearten up Walter , and 
 here and there a shy word of endearment . at last the dawn grow into 
 early day , and as they come over the brow of a bent , they look down 
 over a plain land whereas the tree grow scatter - meal , and beyond the 
 plain rise up the land into long green hill , and over those again be 
 blue mountain great and far away . 

 then spake the Maid : " over yonder lie the outlying mountain of the 
 Bears , and through they we need must pass , to our great peril . Nay , 
 friend , " she say , as he handle his sword - hilt , " it must be patience and 
 wisdom to bring we through , and not the fallow blade of one man , though 
 he be a good one . but look ! below there run a stream through the first 
 of the plain , and I see nought for it but we must now rest our body . 
 moreover I have a tale to tell thee which be burn my heart ; for maybe 
 there will be a pardon to ask of thee moreover ; wherefore I fear thee . " 

 Quoth Walter : " how may that be ? " 

 she answer he not , but take his hand and lead he down the bent . but 
 he say : " Thou sayest , rest ; but be we now out of all peril of the 
 chase ? " 

 she say : " I can not tell till I know what hath befall she . if she be 
 not to hand to set on her tracker , they will scarce happen on we now ; if 
 it be not for that one . " 

 and she shudder , and he feel her hand change as he hold it . 

 then she say : " but peril or no peril , need must we rest ; for I tell 
 thee again , what I have to say to thee burneth my bosom for fear of thee , 
 so that I can go no far until I have tell thee . " 

 then he say : " I wot not of this Queen and her mightiness and her 
 servant . I will ask thereof later . but besides the other , be there 
 not the King 's Son , he who love thee so unworthily ? " 

 she pal somewhat , and say : " as for he , there have be nought for thee 
 to fear in he , save his treason : but now shall he neither love nor hate 
 any more ; he die last midnight . " 

 " Yea , and how ? " say Walter . 

 " Nay , " she say , " let I tell my tale all together once for all , lest 
 thou blame I overmuch . but first we will wash we and comfort we as well 
 we may , and then amidst our resting shall the word be say . " 

 by then be they come down to the stream - side , which run fair in pool 
 and stickle amidst rock and sandy bank . she say : " there behind the 
 great grey rock be my bath , friend ; and here be thine ; and lo ! the 
 uprising of the sun ! " 

 so she go her way to the say rock , and he bath he , and wash the 
 night off he , and by then he be clothe again she come back fresh and 
 sweet from the water , and with her lap full of cherry from a wilding 
 which overhang her bath . so they sit down together on the green grass 
 above the sand , and eat the breakfast of the wilderness : and Walter be 
 full of content as he watch she , and behold her sweetness and her 
 loveliness ; yet be they , either of they , somewhat shy and shameface 
 each with the other ; so that he do but kiss her hand once and again , 
 and though she shrink not from he , yet have she no boldness to cast 
 herself into his arm . 




 CHAPTER XXII : of the dwarf and the PARDON 


 now she begin to say : " my friend , now shall I tell thee what I have do 
 for thee and I ; and if thou have a mind to blame I , and punish I , yet 
 remember first , that what I have do have be for thee and our hope of 
 happy life . well , I shall tell thee - " 

 but therewithal her speech fail she ; and , spring up , she face the 
 bent and point with her finger , and she all deadly pale , and shake so 
 that she might scarce stand , and might speak no word , though a feeble 
 gibbering come from her mouth . 

 Walter leap up and put his arm about she , and look whitherward she 
 point , and at first see nought ; and then nought but a brown and yellow 
 rock roll down the bent : and then at last he see that it be the evil 
 thing which have meet he when first he come into that land ; and now it 
 stand upright , and he could see that it be clothe in a coat of yellow 
 samite . 

 then Walter stoop down and gat his bow into his hand , and stand before 
 the Maid , while he nock an arrow . but the monster make ready his 
 tackle while Walter be stoop down , and or ever he could loose , his 
 bow - string twang , and an arrow fly forth and graze the Maid 's arm 
 above the elbow , so that the blood run , and the Dwarf give forth a harsh 
 and horrible cry . then fly Walter 's shaft , and true be it aim , so 
 that it smite the monster full on the breast , but fall down from he as 
 if he be make of stone . then the creature set up his horrible cry 
 again , and loose withal , and Walter deem that he have smite the Maid , 
 for she fall down in a heap behind he . then wax Walter wood - wroth , 
 and cast down his bow and draw his sword , and stride forward towards the 
 bent against the Dwarf . but he roar out again , and there be word in 
 his roar , and he say " Fool ! thou shalt go free if thou wilt give up the 
 Enemy . " 

 " and who , " say Walter , " be the Enemy ? " 

 yell the Dwarf : " she , the pink and white thing lie there ; she be not 
 dead yet ; she be but die for fear of I . yea , she hath reason ! I 
 could have set the shaft in her heart as easily as scratch her arm ; 
 but I need her body alive , that I may wreak I on she . " 

 " what wilt thou do with she ? " say Walter ; for now he have hear that the 
 Maid be not slain he have wax wary again , and stand watch his 
 chance . 

 the Dwarf yell so at his last word , that no word come from the noise a 
 while , and then he say : " what will I with she ? let I at she , and stand 
 by and look on , and then shalt thou have a strange tale to carry off with 
 thee . for I will let thee go this while . " 

 say Walter : " but what need to wreak thee ? what hath she do to thee ? " 

 " what need ! what need ! " roar the Dwarf ; " have I not tell thee that she 
 be the Enemy ? and thou askest of what she hath do ! of what ! Fool , she 
 be the murderer ! she hath slain the Lady that be our Lady , and that make 
 we ; she whom all we worship and adore . o impudent fool ! " 

 Therewith he nock and loose another arrow , which would have smite 
 Walter in the face , but that he lower his head in the very nick of 
 time ; then with a great shout he rush up the bent , and be on the dwarf 
 before he could get his sword out , and leap aloft deal the creature a 
 stroke amidmost of the crown ; and so mightily be smote , that he drave the 
 heavy sword right through to the tooth , so that he fall dead straightway . 

 Walter stand over he a minute , and when be see that he move not , he 
 go slowly down to the stream , whereby the Maid yet lie cower down 
 and quiver all over , and cover her face with her hand . then he 
 take she by the wrist and say : " up , Maiden , up ! and tell I this tale of 
 the slaying . " 

 but she shrink away from he , and look at he with wild eye , and say : 
 " what hast thou do with he ? be he go ? " 

 " he be dead , " say Walter ; " I have slay he ; there lie he with cloven 
 skull on the bent - side : unless , forsooth , he vanish away like the lion I 
 slay ! or else , perchance , he will come to life again ! and art thou a lie 
 like to the rest of they ? let I hear of this slaying . " 

 she rise up , and stand before he tremble , and say : " o , thou art angry 
 with I , and thine anger I can not bear . ah , what have I do ? Thou hast 
 slay one , and I , maybe , the other ; and never have we escape till both 
 these twain be dead . ah ! thou dost not know ! thou dost not know ! o 
 I ! what shall I do to appease thy wrath ! " 

 he look on she , and his heart rise to his mouth at the thought of 
 sunder from she . still he look on she , and her piteous friendly 
 face melt all his heart ; he throw down his sword , and take she by the 
 shoulder , and kiss she face over and over , and strain she to he , so 
 that he feel the sweetness of her bosom . then he lift she up like a 
 child , and set she down on the green grass , and go down to the water , 
 and fill his hat therefrom , and come back to she ; then he give she to 
 drink , and bath her face and her hand , so that the colour come aback 
 to the cheek and lip of she : and she smile on he and kiss his 
 hand , and say : " o now thou art kind to I . " 

 " Yea , " say he , " and true it be that if thou hast slain , I have do no 
 less , and if thou hast lie , even so have I ; and if thou hast play the 
 wanton , as I deem not that thou hast , I full surely have so do . so now 
 thou shalt pardon I , and when thy spirit have come back to thee , thou 
 shalt tell I thy tale in all friendship , and in all love - kindness will 
 I hearken the same . " 

 Therewith he kneel before she and kiss her foot . but she say : " yea , 
 yea ; what thou willest , that will I do . but first tell I one thing . 
 Hast thou bury this horror and hide he in the earth ? " 

 he deem that fear have bewilder she , and that she scarcely yet know 
 how thing have go . but he say : " fair sweet friend , I have not do it 
 as yet ; but now will I go and do it , if it seem good to thee . " 

 " Yea , " she say , " but first must thou smite off his head , and lie it by 
 his buttock when he be in the earth ; or evil thing will happen else . 
 this of the burying be no idle matter , I bid thee believe . " 

 " I doubt it not , " say he ; ' surely such malice as be in this one will be 
 hard to slay . " and he pick up his sword , and turn to go to the field 
 of deed . 

 she say : " I must need go with thee ; terror hath so fill my soul , that 
 I durst not abide here without thee . " 

 so they go both together to where the creature lay . the Maid durst not 
 look on the dead monster , but Walter note that he be girt with a big 
 ungainly sax ; so he draw it from the sheath , and there smite off the 
 hideous head of the fiend with his own weapon . then they twain together 
 labour the earth , she with Walter 's sword , he with the ugly sax , till 
 they have make a grave deep and wide enough ; and therein they thrust the 
 creature , and cover he up , weapon and all together . 




 CHAPTER xxiii : of the PEACEFUL ending of that WILD day 


 Thereafter Walter lead the Maid down again , and say to she : " now , 
 sweetling , shall the story be tell . " 

 " Nay , friend , " she say , " not here . this place hath be pollute by my 
 craven fear , and the horror of the vile wretch , of whom no word may tell 
 his vileness . let we hence and onward . Thou seest I have once more come 
 to life again . " 

 " but , " say he , " thou hast be hurt by the Dwarf 's arrow . " 

 she laugh , and say : " have I never have great hurt from they than that , 
 little have be the tale thereof : yet whereas thou lookest dolorous about 
 it , we will speedily heal it . " 

 Therewith she seek about , and find nigh the stream - side certain herb ; 
 and she spake word over they , and bade Walter lie they on the wound , 
 which , forsooth , be of the least , and he do so , and bind a strip of 
 his shirt about her arm ; and then would she set forth . but he say : 
 " thou art all unshod ; and but if that be see to , our journey shall be 
 stay by thy foot - soreness : I may make a shift to fashion thee brogue . " 

 she say : " I may well go barefoot . and in any case , I entreat thee that 
 we tarry here no long , but go away hence , if it be but for a mile . " 

 and she look piteously on he , so that he might not gainsay she . 

 so then they cross the stream , and set forward , when amidst all these 
 hap the day be wear to midmorning . but after they have go a mile , 
 they sit they down on a knoll under the shadow of a big thorn - tree , 
 within sight of the mountain . then say Walter : " now will I cut thee 
 the brogue from the skirt of my buff - coat , which shall be well meet for 
 such work ; and meanwhile shalt thou tell I thy tale . " 

 " thou art kind , " she say ; " but be kind yet , and abide my tale till we 
 have do our day 's work . for we be good to make no long delay here ; 
 because , though thou hast slay the king - dwarf , yet there be other of 
 his kindre , who swarm in some part of the wood as the rabbit in a 
 warren . now true it be that they have but little understanding , less , it 
 may be , than the very brute beast ; and that , as I say afore , unless 
 they be set on our slot like to hound , they shall have no inkling of 
 where to seek we , yet might they happen upon we by mere misadventure . and 
 moreover , friend , " quoth she , blushing , " I would beg of thee some little 
 respite ; for though I scarce fear thy wrath any more , since thou hast 
 be so kind to I , yet be there shame in that which I have to tell thee . 
 wherefore , since the fairest of the day be before we , let we use it all 
 we may , and , when thou hast do I my new foot - gear , get we go forward 
 again . " 

 he kiss she kindly and yea - say she ask : he have already fall to 
 work on the leather , and in a while have fashion she the brogue ; so she 
 tie they to her foot , and arise with a smile and say : " now be I hale 
 and strong again , what with the rest , and what with thy love - kindness , 
 and thou shalt see how nimble I shall be to leave this land , for as fair 
 as it be . since forsooth a land of lie it be , and of grief to the 
 child of Adam . " 

 so they go their way thence , and fare nimbly indeed , and make no stay 
 till some three hour after noon , when they rest by a thicket - side , 
 where the strawberry grow plenty ; they eat thereof what they would : and 
 from a great oak hard by Walter shoot he first one culver , and then 
 another , and hang they to his girdle to be for their evening 's meal ; 
 sithence they go forward again , and nought befell they to tell of , till 
 they be come , whenas it lack scarce an hour of sunset , to the bank 
 of another river , not right great , but big than the last one . there 
 the Maid cast herself down and say : " Friend , no far will thy friend 
 go this even ; nay , to say sooth , she can not . so now we will eat of thy 
 venison , and then shall my tale be , since I may no long delay it ; and 
 thereafter shall our slumber be sweet and safe as I deem . " 

 she spake merrily now , and as one who fear nothing , and Walter be much 
 hearten by her word and her voice , and he fall to and make a fire , and 
 a woodland oven in the earth , and sithence dighte his fowl , and bake 
 they after the manner of wood - man . and they eat , both of they , in all 
 love , and in good - liking of life , and be much strengthen by their 
 supper . and when they be do , Walter eke his fire , both against the 
 chill of the midnight and dawn , and for a guard against wild beast , 
 and by that time night be come , and the moon arise . then the Maiden 
 draw up to the fire , and turn to Walter and spake . 




 CHAPTER XXIV : the maid tell of what had BEFALLEN she 


 " now , friend , by the clear of the moon and this firelight will I tell 
 what I may and can of my tale . thus it be : if I be wholly of the race of 
 Adam I wot not nor can I tell thee how many year old I may be . for 
 there be , as it be , shard or gap in my life , wherein be but a few 
 thing dimly remember , and doubtless many thing forget . I remember 
 well when I be a little child , and right happy , and there be people 
 about I whom I love , and who love I . it be not in this land ; but 
 all thing be lovely there ; the year 's beginning , the happy mid - year , 
 the year 's waning , the year 's ending , and then again its beginning . that 
 pass away , and then for a while be more than dimness , for nought I 
 remember save that I be . thereafter I remember again , and be a young 
 maiden , and I know some thing , and long to know more . I be nowise 
 happy ; I be amongst people who bid I go , and I go ; and do this , and I do 
 it : none loveth I , none tormenteth I ; but I wear my heart in longing 
 for I scarce know what . neither then be I in this land , but in a land 
 that I love not , and a house that be big and stately , but nought lovely . 
 then be a dim time again , and sithence a time not right clear ; an evil 
 time , wherein I be old , wellnigh grow to womanhood . there be a many 
 folk about I , and they foul , and greedy , and hard ; and my spirit be 
 fierce , and my body feeble ; and I be set to task that I would not do , by 
 they that be unwiser than I ; and smitten I be by they that be less 
 valiant than I ; and I know lack , and stripe , and diver misery . but all 
 that be now become but a dim picture to I , save that amongst all these 
 unfriend be a friend to I ; an old woman , who telleth I sweet tale of 
 other life , wherein all be high and goodly , or at the least valiant and 
 doughty , and she setteth hope in my heart and learneth I , and maketh I 
 to know much . . . o much . . . so that at last I be grow wise , and wise 
 to be mighty if I durst . yet be I nought in this land all this while , 
 but , as meseemeth , in a great and a foul city . " 

 " and then , as it be , I fall asleep ; and in my sleep be nought , save 
 here and there a wild dream , somedeal lovely , somedeal hideous : but of 
 this dream be my Mistress a part , and the monster , withal , whose head 
 thou didst cleave to - day . but when I be awaken from it , then be I verily 
 in this land , and myself , as thou se I to - day . and the first part of 
 my life here be this , that I be in the pillare ball yonder , half - clad 
 and with bind hand ; and the dwarf leadeth I to the Lady , and I hear 
 his horrible croak as he sayeth : ' Lady , will this one do ? ' and then the 
 sweet voice of the Lady say : ' this one will do ; thou shalt have thy 
 reward : now , set thou the token upon she . ' then I remember the Dwarf 
 drag I away , and my heart sink for fear of he : but for that time 
 he do I no more harm than the rivetting upon my leg this iron ring 
 which here thou seest . " 

 " so from that time forward I have live in this land , and be the thrall 
 of the Lady ; and I remember my life here day by day , and no part of it 
 have fall into the dimness of dream . Thereof will I tell thee but 
 little : but this I will tell thee , that in spite of my past dream , or it 
 may be because of they , I have not lose the wisdom which the old woman have 
 erst learn I , and for more wisdom I long . maybe this longing shall 
 now make both thee and I happy , but for the passing time it bring I 
 grief . for at first my Mistress be indeed wayward with I , but as any 
 great lady might be with she buy thrall , while caress I , and 
 while chastise I , as her mood go ; but she seem not to be cruel of 
 malice , or with any set purpose . but so it be   rather little by little 
 than by any great sudden uncovering of my intent , that she come to know 
 that I also have some of the wisdom whereby she live her queenly life . 
 that be about two year after I be first her thrall , and three weary 
 year have go by since she begin to see in I the enemy of her day . 
 now why or wherefore I know not , but it seemeth that it would not avail 
 she to slay I outright , or suffer I to die ; but nought withhold she 
 from pile up grief and misery on my head . at last she set she 
 servant , the Dwarf , upon I , even he whose head thou clavest to - day . many 
 thing I bear from he whereof it be unseemly for my tongue to tell 
 before thee ; but the time come when he exceed , and I could bear no 
 more ; and then I show he this sharp knife   wherewith I would have 
 thrust I through to the heart if thou hadst not pardon I e'en now , 
 and I tell he that if he forbear I not , I would slay , not he , but 
 myself ; and this he might not away with because of the commandment of the 
 Lady , who have give he the word that in any case I must be keep live . 
 and her hand , withal , fear hold somewhat hereafter . yet be there need 
 to I of all my wisdom ; for with all this her hatred grow , and while 
 rag within she so furiously that it overmaster her fear , and at such 
 time she would have put I to death if I have not escape she by some 
 turn of my lore . " 

 " now far , I shall tell thee that somewhat more than a year ago hither 
 to this land come the King 's Son , the second goodly man , as thou art the 
 third , whom her sorcery have draw hither since I have dwelt here . 
 Forsooth , when he first come , he seem to we , to I , and yet more to my 
 Lady , to be as beautiful as an angel , and sorely she love he ; and he 
 she , after his fashion : but he be light - minded , and cold - hearted , and in 
 a while he must need turn his eye upon I , and offer I his love , which 
 be but foul and unkind as it turn out ; for when I nay - say he , as 
 maybe I have not do save for fear of my Mistress , he have no pity upon 
 I , but spar not to lead I into the trap of her wrath , and leave I 
 without help , or a good word . but , o friend , in spite of all grief and 
 anguish , I learn still , and wax wise , and wiser , abide the day of 
 my deliverance , which have come , and thou art come . " 

 Therewith she take Walter 's hand and kiss they ; but he kiss she 
 face , and her tear wet her lip . then she go on : " but sithence , 
 month ago , the Lady begin to weary of this dastard , despite of his 
 beauty ; and then it be thy turn to be sweep into her net ; I partly guess 
 how . for on a day in broad daylight , as I be serve my mistress in the 
 hall , and the Evil Thing , whose head be now cleave , be lie across the 
 threshold of the door , as it be a dream fall upon I , though I strove 
 to cast it off for fear of chastisement ; for the pillare hall waver , 
 and vanish from my sight , and my foot be tread a rough stone 
 pavement instead of the marble wonder of the hall , and there be the 
 scent of the salt sea and of the tackle of ship , and behind I be tall 
 house , and before I the ship indeed , with their rope beat and 
 their sail flap and their mast waver ; and in mine ear be the 
 hale and how of mariner ; thing that I have see and hear in the dimness 
 of my life go by . " 

 " and there be I , and the Dwarf before I , and the Lady after I , go 
 over the gangway aboard of a tall ship , and she gather way and be 
 get out of the haven , and straightway I see the mariner cast abroad 
 their ancient . " 

 Quoth Walter : " what then ! saw thou the blazon thereon , of a wolf - like 
 beast ramp up against a maiden ? and that might well have be thou . " 

 she say : " yea , so it be ; but refrain thee , that I may tell on my tale ! 
 the ship and the sea vanish away , but I be not back in the hall of the 
 Golden House ; and again be we three in the street of the self - same town 
 which we have but just leave ; but somewhat dim be my vision thereof , and I 
 see little save the door of a goodly house before I , and speedily it 
 die out , and we be again in the pillare hall , wherein my thralldom 
 be make manifest . " 

 " Maiden , " say Walter , " one question I would ask thee ; to wit , didst thou 
 see I on the quay by the ship ? " 

 " Nay , " she say , " there be many folk about , but they be all as image 
 of the alien to I . now hearken far : three month thereafter come 
 the dream upon I again , when we be all three together in the Pillared 
 Hall ; and again be the vision somewhat dim . once more we be in the 
 street of a busy town , but all unlike to that other one , and there be 
 man stand together on our right hand by the door of a house . " 

 " yea , yea , " quoth Walter ; " and , forsooth , one of they be who but i. " 

 " refrain thee , belove ! " she say ; " for my tale draweth to its ending , 
 and I would have thee hearken heedfully : for maybe thou shalt once again 
 deem my deed past pardon . some twenty day after this last dream , I have 
 some leisure from my Mistress 's service , so I go to disport I by the 
 well of the Oak - tree   or forsooth she might have set in my mind the 
 thought of go there , that I might meet thee and give she some occasion 
 against I ; and I sit thereby , nowise love the earth , but sick at 
 heart , because of late the King 's Son have be more than ever instant 
 with I to yield he my body , threaten I else with cast I into 
 all that the bad could do to I of torment and shame day by day . I 
 say my heart fail I , and I be wellnigh bring to the point of yea- 
 say his desire , that I might take the chance of something befall 
 I that be less bad than the bad . but here must I tell thee a thing , 
 and pray thee to take it to heart . this , more than aught else , have give 
 I strength to nay - say that dastard , that my wisdom both hath be , and 
 now be , the wisdom of a wise maid , and not of a woman , and all the might 
 thereof shall I lose with my maidenhead . evil wilt thou think of I 
 then , for all I be try so sore , that I be at point to cast it all 
 away , so wretchedly as I shrink from the horror of the Lady 's wrath . " 

 " but there as I sit ponder these thing , I see a man come , and 
 think no otherwise thereof but that it be the King 's Son , till I see 
 the stranger draw near , and his golden hair , and his grey eye ; and 
 then I hear his voice , and his kindness pierce my heart , and I know 
 that my friend have come to see I ; and o , friend , these tear be for the 
 sweetness of that past hour ! " 

 say Walter : " I come to see my friend , I also . now have I note what 
 thou badest I ; and I will forbear all as thou commandest I , till we be 
 safe out of the desert and far away from all evil thing ; but wilt thou 
 ban I from all caress ? " 

 she laugh amidst of her tear , and say : " o , nay , poor lad , if thou 
 wilt be but wise . " 

 then she lean toward he , and take his face betwixt her hand and 
 kiss he oft , and the tear start in his eye for love and pity of 
 she . 

 then she say : " alas , friend ! even yet mayst thou doom I guilty , and all 
 thy love may turn away from I , when I have tell thee all that I have 
 do for the sake of thee and I . o , if then there might be some 
 chastisement for the guilty woman , and not mere sundering ! " 

 " fear nothing , sweetle , " say he ; " for indeed I deem that already I 
 know partly what thou hast do . " 

 she sigh , and say : " I will tell thee next , that I ban thy kissing 
 and caressing of I till to - day because I know that my mistress would 
 surely know if a man , if thou , hadst so much as touch a finger of mine 
 in love , it be to try I herein that on the morning of the hunting she 
 kiss and embrace I , till I almost die thereof , and show thee my 
 shoulder and my limb ; and to try thee withal , if thine eye should 
 glister or thy cheek flush thereat ; for indeed she be rag in jealousy 
 of thee . next , my friend , even while we be talk together at the 
 well of the Rock , I be ponder on what we should do to escape from 
 this land of lie . maybe thou wilt say : why didst thou not take my hand 
 and flee with I as we flee to - day ? friend , it be most true , that be 
 she not dead we have not escape thus far . for her tracker would have 
 follow we , set on by she , and bring we back to an evil fate . 
 therefore I tell thee that from the first I do plot the death of those 
 two , the Dwarf and the Mistress . for no otherwise might thou live , or 
 I escape from death in life . but as to the dastard who threaten I 
 with a thrall 's pain , I heed he nought to live or die , for well I 
 know that thy valiant sword , yea , or thy bare hand , would speedily tame 
 he . now first I know that I must make a show of yield to the King 's 
 Son ; and somewhat how I do therein , thou know . but no night and no 
 time do I give he to bed I , till after I have meet thee as thou went 
 to the Golden House , before the adventure of fetch the lion 's skin ; 
 and up to that time I have scarce know what to do , save ever to bid thee , 
 with sore grief and pain , to yield thee to the wicked woman 's desire . but 
 as we spake together there by the stream , and I see that the Evil Thing 
  whose head thou clav e'en now   be spy on we , then amidst the 
 sickness of terror which ever come over I whensoever I think of he , 
 and much more when I see he   ah ! he be dead now ! , it come flash into 
 my mind how I might destroy my enemy . therefore I make the Dwarf my 
 messenger to she , by bid thee to my bed in such wise that he might 
 hear it . and wot thou well , that he speedily carry she the tiding . 
 meanwhile I hasten to lie to the King 's Son , and all privily bid he 
 come to I and not thee . and thereafter , by dint of waiting and 
 watching , and take the only chance that there be , I meet thee as thou 
 camest back from fetch the skin of the lion that never be , and give 
 thee that warning , or else have we be undo indeed . " 

 say Walter : " be the lion of her making or of thine then ? " 

 she say : " of her : why should I deal with such a matter ? " 

 " Yea , " say Walter , " but she verily swoon , and she be verily wroth 
 with the Enemy . " 

 the Maid smile , and say : " if her lie be not like very sooth , then have 
 she not be the craft - master that I know she : one may lie otherwise 
 than with the tongue alone : yet indeed her wrath against the Enemy be 
 nought feign ; for the Enemy be even I , and in these latter day never 
 do she wrath leave I . but to go on with my tale . " 

 " now doubt thou not , that , when thou camest into the hall yester eve , the 
 Mistress know of thy counterfeit tryst with I , and mean nought but 
 death for thee ; yet first would she have thee in her arm again , 
 therefore do she make much of thee at table   and that be partly for my 
 torment also , and therefore do she make that tryst with thee , and 
 deem doubtless that thou wouldst not dare to forgo it , even if thou 
 shouldst go to I thereafter . " 

 " now I have train that dastard to I as I have tell thee , but I give he 
 a sleepy draught , so that when I come to the bed he might not move toward 
 I nor open his eye : but I lie down beside he , so that the Lady might 
 know that my body have be there ; for well have she wotte if it have not . 
 then as there I lay I cast over he thy shape , so that none might have 
 know but that thou wert lie by my side , and there , tremble , I abode 
 what should befall . thus I pass through the hour whenas thou shouldest 
 have be at her chamber , and the time of my tryst with thee be come as 
 the mistress would be deeming ; so that I look for her speedily , and my 
 heart wellnigh fail I for fear of her cruelty . " 

 " presently then I hear a stirring in her chamber , and I slip from out 
 the bed , and hide I behind the hanging , and be like to die for fear of 
 she ; and lo , presently she come steal in softly , hold a lamp in one 
 hand and a knife in the other . and I tell thee of a sooth that I also 
 have a sharp knife in my hand to defend my life if need be . she hold 
 the lamp up above her head before she draw near to the bed - side , and I 
 hear she mutter : ' she be not there then ! but she shall be take . ' then 
 she go up to the bed and stoop over it , and lay her hand on the 
 place where I have lie ; and therewith her eye turn to that false image 
 of thee lie there , and she fall a - tremble and shaking , and the lamp 
 fall to the ground and be quench   but there be bright moonlight in 
 the room , and still I could see what betid . but she utter a noise 
 like the low roar of a wild beast , and I see her arm and hand rise up , 
 and the flashing of the steel beneath the hand , and then down come the 
 hand and the steel , and I go nigh to swoon lest perchance I have 
 work over well , and thine image be thy very self . the dastard die 
 without a groan : why should I lament he ? I can not . but the Lady draw 
 he toward she , and snatch the clothe from off his shoulder and 
 breast , and fall a - gibber sound mostly without meaning , but break 
 here and there with word . then I hear she say : ' I shall forget ; I 
 shall forget ; and the new day shall come . ' then be there silence of 
 she a little , and thereafter she cry out in a terrible voice : ' o no , 
 no , no ! I can not forget ; I can not forget ; ' and she raise a great 
 wail cry that fill all the night with horror   didst thou not hear 
 it ? , and catch up the knife from the bed and thrust it into her breast , 
 and fall down a dead heap over the bed and on to the man whom she have 
 slay . and then I think of thee , and joy smite across my terror ; how 
 shall I gainsay it ? and I flee away to thee , and I take thine hand in 
 mine , thy dear hand , and we flee away together . shall we be still 
 together ? " 

 he speak slowly , and touch she not , and she , forbear all sob and 
 weeping , sit look wistfully on he . he say : " I think thou hast tell 
 I all ; and whether thy guile slew she , or her own evil heart , she be 
 slay last night who lie in mine arm the night before . it be ill , and 
 ill do of I , for I love not she , but thee , and I wish for her death 
 that I might be with thee . Thou wott this , and still thou lov I , 
 it may be overweeningly . what have I to say then ? if there be any guilt 
 of guile , I also be in the guile ; and if there be any guilt of murder , I 
 also be in the murder . thus we say to each other ; and to God and his 
 Hallows we say : ' we two have conspire to slay the woman who torment 
 one of we , and would have slay the other ; and if we have do amiss 
 therein , then shall we two together pay the penalty ; for in this have we 
 do as one body and one soul . ' " 

 Therewith he put his arm about she and kiss she , but soberly and 
 friendly , as if he would comfort she . and thereafter he say to she : 
 " maybe to - morrow , in the sunlight , I will ask thee of this woman , what 
 she verily be ; but now let she be . and thou , thou art over - weary , and 
 I bid thee sleep . " 

 so he go about and gather of bracken a great heap for her bed , and 
 do his coat thereover , and lead her thereto , and she lie down meekly , and 
 smile and cross her arm over her bosom , and presently fall asleep . 
 but as for he , he watch by the fire - side till dawn begin to glimmer , 
 and then he also lay he down and sleep . 




 CHAPTER XXV : of the TRIUMPHANT summer ARRAY of the maid 


 when the day be bright Walter arise , and meet the Maid come from the 
 river - bank , fresh and rosy from the water . she pal a little when they 
 meet face to face , and she shrink from he shyly . but he take her hand 
 and kiss she frankly ; and the two be glad , and have no need to tell 
 each other of their joy , though much else they deem they have to say , 
 could they have find word thereto . 

 so they come to their fire and sit down , and fall to breakfast ; and ere 
 they be do , the Maid say : " my Master , thou seest we be come nigh 
 unto the hill - country , and to - day about sunset , belike , we shall come 
 into the Land of the Bear - folk ; and both it be , that there be peril if we 
 fall into their hand , and that we may scarce escape they . yet I deem 
 that we may deal with the peril by wisdom . " 

 " what be the peril ? " say Walter ; " I mean , what be the bad of it ? " 

 say the Maid : " to be offer up in sacrifice to their God . " 

 " but if we escape death at their hand , what then ? " say Walter . 

 " one of two thing , " say she ; " the first that they shall take we into 
 their tribe . " 

 " and will they sunder we in that case ? " say Walter . 

 " Nay , " say she . 

 Walter laugh and say : " therein be little harm then . but what be the 
 other chance ? " 

 say she : " that we leave they with their goodwill , and come back to one 
 of the land of Christendom . " 

 say Walter : " I be not all so sure that this be the well of the two 
 choice , though , forsooth , thou seemest to think so . but tell I now , 
 what like be their God , that they should offer up new - comer to he ? " 

 " their God be a woman , " she say , " and the Mother of their nation and 
 tribe   or so they deem   before the day when they have chieftain and 
 Lords of Battle . " 

 " that will be long ago , " say he ; " how then may she be live now ? " 

 say the Maid : " doubtless that woman of yore agone be dead this many and 
 many a year ; but they take to they still a new woman , one after other , as 
 they may happen on they , to be in the stead of the Ancient Mother . and 
 to tell thee the very truth right out , she that lieth dead in the 
 Pillared Hall be even the last of these ; and now , if they know it , they 
 lack a God . this shall we tell they . " 

 " yea , yea ! " say Walter , " a goodly welcome shall we have of they then , if 
 we come amongst they with our hand red with the blood of their God ! " 

 she smile on he and say : " if I come amongst they with the tiding that 
 I have slay she , and they trow therein , without doubt they shall make I 
 Lady and Goddess in her stead . " 

 " this be a strange word , " say Walter " but if so they do , how shall that 
 further we in reach the kindred of the world , and the folk of Holy 
 Church ? " 

 she laugh outright , so joyous be she grow , now that she know that his 
 life be yet to be a part of her . " sweetheart , " she say , " now I see 
 that thou desir wholly what I desire ; yet in any case , abide with 
 they would be live and not die , even as thou hadst it e'en now . but , 
 forsooth , they will not hinder our departure if they deem I their God ; 
 they do not look for it , nor desire it , that their God should dwell with 
 they daily . have no fear . " then she laugh again , and say : " what ! 
 thou lookest on I and deemest I to be but a sorry image of a goddess ; 
 and I with my scanty coat and bare arm and naked foot ! but wait ! I 
 know well how to array I when the time cometh . thou shalt see it ! and 
 now , my Master , be it not meet that we take to the road ? " 

 so they arise , and find a ford of the river that take the Maid but to 
 the knee , and so set forth up the greensward of the slope whereas there 
 be but few tree ; so go they fare toward the hill - country . 

 at the last they be come to the foot of the very hill , and in the 
 hollow betwixt the buttress of they grow nut and berry tree , and the 
 greensward round about they be both thick and much flowery . there they 
 stay they and din , whereas Walter have shoot a hare by the way , and 
 they have find a bubble spring under a grey stone in a bight of the 
 coppice , wherein now the bird be sing their good . 

 when they have eat and have rest somewhat , the Maid arise and say : 
 " now shall the Queen array herself , and seem like a very goddess . " 

 then she fall to work , while Walter look on ; and she make a garland for 
 her head of eglantine where the rose be the fair ; and with mingle 
 flower of the summer she wreathe her middle about , and let the garland 
 of they hang down to below her knee ; and knot of the flower she make 
 fast to the skirt of her coat , and do they for arm - ring about her 
 arm , and for anklet and sandal for her foot . then she set a garland 
 about Walter 's head , and then stand a little off from he and set she 
 foot together , and lift up her arm , and say : " lo now ! be I not as 
 like to the Mother of Summer as if I be clothe in silk and gold ? and even 
 so shall I be deem by the folk of the Bear . come now , thou shalt see 
 how all shall be well . " 

 she laugh joyously ; but he might scarce laugh for pity of his love . 
 then they set forth again , and begin to climb the hill , and the hour 
 wear as they go in sweet converse ; till at last Walter look on the 
 Maid , and smile on she , and say : " one thing I would say to thee , lovely 
 friend , to wit : wert thou clothe in silk and gold , thy stately raiment 
 might well suffer a few stain , or here and there a rent maybe ; but 
 stately would it be still when the folk of the Bear should come up 
 against thee . but as to this flowery array of thine , in a few hour it 
 shall be all fade and nought . Nay , even now , as I look on thee , the 
 meadow - sweet that hangeth from thy girdle - stead have waxen dull , and 
 welt ; and the blossoming eyebright that be for a hem to the little 
 white coat of thee be already forget how to be bright and blue . what 
 sayest thou then ? " 

 she laugh at his word , and stand still , and look back over her 
 shoulder , while with her finger she deal with the flower about she 
 side like to a bird preen his feather . then she say : " be it verily 
 so as thou sayest ? look again ! " 

 so he look , and wonder ; for lo ! beneath his eye the spire of the 
 meadow - sweet grow crisp and clear again , the eyebright blossom shine 
 once more over the whiteness of her leg ; the eglantine rose open , and 
 all be as fresh and bright as if it be still grow on its own root . 

 he wonder , and be even somedeal aghast ; but she say : " dear friend , be 
 not trouble ! do I not tell thee that I be wise in hidden lore ? but in 
 my wisdom shall be no long any scathe to any man . and again , this my 
 wisdom , as I tell thee erst , shall end on the day whereon I be make all 
 happy . and it be thou that shall wield it all , my Master . yet must my 
 wisdom need endure for a little season yet . let we on then , boldly and 
 happily . " 




 CHAPTER XXVI : they come to the folk of the bear 


 on they go , and before long they be come up on to the down - country , 
 where be scarce a tree , save gnarl and knotty thorn - bush here and 
 there , but nought else high than the whin . and here on these upper 
 land they see that the pasture be much burn with the drought , 
 albeit summer be not wear old . now they go make due south toward 
 the mountain , whose head they see from time to time rise deep blue 
 over the bleak greyness of the down - land ridge . and so they go , till 
 at last , hard on sunset , after they have climb long over a high bent , 
 they come to the brow thereof , and , look down , beheld new tiding . 

 there be a wide valley below they , green than the down which they have 
 come over , and greener yet amidmost , from the watering of a stream which , 
 all beset with willow , wound about the bottom . Sheep and neat be 
 pasture about the dale , and moreover a long line of smoke be go up 
 straight into the windless heaven from the midst of a ring of little 
 round house build of turf , and thatch with reed . and beyond that , 
 toward an eastward - lie bight of the dale , they could see what look 
 like to a doom - ring of big stone , though there be no rocky place in 
 that land . about the cooking - fire amidst of the house , and here and 
 there otherwhere , they see , stand or go to and fro , huge figure of 
 man and woman , with child play about betwixt they . 

 they stand and gaze down at it for a minute or two , and though all be 
 at peace there , yet to Walter , at least , it seem strange and awful . he 
 spake softly , as though he would not have his voice reach those man , 
 though they be , forsooth , out of earshot of anything save a shout : " be 
 these then the child of the Bear ? what shall we do now ? " 

 she say : " yea , of the Bear they be , though there be other folk of they 
 far and far away to the northward and eastward , near to the border of 
 the sea . and as to what we shall do , let we go down at once , and 
 peacefully . indeed , by now there will be no escape from they ; for lo 
 you ! they have see we . " 

 Forsooth , some three or four of the big man have turn they toward the 
 bent whereon stand the twain , and be hail they in huge , rough 
 voice , wherein , howsoever , seem to be no anger or threat . so the Maid 
 take Walter by the hand , and thus they go down quietly , and the Bear- 
 folk , see they , stand all together , face they , to abide their 
 come . Walter see of they , that though they be very tall and bigly 
 make , they be not so far above the stature of man as to be marvel . the 
 carle be long - haired , and shaggy of beard , and their hair all red or 
 tawny ; their skin , where their naked flesh show , be burn brown 
 with sun and weather , but to a fair and pleasant brown , nought like to 
 blackamoor . the quean be comely and well - eye ; nor be there 
 anything of fierce or evil - look about either the carle or the queans , 
 but somewhat grave and solemn of aspect be they . Clad be they all , 
 save the young man - child , but somewhat scantily , and in nought save 
 sheep - skin or deer - skin . 

 for weapon they see amongst they club , and spear head with bone or 
 flint , and ugly axis of big flint set in wooden handle ; nor be there , 
 as far as they could see , either now or afterward , any bow amongst they . 
 but some of the young man seem to have sling do about their 
 shoulder . 

 now when they be come but three fathom from they , the Maid lift up 
 her voice , and spake clearly and sweetly : " Hail , ye folk of the Bears ! we 
 have come amongst you , and that for your good and not for your hurt : 
 wherefore we would know if we be welcome . " 

 there be an old man who stand foremost in the midst , clothe in a mantle of 
 deer - skin work very goodly , and with a gold ring on his arm , and a 
 chaplet of blue stone on his head , and he spake : " little be ye , but so 
 goodly , that if ye be but big , we should deem that ye be come from 
 the Gods ' House . yet have I hear , that how mighty soever may the god 
 be , and chiefly our God , they be at while nought so bigly make as we of 
 the Bears . how this may be , I wot not . but if ye be not of the Gods or 
 their kindre , then be ye mere alien ; and we know not what to do with 
 alien , save we meet they in battle , or give they to the God , or save we 
 make they child of the Bear . but yet again , ye may be messenger of 
 some folk who would bind friendship and alliance with we : in which case 
 ye shall at the least depart in peace , and while ye be with we shall be 
 our guest in all good cheer . now , therefore , we bid you declare the 
 matter unto we . " 

 then spake the Maid : " Father , it be easy for we to declare what we be 
 unto you here present . but , meseemeth , ye who be gather round the fire 
 here this evening be less than the whole tale of the child of the 
 Bear . " 

 " so it be , Maiden , " say the elder , " that many more child hath the 
 Bear . " 

 " this then we bid you , " say the Maid , " that ye send the token round and 
 gather your people to you , and when they be assemble in the doom - ring , 
 then shall we put our errand before you ; and accord to that , shall ye 
 deal with we . " 

 " Thou hast speak well , " say the elder ; " and even so have we bid you 
 ourselves . to - morrow , before noon , shall ye stand in the doom - ring in 
 this Dale , and speak with the child of the Bear . " 

 Therewith he turn to his own folk and call out something , whereof 
 those twain know not the meaning ; and there come to he , one after 
 another , six young man , unto each of whom he give a thing from out his 
 pouch , but what it be Walter might not see , save that it be little and 
 of small account : to each , also , he spake a word or two , and straight 
 they set off run , one after the other , turn toward the bent which 
 be over against that whereby the twain have come into the Dale , and be 
 soon out of sight in the gathering dusk . 

 then the elder turn he again to Walter and the Maid , and spake : " man 
 and woman , whatsoever ye may be , or whatsoever may abide you to - morrow , 
 to - night , ye be welcome guest to we ; so we bid you come eat and drink 
 at our fire . " 

 so they sit all together upon the grass round about the ember of the 
 fire , and eat curd and cheese , and drink milk in abundance ; and as the 
 night grow on they they quicken the fire , that they might have light . 
 this wild folk talk merrily amongst themselves , with laughter enough 
 and friendly jest , but to the new - comer they be few - speak , though , 
 as the twain deem , for no enmity that they bear they . but this find 
 Walter , that the young one , both man and woman , seem to find it a 
 hard matter to keep their eye off they ; and seem , withal , to gaze on 
 they with somewhat of doubt , or , it might be , of fear . 

 so when the night be wear a little , the elder arise and bid the 
 twain to come with he , and lead they to a small house or booth , which be 
 amidmost of all , and somewhat big than the other , and he do they to 
 wit that they should rest there that night , and bid they sleep in peace 
 and without fear till the morrow . so they enter , and find bed 
 thereon of heather and ling , and they lay they down sweetly , like 
 brother and sister , when they have kiss each other . but they note that 
 four brisk man lie without the booth , and across the door , with their 
 weapon beside they , so that they must need look upon themselves as 
 captive . 

 then Walter might not refrain he , but spake : " sweet and dear friend , I 
 have come a long way from the quay at Langton , and the vision of the 
 Dwarf , the Maid , and the Lady ; and for this kiss wherewith I have kiss 
 thee e'en now , and the kindness of thine eye , it be worth the time and 
 the travail . but to - morrow , meseemeth , I shall go no far in this 
 world , though my journey be far long than from Langton hither . and now 
 may God and all Hallows keep thee amongst this wild folk , whenas I shall 
 be go from thee . " 

 she laugh low and sweetly , and say : " dear friend , dost thou speak to 
 I thus mournfully to move I to love thee well ? then be thy labour 
 lose ; for no well may I love thee than now I do ; and that be with mine 
 whole heart . but keep a good courage , I bid thee ; for we be not sunder 
 yet , nor shall we be . nor do I deem that we shall die here , or 
 to - morrow ; but many year hence , after we have know all the sweetness of 
 life . meanwhile , I bid thee good - night , fair friend ! " 




 CHAPTER XXVII : morning AMONGST the bear 


 so Walter lay he down and fall asleep , and know no more till he awake 
 in bright daylight with the Maid stand over he . she be fresh from 
 the water , for she have be to the river to bathe she , and the sun 
 through the open door fall stream on her foot close to Walter 's 
 pillow . he turn about and cast his arm about they , and caress they , 
 while she stand smile upon he ; then he arise and look on she , and 
 say : " how thou art fair and bright this morning ! and yet . . . and yet 
 . . . be it not well that thou do off thee all this fade and droop 
 bravery of leaf and blossom , that maketh thee look like to a 
 jongleur 's damsel on a morrow of May - day ? " 

 and he gaze ruefully on she . 

 she laugh on he merrily , and say : " yea , and belike these other think 
 no well of my attire , or not much well ; for yonder they be gather 
 small wood for the burn - offering ; which , forsooth , shall be thou and I , 
 unless I well it all by mean of the wisdom I learn of the old woman , 
 and perfect betwixt the stripe of my Mistress , whom a little while ago 
 thou lovedst somewhat . " 

 and as she spake her eye sparkle , her cheek flush , and her limb and 
 her foot seem as if they could scarce refrain from dance for joy . 
 then Walter knit his brow , and for a moment a thought half - frame be in 
 his mind : be it so , that she will bewray I and live without I ? and he 
 cast his eye on to the ground . but she say : " look up , and into mine 
 eye , friend , and see if there be in they any falseness toward thee ! for 
 I know thy thought ; I know thy thought . dost thou not see that my joy 
 and gladness be for the love of thee , and the thought of the rest from 
 trouble that be at hand ? " 

 he look up , and his eye meet the eye of her love , and he would have 
 cast his arm about she ; but she draw aback and say : " Nay , thou must 
 refrain thee awhile , dear friend , lest these folk cast eye on we , and 
 deem we over lover - like for what I be to bid they deem I . abide a 
 while , and then shall all be in I accord to thy will . but now I must 
 tell thee that it be not very far from noon , and that the bear be 
 stream into the Dale , and already there be an host of man at the doom- 
 ring , and , as I say , the bale for the burn - offering be wellnigh dight , 
 whether it be for we , or for some other creature . and now I have to bid 
 thee this , and it will be a thing easy for thee to do , to wit , that thou 
 look as if thou wert of the race of the Gods , and not to blench , or show 
 sign of blenching , whatever betide : to yea - say both my yea - say and my nay- 
 say : and lastly this , which be the only hard thing for thee   but thou 
 hast already do it before somewhat , to look upon I with no masterful 
 eye of love , nor as if thou wert at once pray I and command I ; 
 rather thou shalt so demean thee as if thou wert my man all simply , and 
 nowise my master . " 

 " o friend belove , " say Walter , " here at least art thou the master , and 
 I will do all thy bidding , in certain hope of this , that either we shall 
 live together or die together . " 

 but as they speak , in come the elder , and with he a young maiden , 
 bear with they their breakfast of curd arid cream and strawberry , 
 and he bid they eat . so they eat , and be not unmerry ; and the while 
 of their eat the elder talk with they soberly , but not hardly , or 
 with any seeming enmity : and ever his talk gat on to the drought , which 
 be now burn up the down - pasture ; and how the grass in the water 
 dale , which be no wide spread of land , would not hold out much long 
 unless the God send they rain . and Walter note that those two , the 
 elder and the Maid , eye each other curiously amidst of this talk ; the 
 elder intent on what she might say , and if she give heed to his word ; 
 while on her side the Maid answer his speech graciously and pleasantly , 
 but say little that be of any import : nor would she have he fix her 
 eye , which wander lightly from this thing to that ; nor would her lip 
 grow stern and stable , but ever smile in answer to the light of her 
 eye , as she sit there with her face as the very face of the gladness of 
 the summer day . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII : of the new GOD of the bear 


 at last the old man say : " my child , ye shall now come with I unto 
 the doom - ring of our folk , the bear of the Southern Dales , and deliver 
 to they your errand ; and I beseech you to have pity upon your own body , 
 as I have pity on they ; on thine especially , Maiden , so fair and bright a 
 creature as thou art ; for so it be , that if ye deal we out light and 
 lie word after the manner of dastard , ye shall miss the worship and 
 glory of wend away amidst of the flame , a gift to the God and a hope 
 to the people , and shall be pass by the rod of the folk , until ye 
 faint and fail amongst they , and then shall ye be thrust down into the 
 flow at the Dale 's end , and a stone - laden hurdle cast upon you , that we 
 may thenceforth forget your folly . " 

 the Maid now look full into his eye , and Walter deem that the old 
 man shrink before she ; but she say : " thou art old and wise , o great man 
 of the Bears , yet nought I need to learn of thee . now lead we on our way 
 to the Stead of the Errands . " 

 so the elder bring they along to the doom - ring at the eastern end of 
 the Dale ; and it be now all people with those huge man , weapone after 
 their fashion , and stand up , so that the grey stone thereof but 
 show a little over their head . but amidmost of the say Ring be a 
 big stone , fashion as a chair , whereon sit a very old man , long - hoary 
 and white - bearded , and on either side of he stand a great - limbe woman 
 clothe in war - gear , holding , each of they , a long spear , and with a flint- 
 bladed knife in the girdle ; and there be no other woman in all the 
 Mote . 

 then the elder lead those twain into the midst of the Mote , and there bade 
 they go up on to a wide , flat - top stone , six foot above the ground , 
 just over against the ancient chieftain ; and they mount it by a rough 
 stair , and stand there before that folk ; Walter in his array of the 
 outward world , which have be fair enough , of crimson cloth and silk , and 
 white linen , but be now travel - stain and worn ; and the Maid with 
 nought upon she , save the smock wherein she have flee from the Golden 
 House of the Wood beyond the World , deck with the fade flower which 
 she have wreathe about she yesterday . nevertheless , so it be , that 
 those big man eye she intently , and with somewhat of worship . 

 now do Walter , accord to her bidding , sink down on his knee beside 
 she , and draw his sword , hold it before he , as if to keep all 
 interloper aloof from the Maid . and there be silence in the Mote , and 
 all eye be fix on those twain . 

 at last the old chief arise and spake : " ye man , here be come a man and a 
 woman , we know not whence ; whereas they have give word to our folk who 
 first meet they , that they would tell their errand to none save the Mote 
 of the People ; which it be their due to do , if they be minded to risk 
 it . for either they be alien without an errand hither , save , it may be , 
 to beguile we , in which case they shall presently die an evil death ; or 
 they have come amongst we that we may give they to the God with flint- 
 edge and fire ; or they have a message to we from some folk or other , on 
 the issue of which lieth life or death . now shall ye hear what they have 
 to say concern themselves and their fare hither . but , meseemeth , it 
 shall be the woman who be the chief and hath the word in her mouth ; for , 
 lo you ! the man kneeleth at her foot , as one who would serve and worship 
 she . speak out then , woman , and let our warrior hear thee . " 

 then the Maid lift up her voice , and spake out clear and shrilling , 
 like to a flute of the good of the minstrel : " ye man of the Children of 
 the Bear , I would ask you a question , and let the chieftain who sitteth 
 before I answer it . " 

 the old man nod his head , and she go on : " tell I , child of the 
 Bear , how long a time be wear since ye see the God of your worship make 
 manifest in the body of a woman ! " 

 say the elder : " many winter have wear since my father 's father be a 
 child , and see the very God in the bodily form of a woman . " 

 then she say again : " do ye rejoice at she come , and would ye rejoice 
 if once more she come amongst you ? " 

 " Yea , " say the old chieftain , " for she give we gift , and learn we 
 lore , and come to we in no terrible shape , but as a young woman as goodly 
 as thou . " 

 then say the Maid : " now , then , be the day of your gladness come ; for the 
 old body be dead , and I be the new body of your God , come amongst you for 
 your welfare . " 

 then fall a great silence on the Mote , till the old man spake and say : 
 " what shall I say and live ? for if thou be verily the God , and I 
 threaten thee , wilt thou not destroy I ? but thou hast speak a great 
 word with a sweet mouth , and hast take the burden of blood on thy lily 
 hand ; and if the child of the Bear be befool of light liar , how 
 shall they put the shame off they ? therefore I say , show to we a token ; 
 and if thou be the God , this shall be easy to thee ; and if thou show it 
 not , then be thy falsehood manifest , and thou shalt dree the weird . for 
 we shall deliver thee into the hand of these woman here , who shall 
 thrust thee down into the flow which be hereby , after they have weary 
 themselves with whip thee . but thy man that kneeleth at thy foot 
 shall we give to the true God , and he shall go to she by the road of the 
 flint and the fire . Hast thou hear ? then give to we the sign and the 
 token . " 

 she change countenance no whit at his word ; but her eye be the 
 brighter , and her cheek the fresher and her foot move a little , as if 
 they be grow glad before the dance ; and she look out over the 
 Mote , and spake in her clear voice : " old man , thou needest not to fear 
 for thy word . Forsooth it be not I whom thou threaten with stripe 
 and a foul death , but some light fool and liar , who be not here . now 
 hearken ! I wot well that ye would have somewhat of I , to wit , that I 
 should send you rain to end this drought , which otherwise seemeth like to 
 lie long upon you : but this rain , I must go into the mountain of the 
 south to fetch it you ; therefore shall certain of your warrior bring I 
 on my way , with this my man , up to the great pass of the say mountain , 
 and we shall set out thitherward this very day . " 

 she be silent a while , and all look on she , but none spake or move , 
 so that they seem as image of stone amongst the stone . 

 then she spake again and say : " some would say , man of the Bear , that 
 this be a sign and a token great enough ; but I know you , and how 
 stubborn and perverse of heart ye be ; and how that the gift not yet 
 within your hand be no gift to you ; and the wonder ye see not , your 
 heart trow not . therefore look ye upon I as here I stand , I who have 
 come from the fair country and the greenwood of the land , and see if I 
 bear not the summer with I , and the heart that maketh increase and the 
 hand that giveth . " 

 lo then ! as she spake , the fade flower that hang about her gather 
 life and grow fresh again ; the woodbine round her neck and her sleek 
 shoulder knit itself together and embrace she freshly , and cast its 
 scent about her face . the lily that gird her loin lift up their 
 head , and the gold of their tassel fall upon she ; the eyebright grow 
 clean blue again upon her smock ; the eglantine find its bloom again , 
 and then begin to shed the leaf thereof upon her foot ; the meadow - sweet 
 wreathe amongst it make clear the sweetness of her leg , and the mouse- 
 ear stud her raiment as with gem . there she stand amidst of the 
 blossom , like a great orient pearl against the fretwork of the 
 goldsmith , and the breeze that come up the valley from behind bore the 
 sweetness of her fragrance all over the man - mote . 

 then , indeed , the Bears stand up , and shout and cry , and smote on 
 their shield , and toss their spear aloft . then the elder rise from 
 his seat , and come up humbly to where she stand , and pray she to say 
 what she would have do ; while the other draw about in knot , but durst 
 not come very nigh to she . she answer the ancient chief , and say , 
 that she would depart presently toward the mountain , whereby she might 
 send they the rain which they lack , and that thence she would away to 
 the southward for a while ; but that they should hear of she , or , it might 
 be , see she , before they who be now of middle age should be go to 
 their father . 

 then the old man besought she that they might make she a litter of 
 fragrant green bough , and so bear she away toward the mountain pass 
 amidst a triumph of the whole folk . but she leapt lightly down from the 
 stone , and walk to and fro on the greensward , while it seem of she 
 that her foot scarce touch the grass ; and she spake to the ancient 
 chief where he still kneel in worship of she , and say " Nay ; deem 
 thou of I that I need bear by man 's hand , or that I shall tire at 
 all when I be do my will , and I , the very heart of the year 's 
 increase ? so it be , that the going of my foot over your pasture shall 
 make they to thrive , both this year and the come year : surely will I 
 go afoot . " 

 so they worship she the more , and bless she ; and then first of all 
 they bring meat , the daintiest they might , both for she and for Walter . 
 but they would not look on the Maid while she eat , or suffer Walter to 
 behold she the while . afterwards , when they have eat , some twenty man , 
 weapone after their fashion , make they ready to wend with the Maiden up 
 into the mountain , and anon they set out thitherward all together . 
 Howbeit , the huge man hold they ever somewhat aloof from the Maid ; and 
 when they come to the resting - place for that night , where be no house , 
 for it be up amongst the foot - hill before the mountain , then it be a 
 wonder to see how carefully they build up a sleep - place for she , and 
 tilt it over with their skin - cloak , and how they watch nightlong 
 about she . but Walter they let sleep peacefully on the grass , a little 
 way aloof from the watcher round the Maid . 




 CHAPTER XXIX : WALTER stray in the PASS and be sunder from the MAID 


 Morning come , and they arise and go on their way , and go all day 
 till the sun be nigh set , and they be come up into the very pass ; and 
 in the jaw thereof be an earthen howe . there the Maid bid they stay , 
 and she go up on to the howe , and stand there and spake to they , and 
 say : " o man of the Bear , I give you thank for your following , and I 
 bless you , and promise you the increase of the earth . but now ye shall 
 turn aback , and leave I to go my way ; and my man with the iron sword 
 shall follow I . now , maybe , I shall come amongst the Bear - folk again 
 before long , and yet again , and learn they wisdom ; but for this time it 
 be enough . and I shall tell you that ye be good to hasten home 
 straightway to your house in the downland dale , for the weather which I 
 have bid for you be even now come forth from the forge of storm in 
 the heart of the mountain . now this last word I give you , that time 
 be change since I wear the last shape of God that ye have see , 
 wherefore a change I command you . if so be alien come amongst you , I 
 will not that ye send they to I by the flint and the fire ; rather , 
 unless they be baleful unto you , and worthy of an evil death , ye shall 
 suffer they to abide with you ; ye shall make they become child of the 
 Bears , if they be goodly enough and worthy , and they shall be my child 
 as ye be ; otherwise , if they be ill - favour and weakling , let they live 
 and be thrall to you , but not join with you , man to woman . now depart 
 ye with my blessing . " 

 Therewith she come down from the mound , and go her way up the pass so 
 lightly , that it be to Walter , stand amongst the bear , as if she have 
 vanish away . but the man of that folk abode stand and worship 
 their God for a little while , and that while he durst not sunder he from 
 their company . but when they have bless he and go on their way 
 backward , he betake he in haste to follow the Maid , think to find 
 she abide he in some nook of the pass . 

 Howsoever , it be now twilight or more , and , for all his haste , dark 
 night overtake he , so that perforce he be stay amidst the tangle of 
 the mountain way . and , moreover , ere the night be grow old , the 
 weather come upon he on the back of a great south wind , so that the 
 mountain nook rattle and roar , and there be the rain and the hail , 
 with thunder and lightning , monstrous and terrible , and all the huge 
 array of a summer storm . so he be drive at last to crouch under a big 
 rock and abide the day . 

 but not so be his trouble at an end . for under the say rock he fall 
 asleep , and when he awake it be day indeed ; but as to the pass , the way 
 thereby be blind with the drive rain and the lower lift ; so that , 
 though he struggle as well as he might against the storm and the tangle , 
 he make but little way . 

 and now once more the thought come on he , that the Maid be of the fay , 
 or of some race even mightier ; and it come on he now not as erst , with 
 half fear and whole desire , but with a bitter oppression of dread , of 
 loss and misery ; so that he begin to fear that she have but win his love 
 to leave he and forget he for a new - comer , after the will not of fay - woman , 
 as old tale tell . 

 two day he battle thus with storm and blindness , and wanhope of his 
 life ; for he be grow weak and fordone . but the third morning the 
 storm abate , though the rain yet fall heavily , and he could see his way 
 somewhat as well as feel it : withal he find that now his path be 
 lead he downwards . as it grow dusk , he come down into a grassy 
 valley with a stream run through it to the southward , and the rain 
 be now but little , come down but in dash from time to time . so he 
 creep down to the stream - side , and lie amongst the bush there ; and say 
 to himself , that on the morrow he would get he victual , so that he might 
 live to seek his Maiden through the wide world . he be of somewhat 
 well heart : but now that he be lay quiet , and have no more for that 
 present to trouble he about the way , the anguish of his loss fall upon 
 he the keener , and he might not refrain he from lament his dear 
 Maiden aloud , as one who deem himself in the empty wilderness : and thus 
 he lament for her sweetness and her loveliness , and the kindness of her 
 voice and her speech , and her mirth . then he fall to cry out 
 concern the beauty of her shaping , praise the part of her body , as 
 her face , and her hand , and her shoulder , and her foot , and curse the 
 evil fate which have sunder he from the friendliness of she , and the 
 peerless fashion of she . 




 CHAPTER XXX : now they meet again 


 complain thus - wise , he fall asleep from sheer weariness , and when he 
 awake it be broad day , calm and bright and cloudless , with the scent of 
 the earth refresh go up into the heaven , and the bird sing 
 sweetly in the bush about he : for the dale whereunto he be now come 
 be a fair and lovely place amidst the shelving slope of the mountain , 
 a paradise of the wilderness , and nought but pleasant and sweet thing 
 be to be see there , now that the morn be so clear and sunny . 

 he arise and look about he , and see where , a hundred yard aloof , be 
 a thicket of small wood , as thorn and elder and whitebeam , all wreathe 
 about with the bine of wayfare tree ; it hide a bight of the stream , 
 which turn round about it , and betwixt it and Walter be the grass 
 short and thick , and sweet , and all beset with flower ; and he say to 
 himself that it be even such a place as wherein the angel be lead 
 the bless in the great paint paradise in the choir of the big church 
 at Langton on Holm . but lo ! as he look he cry aloud for joy , for 
 forth from the thicket on to the flowery grass come one like to an angel 
 from out of the say picture , white - clothe and bare - foot , sweet of flesh , 
 with bright eye and ruddy cheek ; for it be the Maid herself . so he 
 run to she , and she abode he , hold forth kind hand to he , and 
 smile , while she weep for joy of the meeting . he throw himself upon 
 she , and spar not to kiss she , her cheek and her mouth , and her arm 
 and her shoulder , and wheresoever she would suffer it . till at last she 
 draw aback a little , laugh on he for love , and say : " forbear now , 
 friend , for it be enough for this time , and tell I how thou hast speed . " 

 " Ill , ill , " say he . 

 " what ail thee ? " she say . 

 " Hunger , " he say , " and long for thee . " 

 " well , " she say , " I thou hast ; there be one ill quench ; take my hand , 
 and we will see to the other one . " 

 so he take her hand , and to hold it seem to he sweet beyond measure . 
 but he look up , and see a little blue smoke go up into the air from 
 beyond the thicket ; and he laugh , for he be weak with hunger , and he 
 say : " who be at the cooking yonder ? " 

 " thou shalt see , " she say ; and lead he therewith into the said thicket 
 and through it , and lo ! a fair little grassy place , full of flower , 
 betwixt the bush and the bight of the stream ; and on the little sandy 
 ere , just off the greensward , be a fire of stick , and beside it two 
 trout lie , fat and red - flecked . 

 " here be the breakfast , " say she ; " when it be time to wash the night 
 off I e'en now , I go down the strand here into the ripple shallow , 
 and see the bank below it , where the water draw together yonder , and 
 deepen , that it seem like to hold fish ; and whereas I look to meet 
 thee presently , I grope the bank for they , go softly ; and lo thou ! 
 help I now , that we cook they . " 

 so they roast they on the red ember , and fall to and eat well , both of 
 they , and drink of the water of the stream out of each other 's hollow 
 hand ; and that feast seem glorious to they , such gladness go with 
 it . 

 but when they be do with their meat , Walter say to the Maid : " and 
 how didst thou know that thou shouldst see I presently ? " 

 she say , look on he wistfully : " this need no wizardry . I lay not 
 so far from thee last night , but that I hear thy voice and know it . " 

 say he , " why didst thou not come to I then , since thou heardest I 
 bemoan thee ? " 

 she cast her eye down , and pluck at the flower and grass , and say : 
 " it be dear to hear thee praise I ; I know not before that I be so 
 sore desire , or that thou hadst take such note of my body , and find it 
 so dear . " 

 then she redden sorely , and say : " I know not that aught of I have such 
 beauty as thou didst bewail . " 

 and she weep for joy . then she look on he and smile , and say : " wilt 
 thou have the very truth of it ? I go close up to thee , and stand there 
 hide by the bush and the night . and amidst thy bewailing , I know 
 that thou wouldst soon fall asleep , and in sooth I out - wake thee . " 

 then be she silent again ; and he spake not , but look on she shyly ; and 
 she say , redden yet more : " furthermore , I must need tell thee that I 
 fear to go to thee in the dark night , and my heart so yearn towards 
 thee . " 

 and she hang her head adown ; but he say : " be it so indeed , that thou 
 fear I ? then doth that make I afraid - afraid of thy nay - say . for I 
 be go to entreat thee , and say to thee : Beloved , we have now go 
 through many trouble ; let we now take a good reward at once , and we d 
 together , here amidst this sweet and pleasant house of the mountain , ere 
 we go far on our way ; if indeed we go far at all . for where 
 shall we find any place sweet or happy than this ? " 

 but she spring up to her foot , and stand there tremble before he , 
 because of her love ; and she say : " Beloved , I have deem that it be 
 good for we to go seek mankind as they live in the world , and to live 
 amongst they . and as for I , I will tell thee the sooth , to wit , that I 
 long for this sorely . for I feel afraid in the wilderness , and as if I 
 need help and protection against my mistress , though she be dead ; and I 
 need the comfort of many people , and the throng of the city . I can not 
 forget she : it be but last night that I dream   I suppose as the dawn 
 grow a - cold   that I be yet under her hand , and she be strip I for 
 the torment ; so that I wake up pant and cry out . I pray thee be 
 not angry with I for tell thee of my desire ; for if thou wouldst not 
 have it so , then here will I abide with thee as thy mate , and strive to 
 gather courage . " 

 he rise up and kiss her face , and say : " Nay , I have in sooth no mind to 
 abide here for ever ; I mean but that we should feast a while here , and 
 then depart : sooth it be , that if thou dread the wilderness , somewhat 
 I dread the city . " 

 she turn pale , and say : " thou shalt have thy will , my friend , if it 
 must be so . but bethink thee we be not yet at our journey 's end , and may 
 have many thing and much strife to endure , before we be at peace and in 
 welfare . now shall I tell thee - do I not before ? - that while I be a 
 maid untouched , my wisdom , and somedeal of might , abideth with I , and 
 only so long . therefore I entreat thee , let we go now , side by side , out 
 of this fair valley , even as we be , so that my wisdom and might may help 
 thee at need . for , my friend , I would not that our life be short , so 
 much of joy as hath now come into they . " 

 " yea , beloved , " he say , " let we on straightway then , and shorten the 
 while that sundereth we . " 

 " love , " she say , " thou shalt pardon I one time for all . but this be to 
 be say , that I know somewhat of the hap that lie a little way ahead of 
 we ; partly by my lore , and partly by what I learn of this land of the 
 wild folk while thou wert lie asleep that morning . " 

 so they leave that pleasant place by the water , and come into the open 
 valley , and go their way through the pass ; and it soon become stony 
 again , as they mount the bent which go up from out the dale . and 
 when they come to the brow of the say bent , they have a sight of the open 
 country lie fair and joyous in the sunshine , and amidst of it , against 
 the blue hill , the wall and tower of a great city . 

 then say the Maid : " o , dear friend , lo you ! be not that our abode that 
 lieth yonder , and be so beauteous ? Dwell not our friend there , and our 
 protection against uncouth wight , and mere evil thing in guileful 
 shape ? o city , I bid thee hail ! " 

 but Walter look on she , and smile somewhat ; and say : " I rejoice in 
 thy joy . but there be evil thing in yonder city also , though they be 
 not fay nor devil , or it be like to no city that I wot of . and in 
 every city shall foe grow up to we without rhyme or reason , and life 
 therein shall be tangle unto we . " 

 " Yea , " she say ; " but in the wilderness amongst the devil , what be to 
 be do by manly might or valiancy ? there hadst thou to fall back upon 
 the guile and wizardry which I have filch from my very foe . but when 
 we come down yonder , then shall thy valiancy prevail to cleave the tangle 
 for we . or at the least , it shall leave a tale of thee behind , and I 
 shall worship thee . " 

 he laugh , and his face grow bright : " Mastery mow the meadow , " quoth 
 he , " and one man be of little might against many . but I promise thee I 
 shall not be slothful before thee . " 




 CHAPTER xxxi : they come UPON NEW FOLK 


 with that they go down from the bent again , and come to where the pass 
 narrow so much , that they go betwixt a steep wall of rock on either 
 side ; but after an hour 's going , the say wall give back suddenly , and , 
 or they be ware almost , they come on another dale like to that which 
 they have leave , but not so fair , though it be grassy and well water , 
 and not so big either . but here indeed befell a change to they ; for lo ! 
 tent and pavilion pitch in the said valley , and amidst of it a throng 
 of man , mostly weapone , and with horse ready saddle at hand . so they 
 stay their foot , and Walter 's heart fail he , for he say to himself : 
 who wotteth what these man may be , save that they be alien ? it be most 
 like that we shall be take as thrall ; and then , at the good , we shall 
 be sunder ; and that be all one with the bad . 

 but the Maid , when she see the horse , and the gay tent , and the pennon 
 fluttering , and the glitter of spear , and gleam of white armour , 
 smite her palm together for joy , and cry out : " here now be come the 
 folk of the city for our welcoming , and fair and lovely be they , and of 
 many thing shall they be think , and a many thing shall they do , and 
 we shall be partaker thereof . come then , and let we meet they , fair 
 friend ! " 

 but Walter say : " alas ! thou know not : would that we might flee ! but 
 now be it over late ; so put we a good face on it , and go to they quietly , 
 as erewhile we do in the Bear - country . " 

 so do they ; and there sunder six from the man - at - arm and come to 
 those twain , and make humble obeisance to Walter , but spake no word . then 
 they make as they would lead they to the other , and the twain go with 
 they wonder , and come into the ring of man - at - arm , and stand before 
 an old hoar knight , arm all , save his head , with most goodly armour , 
 and he also bow before Walter , but spake no word . then they take they 
 to the master pavilion , and make sign to they to sit , and they bring 
 they dainty meat and good wine . and the while of their eating arise up a 
 stir about they ; and when they be do with their meat , the ancient 
 knight come to they , still bow in courteous wise , and do they to wit 
 by sign that they should depart : and when they be without , they see 
 all the other tent strike , and man begin to busy they with strike 
 the pavilion , and the other mount and rank in good order for the 
 road ; and there be two horse - litter before they , wherein they be 
 bid to mount , Walter in one , and the Maid in the other , and no 
 otherwise might they do . then presently be a horn blown , and all take 
 to the road together ; and Walter see betwixt the curtain of the litter 
 that man - at - arm ride on either side of he , albeit they have leave he his 
 sword by his side . 

 so they go down the mountain - pass , and before sunset be get into 
 the plain ; but they make no stay for nightfall , save to eat a morsel and 
 drink a draught , go through the night as man who know their way well . 
 as they go , Walter wonder what would betide , and if peradventure they 
 also would be for offer they up to their Gods ; whereas they be 
 alien for certain , and belike also Saracens . moreover there be a cold 
 fear at his heart that he should be sunder from the Maid , whereas their 
 master now be mighty man of war , hold in their hand that which all 
 man desire , to wit , the manifest beauty of a woman . yet he strove to 
 think the good of it that he might . and so at last , when the night be 
 far spend , and dawn be at hand , they stay at a great and mighty gate 
 in a huge wall . there they blow loudly on the horn thrice , and 
 thereafter the gate be open , and they all pass through into a 
 street , which seem to Walter in the glimmer to be both great and goodly 
 amongst the abode of man . then it be but a little ere they come into a 
 square , wide - spread , one side whereof Walter take to be the front of a 
 most goodly house . there the door of the court open to they or ever 
 the horn might blow , though , forsooth , blow it do loudly three time ; 
 all they enter therein , and man come to Walter and sign to he to 
 alight . so do he , and would have tarry to look about for the Maid , 
 but they suffer it not , but lead he up a huge stair into a chamber , 
 very great , and but dimly light because of its greatness . then they 
 bring he to a bed dight as fair as might be , and make sign to he to 
 strip and lie therein . perforce he do so , and then they bear away his 
 raiment , and leave he lie there . so he lie there quietly , deem it 
 no avail for he , a mother - naked man , to seek escape thence ; but it be 
 long ere he might sleep , because of his trouble of mind . at last , pure 
 weariness get the well of his hope and fear , and he fall into slumber 
 just as the dawn be pass into day . 




 CHAPTER XXXII : of the new king of the CITY and land of STARK - WALL 


 when he awake again the sun be shin brightly into that chamber , and 
 he look , and beheld that it be peerless of beauty and rich , amongst 
 all that he have ever see : the ceiling do with gold and over - sea blue ; 
 the wall hang with arra of the fairest , though he might not tell what 
 be the history do therein . the chair and stool be of carven work 
 well be - paint , and amidmost be a great ivory chair under a cloth of 
 estate , of bawdekin of gold and green , much be - pearl ; and all the floor 
 be of fine work alexandrine . 

 he look on all this , wonder what have befall he , when lo ! there 
 come folk into the chamber , to wit , two serve - man well - bedight , and 
 three old man clothe in rich gown of silk . these come to he and   still 
 by sign , without speech   bid he arise and come with they ; and when he 
 bid they look to it that he be naked , and laugh doubtfully , they 
 neither laugh in answer , nor offer he any raiment , but still would 
 have he arise , and he do so perforce . they bring he with they out 
 of the chamber , and through certain passage pillare and goodly , till 
 they come to a bath as fair as any might be ; and there the serve - man 
 wash he carefully and tenderly , the old man look on the while . when 
 it be do , still they offer not to clothe he , but lead he out , and 
 through the passage again , back to the chamber . only this time he must 
 pass between a double hedge of man , some weapone , some in peaceful 
 array , but all clothe gloriously , and full chieftain - like of aspect , either 
 for valiancy or wisdom . 

 in the chamber itself be now a concourse of man , of great estate by 
 deeming of their array ; but all these be stand orderly in a ring 
 about the ivory chair aforesaid . now say Walter to himself : surely all 
 this look toward the knife and the altar for I ; but he keep a stout 
 countenance despite of all . 

 so they lead he up to the ivory chair , and he behold on either side 
 thereof a bench , and on each be lay a set of raiment from the shirt 
 upwards ; but there be much diversity betwixt these array . for one be 
 all of robe of peace , glorious and be - gem , unmeet for any save a 
 great king ; while the other be war - weed , seemly , well - fashion , but 
 little adorn ; nay rather , wear and bestaine with weather , and the 
 pelting of the spear - storm . 

 now those old man sign to Walter to take which of those raiment he 
 would , and do it on . he look to the right and the left , and when he 
 have look on the war - gear , the heart arise in he , and he call to mind 
 the array of the Goldings in the forefront of battle , and he make one 
 step toward the weapon , and lay his hand thereon . then run a glad 
 murmur through that concourse , and the old man draw up to he smile and 
 joyous , and help he to do they on ; and as he take up the helm , he 
 note that over its broad brown iron sit a golden crown . 

 so when he be clothe and weapone , girt with a sword , and a steel axe in 
 his hand , the elder show he to the ivory throne , and he lay the axe 
 on the arm of the chair , and draw forth the sword from the scabbard , and 
 sit he down , and lay the ancient blade across his knee ; then he look 
 about on those great man , and spake : " how long shall we speak no word to 
 each other , or be it so that God hath stricken you dumb ? " 

 then all they cry out with one voice : " all hail to the King , the king 
 of Battle ! " 

 Spake Walter : " if I be king , will ye do my will as I bid you ? " 

 answer the elder : " Nought have we will to do , lord , save as thou 
 bidd . " 

 say Walter : " Thou then , wilt thou answer a question in all truth ? " 

 " Yea , lord , " say the elder , " if I may live afterward . " 

 then say Walter : " the woman that come with I into your Camp of the 
 Mountain , what hath befall she ? " 

 the elder answer : " Nought hath befall she , either of good or evil , 
 save that she hath sleep and eat and bath she . what , then , be the 
 King 's pleasure concern she ? " 

 " that ye bring her hither to I straightway , " say Walter . 

 " Yea , " say the elder ; " and in what guise shall we bring her hither ? 
 shall she be array as a servant , or a great lady ? " 

 then Walter ponder a while , and spake at last : " ask she what be she 
 will herein , and as she will have it , so let it be . but set ye another 
 chair beside mine , and lead her thereto . thou wise old man , send one or 
 two to bring she in hither , but abide thou , for I have a question or two 
 to ask of thee yet . and ye , lord , abide here the coming of my 
 she - fellow , if it weary you not . " 

 so the eld spake to three of the most honourable of the lord , and they 
 go their way to bring in the Maid . 




 CHAPTER xxxiii : concern the fashion of king - making in STARK - WALL 


 meanwhile the King spake to the elder , and say : " now tell I whereof I 
 be become king , and what be the fashion and cause of the king - making ; for 
 wondrous it be to I , whereas I be but an alien amidst of mighty man . " 

 " Lord , " say the old man , " thou art become king of a mighty city , which 
 hath under it many other city and wide land , and haven by the sea- 
 side , and which lacketh no wealth which man desire . many wise man dwell 
 therein , and of fool not more than in other land . a valiant host shall 
 follow thee to battle when need must thou wend afield ; an host not to be 
 withstood , save by the ancient God - folk , if any of they be leave upon 
 the earth , as belike none be . and as to the name of our said city , it 
 hight the City of the Stark - wall , or more shortly , Stark - wall . now as to 
 the fashion of our king - making : if our king dieth and leaveth an heir 
 male , beget of his body , then be he king after he ; but if he die and 
 leave no heir , then send we out a great lord , with knight and sergeant , 
 to that pass of the mountain whereto ye come yesterday ; and the first man 
 that cometh unto they , they take and lead to the city , as they do with 
 thee , lord . for we believe and trow that of old time our forefather 
 come down from the mountain by that same pass , poor and rude , but full 
 of valiancy , before they conquer these land , and build the Stark- 
 wall . but now furthermore , when we have get the say wanderer , and 
 bring he home to our city , we behold he mother - naked , all the great 
 man of we , both sage and warrior ; then if we find he ill - fashioned and 
 counterfeit of his body , we roll he in a great carpet till he die ; or 
 while , if he be but a simple man , and without guile , we deliver he for 
 thrall to some artificer amongst we , as a shoemaker , a wright , or what 
 not , and so forget he . but in either case we make as if no such man have 
 come to we , and we send again the lord and his knight to watch the pass ; 
 for we say that such an one the Fathers of old time have not send we . but 
 again , when we have see to the new - comer that he be well - fashioned of 
 his body , all be not do ; for we deem that never would the Fathers send 
 we a dolt or a craven to be our king . therefore we bid the naked one 
 take to he which he will of these raiment , either the ancient armour , 
 which now thou bearest , lord , or this golden raiment here ; and if he take 
 the war - gear , as thou takedst it , King , it be well ; but if he take the 
 raiment of peace , then hath he the choice either to be thrall of some 
 goodman of the city , or to be prove how wise he may be , and so fare the 
 narrow edge betwixt death and kingship ; for if he fall short of his 
 wisdom , then shall he die the death . thus be thy question answer , 
 King , and praise be to the Fathers that they have send we one whom none 
 may doubt , either for wisdom or valiancy . " 




 CHAPTER XXXIV : now COMETH the maid to the king 


 then all they bow before the king , and he spake again : " what be that 
 noise that I hear without , as if it be the rise of the sea on a sandy 
 shore , when the south - west wind be blow . " 

 then the elder open his mouth to answer ; but before he might get out 
 the word , there be a stir without the chamber door , and the throng 
 part , and lo ! amidst of they come the Maid , and she yet clothe in nought 
 save the white coat wherewith she have win through the wilderness , save 
 that on her head be a garland of red rose , and her middle be wreathe 
 with the same . fresh and fair she be as the dawn of June ; her face 
 bright , red - lipped , and clear - eye , and her cheek flush with hope and 
 love . she go straight to Walter where he sit , and lightly put away 
 with her hand the elder who would lead she to the ivory throne beside the 
 king ; but she kneel down before he , and lay her hand on his steel - clothe 
 knee , and say : " o my lord , now I see that thou hast beguile I , and 
 that thou wert all along a king - bear man come home to thy realm . but 
 so dear thou hast be to I ; and so fair and clear , and so kind withal 
 do thine eye shine on I from under the grey war - helm , that I will 
 beseech thee not to cast I out utterly , but suffer I to be thy servant 
 and handmaid for a while . wilt thou not ? " 

 but the King stoop down to she and raise she up , and stand on his 
 foot , and take her hand and kiss they , and set she down beside he , 
 and say to she : " Sweetheart , this be now thy place till the night 
 cometh , even by my side . " 

 so she sit down there meek and valiant , her hand lay in her lap , and 
 her foot one over the other ; while the King say : " lord , this be my 
 beloved , and my spouse . now , therefore , if ye will have I for King , ye 
 must worship this one for Queen and Lady ; or else suffer we both to go 
 our way in peace . " 

 then all they that be in the chamber cry out aloud : " the Queen , the 
 Lady ! the beloved of our lord ! " 

 and this cry come from their heart , and not their lip only ; for as they 
 look on she , and the brightness of her beauty , they see also the 
 meekness of her demeanour , and the high heart of she , and they all fall 
 to love she . but the young man of they , their cheek flush as they 
 behold she , and their heart go out to she , and they draw their sword 
 and brandish they aloft , and cry out for she as man make suddenly 
 drunk with love : " the Queen , the Lady , the lovely one ! " 




 CHAPTER xxxv : of the king of STARK - WALL and his queen 


 but while this betid , that murmur without , which be aforesaid , grow 
 louder ; and it smite on the King 's ear , and he say again to the elder : 
 " tell we now of that noise withoutward , what be it ? " 

 say the elder : " if thou , King , and the Queen , wilt but arise and stand 
 in the window , and go forth into the hang gallery thereof , then shall 
 ye know at once what be this rumour , and therewithal shall ye see a sight 
 meet to rejoice the heart of a king new come into kingship . " 

 so the King arise and take the Maid by the hand , and go to the window 
 and look forth ; and lo ! the great square of the place all throng with 
 folk as thick as they could stand , and the more part of the carle with a 
 weapon in hand , and many armed right gallantly . then he go out into 
 the gallery with his queen , still hold her hand , and his lord and 
 wise man stand behind he . Straightway then arise a cry , and a shout of 
 joy and welcome that rent the very heaven , and the great place be all 
 glitter and strange with the tossing up of spear and the brandish 
 of sword , and the stretching forth of hand . 

 but the Maid spake softly to King Walter and say : " here then be the 
 wilderness leave behind a long way , and here be ward and protection 
 against the foe of our life and soul . o bless be thou and thy valiant 
 heart ! " 

 but Walter spake nothing , but stand as one in a dream ; and yet , if that 
 might be , his longing toward her increase manifold . 

 but down below , amidst of the throng , stand two neighbour somewhat anigh 
 to the window ; and quoth one to the other : " see thou ! the new man in the 
 ancient armour of the Battle of the water , bear the sword that slay 
 the foeman king on the Day of the Doubtful Onset ! surely this be a sign 
 of good - luck to we all . " 

 " Yea , " say the second , " he beareth his armour well , and the eye be 
 bright in the head of he : but hast thou beheld well his she - fellow , and 
 what the like of she be ? " 

 " I see she , " say the other , " that she be a fair woman ; yet somewhat 
 worse clothe than simply . she be in her smock , man , and be it not for 
 the baluster I deem ye should see she barefoot . what be amiss with 
 she ? " 

 " dost thou not see she , " say the second neighbour , " that she be not only 
 a fair woman , but yet more , one of those lovely one that draw the heart 
 out of a man 's body , one may scarce say for why ? surely Stark - wall hath 
 cast a lucky net this time . and as to her raiment , I see of she that she 
 be clothe in white and wreathe with rose , but that the flesh of she be so 
 wholly pure and sweet that it maketh all her attire but a part of her 
 body , and halloweth it , so that it hath the semblance of gem . alas , my 
 friend ! let we hope that this queen will fare abroad unseldom amongst the 
 people . " 

 thus , then , they spake ; but after a while the King and his mate go back 
 into the chamber , and he give command that the woman of the Queen should 
 come and fetch she away , to attire she in royal array . and thither come 
 the fairest of the honourable damsel , and be fain of be her waiting- 
 woman . Therewithal the King be unarmed , and dight most gloriously , but 
 still he bear the Sword of the King 's slaying : and sithence be the king 
 and the queen bring into the great hall of the palace , and they meet on 
 the dai , and kiss before the lord and other folk that throng the 
 hall . there they eat a morsel and drink a cup together while all beheld 
 they ; and then they be bring forth , and a white horse of the 
 goodly , well bedight , bring for each of they , and thereon they 
 mount and go their way together , by the lane which the huge throng 
 make for they , to the great church , for the hallowing and the crowning ; 
 and they be lead by one squire alone , and he unarm ; for such be the 
 custom of Stark - wall when a new king should be hallow : so come they to 
 the great church   for that folk be not miscreant , so to say , and they 
 enter it , they two alone , and go into the choir : and when they have 
 stand there a little while wonder at their lot , they hear how the 
 bell fall a - ring tunefully over their head ; and then draw near the 
 sound of many trumpet blow together , and thereafter the voice of 
 many folk singing ; and then be the great door throw open , and the 
 bishop and his priest come into the church with singing and minstrelsy , 
 and thereafter come the whole throng of the folk , and presently the nave 
 of the church be fill by it , as when the water follow the cutting of 
 the dam , and fill up the dyke . thereafter come the bishop and his mate 
 into the choir , and come up to the king , and give he and the Queen the 
 kiss of peace . this be mass sing gloriously ; and thereafter be the 
 King anoint and crown , and great joy be make throughout the church . 
 afterwards they go back afoot to the palace , they two alone together , 
 with none but the esquire go before to show they the way . and as they 
 go , they pass close beside those two neighbour , whose talk have be 
 tell of afore , and the first one , he who have praise the King 's 
 war - array , spake and say : " truly , neighbour , thou art in the right of 
 it ; and now the Queen have be dight duly , and hath a crown on her head , 
 and be clothe in white samite do all over with pearl , I see she to be of 
 exceeding goodliness ; as goodly , maybe , as the Lord King . " 

 Quoth the other : " unto I she seemeth as she do e'en now ; she be clothe in 
 white , as then she be , and it be by reason of the pure and sweet flesh 
 of she that the pearl shine out and glow , and by the holiness of her 
 body be her rich attire hallow ; but , forsooth , it seem to I as she 
 go past as though paradise have come anigh to our city , and that all the 
 air breathe of it . so I say , praise be to God and his hallow who hath 
 suffer she to dwell amongst we ! " 

 say the first man : " Forsooth , it be well ; but know thou at all whence 
 she cometh , and of what lineage she may be ? " 

 " Nay , " say the other , " I wot not whence she be ; but this I wot full 
 surely , that when she goeth away , they whom she leadeth with she shall be 
 well bestead . again , of her lineage nought know I ; but this I know , that 
 they that come of she , to the twentieth generation , shall bless and 
 praise the memory of she , and hallow her name little less than they 
 hallow the name of the Mother of God . " 

 so spake those two ; but the King and Queen come back to the palace , and 
 sit among the lord and at the banquet which be hold thereafter , and 
 long be the time of their glory , till the night be far spend and all 
 man must seek to their bed . 




 CHAPTER xxxvi : of WALTER and the maid in the day of the KINGSHIP 


 Long it be , indeed , till the woman , by the King 's command , have bring 
 the Maid to the King 's chamber ; and he meet she , and take she by the 
 shoulder and kiss she , and say : " art thou not weary , sweetheart ? Doth 
 not the city , and the throng folk , and the watch eye of the great 
 one . . . doth it not all lie heavy on thee , as it doth upon I ? " 

 she say : " and where be the city now ? be not this the wilderness again , 
 and thou and I alone together therein ? " 

 he gaze at she eagerly , and she redden , so that her eye shine light 
 amidst the darkness of the flush of her cheek . 

 he spake tremble and softly , and say : " be it not in one matter well 
 than the wilderness ? be not the fear gone , yea , every whit thereof ? " 

 the dark flush have leave her face , and she look on he exceed 
 sweetly , and speak steadily and clearly : " even so it be , beloved . " 
 Therewith she set her hand to the girdle that girt her loin , and do it 
 off , and hold it out toward he , and say : " here be the token ; this be a 
 maid 's girdle , and the woman be ungirt . " 

 so he take the girdle and her hand withal , and cast his arm about she : 
 and amidst the sweetness of their love and their safety , and assure hope 
 of many day of joy , they spake together of the hour when they fare the 
 razor - edge betwixt guile and misery and death , and the sweet yet it 
 grow to they because of it ; and many thing she tell he ere the dawn , of 
 the evil day bygone , and the dealing of the Mistress with she , till the 
 grey day steal into the chamber to make manifest her loveliness ; which , 
 forsooth , be well even than the deeming of that man amidst the throng 
 whose heart have be so draw towards she . so they rejoice together in 
 the new day . 

 but when the full day be , and Walter arise , he call his thane and 
 wise man to the council ; and first he bid open the prison - door , and 
 feed the needy and clothe they , and make good cheer to all man , high and 
 low , rich and unrich ; and thereafter he take counsel with they on many 
 matter , and they marvel at his wisdom and the keenness of his wit ; 
 and so it be , that some be but half pleased thereat , whereas they see 
 that their will be like to give way before his in all matter . but the 
 wiser of they rejoice in he , and look for good day while his life 
 last . 

 now of the deed that he do , and his joy and his grief , the tale shall 
 tell no more ; nor of how he see Langton again , and his dealing there . 

 in Stark - wall he dwelt , and reign a king , well beloved of his folk , 
 sorely fear of their foeman . strife he have to deal with , at home and 
 abroad ; but therein he be not quell , till he fall asleep fair and 
 softly , when this world have no more of deed for he to do . nor may it 
 be say that the needy lament he ; for no needy have he leave in his own 
 land . and few foe he leave behind to hate he . 

 as to the Maid , she so wax in loveliness and kindness , that it be a 
 year 's joy for any to have cast eye upon she in street or on field . all 
 wizardry leave she since the day of her wedding ; yet of wit and wisdom she 
 have enough left , and to spare ; for she need no go about , and no 
 guile , any more than hard command , to have she will do . so love she 
 be by all folk , forsooth , that it be a mere joy for any to go about her 
 errand . to be short , she be the land 's increase , and the city 's 
 safeguard , and the bliss of the folk . 

 somewhat , as the day pass , it misgave she that she have beguile the 
 Bear - folk to deem she their God ; and she consider and think how she 
 might atone it . 

 so the second year after they have come to Stark - wall , she go with 
 certain folk to the head of the pass that lead down to the Bears ; and 
 there she stay the man - at - arm , and go on far with a two score of 
 husbandman whom she have redeem from thralldom in Stark - wall ; and when 
 they be hard on the dale of the Bears , she leave they there in a 
 certain little dale , with their wain and horse , and seed - corn , and iron 
 tool , and go down all bird - alone to the dwelling of those huge man , 
 unguarde now by sorcery , and trust in nought but her loveliness and 
 kindness . clothe she be now , as when she flee from the wood beyond the 
 World , in a short white coat alone , with bare foot and naked arm ; but 
 the say coat be now embroider with the imagery of blossom in silk 
 and gold , and gem , whereas now her wizardry have depart from she . 

 so she come to the bear , and they know she at once , and worship and 
 bless she , and fear she . but she tell they that she have a gift for 
 they , and be come to give it ; and therewith she tell they of the art of 
 tillage , and bid they learn it ; and when they ask she how they should 
 do so , she tell they of the man who be abide they in the mountain 
 dale , and bade the Bears take they for their brother and son of the 
 ancient father , and then they should be teach of they . this they 
 behight she to do , and so she lead they to where her freedman lay , whom 
 the Bears receive with all joy and love - kindness , and take they into 
 their folk . 

 so they go back to their dale together ; but the Maid go her way 
 back to her man - at - arm and the city of Stark - wall . 

 thereafter she send more gift and message to the Bears , but never again 
 go herself to see they ; for as good a face as she put on it that last 
 time , yet her heart wax cold with fear , and it almost seem to she 
 that her Mistress be alive again , and that she be escape from she and 
 plot against she once more . 

 as for the bear , they throve and multiply ; till at last strife arise 
 great and grim betwixt they and other people ; for they have become mighty 
 in battle : yea , once and again they meet the host of Stark - wall in fight , 
 and overthrew and be overthrow . but that be a long while after the 
 Maid have pass away . 

 now of Walter and the Maid be no more to be tell , save that they begat 
 between they goodly son and fair daughter ; whereof come a great lineage 
 in Stark - wall ; which lineage be so strong , and endure so long a while , 
 that by then it have die out , folk have clean forget their ancient 
 Custom of king - making , so that after Walter of Langton there be never 
 another king that come down to they poor and lonely from out of the 
 Mountains of the bear .