undine 
 Schreiner , Olive   1855 - 1920 


 I. 
 a queer LITTLE child 

 KAROO 
 , red sand , great mound of round iron stone , and bush never very beautiful to look at and now almost burn into the ground by the blaze summer 's sun . an old dutch farmhouse build of the bright red brick to match the ground and stone ; an old stone wall break down here and there at irregular interval , as if to allow for the ready ingress and egress of the hundred enterprising goat , whose delight it be daily to regale themselves on the deformed peach tree and leafless cabbage stalk which the enclosure contain ; an old tent - waggon , whose tent and floor have long go the way of all flesh wood flesh into the fire ; an ancient willow tree , which stand vainly try to reflect itself in a small pond of thick red fluid , and under which may at all time be see a couple of dirty and benighted duck , who there disport themselves under the happy delusion of its being water . 


 all these part compose a picture in which , when look at by daylight , it be hard work to find the slight trace of beauty ; but tonight , penetrate in 

 every nook and corner by the cold white light of an almost full moon , there be a strange weird beauty , a beauty which the veri sheep - soule boer that ever smoke pipe or wear vel - skoen , might feel if he have but one ray of light leave in he . 

 it be a silent night . even the great dog have creep to sleep under the old tent - waggon , and nothing live or move be to be see except a small child and a small ape who be perch in one of the gap of the stone wall . 
 there they have sit for the last hour , never move but very busy cogitate , if one might judge from the grave expression of both face . likely the small ponder on the dire injustice of tie he up all day and give he orange peel in place of orange pulp , and uncracked almond , which all the world know he could not break . his thought might have be the most profoundly philosophical , however , if judge by the appearance of his small black countenance abstruse inquiry into the nature , origin , and destiny of the moon , whose course he be follow with eye hardly less grave and earnest than the large brown pair above he . 

 he be wrap up in the end of the small blue pinafore which the child have on , the only part visible be the small wizard - like face and a small black hand , with which he hold his chin and every now and then raise for a soft sympathetic pat of the little white hand that serve as chin - rest 

 to the white , dark - eyed face above he . the child might have be ten year old , but she look much less as she sit there , perch on the top of a large round stone with her thin little leg draw up under she in a queer little fashion of her own . 

 " Socrates , " she say , presently . the monkey turn his soft brown eye and fix they full on her . 
 " I wish we know , " say the child . 
 Socrates give a long sigh in answer and turn the gaze of his great sad eye back to the slowly move moon . 
 " come to prayer , come to prayer , " shout a stentorian voice from one of the back window , and Socrates ' reflection for that night be end . he be tie up to his stand ; and with a kiss on the crown of his little grey head the owner of the blue pinafore leave he and go into the house . 
 the house , as we have say , be Dutch , build in the true dutch style , with one large front room , from which open six or eight cabin - like apartment to serve as bedroom ; and with that indispensable of all dutch farmhouse overhead a great loft . 

 in the front room be two large glass cupboard let into the wall , which in the day of their old dutch proprietor have be will not to contain doll , earthenware , and all the wealth and glory of the household , and which even now , in spite of their 

 be fill with book , have an uncomfortably dutch appearance . the room be well furnish , and light by a great lamp stand on the centre - table . before it , with an open Bible and Prayer Book , sit the farmer : an English Africander with nothing worthy of remark about he , if it be not the unusually fine development of his tall muscular figure and the unusually large amount of yellow hair upon his face . there be five other in the room his wife , a delicate , refined , fair little woman who recline on the sofa his son , handsome and bright - eye , and now home for the holiday and two little dutch girl , grey - eye , yellow - haired , pudding - face , who be here to share with his step - daughter the instruction of the very stiff and upright individual who sit on a chair near the door . this individual wear three curl on each side of her head and carry a large wart on the tip of her chin . 

 " late for prayer again , Undine , " she say , as the owner of the little blue pinafore slip in at the door and take her way to the near seat . 
 no one else take any notice of her entrance , and the chapter be finish they kneel down to pray . Undine do not listen to the prayer but to the great red clock overhead , that be tick away such solemn word , the child think , as she bend below it : 

 " another week go , another day go . what 

 have you do ? we never come back , we moment ; we fly , but we never return , never , never , tick , tick . what have you do with we ? if you do the good you can with all the rest of we , you can never bring one of we back , never , never , tick , tick . " 

 Undine try to listen to the prayer , but the old clock 's voice be loud . 
 " tick , tick , " cry the inexorable old clock , " what good have you ever do ? how be you well able to die now than you be last week ? you be nearer death , but be you ready , ready , ready , tick , tick , tick ? " 
 Undine try to listen to the prayer again , and she catch these word : " thousand , o Lord , be go to destruction every moment . " 
 " yes , yes , yes , " say the clock , " tick , tick , hell , hell , go , go , go , thousand , thousand , thousand , tick , tick , tick , tick . " 

 she could kneel there while the old clock tell only of her own sin and fate , but now when every tick talk of half the world , for whom there be no help , no hope , who be go , go , go she feel as though she be be suffocate and the wall and roof be throb and come down on she . she leap up from her knee , and be recall to a sense of thing present only by be very sharply pull onto they again . fortunately the prayer be almost end , and when they rise there be at once so many human voice try to 

 make themselves hear that the voice of the old wooden prophet be quickly drown . 


 " Undine , my dear , I really must report your conduct to your mamma ; it really be most reprehensible , " say the stiff and upright individual . " you surely have time enough in which to run about ; you might forget your play and worship God , when you come 
 here 
 . your mamma think so . do you not ? " 

 the lady thus appeal to not only fully endorse the opinion , but also , on hear the nature of the offence , ordain that henceforth the offender 's seat should be in the centre of the room , beside her stepfather , and so to speak under the eye of the assembly . this be intend as a direful chastisement , but the child 's thought be still occupy with the ominous ticking of the old clock , and she would have care nothing just then if they have sentence she to sit next some savage king of Timbuctoo who make his meal off little girl . she stand there before they , with the end of the blue pinafore twisted round one small arm which the other be nurse and pat as tenderly as if it have be Socrates . 

 " really , Undine , you be the hard child to manage . there be no need to put on that look of proud indifference ; go to bed at once and let I see no more of you tonight , " say her mother ; and the child take up her light and go . soon she have put it out and creep into bed , but she could not forget the old clock ; and how dark the room be ! perfect , 

 boundless , endless darkness it might be , for anything she could see ; like that silent darkness which surround poor lose soul and be all the answer they get when they cry aloud to God . she pull the cover over her head and bury it under the pillow ; but whoever have try these mean of dodge disagreeable thought know how signally they always fail . she find this out ; for by and by a small white face show itself above the blanket and a pair of troubled eye look out into the surround darkness . 

 " dear God ! great God ! " cry the little child , cover her face with both hand , " you who be so very happy and great and strong , who can do all thing , o dear God ! save they . they be go , go , forever , forever , o God ! God ! " 
 she lie still for some minute and then burst forth again , this time in a perfect agony : 
 " o god ! great God ! save just one soul tonight because I pray . I know that I be wicked and will never be save , but I pray with faith ; save , oh save one soul , for my prayer . great God ! God ! God ! " 

 she sit up and bury her face in both her tremble hand . what be the use of she pray she who do not love God , who could not believe , who could never be save ? how easy it be to understand how the great Son of God could come down to die for soul . the child feel that night as though she , too , could have die to save only a few , a few 

 soul from the great company of the God - hat who be pass over the edge to darkness . how many have go since she come into that room tonight ! how many through the long dim age of the past ! the old Greeks and Romans , and the wild million of Asia ; and how many would pass over long after she have take her place in the great company and vanish into sin and woe forever ! before and behind she seem to stretch a chain of endless pain and anguish . 

 after a time she lie down and try to close her eye and drop asleep ; but now it seem as if already she have pass into that unknown land , prepare by God for the soul at whom he laugh . in Dante 's hell there be fire and fellowship , earth and pain , but in hers there be nothing so merciful or so material . she seem in a wide void in which there be only endless space and blackness , and she have not even two hand , the one of which might touch the other and in touch find fellowship ; and when she cry aloud her voice fall dead upon the air . there be only emptiness , and black space , above , around , below , and she be one alone . oh , how the silence ache ! one throb of pain , one touch , one sound , how blessed they would be . 

 an indescribable terror seize the child . such must be death , eternal death , the death of the wicked , changeless and everlasting as the throne of the God who make it . she creep out of bed 

 trem- 
 trembling 


 bling and lie down on the cold mud floor ; that at least be hard and solid , and it seem to calm she . she press her face onto it , and a few burn tear fall on it ; then she lie as still as though she be asleep . how comfort it be , that solid earth ; but it be dead and cold , and she would like the touch of something warm ; so after a time she get up and , noiselessly open the door , stand in the large front room . it be dark and quite still but for the ticking of the old clock and the sound of her own breath . she stand for a minute listening ; then she creep on till her finger touch a door at the far end of the room . after a little pressure it open , and she go in . there be two bed in the room , both occupy , and she kneel down at the foot of the near and stretch out her hand . it come in contact with what she be in search of a small foot , soft and warm and full of life . she hold it for some moment in both hand , and then , afraid of wake the sleeper , rise to go , noiselessly and softly as she have come . 

 how the owner of the foot one of the grey - eye , cheese - face little dutch girl would have wonder and be mystify , could she have watch the proceeding of her little white - nightgowne visitor , who , feel her way softly by chair and table , soon find herself again in her own room . 

 she be comfort , but not sufficiently ; so she 

 draw from between the mattress on her bed a small brown New Testament . press it close to her side with one little arm , with the other she drag a large wooden chair to the window ; and with its aid , and that of a stool , climb up into the window seat . push her hand through a broken pane , she send the heavy wooden shutter fly back on its hinge . a flood of white moonlight fall into the room , and the face of the moon herself look in on the little tumbled bed and the whitewashed wall and the mite of a thing , with its little white nightgown and bare foot , perch up in the window . 

 the mite of a thing close her eye tight and open her book , turn the leaf over and over again , and at last bring down a small finger upon one of they . she open her eye and stoop down to read by the moonlight the word on which it have alight ; they be these " which be the son of Melchi , which be the son of Addi , which be the son of Cosam , which be the son of Elmodam , which be the son of Er . " 
 she close the book and sit look at the cover in silence , with very much the expression of Socrates when lose in the contemplation of a nut he have vainly endeavour to crack . faith be strong , however , and reason weak , at ten year ; so the brown comforter be open again ; and , after the fashion of the Apostles and good man of old , Providence be appeal to . 

 this time the word be these " strive to enter in at the straight gate , for many I say unto you shall seek to enter in , and shall not be able . " 
 she do not close the book this time but sit look at its open page with her eyebrow slightly bent ; then she catch the book up tightly in one hand and fling it from she with such force that it leave the story of its journey write in a large brown dent on the whitewashed wall opposite . she throw her head down on the window seat and cry long and bitterly ; but by and by , when she grow quieter , she sit up and press her little burn cheek against the window pane . how calm and still the outside world be ; so far remove from all passion and strife , damnation , fire and brimstone ; so strong , so self - contain . how peacefully the great round stone lie rest on each other . through that subtle sympathy which bind together all thing , and to stump and rock give a speech which even we can understand , the night speak to the little child the sweet word of comfort which she have look for in vain in the brown Testament . she leave off think and only sit and listen , and the sweet night wind blow in through the broken pane and touch she softly , till the weary eyelid close and the little head find rest once more on the window seat . 

 of course Undine be late next morning , late even for Sunday morning . socrate , in despair of ever get his breakfast , sit disconsolate on the 

 top of his box , make believe to eat his tail , and every now and then raise his hand to his head and slowly rub they across his forehead , as if still suffer from the effect of too much moonlight think . 

 it be go to be a swelter day ; even now it give one an unpleasant sensation to look at the little hill of red round stone scatter here and there and act the part of great reflector ; as though man and herb be not desiccated and burn red enough without their help . indoor the blue fly buzz . in spite of the soothe effect of more than half - close shutter all sit down to breakfast feeling mortally aggrieve , though hardly know in what respect , and , accord to their several disposition , desire to have it out with some one or lapse into silence . 

 when Undine come to the table she be meet with the usual : " late again , my dear ; surely go to bed when 
 you 
 do , you 
 might 
 get up a little early . it be this sleep so much that make you so incurably stupid . Sannie and Annie be up hour ago , " say the governess , cast an approve glance at the two little maiden opposite , who by their earnest patronage of mutton chop and fat be incontrovertibly prove their Africander origin . 


 " they go to bed much later than you and be up early , and have do their hair much well than you , " continue her instructress , whose idea be so truly correct , feminine , and orthodox , that 

 they might all have be place in an ordinary breakfast saucer and leave there forever , without the least fear of their ever run over . 

 the meal be end , the farmer go out to bully the herdsman for not have let the sheep out early , and to saunter about till the heat should drive he in ; while his wife hie to the nether region , where bitter and clamorous war be be wag between Hendrik and Gobalee as to the possession of the sheep' - head - and - foot . the two little dutch girl stand in the kitchen doorway , and for once the dawning of a light , which if it have arise might have be call animation , shine in their placid countenance as they drink in every word and even now and then insert one . 

 Undine collect some bit of bread , take half a green mielie 
 1 
 and a cup of water , and , put on her great brown kappie , go out to visit Socrates in the yard . he be glad of the content of cup and plate , but quickly satisfy himself and begin play with his mielie , 
 2 
 now throw it from he with disdain and gaze up into the sky with an air of deep abstraction , as though completely unconscious of its existence , then seize it up , take a bite and hug it to he , with an expression of earnestness so comical it might have set a Methodist 

 1 
 the mielie   " corn "   be on the cob . 


 2 
 use they in S. Africa both for a single " pip " and for the cob with the pip on . here it be obviously use in the latter sense . 


 parson laugh on his way to class meeting . Undine do not laugh ; she sit down on the ground beside he and look at he , wonder if he really feel so happy , or only play so wildly because his heart be heavy . she wonder if he ever wish to be anything in the wide world but himself , and yet do not   see anything that he like well ; wonder if he ever long to die , and yet wish never to die , and nothing in the world ever to die ; wonder if it make he feel queer to look up at that little white fleecy cloud in the blue sky overhead ; wonder what the little cloud mean and how it come there and why it come there , and why anything be where it be , and why the world be the world , and the sun the sun , and she , she ; and why she could not wonder any more , for two strong hand be shake she so that the little white cloud , Socrates , the blue sky and red earth , be all jumble up together . 

 " do you wish to ruin your complexion completely , you wicked child , that you sit here star up into the sky as if you have never see it before and be bereft of all your sens ? get your kappie from that ape and come into the house at once . " 

 for Mr. Socrates have possess himself of the large brown kappie and seem in no hurry to restore it . find be keep accord to the code , and it be only after a world of persuasion have be lavish upon he that he very gingerly descend 

 from his box and , with an air of melancholy resignation and a touch of condescension , deliver it to its owner . then he sit gravely follow with his eye the little blue pinafore and brown kappie as they vanish into the house , and , there be nothing leave worth his look at , he then clamber up into his box to take a doze . 


 the sheep's - head - and - foot quarrel have be settle , and when Undine enter the front room she find the two little dutch girl demurely seat on two chair with their hymn book in their hand , learn their Sunday lesson . undine , too , get her hymn book down from the shelf , but instead of follow the virtuous example before she , she place her book on the floor , lay herself across a chair , and in this very highly unorthodox position have just compose herself to learn , when she be ask if she have not yet rest enough and be go to sleep again . of course there be nothing for it but to sit up and learn away steadily till the hour arrive at which , every Sunday morning , the three scholar be march off into a side room to receive such religious instruction as be suit to their limited capacity and tender year . the first part of the program , which consist in the recitation of lesson , be soon over . then bible be produce . the little brown Testament be not one of they false friend it might sometimes be , but friend for 

 all that , and not to be bring out for common eye to gaze on . 

 the stiff and upright individual sit in a large armchair , and before she the two little dutch girl on high - back riem - bottom chair , while Undine take possession of a green waggon - chest that stand near the door . 
 the chapter choose for their perusal and consideration be the twenty - fifth of Matthew , and when it be conclude each be in turn require to ask some question bear on its content . the eld of the dutch girl on whom the heat , the darkness of the room , and the exertion of spell out the long english word have have an almost stupefy effect sit for some moment gaze at the face of her oracle with an expression of hopeless vacancy . at length a happy thought occur to she : be the virgin man or woman ? the mental effort require for the birth of this question seem so completely to have exhaust all her power of mind as to make it highly probable that the reply of the oracle be lose upon she and that she remain forever in total ignorance on the momentous subject of her inquiry . 

 it be now the turn of number two , who , with astonishing brightness , ask if the bridesmaid wear white muslin dress and carry eau - de - cologne bottle in their pocket . this searcher after truth have be satisfy , it be Undine 's turn to 

 in- 
 inquire 


 quire and learn . but that young lady sit upon the green box , noiselessly tap it with her heel and fix on the skin carpet that attention which should have be bestow on her worthy instructress . 

 " well , Undine , my dear , what have you to ask ? " 
 " I understand that chapter , " say Undine , without raise her eye to the face of her interlocutor . 
 " you do , my dear ! well , then I suppose we have well reverse the order of thing and I will question you . what be the oil which be generally burn on all such occasion in the East ? " 
 " I do not   know , " say Undine , very composedly . 
 " I think that you understand everything that this chapter contain . I very soon find that you do not . you be wofully ignorant , my dear , " say the teacher . 
 " I do not notice that there be anything say about the kind of oil , " respond Undine ; " otherwise I should not have say that I understand it . " 
 the questioner be fairly at her wit ' end , but she shift her ground . " what do the thirty - first verse speak of , my dear ? " 
 " the judgment of the world , " say Undine . 
 " and what do he say to the good people on his right and the bad on his left hand ? " 
 " he say to the good people , " come , you bless , inherit the kingdom prepare for you from the foundation of the worldí ; and to the other , " go , you curse , into the everlaste fireí . " 

 " and what lesson do this teach we , my dear ? " 
 " that God have prepare a heaven for the people he mean to save and a hell for the people he mean to burn , " say Undine , very gravely , never raise her eye from the carpet on which they rest . 
 there be a pause ; then come the remark : " hardly the right way of put it , my dear . it teach you that you should be a very good little girl , so that when you die God may take you to heaven and not send you to hell to burn forever and ever . " 
 " I would much soon be wicked and go to hell than be good only because I be afraid of go there , " say Undine , now raise her eye from the carpet and fix they on the horror - stricken countenance of her instructress . 

 " Undine ! " gasp forth that unfortunate individual . " Undine , what 
 do 
 you mean ? you be always an evil and wicked child , but you grow vile every day . " 


 " yes , " say Undine , get off the box , with a face alternately as red as the sprig on her little print dress and as pale as her little white pinafore " yes , I do not   want to go to heaven , and , if God want to , he can send I to hell and I will never again ask he not to , 
 never 
 . I know I be very wicked , but I be not half so wicked or so cruel as he be . nothing be , not even the devil . the devil be glad when we go to hell , but he do not make we 

 on purpose to send we there , and he do not make hell , and he do not make himself , and I be sorry for he . I believe he try to be good and God will not   let he , that be what I believe , " say Undine , who , with her wild dark eye and clench hand , look more like some spirit who have just arrive from the region of which she speak than a carefully - bring - up little Christian receive her Sunday lesson . 

 if she have be Medusa her gaze could not more completely have paralyse her opponent , who sit there as if turn into stone ; while the two little pudding - face look from one to the other with wild astonishment in their big grey eye . 
 Undine clasp her little hand behind she and walk slowly out of the room . 
 it be the first time that she have ever give utterance to the evil thought with which her small and , as she believe , devil - ride soul be haunt ; they be fiendishly evil thought , all of they , she know ; but , if they be her , why should she not give they utterance ? 
 her little heart swell so it well nigh suffocate she , but it be with a sense of freedom and strength that she be pace up and down her little room , when she hear the key turn in the door . 

 it be pleasant enough to think of have a day all to herself with no fear of interruption and no company but her book ; but to think of that clink of the key and know that , wish it or not , she be 

 a prisoner , make she stamp her foot upon the ground as she walk up and down and to rebel in her bitter little heart against all power , human and divine . 

 the world be not the place for she , she be feel persuade ; she be not fit for it . why then have she be make so bad , and put into it ? it be no use say she ought to be good ; she could not . the devil do not come to other people and make they think such thought as he make she . she feel herself very much aggrieve by these attack from the infernal region , and presently become very wrathful . then reaction set in and she grow sleepy . lie down upon the floor , she be soon sound asleep , dream of the glorious time when she would be a woman and would know everything and be love by everyone , and when she would be free . 

 the ringing of the dinner bell waken she ; and , find that nothing in the shape of food be send she , she kneel down before her little bookshelf in search of refreshment of another order . there be delicious fairy tale 
 Arabian Nights 
 whose old torn page seem to emit an odour of myrrh and rose catch from the garden of Bagdad Hans Andersen 's beautiful song in prose about the mermaid and the young prince but these and other be of course not to be look at . it would have hurt the child 's conscience as much to have read a fairy tale on Sunday as to have tell a lie ; one of the crime which always come to haunt she in the dark watchful 

 hour of the night be she have read , on one never - to - be - forget Sunday afternoon , a part of that story of " the Mermaid and the Prince . " 

 so Undine , rebel though she be , touch not , look not , at the wicked thing , but from its hiding - place behind the other book bring forth a large , dull - colour , leather - bind volume . 

 it be 
 a careful and strict Enquiry into the Modern Prevailing Notions of the Freedom of Will , which be suppose to be essential to Moral Agency , Virtue and Vice , Reward and Punishment , Praise and Blame 
 , by Jonathan Edwards , A.B. they would have laugh at she for read such an old man 's book and one with so grandiloquent and lengthy a title , so it be always stow safely away behind the other where there be no fear of its be discover by pry eye . the fade ribbon place - marker have already find its way into the middle of the book , and the child be soon deeply absorb in section eight , nine and ten of section two , in part three . she do not get through more than these , for each sentence be find so pregnant with profound and misty thought that she be oblige to read it carefully , and often re - read it , before it could be dismiss . 


 there be a strange contrast between the little reader and her great brown book as she sit there on the floor on that Sunday afternoon . the child so warm , with the wild blood dance in every vein , 

 look out so eagerly into the world , so ready to give and take the book so old , so dead , with the life thought of another generation petrify in its old yellow leaf , now probably be read for the last time . 

 the book have belong to her own father , who , much to the grief of his father , have turn aside from the path of truth and Arminianism , to the way of Calvinism and error , and in those evil way have die . 
 about three o'clock the key turned and one of the little dutch girl put her face in at the door . 
 " you can come out when you like , " she say . Undine do not even raise her eye from the book , determine to show that she by no mean object to be make a prisoner in her own room ; and she would in all probability have remain where she be until call to tea , have she not suddenly remember Socrates . of course pride must be swallow and his want attend to ; so with an air of extreme indifference she make her way through the front room and , have get a mug of water and throw a large damp towel over the brown kappie , go out into the yard . 

 she find Socrates lie on the floor of his box , quite exhausted with the heat and very glad to get under the shade of the damp towel . loosen he from the stand , she carry he down to the little dam , where , under the scant shade of the willow- 

 tree , her brother Frank lie recline on his back . he have throw open his jacket and waistcoat , more from force of habit than from reason , one would think ; for the wind , like the breath from an oven , seem , in place of cool , to blight and desiccate all it touch . he be a fine speciman of an English Africander , tall and broad , with a fair handsome face , though rather sleepy - look just now as he lie with his leg raise against the trunk of the old tree and his hat pull half over his eye . with one hand he keep it there while with the other he pick up small bit of baked earth wherewith to pelt the miserable duck who , red , dirty , and hot , be endeavour to swim in diluted mud by way of improve their condition . 

 Undine sit down close to the trunk of the tree , for that cast a small shadow if the branch do not ; and for some minute nothing be say . 
 " have he that time , " mutter Frank at last , as a more than usually lucky hit catch the old drake in the eye . 
 " I wonder why you do that , " say Undine ; " everything be miserable in the whole world . " 
 the only response to this observation be another throw , but presently he say , " so you have   be in the war today , little woman , eh ? " 
 Undine make no reply , but stroke Socrates softly the wrong way . 

 " too bad to make you go without your dinner , little woman , be not   it ? " 
 " I do not   mind that one bit , " say Undine , " but I wish I have never be bear . I be miserable , and nobody love I . " 
 " why , I do , and we all of we do , though you be such a queer little coon , " answer Frank lazily . 
 " yes , that be just it , " say Undine , gravely tie Socrates ' tail into a knot as she speak , much to that gentleman 's dissatisfaction . " yes , that be just it ; you only care about I because I be your sister ; you call I queer and strange ; you do not   like I one bit only Socrates . " 

 " well , that be good . how do you know that Socrates like 
 you 
 , and not the bread and butter you bring he ? " ask Frank . 


 " I know he like I , " answer Undine , very indignantly . " can not   I see it ? do not   I know it ? when we sit together of an evening , I can feel he be think just what I be , and when I talk to he he understand I . that be what I hate , " say Undine , twist at the tail more vigorously than ever ; " people do not   know anything about it , and they say he have not   get a soul . how do 
 they 
 know , I should like to know ? if only people would not talk till they know , I think the world would be a much nice place . " 


 Frank say nothing , but laugh , and direct a bit of mud straight at the tip of Socrates ' black nose , 

 who merely open his eye and close they again very solemnly . 

 " I wish I be one of those duck , " remark Undine , presently . 
 " I do not ; they look hot , " say Frank ; " and I think you say , just now , everything in the whole world be miserable . " 
 " yes , but not so very miserable because they do not   think ; at least , perhaps they do ; but they have   no bible , you see , and I do not   think the devil ever tempt they . it would not be worth his trouble , they be so small . " 
 " if he pay visit only on account of size , I expect you would not see much of he , " say her brother , with an amuse expression on his face . " be bible your great trouble ? " 

 " yes , " say Undine , unhesitatingly . " sometimes I feel quite good , and I be sit and read , and I come to something that be quite different from what it be somewhere else . then the devil make I think , how can two thing that say the opposite both be true ? and then I feel wicked and I can not   go on read any more . sometimes , too , when I be pray and I feel as though I love God very much , I remember all at once how it say in the Bible that he never forgive anyone for nothing , but always make some one suffer pain first ; and I remember all the other cruel thing it tell about he ; and then I hate he , and for a long time I can not   pray again . 

 oh dear ! " she say after a little pause . " I wish the world belong to I . I would make it much well ; I would let all the devil out of hell and love they and make they good , so there would be no one to tempt the people any more . do you ever feel so wicked as I do when you be little like I ? " ask Undine , look earnestly at he , as though with the vague hope that his answer might be in the affirmative . 

 " no , I should rather think not , " be the answer . " I use to make little clay oxen and train kid in an old box and enjoy myself ; that be what I use to do when I be your age . " 
 Undine heave a little weary sigh and look at the duck . " I wonder if there be any people in the world who feel like I do and who have such wicked thought , " she say at last . 
 " of course there be , and much wickeder , too ; there be people who do not   believe the Bible be true , or anything else , and they write book also . " 
 " do they ? " say Undine . " I wish I could read they . have you ever ? " 
 " no , " say Frank ; " it be too much bother ; but I will , when I be a man ; " and pull his hat low over his eye , he either make believe to do so or really go to sleep . 

 Undine do not go away , but sit at his foot , nursing Socrates and watch the duck , till the koppie 

 begin to cast long shadow and the fast cool air tell that sunset be not far off . 

 by and by the back door of the house open and the whole family appear equip for their Sunday evening walk all , with the exception of the small dutch girl , who , complain of a headache , be leave to keep Undine company . 
 " take care of everything ; get into no mischief ; and above all remember that it be Sunday , " be the parting injunction which they receive as the group , which now include Frank , move off . 
 the two child stand still watch they till they pass out of sight . then Undine , after cry and pray half the night , and read Edwards and meditate half the day , begin to discover that , she be neither anchorite nor saint , but only a very young animal with much wild blood in its young vein that need circulate . it may have be the evening 's cool that make she conscious of this , for it seem to have an inebriate effect upon Socrates , who leap , grin , and turn somerset in a manner truly astonishing . 

 " I wonder , " say Undine , " if Socrates and I be to run a race , which of we would beat " ; and without wait for a reply , she set about test the matter at once . with one end of his chain hold firmly in her hand they set off , but have not go thirty pace when it have slip out and Socrates , chain and all , be make his way to the near koppie , with 

 jingling , screeching and leaping , much to the mingled horror and delight of his little pursuer . the delight soon vanish , however , for , the koppie reach , Mr. Socrates feel himself quite in his own element , and absolutely refuse to be cozen by soft word or specious promise . seat himself on the top of a large round stone , he would very leisurely stretch out his leg , scratch himself , and then look up into the blue sky with an air of melancholy abstraction ; this till his breathless pursuer be within half a foot of he ; then , with a whirl , a cry , and a somerset , off to another and more inaccessible stone , round which his little pursuer might dance and beseech in vain , leap to catch the tip of the chain he leave hang almost within reach of her finger . it be uncertain how long this game might have continue have not the idea enter Socrates ' small head that more fun might be get from scamper over the roof at home than by remain where he be . 


 accordingly , he be off like an arrow , while Undine follow he breathlessly , minus one shoe and with more rent in her garment than could well be count . arrive at the house , she find the exemplary Sennie stand exactly where and as she have leave she ; except that she have place one finger in her mouth and partly turn her head to look at Socrates , who be now on the roof of the house , 

 busily occupy in pull out thatch and work away with the great dispatch and precision . 

 Undine quickly see that , if this be allow to go on for many minute , he would have work his way into the loft and perhaps to a bloody death as the reward of his evil deed . 
 what be to be do ? she look at the little dutch girl in despair ; the little dutch girl look at she . 
 " he be naughty , " say that little maiden at length , and then slowly replace the finger she have take out of her small mouth . Undine turn away in disgust ; there be no help to be get from she , and nothing for it but to climb the roof herself and capture he . 
 with much difficulty a long ladder be bring which reach just to the top of the wall ; and this be soon mount . once there , how to get on to the ridge be the question ; for at every touch the old thatch crumble away by handful , and she have not crawl many inch before it seem inevitable that she should soon find herself deposit among the skin in the loft or with the thatch upon the ground . 

 " you will fall down and die , " say the little dutch girl , very deliberately , as she watch Undine 's perilous ascent with almost as much interest as Socrates , who have now take his seat on one of 

 the gable , and with his chin rest on his hand be contemplate her movement most attentively . 

 Undine take no notice of either , but continue to climb , do more harm at every move than Socrates in twenty . the ridge be gain at last , after infinite trouble , but not so Socrates . he wait till her finger touch his tail ; and then , with that appendage cock high in air , walk off very quietly to the other gable , where he ensconce himself far more comfortably than his little pursuer find it possible to do at her . there be no get down again , for the first step down would have be on the ground ; there be nothing to be do but sit still and wait . consequently the appalling and shocking spectacle which meet the eye of the upper power , on their return home , be Undine , shoeless , kappieless and tear , seat on the ridge and hold on with one arm to the gable , while at the other end Socrates , with clank chain and tail in air , be dance a true devil 's quadrille . never be worthy parent and instructor , on their return from a quiet Sabbath ramble , meet by so horrific and wrath - rouse a sight . 
 a second ladder be quickly get and undine safety deposit upon the ground , where she be instantly march off into the house to answer for her evil conduct . 
 " how do you get into this plight , you wicked , wicked little girl ? " say her mother . 

 Undine stand with her hand cross and her eye fix on the one little white toe that have force its way out of the stocking . 
 " I do not mean to , " she say , feel very contrite and not a little ashamed of herself . 
 " do not mean to ! of course not ! you never mean to do anything that you do . the wind loosen Socrates and blow you both up onto the roof of the house ! of course it do ; we all know that it do . " 
 Undine feel very much inclined to say that she be sorry and be not go to do so any more ; then she remember that say so might make her punishment less , so she stand still and look down at her toe . 
 the lean and lanky individual now strike in her note . 
 " Undine , my dear Undine , " she say in a very low and subdued voice , " if you continue this course of action , what will become of your immortal soul ? what will become of it ? " 
 this be too much for Undine who have stand still to receive her bullying , fill with contrition and repentance ; it raise all the evil in her nature . " I know I be wicked and I do not   care , and I do not   care what become of my soul , and I be not afraid of anything , " say Undine , lift up her face and throw back her long tangle hair defiantly . 

 " be there ever in this world so evil dispose 

 and ungodly a child ? " say her spiritual guide , shake her head solemnly . " go to bed , undine ; go to bed ; I shall say no more to you . " 

 " good - night , " say Undine and she walk off to her room with almost a smile upon her face . but once there and alone , she fling her tired little body across the foot of the bed and cry bitterly . 
 " oh , I wish I be dead ! I wish I be dead ! there be nobody like I , and nobody love I . oh , I wish I be dead ! " and at last , without undressing , fall asleep . 



 II . 
 UNDINE be JOTTINGS 

 ' TWAS 
 a bright summer afternoon , just three week after my arrival in England . we be expect visitor , and Aunt Margaret and I have take our needlework out among the rose tree in the garden . 


 my brother Frank loll beside we on the grass , pull flower to piece and shower the leaf over Aunt Margaret 's golden hair and white dress . he have change in the three year that have pass since last I see he , and have grow noble and handsome enough , I think , even to possess the beautiful woman on whom his eye be rest . in my estimation no one else be worthy to own she ; certainly not my grandfather , whom I could not learn to like . he remind I , when I first see he , of the ox hide so often see lie near the little dam at home , which have once be damp but by dint of lie in the sun have be reduce to a stone - like mass of wrinkle and line ; and he be so tall and thin . for a long time I never could see he rise from his seat without have recall to my mind the image of an earthworm creep out of the ground , which 

 unfold and unfold itself to unimagined length . he have more resemblance to the skin than to the earthworm , however ; for he be mentally as ossify and incapable of growth as any ox hide under the sun . only in connection with Aunt Margaret do there seem a trace of softness in his nature , and it could not be otherwise . nature give to a few person to have the influence of sunshine on all they touch silently soften , warming , melt it and she be one . I worship she ; for in those day I have not eat of the tree of knowledge , and worship and think perfect all I love . 

 I do not care for my grandmother nor yet dislike she . she be a weak , nervous little old woman , who have have all the soul press out of she long ago , and whose tremble little hand I never see at rest for an instant , except she be asleep . 
 on that summer afternoon we three sit there , feel very happy . they because they be together , and I because the rose be beautiful and the sky blue and they glad . the work have drop from my hand and I have just get into a delicious dream , in which rosebuds , prince and spirit be largely concerned , when Frank toss a great white rosebud into my face . 

 " at your old work again , " he say , laugh . " you have   no idea , " turn to Aunt Margaret , " what evil thought be always ferment in that little innocent - look head . it be my decide opinion that 

 in a pre - state of existence she be a buddhist philosopher , or something else equally disagreeable and full of contemplation , and at her rebirth she do not become quite rejuvenised or lose all her old habit ; otherwise I can not   account for she , " say Frank , turn round onto his back , while Aunt Margaret and I laugh . 


 " it be all very well to laugh , " he continue , " but she be awfully bad , much bad than I be . she be only a little girl and she have not any right to have thought at all . it be all very well for 
 I 
 to think that it be a hard state of affair when a poor fellow have to be call into existence for the purpose of be send to fire and brimstone ; but it do not do for she ; it be highly improper , 
 highly 
 , " say Frank , roll round onto his face again . 


 Aunt Margaret open her big blue eye and look at I . I have be so shy and say so little since I come there , that I think they all think I a particularly childish child ; and I be glad of it . I be young , but I have learn a little worldly wisdom enough to tell I that , if a man be unfortunate enough to have idea of his own , he have well keep they to himself . I be tired of be call queer and strange and odd , and all those other epithet which I have so learn to hate ; and here be Frank drag all my weakness out into the sunshine that the old name might be brand on I again . what I should have say I do not   know , 

 but at that moment , greatly to my joy , our expected guest arrive . they consist of a parson , his wife , an old young lady , and a certain Jonathan Barnacles , whose wife have be a cousin to my father . all these have come to assist in the stirring up of the deaden conscience of my grandfather 's congregation . 

 from behind our wall of rose we could , without be see , observe and criticise they as they walk up the long garden path . 
 the advance be lead by the Rev. Joseph Goodman and his portly spouse , both tall , both fat : she decidedly good looking , with large brown eye and a roman nose ; he , decidedly greasy and with a dirty white choker . I be strike dumb with horror at the way in which the good lady turn her head from side to side , evidently bent , as I think , on discover our whereabout , but , as I afterwards learn , merely from a long - acquire habit and a wish to overlook no one . 
 close at their heel be a little angular figure , dress in a very fashionable and juvenile manner , whose head and face be completely envelop in a blue gauze veil . Frank say she have take to attend revival and stay to prayer - meeting only since the arrival in their circuit of a young assistant preacher whose mother she be old enough to be . 

 the rear be bring up by Jonathan Barnacles , 

 Esq . , at whom I look with more interest ; for , after the dutch fashion , might he not be call a relation of mine ? he be a lean , bony man of about two - and - forty , with large calm blue eye , lanky and scanty hair and beard , and an enormous mouth a mouth that seem forever hunger and seek after something . I wish he be no connection of mine when I look at it , little child though I be . look at from the lip upwards , he might have be an angel ; look at from the lip downwards , he might have be a devil . he be dress then and I never , in all the year I know he , see he in anything else , except on Sundays in a rusty brown jacket and a pair of dark green - and - blue - plaid trouser . to I those trouser have become so a part of the man that I can never see any like they without be unpleasantly remind of he . 


 as soon as the visitor have go into the house Aunt Margaret rise to follow they , and Frank and I be leave alone . he ask I if I be go to the revival meeting that evening . " you have well , " he say ; " it be great fun . I always do : I take my notebook and pencil ; one hear thing worth remember sometimes . besides , you will get into hot water if you do not   go , and pretend to be edify , too . there be just three grand crime accord to your grandfather 's creed to give expression to an idea that have not be propound at least one hundred time before you be bear ; to believe in the 

 pos- 
 possible 


 sible salvation of a roman Catholic ; and to absent yourself from a little heaven below : 

 " I have be there , and still would go , 
 ' tis like a little heaven below " 

 hum Frank as he rise to go into the house , where he would no doubt look up his " Golden Light , " as he nickname Aunt Margaret . 

 I go to the revival meeting that evening , for I have never be to one before . Aunt Margaret and I start some time after the other , so we have a pleasant long walk all to ourselves . Frank , in spite of the sage advice of the morning , do not go . I suppose , have get what he want , he do not care whether he please my grandfather or not , and could not make up his mind to leave an easy chair and cigar for " those purgatorial Methodist plank , " as he irreverently call the straight - back pew in my grandfather 's chapel . 
 we walk on in silence at first through the quiet twilight . at last I say : " do you like go to revival meeting ? do they do you good , Aunt Margaret ? " 
 " I do not   know that they ever do , " she say , hesitate a little , " but Christ do show himself wonderfully sometimes ; and I feel , if only one soul be save , it must be God 's own work and I must help it . think , if only one soul be save from endless pain and sin , what a glorious work . " 

 the twilight give I boldness , so I say , " I wish you could feel as I do , that our Father will let nothing he have make be lose forever . as long as I believe as you do I could not love he , nor serve he ; but since I have leave off look to the Bible , and listen to what he say in my own soul , I love he and I be happy . " 
 " I wish you could make I think so too , " she say , " but I know it be wrong even to say so . if once we listen to our own heart and use our reason , we go away from God . yet do you know , if some one whom I love very much be to die not love Christ , I think I be sure , I should go mad , quite mad . it be so terrible that you can not pray for they , that you can not do anything for they when once they be go . we must pray for they now , now , " she say , with a passionate earnestness that astonish I ; she be so bright and placid generally . 
 I look up into her face , and I fancy there be tear in her eye , but I could hardly tell , for it be so dark . I know of whom she be think , and long after I remember her word . 
 the chapel be dimly light . only round the pulpit there be two or three candle , whose light serve to make clearly visible the three principal actor in the scene about to be perform . 

 in front of the pulpit stand Cousin Jonathan , and when he speak I could look at nothing but that mouth , that dreadful mouth , that seem to have 

 a horrible fascination for I . on his right he be support by the Rev. Joseph Goodman , who stand with eye turn heavenward and fat hand fold meekly across his greasy and distend waistcoat . on his left stand my grandfather , his cold hard eye engage in critically examine the scatter occupant of the different pew . 

 the proceeding be open by the singing of a hymn , in which the torment await all mankind , except that infinitesimal portion who be believer in Christ , be set forth vividly , and in no bad verse . that be end , my grandfather engage in prayer . the prayer be very much in the same key as the hymn have be , but a little bold and weak . when it be end Brother Vickers pray . he be one of those who most frequently call Frank 's notebook into requisition ; and if my grandfather 's way of treat fire and brimstone be cool and calm , so certainly be not his . the good man fairly work himself into a profuse perspiration and drag away at the pew - back before we with both hand and with such fervent energy that I momentarily expect to see he fly , pew - back and all , against my head . 
 Brother Vickers ' prayer end , another hymn be sing , and then Brother Jones be call upon . 

 some man must think the Almighty very ignorant , for they never kneel down to speak to he without feel themselves call upon to explain to he 

 the whole plan of salvation , creation , and damnation : subject on which , one might almost suppose , he would be well informed than themselves . Brother Jones be one of these . it may have be that my mood be not very charitable that evening , but it certainly seem to I that , in place of pray to any other being , he be lay out for his own personal edification and satisfaction the whole circle of his theological knowledge . 

 when we rise from our knee , before Cousin Jonathan give out the next hymn , Mr. Goodman come forward and tell we that , if the spirit of God have touch any of our heart during the precede prayer , we be request to come up . 

 " do come up , dear friend , 
 do 
 come up , " he say . 

 the hymn finish , the spirit still remain inactive and no one have accept the invitation , it be repeat a second time , more urgently than at first . 

 " do come up , dear friend , 
 do 
 come up . while Brother Stiles engage in prayer , do come up . " 

 Brother Stiles begin , Brother Stiles end ; no one move . 
 before Brother Stubbles engage , the invitation be again renew : 
 " the time be young , dear friend . will no one begin ? will no one come up ? " 

 no one would ; so brother Stubbles begin . between every verse of the hymn that follow Mr. 

 Goodman continue to ask , at last almost with tear , if no one would come up , if no one would lead the way . " do come , do come , " he cry , as he move both hand unctuously to and fro ; and my heart be touch with pity for the unfortunate man . I look round the chapel anxiously to see if there be no sign of an upward movement , but could discover none . 


 Brother Snappers , who pray next , seem to have be move in the same way , for he scold quite rabidly : if there be any there that evening   and he know there be such   whose heart God have touch , let they beware ! if they refuse to accept the invitation , if they refuse to come up , that night , that very moment , the spirit of God might leave they ; and that day year , or that day month , or that day week , nay , by that time tomorrow , they might be in that place from which there would be no come up forever . he do not say so , but he leave one the impression that he would not have many tear to weep if such 
 be 
 the case . 

 Brother Goodman himself pray next , a rambling , meander sort of prayer , which would have be just as suitable at a funeral , a coronation , or a wedding . 

 then Cousin Jonathan , after a last vain appeal , close the meeting with a prayer ; and that prayer , sweet , tender and earnest , seem strangely out of harmony with the rest of the evening 's proceeding . 

 ' twas like enter a silent sunny cove after be toss among black breaker . he pray for those who have not yet feel the love of Christ , that to they it might speak with its glorious power , till at length , perfect in purity , they might become but the live reflection of that unfathomable love . perfect purity , perfect truth ; through every sentence the yearning for it breathe ; and when we rise from our knee and I look up into his face , I could not see that the mouth be always crave something ; I look only at the serene eye and brow . 

 when the meeting be over we all walk home rather silently , for it have be a failure to all of we . as for myself , I have make up my mind , even in spite of Cousin Jonathan 's beautiful prayer , never to attend another ; never , come what would . on our way home the Goodmans turn in to have a chat at Brother Vickers 's , Frank and Aunt Margaret go for a stroll on the beach , and when we get to the house my grandfather and Cousin Jonathan take themselves off to the study . there be nothing else to be do , so I curl myself up at one end of the great parlour sofa with Wolf 's fairy tale . I still enjoy they as much as I have do when I be eight year old , though I have such an old , old - womanish feeling sometimes . 

 presently my grandmother and Miss Mell come in and sit down at the other end of the room . I think they soon forget my presence ; Miss Mell keep 

 up a constant flow of talk , while my poor nervous little grandmother put in a timid little yes or no when she think it require , and pull away at the fringe of her crochet wrapper . she be old and not beautiful , but she look so beside Miss Mell who sit opposite she in her juvenile dress , with her wrinkle and her sharp nose and chin , over which the skin be draw so tightly that a little more would surely have cause it to crack . at first I be too much engross by my book to pay any attention to what they say ; but when my tale be end I sit and listen . 


 " a pity she praise up those great fat girl so , " Miss Mell be just say of Mrs. Goodman . " they be the ugly girl in the village , but she can not   see it . she have a very good opinion of herself , too , " continue Miss Mell , see that my grandmother give no response ; " and she imagine there be no other minister 's wife to be compare with she , and I know that she take good 
 care 
 never to go where there be any infectious disease , and " 


 here the door open and Mrs. Goodman 's face , with its beam smile , present itself . " do you think I be very long go , dear ? " she say to Miss Mell ; and , kiss my grandmother affectionately , add , " it be a shame to leave you , but the dear good creature would have it so , and I come back to you just as soon as I could , dear , just as soon . " she seat herself close to my grandmother and , take 

 one of her hand , proceed to pat , smooth , and caress it during the whole of the conversation which ensue . 


 " what be you talk about , dear , when I come in ? I be sure it be something 
 very 
 entertain ; Miss Mell 's conversation always be so entertaining . as Sarah Jane say to I yesterday afternoon : " oh , Ma ! there come Miss Mell . shall we not have a nice afternoon!í and we have a 
 pleasant 
 time . have we not , my dear ? " 

 " very . do I tell you that Alice Brown have come back ? " ask Miss Mell . 
 " no , dear , you do not ; but when I be up at Mrs. Barnacles ' this morning she tell I of it , and that she have grow into such a beautiful girl ! be it true ? " 
 " beautiful ! " say Miss Mell , with a sharpening in her voice that make it very fit company for her nose . " I should beg to be excuse from such beauty ! she be as large as an elephant and a great deal coarser , and as for her forest of hair the good thing she could do with it would be to cut it off ; it be as black and coarse as a horse 's tail ! " 

 " I do not   know what she 
 look 
 like , " say Mrs. Goodman , shake her head , " but she be be very badly bring up . " 


 " bring up ! " interrupt Miss Mell . " why , she have not be bring up at all . they be the low people in the place till they get this money 

 leave they , the low and the poor ; and she be the bad of they . do you ever hear of that affair with young Mr. Blair ? " 

 " no , my dear , I hear nothing , " say Mrs. Goodman , in her great interest for a moment forget to caress my grandmother 's hand . 
 " it be about two year ago now , " say Miss Mell . " Mr. Albert Blair be swim in the great pool near Brown 's house and get cramp . he call for help , and the girl   she be then about fifteen   happen to hear he . you will hardly credit it , but in place of go for some one , she actually have the immodesty to tear off her own clothe and leap in ; and , as if that be not enough , she actually carry he in her arm up to their house . you may believe I , for I have it all on the good authority ; my servant be very intimate with the Browns in those day , and she tell I all about it . she say , too , that he send she ever so many present afterwards , and think nothing of stop to speak with she in the street the brazen - face creature . " 
 " be it possible , my dear ! " say Mrs. Goodman . " how want in modesty and self - respect ! how very shocking ! " 
 " it be not the bad thing we shall hear of she , mark my word , " say Miss Mell , with a gleam of intense satisfaction in her grey eye as she give utterance to this prediction ; which , consider its nature , be by no mean unlikely of fulfilment . 

 " ah ! this be a sad , sad , wicked world , " say Mrs. Goodman , gaze fixedly at the wall opposite and shake her head slowly . " as I say to Sarah Jane only this morning , if once we depend on our own weak self how miserably we shall fail , fail , fail ! " 
 Miss Mell , not perceive the exact bearing of these remark on the subject in hand , sit still ; but my grandmother utter a timid , " yes . " 
 " ah ! you may well say yes , dear . I have have a dreadful blow this evening . oh , it be a wicked , wicked world in which we live . if my dear girl have not give their heart to Christ , I should tremble for they , yes , even for they " ; and the tear that have be gather in the good woman 's eye roll slowly down her cheek . 
 " what have you hear ? " say Miss Mell , who already scent something good . 
 " oh , you know all about it , no doubt , dear about Dr. Harper , who I always think such a dear , good man , and Mrs. Harvey . " 
 " Dr. Harper and Mrs. Harvey ! I have   hear nothing , " say Miss Mell . 

 " you do not 
 say 
 so , my dear ! I be 
 so 
 grieve I say 
 one 
 word about it . I make sure you know it 
 all 
 . you know I never talk about such thing , never , never ; but , oh ! it be the sad , 
 sad 
 thing I have   hear for a long , long time ; though I always know that that Mrs. Harvey be not a good woman . I say so long ago at the time she leave our chapel for 

 the church . Mrs. Lovedy be nurse she when her first boy be bear , and she tell I thing , dear , dreadful thing ; she say " and there follow the relation , in minutest detail , of thing such as I have not even dream of , whose hideous shadow have never yet be throw across my young life . from my lonely african home I have bring an ignorance of evil   and of that which , holy and pure in itself , man 's folly have make so   that might have be think strange in a child of six year . much that have be cause of vague speculation and wonder be make clear to I that night , and I be wretche ; for , alas ! be it not the old , old story that the tree of knowledge be the tree of pain , and that , " in the day wherein thou eat thou shalt surely die " stand write on every fruit of the wonderful tree ? 

 the gentleman come in after a time to say good - night , and I slip off the sofa and go to my own little room , for I do not feel in the mood to be speak to by anyone . 

 when I get there , it somehow seem that all be change ; nothing look as it use to look ; the very light do not produce its old effect when it shine on the white bed curtain ; and my beautiful bunch of rose tell quite a different tale from that which it have whisper in the morning . I feel sour and bitter , and I take the poor bunch I have gather with such care and fling it out of the window ; then I partly undressed and sit down upon the floor and 

 set my candle down opposite I . it do I good to look at its wicked red flame flicker and flare . before that night I have often feel sympathy with my candle ; but then it have seem to I a poor soul always strive to grow high , and never succeed ; now it look red and bad , like the new world that have be open to I . this be a wretched earth , and perhaps , after all , there be a place of endless sin and therefore of endless pain ; it would only be the world a little more worldly , I think . 

 Aunt Margaret come in to wish I good night just then ; she have a crimson wrapper over her head , so I know she have just return from the beach . she look more beautiful than ever and happy than I have ever see she ; but she seem to have change , just like the rose and the light . 
 " I think I should find you in bed , " she say , stoop down over I . " which be you study your little bare toe or the candle ? " 
 " neither , " I say ; " but I wish I be not a woman . I hate woman ; they be horrible and disgusting , and I wish I have never be bear rather than to be one . " 
 " why , darling , what be the matter now ? I be very glad I be a woman ; it be so sweet " ; and a soft smile play round her mouth as she speak . 
 " do you like the revival meeting this evening ? " she ask I after a pause . 
 " no . it be horrible . I be never go to another , " I answer , briefly . 

 " oh yes , you will . you will make papa so angry if you do not . " 
 " I can not   help it , " I answer . " there be some place that make one wicked , and it be not right to go to they . I feel tonight as if everyone in the world be a hypocrite , and I shall be one too , if I go to these place just for the sake of please some one else as bad as Miss Mell and Mrs. Goodman . 
 " you be tired tonight , darling ; tomorrow thing will look bright to your poor little eye . you have sit up too late . good night , sweet ; " and she go out and I be leave alone with my red light . I soon get chilly and sleepy and creep into bed . 
 I remember that day because , first , on it the joy and peace I have live in for two year begin to break ; because on it I first enter the shadow of that cloud in whose darkness I be to walk for year , hop nothing , believe nothing , trust nothing . 



 III . 
 the MAN with the mouth 

 as aunt MARGARET 
 have say , thing look brighter in the morning the beautiful morning that throw its veil of misty light over the great ugly truth which , in all their hideous nakedness , have stand star we in the eye and rid we on the breast all night . 

 Undine , as soon as she be dress , run down to the beach ; there the tiny wave dance laugh on the side of the big one , which in their turn chase and overtake one another , toss their head high into the sunny air and turn to white foam , or make a mad dash for the land and die away in laugh ripple on the sand . 

 on such a morning , on this side of twenty , with no ghost to haunt one and come in between the happy sunshine and the eye , who would not forget that there be such thing as revival meeting , and good people who always say one thing and mean another , and jealous old maid and unfaithful wife , and dry hippopotamus - hide - like old man ? who would not forget that underneath this green , 

 laugh- 
 laugh 


 ing , merry old world lie fire and brimstone , into which a fall from any rock may send one in a moment ? undine forget this and everything , and grow at last as wild as the dancing wave . she have bring poor George Macdonald with she for company , but now she throw he down upon the sand , where the wave catch he and make fine sport of his Unspoken Sermons and almost run away with they ; while she leapt from rock to rock , and finally pull off her shoe and stocking , the well to keep she footing and capture the queer little being which every wave leave behind it in the rocky hollow . 

 she be very busily secure an extraordinary little monster , with a multiplicity of tail and feeler , and , with her head some two foot low than her foot , be in no small danger of have an unexpected bath in the shallow pool , when she hear a voice at her elbow . 
 rise to her foot with some difficulty and throw back the wild hair from her eye , she see , stand beside her none other than the man with the green - plaid trouser and the mouth Cousin Jonathan . 
 he ask what she be look for ; and when he understand very soon capture the queer little fish . 

 the presence of a second person have in an instant take all the exhilaration and life out of the morning and bring she back to the disagreeable human 

 world , in which wild hair , wet clothe , and bare foot be terribly disgraceful thing . she feel conscience - stricken and look down into the little pool , wish she be one of the little fish swim there . 

 Cousin Jonathan hold out the fish he have just catch with one hand ; in the other he have poor George Macdonald , look almost as wet and disreputable as its mistress . 
 " I find your name in this book , so I suppose you must have drop it , " he say as he give it to she . " the wave be very nearly steal it , as I fear they may you one of these day , if you continue such a very zealous little naturalist . " 
 " I be not a naturalist ; I do not   know anything about fish or about anything else , " stammer Undine , hardly know what she say . 
 Cousin Jonathan smile , not an unpleasant smile of ridicule , but one of quiet amusement . 
 " they say , when we know our own deficiency they be half rectify . you would like to know all about a strange little fellow like this , would you not ? " 
 " I would like to know something about he , " she answer , the kind , quiet manner of her companion already begin to set she at her ease . " when I be at home I use to try and learn a little about plant and insect , but I never have anyone to help I and I have not the right book . " 

 " perhaps I could help you a little , " he say ; " at 

 least I be sure I could , with book ; but if you do not wish to study they , what make you take such trouble to catch they ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Undine , " but I never see anything beautiful without want to have it , especially if it be very hard to get . it be not beautiful now , " she say , turn over the poor little fish in her hand . 
 " I never can see some beautiful thing without wish for they , " he say , and when he speak those word he speak the truth . 
 he help she over the rock , with that respectful kindness with which even little child like to be treat ; and , when they reach the beach , sit down beside she and let his talk wander on , from a description of the nature and habit of the little creature in her hand to that wonderland which the microscope make visible ; and Undine sit and listen till she forget his mouth and forget even her own bare toe . 
 " we must go home to breakfast , " he say at last , and Undine go in search of her shoe and stocking . Cousin Jonathan never forget when it be time for a meal . 

 on their walk home he change the conversation and try to draw she out ; for the study of character please he , and he feel attract by the queer , babyish , womanish creature . she be an orphan , too , and almost friendless , and he pity she . 

 More- 
 moreover 


 over , have she not look lovely as she stand there on the rock with the hot blood in her cheek and her exquisite little foot cling to the rough stone . Cousin Jonathan like beautiful thing of the feminine gender . 

 Undine as she trot beside he have little idea that he or anyone else could see anything in she to admire ; but with a woman 's quick perception she feel intuitively that whatever she might say , it be all right , it would be well receive ; and accordingly her idea and word flow forth in such a stream as would have astonish anyone who know she as the shy awkward child in whose throat even yes and no seem usually to stick . 
 Undine pass the day almost entirely in Cousin Jonathan 's society . Aunt Margaret be busy , and when she have time to spare be with Frank , who be return to college the next day . in the evening Cousin Jonathan leave , for his wife be an invalid and he could never be from home long . at part he tell Undine that he would send her book and that , in return , she be to write and tell he what she think of they . when he walk down the garden path , she stand look after he and feel almost as though an old friend be go . 



 IV . 
 go to CHAPEL 

 EVERY 
 house have its smoky chimney , its draughty room , its creaky door ; every life its own haunting shadow ; and every state of life its own small trouble . it may be , when we arrive in a new place or enter upon altered circumstance , the sky be all serenely blue above we ; but ' tis never long before the discover eye perceive the tiny cloud the cloud on the horizon , at first no big than a man 's hand , which , grow great and never quite dissolve , hang over we , forever ready to rain sorrow on our head . the direction from which her storm be to arise be soon make clear to Undine . after Cousin Jonathan leave she take her work and sit down at one end of the pantry dresser where Aunt Margaret be busy make cake for tea . every now and then Aunt Margaret look down at Undine and wonder what be knit her brow and make her little hand work away with such desperate energy . 


 Undine herself could hardly have trace the gyration of the thought that be toss in her own 

 small head , but the result be an unalterable determination that she would go to chapel no more . it be her duty , yet she could not go , she think ; and wonder wearily if she be always to be afflict with sens of duty drive she into path where no one else would or could walk . 

 the Goodmans and Miss Mell have be ask out to tea , so there be none but the family round the table that evening . 
 " you must make haste , " say Mr. Roch , " and get your tea do ; the meeting begin in three - quarter of an hour . " 
 " you must take care to wrap yourself up warmly , " say the grandmother ; " you be not accustomed to our climate yet . " 
 " I be not go , " say Undine . 
 " what do you say ? " ask her grandmother , in whose throat the word stick so fast that not even Frank , who sit next she , could hear they . 
 " I be not go to the meeting this evening , " she answer , star very hard at her plate as she speak . 
 " do you feel ill tonight , dear ? you look very pale , " say Aunt Margaret . 
 " I be quite well , thank you ; but I would rather not go tonight . " 
 " I wish all my household to be there , " say the dried hide , straighten and elongate himself in his seat . 

 " perhaps she wish to stay with Frank , as it be the last evening , " say the poor nervous little grandmother in an apologetic little whisper . 
 " Frank be go with Margaret , " say the dried hide , with his leathery , intonationless voice . it sound so terrible to Undine and fill she with such trembling , that the brown Wesleys and Fletchers in the little bookcase behind her grandfather seem to go up to the ceiling and come slowly down to the floor , and she wonder if everyone in the room could not hear her heart beat . 
 " I would rather not go , I do not   mind stay alone at all , " she say at last . 
 " why do you not wish to go ? " say her grandfather , fix his cold eye upon she . 
 " I do not   think it be I mean I do not   get any good from go , and , I would rather stay please . " her voice have almost die away as she speak the last word . 
 " why do you not wish to go ? " repeat her grandfather in his usual calm voice . 
 the blood come back to Undine 's cheek , and with it her spirit rise . 
 " because it would be wicked of I , " she say , and then , feel that anything would be well than the silence that ensue , she go on , " I can not   go and pretend to be serve God when all " 

 " be silent , " say her grandfather . " little child who act in this manner should be whip and 

 teach how to behave themselves . it be a pity you be not a few year young , Undine . " 

 the child look up at he , with eye almost blind by rage and hatred , and tremble in every limb ; then suddenly there come to she a thought the thought of one who bear all thing in meekness , wrong in silence , who return cruelty with act of mercy , and the hatred of evil with the love of a god . through long year of ceaseless dream he have become to her no vague shadowy existence of the long past , but a present living reality , ever aid and ever sympathise , to whose influence be ascribe all her high thought and well feeling , no matter from what source they arise . she think of he , and no answer rise to her lip ; and in place of the fury only a cold fainting at her heart be leave . she sit here so quietly , break up into little bit the bread in her plate , that Frank , remember the Undine of the old african day , gaze at she in astonishment , expect an outburst . none come ; and when her grandfather rise from the table and tell she to get ready she quietly go to obey he . 

 " conquer , " think the old man as he put his coat on in the hall ; but perhaps he would hardly have think so could he have see what be pass in the heart of the conquered . " it be very hard and bitter to have to go after all this , but because it be bitter it must be right to go just this once , at 

 least as a punishment to myself . " so she reason as she walk beside he on the way to the little Methodist chapel . 

 the meeting pass for Undine very much as the last have do ; only that this evening , on the seat in front of she , sit a tall , gaunt old woman in a black bonnet who from time to time push and pull at the shoulder of the sallow girl who sit next she , in an endeavour to drive she up to the rail every time the invitation be utter afresh . 
 " I do not   want to go , " the poor creature whisper , draw back ; and she would , undine thought , have keep her ground have it not be for Mrs. Goodman , who , lean over the back of the bench , whisper loudly in her ear , " go up , my dear ; go up . " 
 the girl look round with a startled expression . it seem as though all thing , above , around , below , be combine to send she " up . " the poor preacher call from the rail , the prayer hurl anathema at those who do not accept the invitation , the hand of her companion persistently apply physical force in the direction of salvation , the mysterious voice from the gloomy depth behind urge she upwards : these be force which she have not strength to resist , and rise slowly she go up . 
 Undine wonder what she find to tell he when Mr. Goodman 's greasy head be bent down over she . 

 she be the only fruit that evening , but as they 

 walk home Mrs. Goodman express her joy that the blessed work of Christ have begin and that she have be the humble instrumentality in his hand for begin it . 

 " a word in season , my dear Mrs. Jones , a word in season ; let we be thankful when the dear Lord allow we to speak a word in season , allow we poor weak voice to speak a word for he . " 
 Mrs. Jones , whose road lie in the same direction , be accompany they part of the way . she fully acquiesce , and at parting beg Mrs. Goodman to come and spend the next day with she . Mrs. Goodman be deeply grieve , but the next day they be return to Greenwood ; she would not see more of her dear Mrs. Jones . that lady be , in her turn , deeply grieve at hear this , and bargain that Sarah Jane and Elizabeth Ann should be send over to spend a week with she . 
 Mrs. Goodman say there be no one in the world with whom she would so gladly have her treasure as her dearest , old , friend , and they should surely come . Mrs. Goodman 's dearest always be the person whom she happen to be address at the moment . 

 they part with an affectionate embrace , and Mrs. Goodman be still wipe her cheek from the trace of Mrs. Jones 's rather moist salutation when she remark : " what a dear , good creature Mrs. Jones be ! what a pity she should think so much of 

 dress at her age ; and oh , the adornment of the outer man , what be they , my dear Miss Mell , what be they ? " 

 " yes , indeed , " say Miss Mell , " yes , indeed . " 

 " and her poor husband , my dear , " continue Mrs. Goodman , " he can not   stand it , my dear , he can not   stand it . do you notice the really 
 su 
 perb silk she have on really 
 su 
 perb . " 

 " I do not   think it be silk ; it be alpaca , " say Miss Mell . 
 " Alpaca , my dear ! you be quite mistaken . she sit close to the rail , and I be look at it from the time she come in till we go out , and what a lovely brown it be . " 
 " I think you be mistake about the silk , " say Miss Mell , determine not to yield her point . 
 " I know it be silk , my dear , " reply Mrs. Goodman . " we be in the middle of the first prayer when she come in , and I hear the rustle of the silk as soon as ever she open the door . I think , " whoever be that!í so I just look up as she go by . " 
 " well , it might be , " say Miss Mell . " I know she be as extravagant as she be stingy . " 

 " yes , it be a great pity ; she be such a dear , good creature , " say Mrs. Goodman , with much earnestness ; " it be a sad , sad pity she should be so close : the fly , the fly in the pot of ointment , my dear . ah ! 

 that fly ! " and so the good soul continue their conversation all the way home . 

 arrive there , Undine run away to her own little room , tonight to study not her candle , but the little brown Testament . she sit read a little and dream a great deal till she have work herself into a state of beatific felicity ; and in this state Aunt Margaret find she when half an hour after she enter the room . 
 " what be make you so happy ? " she ask . " you look like one of the little angel I use to dream about long ago . " 
 " nothing , " answer Undine , the golden light fade as quickly from her face as it be from her heart . Heaven on earth be only find in perfect solitude , whether by saint or by poet ; and ' tis only a step from the height of the celestial mountain to the depth of the valley below . 
 when Aunt Margaret have leave she she begin slowly to pull off her boot ; and it seem as though the thought of last night , mingle with today 's bitter feeling , all come back to she . 

 she could just catch the sound of her grandfather 's voice as it rise in prayer from the room below ; and as she sit there listen , the old hobgoblin of doubt who have be silent for so many month begin their dance over her once more . they ask the old unanswerable question , and new one , more unanswerable still ; and dare even to lay profane hand 

 on the word that have just be transport she into the seventh heaven . 

 when , however , the prayer below be end and she have get into bed , she put these suggestion of the evil one from she . she have be read too much , she have be think too much , she have be turn her eye away from Christ . for a whole month she would touch no book but his word and think no more , and so resolve she fall asleep . 
 the cloud , the little cloud , at first no large than a man 's hand , wax great as the month go by grow in the end to be so thick and heavy that at last even Aunt Margaret 's sunshine be absorb by it . 
 Undine go quietly to chapel Sunday after Sunday ; and a meek , sweet , quiet child she be , they all say , even if rather dull and stupid . they little know how those still eye make food of their every action ; how forever they be be hang in the balance and dismiss to have that unchanging " Tekel " write up against they in her mind . 
 she keep her resolution , and except when at her lesson allow no book to tempt she but her little brown Testament ; that she pore over daily for hour , just as she have do in her little whitewashed sanctum at home . 

 be the Testament most to blame , or the inherent wickedness of her own small heart , or the good woman with whom she come in contact in her 

 grand- 
 grandfather 's 


 father 's house who , when not in chapel or talk of their neighbour , be thank the Lord that they be not as their sister in the mire ? 

 whichever it might be , at the end of three month this small heathen in a christian land have make up her mind to go no more to chapel , have come to the conclusion that neither prayer - meeting nor their cousin , the class - meeting , be the gate of the Golden City , but rather the entrance to that other way that , begin with a short circumbendibus , at last lead one straight to the gate of the city whose wall be of groan and whose pavement of sigh . 
 have now a very decide hankering after that Golden City and a very decide impression that she be bind for it , it could not but be that she should eschew those entrance . she do not believe that at the gate of the Golden City stand a great wing angel : 
 " how old be you ? " he ask of the applicant for entrance . 
 " thirteen year . " 
 " have you always try to do as your conscience tell you ? but , no , stay . have you no one who give you bread and butter and shoe ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " oh , then they keep your conscience . if you only try to obey they well and faithfully do , enter into joy , and sit down on a throne . " 

 this be what she do not believe ; and so one Sunday morning she come downstairs with a laggard step and slow . 
 when she get to the door of the breakfast room she run back again , to pray one prayer more , for it be a terrible mountain she have to cross that morning . 
 the window of the breakfast room be wide open and the morning light force its way in , gild for once the brown Wesleys and Fletchers in the bookshelf , and play over the little bunch of flower Aunt Margaret have put beside her plate . she eat little , and before breakfast be half over have strew the carpet with the leaf of her broken flower . 
 Aunt Margaret wonder what be wrong with her little niece , and make vain conjecture ; while Undine keep repeat to herself the nice little speech she have prepare to make to her grandfather , which she have even take the trouble to write down the night before by way of strengthen her memory . she would tell he that she could not go to chapel , because it do her harm ; but she would tell it he so humbly and in such term that even he must forgive she . 

 but alas for human plan ! every time she essay to begin , the word stick fast in her throat ; the precious moment speed and breakfast be over without one syllable of she carefully prepared little 

 oration be have get far than the region of her heart , where it lay , heavy as lead . 

 when , however , her grandfather have rise to go , and have pass out into the passage , she also rise quickly and , stand in the doorway , say , " Grandfather . " 
 he turn round slowly and fix his cold eye on she . 
 " what be the matter ? " he ask . 
 Seek of the dumb an answer , and you will as easily find it as Undine the word of her precious and laboriously concoct little speech . they have hopelessly vanish and go , and in their place come only these " I be not go to chapel . " 
 " I think I have give you clearly to understand , Undine , on a previous occasion , that I wish you always to go . I allow no disregard of my wish in this house . " so say , he turn round to enter his study , but Undine pass he quickly and stand in the doorway before he . 

 " I be not go , " she say . " it be a wicked cruel world in which one human being have power over another , but you can not make I do what I think be wrong ; and if I go to chapel just because I fear you I shall be a hypocrite like all the other who go there ; and I will not . all people who love Christ should keep away from such place , which only bring disgrace and shame upon his name . if he come 

 to earth today he would denounce they as he do the pharisees and priest in his day . it be all a mockery and an empty show , and I shall never go again , never , never . " 

 her word follow one another in a quick incoherent stream while she pound away vigorously with one little hand in the palm of the other , till both be furiously red . her grandfather stand silently look down at she . in his heart horror and wonder largely mingle with hatred be move , but his face tell nothing . for one moment he feel a wish to strike she , but she scar he , as she have often do her old opponent , by her wild earnestness . he look at she again , and then , without make an effort to enter his study , walk out the front door , conquer for the first time in his life ; conquer by a little child . 
 and Undine , the conqueror ? alas ! have not the victor 's fate be , from the beginning , to lie down and weep ? she go out into the garden and drop down onto the soft green turf among the rose tree . 

 the sweet Sunday bell be ring loud ; through the clear morning air their music come to she , sound strangely soft and sweet now that she know they would never summon she again . for all other they be call , but they have no word for she ; she be one alone , without kinship or 

 fel- 
 fellowship 


 lowship among man so she say in her bitterness . have she be bear with a curse over her head ? would it be so wherever she might go , that her hand should be against every man , and every man 's hand against her ? or be she really so much bad than other that , wherever she might go , love and sympathy would be deny she ? would she have to walk on alone , alone , unloved , misunderstood , right on to the end ? 

 she be sob and dig away with her toe into the soft earth when Aunt Margaret come and kneel down beside she . 

 " go away , " say Undine , fiercely . " I be alone . 
 leave 
 I alone . " 

 " Undine darling , what have I do to you ? what have anyone do to you ? undine , you say you love Christ and be try to be his child . do not   you think you be wrong to speak as you do just now ? " 
 Undine throw from she the soft hand that be caress her hair , and say , though more gently , " please go away " ; and Aunt Margaret rise and leave she . 

 long after , undine thought , with tear bitter than those she then shed , of the hand she have throw from she that morning ; but they be bitter enough to the little child the little child , who have not yet find out , as we all must soon or later , that the path through life in which each soul must tread be 

 single ; that no two walk abreast ; that where one soul stand , never have stand , and never shall stand , another ; but that each man 's life and struggle be a mystery , incomprehensible and forever hide from every heart but his own . 




 V. 
 a sunny afternoon and a WILD night 

 IT be 
 summer again ; a dreamy , hazy , delicious summer afternoon . three sit upon the brow of a small grassy hillock near the beach Frank , Undine , and Aunt Margaret . 

 the grass be rich with great golden - eyed flower , and he pick they as he lie there , to fasten in the golden hair of the woman he love long silky yellow hair that hang about she , soft and fleecy as the small white cloud that lie dream far away to seaward . 
 Undine , sit a little apart with her book , look up ever and again to watch they ; they be pleasant to look at as the blue sky overhead or the green grass and shimmering light below . every now and then she catch a word of their conversation ; they be make little plan for the spending of the long good year that be come to they , when they two should be always together . at last they call to she : " what shall the colour of the study curtain be red , green , or yellow ? " 

 " Blue , " say Undine " blue , just the colour of the sea where it lie at rest , far away . " 
 " no , no ; not that colour , " Aunt Margaret answer , quickly . " I never do so before , but this afternoon I hate it . every time I look up and see it , I hate it . " 

 " look at that cloud , " say Undine ; " when we come ' twas a tiny speck we could hardly see , and now ' tis like a great fairy snow - ship in the sky . " then a silence fall on all three ; but by and by Frank fasten more golden flower in the yellow hair , and Aunt Margaret 's merry laugh be hear mingle with the rippling of the wave and the hum of the brown insect in the grass . Undine sit look at the picture before she , all green and gold . surely it must be that in such a world life and love be alone reality , and death and pain be but the fevere dream of our own mind . 
 " 

 there be wither flower lie among the grass stalk ; there be heavy shadow grow in the valley ; the fairy ship be grow dark every moment and would come with the storm wind and the hellish grin of the lightning , to plough up the smooth face of the sunny sea before morning , but they see none of those thing and sit there smile in the sunlight . 

 " Delilah , you be bewitch I , " say Frank at last , as he spring up from the grass on which he have 

 be lie with his head in her lap . " I promise to be at Leeford tonight ; must be there , in fact . " 

 " it be too late now , " say Aunt Margaret , shade her eye with her hand to look at the sink sun ; " if you walk ever so fast you can not get there before dark . " 
 " I shall not walk ; I shall hire a boat in the village and two boy , and shall be back again by ten o'clock . " 
 " it be the last evening , Frank , " she say , turn her bright childish face up to his , " the last for four whole week . be sure you come back . " 
 he stoop over she and whisper softly for a moment , and then with a good by to Undine spring down the green slope and over the rock along the beach . 
 just as he be pass out of sight he pause for an instant to look back at they and call out , " only till ten o'clock , you know , only till ten o'clock . " 
 the two leave rise to go home then . 
 " shall I pull the flower out of your hair ? " ask Undine . 
 " no ; I leave they there ; I feel like only a little child tonight . oh , Undine , I hope you will one day be as happy as I be . " 

 she have reason to be happy , undine thought ; in a few month more he would have finish his study and be to settle as doctor in Greenwood , and they be to be marry ; reason enough , but so 

 have most woman . how glorious it would be when she , too , be one ! 

 later on in the evening Undine kneel in the seaward window of Aunt Margaret 's room . Aunt Margaret stand behind she with her arm twin round she , and both be look into the darkness . except the flash of the distant lightning , nothing be to be see , nothing to be hear but the faint roll of the thunder and the roar of night wind as it fling the mountain of water it have create against the cliff or hurry they madly over the rock . 
 " it be no use look out any long ; he will not come tonight , Golden , " say Undine , use , as she often do , his pet name . 
 " no , no , you do not know he as I do . he would do anything rather than disappoint I , " she answer . 
 " but the boy , the boy , " say Undine ; " they would never venture out on a night like this . " 
 " then he would come alone . " the word be say in a calm , measure voice utterly unlike her own ; and Undine look up at the white face above she and out at the darkness , and shudder . 
 " what time be it ? " Aunt Margaret say at last . 
 " I do not   think it be very late , " say Undine , with a piteous attempt at a smile that fade instantly when she have leave the room and be make her way through the sleep house . 

 as she stand before the great clock in the hall it 

 strike the hour slowly ; and then the solemn ticking be renew . she think of the thing it might once have speak to she , concern the bright brown face that have look back at they from the rock the rock where now the wild water be foam in the darkness and be glad that it could speak they no more . 

 when she get back to the room , Aunt Margaret be kneel at the side of the chair on which the candle stand , with her two beautiful hand clasp over her head . 
 " it be just twelve , " whisper Undine as she sit down beside she . " he will not come tonight ; it be too late . " 
 " too late , too late ! " Aunt Margaret hiss the word from between her clinched tooth . " I never pray for he as I ought , I never keep on pray till I feel God 's answer , and now I can do nothing more for he , nothing more . it be what I deserve , it be God 's punishment on I for love a man who mock his name , who have no faith in Christ ; but , Undine , Undine , heaven will be no heaven to I if he be not there . I would give my soul so willingly to reclaim his ; I could bear all for he . pray , Undine , pray . I can not . " 
 and Undine pray pray as we pray for that which we be lose , for that for which we fear the day of prayer have almost end . 

 " talk , Undine , talk , " say Aunt Margaret . " if 

 you be quiet I can not bear it . " and Undine talk on , the word of her own sweet dreamy faith talk on till Aunt Margaret fall asleep with her head in the child 's lap . then at last Undine lean her forehead against the chair , and sleep also . 

 when she awake next morning the world be laugh , the sky all blue with not one tell - tale cloud , the hill all green and glitter in the morning light , and the blue sea beyond they ripple in the sunshine , with a smile like the dimpled smile of a beautiful wicked woman after she have break heart and suck the sweetness out of human life . 
 Undine , before she be well awake , smile back at the picture that laugh back at she through the open window ; then wonder what this heavy weight about her heart might mean , and remember all . 
 have he come ? where be Aunt Margaret ? glance round the room , she hurry out to look for she . as she pass her grandfather 's door he open it and call to she : 
 " do you know who go out at the front door last night and leave it open ? I feel the cold wind blow in , and have to go down and close it , about four o'clock . " 

 he feel pretty sure the culprit stand before he ; no one else in the house be give to wander out at night , and in the dark . it would only be of a piece with all her other eccentricity , which have 

 at last bring he to the conclusion that the child whom he thoroughly detest , yet could not get rid of , be not quite in her right mind . 

 she give he no answer to his question , but ask hurriedly , " have he come ? " and see from his face that he do not know , she pass on . 
 where be Aunt Margaret ! not in the garden , not in the house . soon everyone be in full search of she except her father , who go into his study to prepare next Sunday 's sermon . 
 she have anger he last night by ask he to send some one over to Leeford to hear if Frank have leave . he hat his future son - in - law with a hatred only less perfect than that which he feel for his little granddaughter . a freethinke child of the devil , he have more than once call he to Aunt Margaret , and he would never have have she have it not be that from his mother he have inherit something . 
 gold be like charity ; it cover a multitude of sin ; it maketh a cloak wherein even Freethinking may array itself , and its nakedness shall not appear . 
 two hour later he come out of his study with a troubled look . his wife have be to tell he that Margaret be nowhere to be find , and that one of the boy have return from Leeford . Frank with the other have start in the boat at eight o'clock the night before , hop to reach home before the storm break . 

 if there be one thing in the world the dry - hide love , it be his daughter ; and in the search that follow no one look so anxiously or so earnestly as he . 
 he have refuse to send anyone last night , and she have go herself , he think ; and so think he set out on the road she must have take . Undine go to search where she know Aunt Margaret 's own heart would have take she to the little green hillock where the yellow flower he have pick lie wither here and there , where she could see the rock on which he have stand to wish his last goodbye and the placid sunny sea which murmur on so softly , tell no tale of the beauty and the strength it have devour . 
 Undine could not bear to stay near it and hurry back to the house and the dear old rose - fill garden . 
 her grandmother meet she at the door , cry and wring her poor weak hand : " oh , he be dead ! Poor Frank be dead ! they have find his body , and the boy 's that be with he . and my darling , my poor darling , where be she ? it will kill she ! it will kill she ! " 
 Undine do not stay to mingle tear with she , but pass from room to room like one in a dream , search where yet she do not hope to find ; with the restless move water ever before her eye as she wearily close and open door after door . 

 the door of her own room stand half open , but she only glance in , and be just leave it when her ear catch a sound from the corner near the window . there , with the sunlight stream full over its yellow hair , crouch a naked human figure . the knee be draw up till the chin rest on they , and one arm be clasp tight round they ; the other be stretch out , and one finger point to a crack in the board . the eyebrow be draw down till the eye be hardly visible , but they open slightly every time the mouth twitch nervously to one side or the other . 
 Undine stand motionless in the doorway and watch it . have sorrow touch her reason ? be she mad ? or be that really what she look for that thing with the fade yellow flower in its hair ? 
 " ha - ha - ha ! " 
 ' twas a hellish laugh that fill the room and ring out across the rose tree in the garden . the finger be still point to the crack along the board . 

 " ha - ha - ha ! there they come one , two , three ; there they come the devil that have get his soul , hundred of they , thousand of they . that be the door they take he down , there . I ask God to take I instead , but he would not , and now they have get I too . he use to say there be no God , and no hell , but God will show he now . 

 ha - ha - ha ! how they come ! little devil one , two , three ! " 

 Undine utter a low cry and drop down onto her knee beside she . 
 the yellow thing , with its fade flower , crouch down lower , crouch till its chin rest on the floor , and its half - close eye glance furtively now on this side now on that . then spring to its foot , with a cry , it seize Undine with both hand and bear she to the ground . kneel on she and put its lip close to her ear , it hiss forth : " I know you , who you be . you look like Undine ; but you be the devil ; the devil to whom God give his soul . I know , I know . you leave his body lie there upon the beach , and you tore it with your cruel hand that I might not know it when I find it lie there in the grey dawn : but I know it , I know it . " she fix her tooth in Undine 's arm and clasp she to her breast until Undine 's cry be smother and she become unconscious . when those who have hear they enter the room , Undine lie upon the floor insensible , and in the far corner crouch a thing that lick its red lip and cry exultingly as it point at she : " I have kill the devil ! I have kill the devil ! ha - ha - ha ! " 
 a week after , and Cousin Barnacles have take Undine to his house in Greenwood . 

 it be not time which make old man and woman of we . Undine 's childhood lie bury in the grave 

 upon the hillside where a form which the sea have give up be lay , and in a dark strong house far off where a mad woman grow wilder still if they show she a bible or a yellow flower . 

 Ignorant of the world , shy , childish in her manner , yet for her childhood be forever of the past . she would never again dance with naked foot among the rock and wonder how , in the world of green and gold , man ever sigh and pray for rest beneath its crust . for she , henceforth , the merry laugh child would be you , and grave - eyed man and woman , we and we . 



 VI . 
 GREENWOOD 

 IT be 
 a white lifeless face that Cousin Jonathan bring with he to Greenwood . so ghastly and pale that even Mrs. Goodman and Miss Mell , if they be not move to pity , could not find it in their heart to exercise their tongue upon it . 

 all day Undine use to wander in the old wood that lie between Cousin Jonathan 's house and the village ; use to wander there when the dry leaf be fall down in shower and pile themselves up in little grave - like heap at the root of the great tree ; use to look at they and fancy , with a kind of apathetic pleasure , that , when the spring come with its young green , she , like the leaf , would have vanish away . she think her heart be break . perhaps it be ; but she do not know that heart be only Time 's china cups china cup which the old father be forever throw hither and thither , crack and smash in his wild reckless way , and then carefully pick up and cement so cleverly that the old scar do not even show . they may ring a little dead if you strike they but that be all . 

 not know this , Undine wonder at herself when she find out that she intend to live , and to grow strong , and pretty too . 
 then the woman in the village begin to say malicious thing , and to find out that she be stupid and conceited and unchildlike ; but she care nothing for what they say , and read her book and curl herself up to dream for hour among the root of her favorite old tree by the little bridge in the wood . at first they be sad , unearthly dream , but when the year grow old and the golden colour come creep over the hill , it creep into her dream also ; and she would sit there smile and glad ; then she would wonder at herself and go home slowly , think of the dark lonely house and the Goldenlight that be bury there forever . 
 Cousin Jonathan try to cheer she , buy book for she , a horse , dress and trinket , and everything wherewith man seek to comfort and delight the heart of womankind . but , as his wife remark to Miss Mell , he might as well have save his money and spar himself the trouble : she never show the least pleasure at receive his prettiest gift , except it happen to be a book that please she , and then it be only in a staid , old - womanish way . 

 three year have pass by , and Undine the child have change into Undine the woman pretty , very pretty , even Miss Mell be oblige to allow that , " for those who like that style of beauty . " but she 

 be stupid , terribly stupid and old - fashioned . all her female acquaintance be agree on this point . the most ravish dress could not win even a glance , the most delicious piece of scandal the least attention . no little party or picnic , however heart - subdue in person or purse the gentleman who be to be there , could ever awaken in she the faint enthusiasm . People leave off have anything to do with she at last . 

 " I be terribly anxious about she , " Mrs. Barnacles would say . " it be not that she be old ; she be a mere child ; but I do not   see what be to make her change ; and if no one ever see she , who be to marry she ? " Mrs. Barnacles be a yellow - face big - nosed invalid , who pass her life on a sofa and be apt to take a dyspeptic view of thing . " she have need of all her good look , if she be to go off ; man do not   take readily to those queer , dull sort of girl ; and with those idiotic idea of her , on religious matter , too , half the man would not have she as a gift . " 
 " of course they would not , " Miss Mell would here strike in ; " and I believe it be all put on too she not go to chapel and all the rest of it just to be peculiar . it be all nonsense . what do she know about such thing ? for clever learn man it be all very well , but a stupid child like she ought to be well whip and feed on bread and water for six month ; that would take the nonsense out of she well than anything else . " 

 " yes , " Mrs. Barnacles would assent , " for man it be all very well , as you say ; but a woman , and one who live on charity , ought to keep they to herself if she have idea of that unwomanly kind . " 
 she use to tell Undine all this , to her face , sometimes : " go to chapel and give up read those nonsensical book , and act like other people even if you do not   think like they . it will not   answer , it will not   answer at all ; and you have well give up all this sort of thing before it be too late . you will repent it if you do not . " 
 then Undine , half bitter , half indifferent , would get away from she to the dear old world of inanimate nature , which never call we queer and strange or advise we to wear a mask . it be well for she that she care for that at least , for dark loveless time have fall on she , and she care for nothing else . Cousin Jonathan be good to she , do all in his power for she , but she like he less as the year go on . she have never love he , and the intellectual help which he have be able to give she cease to be a bond between they when she have reach his ground and even pass beyond he . so now Cousin Jonathan share the fate common to all lover , and give out his gold , such as it be , for dust . 

 one afternoon late in the summer Undine sit half bury among the long grass at the foot of her old tree . Mill 's 
 Political Economy 
 , with its face turn 

 to the ground , lie at her foot , while a little black beetle scud hither and thither among its page , all unnoticed . her hand be busily employ in pick off small bit of dry bark from the trunk of the old tree ; while her thought be in the same key , and as sweet and impossible of fulfilment , as ever be little Ellie 's when she sit alone ' mid the beech in the meadow . 

 it may be true that the man who have never dream with his eye open never can know what disappointment mean ; but it be also true that he never know what heaven be like . Undine 's stay there be not of long duration , for by and by Cousin Jonathan come saunter through the wood in search of she . 
 she be so enwrap in her own thought that she do not notice his presence till his hand have be pass softly over her hair . 
 " where be your thought wander ? " he ask as he seat himself softly beside she on one of the great knot root of the old tree which have force its way out of the ground . 
 " nowhere , " Undine answer wearily . 
 " that be the answer you always make I now , " he say , very gravely ; " you do not   make a friend of I now as you use to , Undine . " 
 " because I can not . there never be much sympathy between we on any subject ; there be none now . " 

 " it be you who do not understand I , " he 

 an- 
 answer 


 swere , pass his finger softly through her hair and let his hand rest on the back of her neck . 

 there be something in the action , simple as it be , that she do not like ; and a feeling of disgust come , as it have often do lately when he kiss or caress his little daughter , as he call she . 
 she throw his hand from she as she would a toad 's claw , and spring lightly to her foot . 
 " what be the matter ? " he ask , look up at she with his serene blue eye ; and Undine feel ashamed of her ingratitude and foolishness . 
 " nothing be the matter , " she answer , laugh , " only I be not quite so old as you and believe in perpetual motion . " 
 stand on tiptoe , she catch one of the overhang bough and sway herself gently backwards and forwards . Cousin Jonathan think , as he look at she , that never , even on that first day when he see she stand with her little naked foot upon the rock , have she look so deliciously lovely : as round , as downy and inviting as any golden peach that ever schoolboy eye look at and , look , thirst for , because it be unattainable . 
 " how dare you intrude upon I in my private residence ! " she say , still laugh . " be it not enough to make I disagreeable ? why do not   you wait till I invite you ? " 
 " I should have to wait a long time , I fear , " he reply , still look at she . 

 " perhaps so , but death may make I more agreeable and sociable ; and , as I be sure to die long before you , when you hear that I have depart this life you may come and hold converse with my spirit under this tree . I mean to haunt it , if the old monster do not quite dissolve I into nothingness . " she rattle on thus , not know what to say and not wish to be silent . 
 " you have a queer mind , " say Cousin Jonathan . " as surely as you seem to be in one of your merry mood , you drag in some grim and ghostly thing to spoil it all . I do not   believe you know what it be to be gladly happy . " 

 " perhaps not . I know that when I be a child and use to romp most wildly and do mad thing that none of the other dare , it be just because I be not happy . whenever my thought and misery be too great for I , I use to let off steam by do something terribly naughty ; and when I have be lie awake all night under my bed , in the great agony about my sin and other people 's , I use to get up and have the most desperate of romp all by myself . I remember one day , when I be only seven year old , have the story of Cain and Abel for my Sunday lesson . it make a great impression on I . if God accept Abel 's sacrifice not because of its value but because of his faith , why , if I only have faith , should not fire come down 

 from heaven upon my sacrifice at Wilge Kloof . 
 1 
 I could think of nothing else for day , and so I wait till one day when I be very hungry and there be very nice meat for dinner . I think the sacrifice must be one that have cost I something ; so I would not touch a mouthful , but save the nice little chop that be put on my plate till dinner be do and everyone have go to take their siesta . it be a broil day , but I go out to the shady side of the house and collect twelve little flat stone and pile they up neatly in a square heap ; then I put my meat down on they and kneel down to pray . I tremble with ecstatic joy when the prayer be finish , for I feel sure that , when I look up , the flame would have descend and devour my fatty chop . I be almost afraid to raise my eye . when I look up and see the chop lie just as I have leave it , I feel astonish , but my faith be not at all shake , and I set to work again , pray with all my might . I look up again after a long time , think I would see the chop and perhaps the stone themselves , like Elijah , lick up by the heavenly fire ; but it be just as I have leave it , only the sun have make the fat melt a little and run down the stone . I keep on pray till the people in the house begin to stir , and then I throw down the altar and give the chop to the dog , and feel ever so wicked and miserable as I walk up and down in 

 1 
 Wilge Kloof pronounce Vilgerkloof . Wilge mean willow . 


 the shade of the house . I know I have pray with faith , and I think the only reason why the fire have not come be because God hat I , as he have do Cain . by and by I go down to walk by the kraal , and see one of the Kaffir girl fetch cattle dung to smear the floor of the house with . I think smearing must be delightful work , and I could not bear to think about my poor altar and my chop any more ; so I find a hard flat piece of ground at the back of the kraal , fetch some water in a broken oil can , and mix up the water with the dung nicely , just as I have see the black girl do . I work so hard that in half an hour I have smear a place the size of a room , and my clothe and face too . I be just begin to feel quite well and as though I do not care so much that my offering have be reject , when some one come and catch I in the middle of my dirt and happiness , and I be perch up on the top of a great box till bedtime . " 

 Undine pause to take breath at the end of this long relation . she do not care much for Cousin Jonathan 's company nowadays , and the fear that he would feel it and be pain make she very voluble generally . 
 " you have change strangely since those old day , " he say . " I do not   think you be trouble with too much faith now ; you believe in nothing under the sun . " 

 " that only prove what I say just now , " she answer . " you do not   understand I . I believe more truly in some thing than you do . " 
 " in what , for instance ? " 

 " oh , in more than one . you say yesterday that there be no such thing as a love that must live while the soul live ; that wrong or neglect 
 can 
 change the love that can be feel but once in a lifetime for one human being and which be the good of earthly thing . you pooh - poohe it and call it dream , not reason . I merely return the compliment . " 

 Cousin Jonathan do not like this enthusiastic speech , and smile a sneer sort of smile . beautiful man and woman can afford to sneer ; Cousin Jonathans can not , and he look grotesquely ugly as he do so . 
 " with your magnificent intellect and your profound reasoning faculty whereby you profess to test everything , one might almost expect you to show a somewhat deep knowledge of life and human nature . but after all you be only a child , and will grow wise , when you have see more of the world , than to believe that love can live without hope or return , any more than a body without food or air . " 

 Undine hat to be tell she be but a child and have no knowledge of the world , because there be so much of truth in the assertion . the little man 

 know this and therefore he tell she so , for he feel angry with she that afternoon , though he hardly know why and his blue eye never show it . 

 " you read all manner of trash and sentimentality till your mind be completely enervate ; you come down here this afternoon to read some of Mrs. Browning 's poetry and effete nonsense , I have no doubt . " 
 " there lie what I have be read , " she say , point to where Mill still lie upon the ground . " there be nothing very sentimental in that , I fancy . " 
 " you be likely to get just as much good from this style of reading as from the other , " he reply as he pick up the book . 
 " you be difficult to please , my old father , " she say as she catch the bough again and rock herself gracefully to and fro . 

 difficult to please ! of course he be . there be one thing in the world that would have please he , and that thing he could not have . the little man feel , as he sit there among the long grass , with his mild angel eye and his seek mouth , as though he could have kill she , for he know that she would never love he . she hang as far from his reach as the rose that hang on the topmost branch of a bush be from the worm that creep up and down on the rotten leaf below . he hat she , and yet he love she with a love that have grow with her opening beauty and her soften figure , as the worm grow 

 while the rose but swell . it be a long way from the dirt to the rose ; but may it not be climb ? 


 be he ask himself this question as he sit look at she ? undine think he look ugly and strangely out of place among the dreamy flower grass on which be dance the sunbeam which have make their way through the thick foliage . the little brook that murmur all the more sweetly , because almost bury out of sight he could not understand what it be say , and why have he come to disturb she quiet ? her conscience be just begin to give she the most unpleasant twinge for think so ungratefully of one who have do more for she than any other being , when step and voice come over the bridge make she look round . there be two gentleman cross it , and Cousin Jonathan rise to his foot and go to meet they . he introduce they to Undine as the Mr. Blairs , father and son . there must have be at least thirty year ' difference in their age , yet as far as form and feature go there be a strong resemblance between they . both be short and very broadly build , with round nose , round face , blue eye , scant beard , and sandy - colour hair ; but here the resemblance end . in place of a painfully flexible and sensitive mouth , and eye more soft and melt than a woman 's , the father have thick , firm , press lip that tell of a strong animal nature and an iron will , while the eye above be so cold and dead that the great 

 stone in his breast - pin give out more light and warmth than they do . 


 the path through the wood allow only of two abreast ; Undine have what half the girl of Greenwood would have give their little finger to gain , a long walk and 
 t?te-?-t?te 
 with Mr. Henry Blair . 

 " be you fond of reading ? " he ask she , notice the book in her hand . when a man open conversation by this remark you may make pretty sure of one of three thing he want education , he think you a fool , or he be one himself . Undine decide at a glance that neither of the first two be the case , and that consequently the last must be . 
 " at time , " she answer he , in a very indifferent voice . book be her meat and drink , her friend and lover , but she be not go to tell he so . 

 " you have Mill 's 
 Political economy 
 here , I see , " he remark . " I be just go through his work with very great pleasure . they be beautiful , be they not ? " 

 " very , " say Undine , smile inwardly . 

 her companion then go on to state how he delight in reading , how he spend his whole time in it . there be no work of note in English , french , german or Greek that she could mention , which he have not read . he like philosophy , he revel in poetry , he study history , he worship science . he be a wonderful man , with a brain cram as 

 full of fact and idea as a brain could be ; and yet not one of they have ever be able to reach he . just the backboneless , warm - hearted , weak character which nature have give he he have , and would have to the end of his day . ' tis small use try to graft an orange tree on to a Coonie . 
 1 
 if you have no thought of your own , those of other man will find nothing to which they can fasten themselves ; and you will have to carry they about with you if carry they you will much as you do your ring and your glove , rightfully or wrongfully your , as the case may be ; but always outside of you , and never part of you . 

 so Undine walk beside her companion , with his black - blue woman 's eye and his soft voice , feel a kindly contempt for he , in spite of his infinite superiority to herself in knowledge and acquirement of every kind . 
 " what do you think of they ? " say Cousin Jonathan , when after a somewhat lengthy call their visitor have take their departure . 
 " nothing , " say Undine . " the son have not a bone in his whole composition , and the father be all bone , or something hard . " 
 Cousin Jonathan smile , not displeased to hear she express her disapprobation of other man . 

 " I wonder if you ever do meet 
 anyone 
 whom you approve of , " he remark , smooth her soft hair . 

 1 
 the " c " be a click . Coonie be a tree   shrub . 


 " you be quite right with regard to the father , however ; he be not trouble with too much tenderness of heart . the first time he marry it be to a lady of very good family , whom he marry just on account of her blood . he lead she a very fine life , and when she die at the end of two year he marry a woman who be immensely rich and whom he like still less and treat still bad . she leave he all her money when she die ; but I believe he hat her son , who be here this afternoon , just because he be her . I never see they together before . " 

 " has he any other child ? " ask Undine . 
 " yes , Albert , his eld . in my pedagogue day , before I marry Mrs. Barnacles , he be my pupil . he be here now , and be sure to call and see I in a day or two . " 
 Albert Blair ! yes , that be the name of the man Miss Mell have talk about as have be save by a girl from drown . Albert Blair yes , that be the name ; then she take up her book and think no more about it . 

 next morning Undine rise early and take her morning walk onto the little hill that lie behind Cousin Jonathan 's house . the grass be still heavy with the great glitter dewdrop , and the fresh clear air remind she of the morning in her old african home when she use to get up early and go to pray behind the little koppie . there it be 

 so still and beautiful that it be easy to pray and to believe in God 's love . she wonder if the dew lie on the english grass be really as lovely as the great drop that use to stand tremble on the bush and silvery ice - plant among the stone of the koppie . her thought go back to those old day not longingly , for there hang over the memory of her childhood little of that free gladness which to most man cause it to lie behind they , a land of light and song , to be look back at across the thirsty steppe of life with vain longing and sore regret . she have look out onto the world with eye too grave and earnest ever since the time when , a little child of six year , she have kiss the leaf and cry among the thorn bush , because when chop down and burn they would die forever . she have find grief and mystery where other child see only plaything , and have pass a tearful solitary childhood in a home of love and plenty . there be no wish for their return in the eye that look back to those day ; but they have about they that subtle charm which death alone give to man or time . with all its intense solitude , its tear and doubt and bitter prayer , there have be hour of happiness in her childish life , hour when the heavens have seem open and the angel of God have descend , and ascend from the earth . 


 her thought wander on from those old day to the first year of her life in England , to the glad 

 love that have live before she and which have be so suddenly put out . 

 the impression those day have make upon she , extinguish all hope , all faith , all trust , have somewhat fade , but a strange deadness seem to have settle down upon she ; and , with an intellect vigorous and alive , it seem as though all emotional vitality have die within she . 

 Cousin Jonathan have say , " you believe in nothing . " he might with as much truth have add , " and love nothing . " not Cousin Jonathan 's extinction or disappearance into fire and brimstone , or that of anyone else , would now have cost her one tear ; and even for herself she have but a kind of apathetic indifference . in a way , it might be , she love her book and nature ; but her feel for Spencer 's 
 First Principles 
 be not like the love which have pour itself out in hot kiss on the leaf and cover of her little brown Testament . 


 it be the sense of this coldness and deadness that make the day of passion and feeling look so beautiful to she now , and that almost bring the long - strange tear into her eye as she look down on the glitter dew and think of those early morning behind the koppie . Agony , anything , would be well than this dreadful coldness and indifference . would it never end , never break ? if only I could love something , she think , as she pass slowly over the wet grass . to love 

 some- 
 something 


 thing , to believe in something , to worship something , even if that something be only herself to look at something with eye other than those of calm indifference it would be worth sleepless night of tear and prayer . 


 she walk on with her eye fix on the ground , and be surprised when she look up to find herself at the top of the hill . it be not a very stirring or striking scene that lie before she , but calm and bright . at the foot of the little hill on which she stand lie Cousin Jonathan 's house , and beyond that the little wood in which grow her old tree . the white house of the village be visible on the other side of it , and beyond that again the large mansion of the Blairs with its roof glitter in the sunshine . not a soul be to be see except at the edge of the wood , where a man and woman be stand . it look as though the woman 's head be rest on his arm , but they soon part ; he turn back among the tree , while the woman take the little path that lead straight up the hill . Undine sit down , listlessly watch she as she come near ; then she see it be not a face she know or have ever see before in Greenwood . ' twas a young face like those that sometimes haunt Undine 's wake dream and make her wish she be a painter , to fix they everlastingly on canvas . the woman be of more than middle height , with a magnificently develop yet graceful figure ; her feature be 

 regular and almost of a jewish cast , while her long curl eyelash droop over cheek as dark and brilliantly colour as the rare hothouse flower she wear in her bosom . Undine look at she as she pass , fill with genuine admiration , but the woman seem quite unconscious of her presence . she love some one , and she be happy , think Undine ; if I could love I would be happy too . 

 when she sit do her needlework in Mrs. Barnacles ' room that morning , she ask she who the beautiful stranger be ; for that lady be keep well inform in the doing and saying of all Greenwood by the indefatigable Miss Mell . 
 " you must mean Alice Brown , I think , " say Mrs. Barnacles , after a moment 's consideration ; " they say she be grow more and more beautiful . it be very queer , but whenever the blair be here , she be . generally she live with her grandmother . " 
 " I should like to know she , " say Undine . 
 " oh , they be only common people , " say Mrs. Barnacles . " we do not   associate with they . " 
 that afternoon Harry Blair put in his appearance . as a rule he be careless enough about his dress to be mistake for the great genius live ; but on that afternoon he have array himself with punctilious care , and have come to invite Cousin Jonathan and Undine to look at some fine picture which have just arrive . Undine have say she be fond of picture , and these be really beautiful . 

 of course she could not refuse to go ; and Cousin Jonathan go , for he follow her step as smoke follow a train . 
 George Blair be a rich man , and no miser ; a man who value his money only for the status it give he in the eye of his fellow man and the ease and luxury it might bring he . the erection and adornment of this house at Greenwood have be the employment and delight of the last twelve year . he would pay away hundred of pound for a picture or a statue that be say to be good , though he be about as well able to understand the one or the other as would have be one of the thoroughbred that stand in his stable . 
 it be the first time Undine have be in the house , for during the three year she have be in Greenwood the owner have be travel abroad . it be aristocratic to travel on the continent , therefore he go . he have marry his first wife because she know who her great - grandfather be . he would have sell his own soul to be think refined and of blue blood , but he never succeed in produce the desire impression . 
 perhaps it be the sense that where he so deplorably fail his eld son be by gift of nature preeminently successful , that give rise to the feeling of dislike he entertain for he . this , if not so strong as the feeling with which he regard his young son , be to say the least unfatherly . 


 it half amuse , half disgust Undine to see the little bloated , leaden - eyed creature stand among the elegancie and beauty which his money have buy , talk of 
 my 
 picture . my picture ! as if anything with a trace of beauty could ever belong to he . he might lay out his money for they ; and if they be picture they might hang on his wall , if they be woman   a luxury in which he still largely indulge   he might dress they richly and buy their smile and obedience ; but possess they never ! the flesh - incrust soul that look out through the hard blue eye in their setting of red fat , would know nothing of the possession of that which have beauty . undine thought as she look at he how unenviable be the fate of both woman and picture . but she soon forget he before a large oil painting . it represent a battlefield . horse and rider , die and dead , lie around in wild confusion , while in the foreground , stretch out upon a heap of the slain , lie the figure of a man gorgeously clothe in the knightly costume of the olden day . his plumed helmet lie at his side , fill with blood ; and the beautiful face , so faultless in feature , so pitilessly hard in expression , be turn upward to the dark evening sky . at his foot , clasp they with both hand while it crouch upon the ground , be the figure of a woman , its delicate and voluptuous development be hardly conceal by the coarse , scanty clothing it wear . on the face there 

 be a wild look almost of joy , though the line about the mouth be those of speechless agony . 

 " you seem fascinate by this picture , " say Harry Blair , gently , as he stand behind she . " it be my favourite also , but I confess I like it only because of the woman 's face ; I can make nothing out of it . " 
 " it seem to I to tell its own story , " answer Undine , speak softly , as though more to herself than to he . " he be a noble , high - blooded lord , and she a poor serf , with only her soul and beautiful body to give he . he hardly care to take they , though it be for nothing ; and now , in the hour of death , she have follow he and find he lie dead ; and she be crouch at his foot in agony because he be go , and in wild joy because he be her alone now , her and no other 's , if only that she may lie at his foot and die there . " 
 " a very desirable fate , certainly , " say a voice behind she that be far too melodious and well modulate to be that of either Harry Blair or Cousin Jonathan , whom they have leave in the next room . 
 Undine look round quickly from her slaughter knight and passion - fill maiden to behold , stand behind she , that " Piece of divine perfection " as his lady admirer be will not to call he Mr. Albert Blair . 

 he be a man of somewhat more than six foot in height , with a lithe graceful figure and a head of beautiful yellow - brown curl . his moustache , of 

 the same colour , be so delicately curl that one feel surprised to see the firm powerful lip under they . his feature be delicately chisel , and from the regular white tooth to the small round ear there be neither fault nor flaw to be find in he , unless it be his eye . they be of a pale cold blue , and would not have be small have he not habitually keep the lid more than half close . there be nothing lose by that proceed certainly , for when now and then on rare occasion he lift they , the gleam shot forth be as icy and chilling as a moonbeam fall on a glacier . it be one of these that fall on Undine as she look round , and it instantly freeze she . she know without look at he that the cold light be fall on the small rent in her glove and on her ruffle hair which she have not smooth before come out . 


 there be some man and woman in whose society we instantly feel a sublime indifference as to the cut of a coat , the dust on our sleeve , or the sit of our necktie ; while there be other who , the moment we see they , set we run over all the flaw and defect in costume and person , from the want of black on our boot to the broken nail on our forefinger . there be man and woman in whose presence we seem to be release from ourselves and to be possess of idea and power of expression which till then we never dream of ; while other seem to shrivel we up and leave we stand without 

 an idea or a correct word in all our vocabulary on which we can lay hand . one of these latter be Albert Blair . 

 everyone on whom the cold beam fall feel awkward , ill - dress , and ignorant . elegant dandy feel in his presence that their whisker be too long , the set of their coat execrable , and their way of handle a cane simply clownish and disgraceful . lady , however well content they have be with their own appearance the moment before , discover that their dress be all in shocking taste , their knuckle be too large and their sleeve too short , when the blue eye be turn upon they . and Undine in the hour that follow thought of nothing but her split glove and ruffle hair and , while she star at the picture , see as little of their meaning as do the Piece - of - perfection who walk at her side , with his deferential manner and his disagreeable eye , pass commonplace conventional remark upon all they look at . 
 it be a great relief to she to get away from he into the fresh evening air , and walk down the green lane between Cousin Jonathan and Harry Blair . 

 an hour or two later that young gentleman be seat in the smoking - room , with Mrs. Browning 's 
 portuguese sonnet 
 open before he . his foot be draw up under his chair , his elbow rest on the table , his head be stretch forward , and his great eye fix on vacancy . his brother Albert be at the 

 other end of the room , recline in an easy - chair with his leg stretch over another . his glass , lamp , an elegant cigar - stand , and a pile of blue paper lie at his side on a small round table . 

 presently he take the cigar from between his lip and , throw down the last of the blue paper , say with one of his graceful inimitable little yawn : " you seem to find your book singularly entertain this evening . you have not look at it once in the last half hour . " 
 his brother start , and answer quickly , " quite as entertaining as those everlaste blue paper of your " ; and then add , after a pause , " do not   you think Miss Bock be very like the woman in that picture ? " 

 " what woman , and what picture ? you should 
 try 
 and be a 
 little 
 more explicit if you wish for an answer , " say Albert Blair , now really close his eye and puff the blue smoke softly through his lip . 

 " of course I mean the picture we be look at when you come up this afternoon , " respond his brother , in a tone that very clearly show how unwelcome that come up have be . 
 " yes , possibly there be a resemblance ; but your divinity have not nearly such a delicate hand ; and a good hand rank next to a good figure , " retort his brother , calmly . 

 Harry look fire and lightning at he , and the 

 Piece - of - perfection , who have a strange aptitude for see thing without open or at least appear to open his eye , say , as he puff away serenely : " there be no occasion to excite yourself about what I say , my dear fellow . she be a very pretty little girl , an uncommonly pretty little girl ; beat Lady Edith and her sister hollow ; only rather too careless about her dress , and a little peculiar in her manner , that be all . " 

 to think of compare she to Lady Edith , a die - away beauty with no more soul in she than a fly , and to speak of she with that cool air of superiority , be a crime on his brother 's part which put into poor Harry 's hand a strong inclination to send Mrs. Browning in her red morocco binding among his brother 's curl . 

 other book have be so send for small offence in their boyish day , and the sender have be invariably knock over and coolly kick out of the room . he be not one of those to whom experience teach much , still on this occasion he be wise enough to take himself out of the way of temptation ; and make his way into the garden he pace up and down the path in the moonlight . surely that thing of grace and beauty which in two day have fill the whole circle of his existence surely it be now in like manner wander up and down under the dark tree around Cousin Jonathan 's house . for have she not say in answer to his 

 ques- 
 question 


 tion that she love walk alone and in the moonlight ? 


 now as it happen , on this particular evening Undine sit beside a little table darn Cousin Jonathan 's stocking , listen and laugh at extract from the daily paper and 
 Punch 
 , which the little man read aloud to she as he lie on the sofa . 

 when she stand up to put her work away he ask she what she think of Mr. Blair number three . 
 " think of he ? " she answer . " he be only an equally proportion mixture of ice and iron . with all his deference and politeness , he would freeze one or crush one to atom with as little compunction as a fly , if one happen to stand in his path . I do not   like his brother , I dislike the father , and I detest he , " say Undine , as she throw the last stocking into the basket and think of her tear glove . she sit down to mend it when she get to her room . 

 " what a contemptible little wretch I be become ! " she think when she have finish it , " to allow such triviality to break into my real life and drive out high thought . be I no well than other woman after all ? I have   no heart ; if I lose my head what be to become of I ? " she feel weary of herself and disgust , and she could not now lie down on the floor and pray , till in an agony or an ecstasy , she should forget herself . she have take the first bite at the forbidden fruit , and could see that the terror which have haunt she be but 

 the inevitable creation of the human mind , as it look out in its ignorance on this world of suffering and wrong could see that the vision which have entrance she be but the dream of the human soul in its craving after happiness and truth . so much she see ; but see no far . inevitably as to the soul in its search after its high truth there come a time of agony and of blood , so too there come a time of deadness and of cold . the old life have be cut down to the root , the new life have not yet arise . so , too , in our childish vision of hell , we stand alone in a world of darkness and silence till the world around we and even we ourselves seem to become mere mocking shadow . yet , could we know it , it be but the silence that come before the dawning ; it be but the darkness that come before the day break ; it be but the land of glitter glacier that lie between we and the celestial city . and what if we should perish alone in its mist and cold ? well to die frozen , strive for the glorious golden city of God , up yonder well than here , in the land of Egypt , with the flesh pot and the onion , the leek and the garlic . 

 that evening , while Undine sit mend her glove , Albert Blair still lean back in his chair , sip his glass , and smoke with his half - close eye , make calculation and think hard all the while . 

 unknown to his father and without capital , he 

 be speculate , as he himself would have allow , in a rather wild and reckless manner . these speculation have for he the same irresistible fascination that the gaming table have for many , and only through their help , if ever , could he hope to free himself from his father 's control unless he should marry a rich wife ; and to Albert Blair 's proud palate a wife 's bread would have taste yet more bitter than a father 's . 

 " still , I must keep Lady Edith well in hand . if these speculation should fail , it must come to marry she . she dress in good taste and be in perfect style but I would rather it be her sister , " he soliloquize . 



 VII . 
 lover 

 there 
 be love many and god many ; and happy the man whose god and love be one happy for the time be ; most miserable of mortal when the time of revelation come and at one stroke both god and lover crumble into dust . 


 Harry 's love for Undine have spring into life , full grown and omnipotent , on that first afternoon when he meet she in the wood ; and if from that time it could not be say to have grow strong , it have certainly grow large , until at last the whole world animate and inanimate , intellectual and moral , be for he but one being , image and reflect in a thousand way . woman 's dress and face have a new meaning for he ; for , though stand afar off , be they not like to her ? and the little wild forest flower that she love , be they not emblem of she , as they nod their innocent white head at one another ? in the book that he read , he pause only when he come to some sentence that might have be her ; and all that be beautiful and sweet sing back her name to he . dark day come 

 for his well - wear bible , and for Beecher 's 
 Life Thoughts 
 and a score of brother who have be his daily study . 
 she 
 never read they ; and they be throw contemptuously onto a low shelf , to lie there till the wheel of time should have turn . 

 " why do you always change the topic when our conversation turn to religious subject ? " Harry ask Undine one day , some four month after their first meeting , as he sit in the low bow - window in front of Cousin Jonathan 's house , with his foot rest on the gravelled path outside . 
 Undine stand behind he , mend a great rent in her dress , make as they have be ramble in the wood together in search of the wild flower which now , tie into a great bunch , he hold in his hand . 
 " religion be like love , " answer Undine . " it flourish good in silence , and be to be feel , not speak of . " 

 " I do not   mean merely what one may call emotional religious subject , " he answer , look up into her face with his great plead woman 's eye . " you be argue last night with Mrs. Barnacles about the right or wrong of commit suicide . you never talk with 
 I 
 about such thing ; your conversation with I be always about the small triviality , such as you talk of to Miss Mell . " 

 the dark eye above he look down on he with that half - pity , half - scornful look that be so often in they when they rest on he . 

 " you must be content with what you get , " she say . 
 " but you give I so very little . " 
 there be something very piteous in the word and in the face that look up at she which would have cut sore against the heart of many woman ; but she care nothing , only say : " I give light where I get it . when you enlighten my spiritual darkness , I shall try and do as much for your . " 
 she have a contemptuous pity for the great boy , with his manly year and his crammed brain , and his passionate love that have make he follow she about for the last four month and serve she like a dog . 
 " if a bird be only fit to live among the marsh and reed in the valley , why tempt it after you to the cold high rock where the eagle find a glorious life in the clear cold air ? " so Undine say to he , and so thinking , she make no attempt to lead her poor wild duck to the height for which nature have never fit he , and where he must die of frost and starvation . 

 his idea as to what her view might be be not very clear , but he have a vague notion that she believe in nothing ; accordingly he have convince himself that he also believe in nothing and he have not a little disgusted and very much astonish she by inform she , as he scrap up and down with his boot on the gravel , that he be an infidel , an 

 atheist beside whom Hume be orthodox and Voltaire a credulous believer . 

 " I be sorry to hear it , " be Undine 's brief reply . 
 " why should you be sorry that I resemble you ? " he ask . 
 " I be not aware that you do so , " she answer . " will you please tell I the name of that little purple flower ? I wish I have all at my finger end that you have . " 
 he tell she the name of the flower and sit twirl the bunch round in his hand . 
 Undine stoop down for it , when the rent in her dress be mend . 
 " I wish you would choose out one flower and give it to I , " he say , never remove his gaze from her face . " may I have one ? " 
 " of course you may , " say Undine , carelessly hold out the bunch . " they be very pretty ; choose which you like . " 

 " I care nothing about it unless 
 you 
 give it I , " he answer , in a deep passionate voice that always anger she . 

 " there , " she say , pull out a great gaudy dandelion , which in spite of his disapproval she have persist in put in the bunch . 
 " how long the shade be grow . I really must go and get tea ready . I be very discourteous to dismiss you in this way , be I not ? " say his angel , and with a laugh flutter out at the back door . 


 " what a poor fool I be ! " he say to himself as he sit in the window , look at the gaudy flower in his hand and feel a strong inclination to throw it down on the ground and tread on it . in the end , however , he fasten it carefully in his buttonhole and walk home moodily through the wood ; for , be it not write on the iron leaf : 

 " who drink of Cupid 's nectar cup 
 love downward , and not up : 
 he who love of Gods and man 
 shall not by the same be love again . " 


 it be not often the case   and it show the discretion of all party that it be not   that they be alone together , the three Blairs , father and son . on this evening , however , all three sit in the smoking - room and all three be smoke ; for have not Undine say that " a man who do not smoke be as bad as a woman that swear . " it be purgatory before that time to Harry Blair , but he stick to his pipe with the resolution of a martyr . 
 there be a blaze fire in the grate , and at one side of it sit Albert Blair ; while before it lie a great curly brown - and - white dog with his nose rest on his master 's foot . 
 " you be leave for London tomorrow , be you not ? " he ask his father , who sit on the opposite side of the fire . 
 " yes , " be the short rejoinder . 

 " be back at the beginning of summer ? " 
 " perhaps so . depend on circumstance . " 
 " when be you take yourself off ? " 
 " do not   know . " 
 the master of the dog have more than one attraction in Greenwood , and a lady who must be keep in hand close by ; so , though the place be wretchedly dull , he be in no hurry to leave it . 
 " there be no need to ask when you go , " say the father , turn with one of his most sinister smile to his young son . " we all know you be book for Greenwood till a certain individual , despair of a rich morsel , shall consent to swallow you . " 
 Harry Blair throw down his pipe , empty its content on his trouser and the carpet ; and draw himself up and make a tremendous effort to look dignified and serene , after the manner of his eld brother , he say with trembling lip : " I must beg of you to say no more upon a subject upon which you be in total and absolute ignorance . " 
 his father laugh , one of his coarse brutal laugh ; Albert lean down to stroke Prince 's head and go on curl his moustache . 

 " as to my be in total ignorance , " say the father , " I know nearly as much of your little beauty as you do yourself , and infinitely more about woman in general , I fancy . she would think no more of throw you overboard , along with her book and her flower , if by do so she could gain a few 

 thousand a year , than I do of knock the ash off the end of my cigar . " 

 Harry Blair rise to his foot , knock over the tumbler that stand at his elbow . his hot blood , which in schoolboy day have gain for he the highly appropriate sobriquet of " Fire Brain , " be now fairly rouse : 
 " if any man but my father have dare to speak those word , " he say with tremendous passion , " I would have knock they down his throat ; as it be , I will only prove to you that they be a lie , a cowardly dastardly lie . " 
 his father speak with a quiet sneer : " you surely forget in whose house you be stand , whose money it be that cause woman to look at you ! go and tell your beautiful Undine that your father have turn you out of his house , that you have not a penny in the world , nor the wit to make one ; go and tell she that your father would rather see his money roll in the gutter than that a penny of it should ever come to you . go and tell she that , and see what her answer will be ! go , go at once . " 
 there be no passion in the word ; they be calmly , sneeringly speak , as word be that have be lie on the tongue for year , ready for use . 
 Albert Blair sit lazily look into the fire . he have know it would come to this some day , and he be glad ; it give he a well chance . 

 when he look up his brother have leave the room , 

 and his father , sit opposite he , be puff away vigorously . 

 " the young dog ! " he say after a pause . " he have all his mother 's damned impertinence , and he shall learn a lesson or two yet before he die . young dog ! " 
 Albert make no remark and a long silence follow , suddenly break , greatly to his surprise , by a long - continue , deep chuckle laugh proceed from his father . the Piece - of - perfection for once fairly open his eye and star at he . his respected senior be not generally give to mirth , even of the demoniac order . 
 " I will do it , " he chuckle , " I will do it . " and then , seem to remember himself , he rise , kick the dog , and take his departure , leave his son in undivided possession of the fire and his own meditation . 
 the next morning be cold and stinging and Undine half repent that she have not stay at home , as Cousin Jonathan wish , in place of go for her morning walk . 
 she be just turn homeward when , hear a step beside she , she look round , and see , to her great astonishment , no less a personage than Mr. George Blair , look red than usual and almost out of breath . 

 " I hear this be your favourite early walk , " he begin , after wish her good morning ; " and I have walk myself almost out of breath , fear I 

 might miss you . I have long wish for an opportunity of see you in private , and at last I have it . " 


 a pause follow , Undine ransack her brain to discover some possible cause for 
 his 
 desire a private interview with she . 

 " I trust , " he begin again , " that you will not be much surprised at what I be about to say . I trust I feel in fact convince that you have understand what the attraction have be which have lead I so often to your cousin 's house . though so much your senior in year , I trust , my dear Miss Bock , that you will believe I when I assure you that the affection which I offer you be as ardent and as sincere as that which any young man might give you , and that , with the will , I have also the power to surround my wife and such , if you will permit I , I would make you with everything which can induce to happiness . I can not ask , I would not desire , an immediate answer . it be of course only right that you should first seek the advice of your friend ; but will you not give I some hope , however faint it may be ? " 

 he pause to take breath at the end of his pedantic little oration , while Undine turn on he a face in which nothing but blank astonishment be write ; it change to one of disgust as her eye rest on the little red - faced creature . he see the look and have expect to see it . he have have , as he say , great experience in woman , and know that the handsome penniless young lover must hope to 

 carry the day by storm or not at all , that time and reflection be fatal to his success ; while the man of fifty , with his bloated face and bag of money , have nothing but these to rely on ; and they work for he more surely when he be absent than present . 

 he take no notice of the look she give he , but it make he swear in the fatty depth of his inmost heart that , come what would , he should yet have she as his wife . he draw the little scarlet cloak that be slip back lightly over her shoulder , and fasten it with a brooch form of diamond - stud flower which he draw from his pocket . 
 " pray do not , " she say , as she wrench it loose and hold it out to he as though it have be a creature which sting her hand . " you do I a great honour , " she say ; " but it be quite impossible , quite . " 

 the old man peer out at she from his roll of fat , and before turn to leave she say , " then I have good wish you good morning ; but before I do so may I beg of you , my dear Miss Bock , to remember that if ever you should change your mind   and we never know what the future may bring we , 
 I 
 shall not have change . I leave for London tomorrow , " he continue ; " and unless you should write to I , have alter your mind , as I sincerely hope you may do , it may be long before we meet again . good - bye , Miss Bock . " and without wait for her reply he turn away and trot down the lane . Undine stand to watch he as he roll out of sight . 


 " his wife ! " she laugh a merry , mock laugh . " his wife ! " 
 the idea of be any man 's wife , of bear any man 's child , be absurd enough to she , to whom a lover be only a reality of the imagination , to be adore , worship , and endow with every perfection mental and physical , but not to be see , clothe in flesh and blood ; just as we dream of heaven , but would laugh to scorn the man who offer to show it we . 
 her merry mocking laugh would have sound almost as derisive have it be Albert Blair , the son and graceful Apollo , instead of George Blair , the father , old and coarse . 
 " money , " she say . " what be money ? " and kick with her little foot a rotten stick which lie in her path as contemptuously as she have just throw from she the wealth that a word might have make her . 
 Aye , gold and love , what be they ? the great god that rule we ! gold , god of the body with its lust and its clay ; Love , god of the soul with its fire and its passion . as long as a human being life shall they , too , not live and struggle and strive for the mastery ? the one rule over the young and fresh , the other steal his kingdom from he when he grow old and wrinkle ? 

 " money ! what be money ? " say Undine , derisively , for she have see no deep into life than love 

 song and dream could take she ; and she wrap the little scarlet cloak about she and go home light of heart and singing . 

 she find a letter wait for she on her bedroom table , but take off her thing and stand warm her hand at the fire before open it . 
 " only from poor Harry Blair , about some book or flower , " she say . " Poor " fall naturally before some name ; it do before his . 
 she open the letter and throw the wrapper into the fire , where it flame up and turn to ash , like a young heart devour by that cruel merciless old God of Love . 
 at first as she read she look a little puzzle , then angry , then amuse , and finally with a mingling of all three upon her face sit down before the fire with the three great blue sheet in her lap . 
 it be as passionate an appeal as ever be pen by arrow - smite man . 

 for her sake he have give up all fortune , friend , rank without a thought and without a regret . she alone could give he that for which alone he long , that which alone could make he happy . would she refuse he ? no , she could not , would not ; he feel sure of that . nothing else be dear to he on earth , nothing else do he desire . so it run on . it might be year , he say , before he could make she his wife , but all he yearn 

 to know be that her heart be his , her head , her soul . 

 when Undine get thus far the disgust she feel get into her finger , which send the two sheet she have finish into the fire after the wrapper . 

 " the father ask for my body and offer I gold in return ; 
 he 
 ask my soul , spirit 
 and 
 body , and have nothing in the universe to give but a pair of great star woman 's eye , and a soft brain , cram to burst and without a particle of sense in it . " so she say to herself , as she sit tear up the last page , still unread , and let the fragment fall in a blue shower at her foot . 

 well be it for the hapless penman that he could not see this and be not where he long to be lie at her foot ; well wander the wood where now and then , as the wind sway the leafless branch , he would catch a glimpse of the house which hold she . 
 she have just finish write he a few very cool and careless line in answer , when the breakfast bell ring . 
 " I will say nothing about it to Cousin Jonathan . it must make a man feel wretchedly small to find that another know his love have be throw back at he . and I suppose it be a kind of love they both have for I , " she think as she rise to go . 

 pass out at the door , she catch sight of her own face in the little glass that hang on the opposite 

 wall , and for the first time that morning a womanly , or in justice let we say a human , feeling of pleasure come to she . 

 it be so nice to be desire by other , so nice to be beautiful . 
 when she enter the breakfast - room Cousin Jonathan be stand with his back to the fire , dress in his everlasting salt - and - pepper coat and plaid trouser . 
 " I be a little wretch , " she think as she look at he . " here be a man who have be more than a father to I , and yet whenever I look at he I detest he . and two man have tell I this morning that they love I , and I feel no sorrow that I can not   return it as a true - hearted woman would . I be a heartless creature and horribly hard , there be no doubt of it . " 
 " you be late this morning , " say Cousin Jonathan . " I suppose you have be write your answer . " 
 " to whom ? " ask Undine . 

 " the letter you receive be give I to bring . I know all about it , " reply Cousin Jonathan , smile . he feel no trepidation as to what her answer might be ; for , if there be one thing which the little man have study in the last three year , it be the character of the pink - and - white thing before he . he understand she well than anyone else have ever do , in many way . he know of that 

 power of passion that lie dead and unawakene beneath the cold , feelingless shell ; and he know as surely that the day would come when it would be call into wild life , not by his hand or that of any Harry Blair , with woman 's eye and soft trusting nature . 

 " you have still get your red cloak on ; I always like you good in it , " he say , as he draw she to he to receive the morning kiss he have give she ever since she come to he . 
 Undine turn quickly from he and sit down to pour out his tea . 
 " where be Cousin Jane this morning ? " she ask . 
 " she be feel bad than usual and have just send for the doctor , " he answer as he draw his chair near to the table and to she . " what answer be you go to give a certain individual ? " he ask she , after a pause . 
 " there be only one answer I could give he , " she reply , shortly , as she pass Cousin Jonathan 's tea . 
 " and he give up everything for you ! his father have vow to have nothing more to do with he ; and now all the world will say that you do not marry he because he have no prospect . " 
 Undine laugh her little scornful laugh . 
 " all the tongue on earth may clamour ; they can not hurt I , " she answer . 

 when breakfast be over she dispatch the note , as cold and kill a missive as ever carry 

 destruc- 
 destruction 


 tion to aerial castle . she do not love he , never could ; would never care to be any man 's wife ; hop they would always be good friend ; hop he would find some one to make he happy and love he ; so the note end . 

 all the morning she sit with Mrs. Barnacles who be really very ill ; but when the afternoon come , bring Miss Mell and Mrs. Goodman , she feel free to take her book and cloak and wander out . 
 ' Twas cheerless and wintry enough , but the air be pleasant and fresh after the close room , and her book engross her attention . 
 presently she hear voice , but do not look up until she find herself close to Albert Blair . there be no one with he but his dog , so she conclude he must have be speak to it . 
 Master and dog make a pretty picture as they stand on a raise bank , with the leaden sky and leafless tree for a background . both look so strong and placid , so perfect after their type . 
 the half - close eye catch sight of she in a moment , and their owner come forward to meet she . he make some graceful remark concern the weather , inquire after her cousin ; and they pause as they walk beneath the very tree where poor Harry have wander in the morning . 

 " here , sir ! here ! " he call to the dog , who bound out of the little path in search of some imaginary game . the dog come slowly back and 

 rub his head against his master 's knee , who stoop down to stroke his head . 

 " how absolutely that dog obey you , " say Undine , feel as she always do in the presence of the Piece - of - perfection , at a loss for an idea . 
 " I make most thing which belong to I do that , " he answer , quietly ; and as she glance up at the firm lip beneath the delicate golden moustache she feel it must be so . 
 how nice it must be to have something you must obey , something you can not help obey , whether you wish or not ! I never have , she think . 
 " have you have that dog long ? " she ask . 
 " about two year , and he never leave I ; sleep at the door of my room every night . " 
 " you would miss he now if you be to lose he , " say Undine , think of Socrates . 
 " perhaps so , " he reply , carelessly curl the tip of his moustache ; " he be an exquisite animal . I have be offer fifty pound for he , but would not let he go for four time that sum . " again he stoop and touch the dog 's head , who walk close beside he , proud and pleased . 
 Undine , walk at the other side , envy he . 
 " will you allow I the pleasure of carry your book ? it be rather too large a one for you , " he say , notice the ponderous volume under her arm . 

 take it from she , he glance at the title , and Undine see the satirical line at the corner of his 

 mouth and eye grow deeply ; but he only say in his blandest tone , " rather stiff reading , I should imagine , " and stoop to loosen a dry branch that have catch in her skirt . 

 Undine wish the book bury under the high pile of leaf that ever wind collect and leave there to rot ; though only half an hour before she have be so absorb by it that Greenwood and the vanity of the present life be banish from her mind . 

 in the presence of all other man and woman she could walk erect . why in this man 's presence be she bow down , wish only to do and say what he might approve ? other might ridicule her dress , her manner , her taste , and she would cling to they with the great tenacity ; but if a line deepen round 
 this 
 man 's mouth , she would have give untold treasure to be able to alter or disclaim they . 

 she be glad when the walk be over as she always be to get out of his society and yet , when she be alone before the fire , she take the great book and quietly tear out the leaf one by one and watch they wither and shrivel in the flame . 
 " I must be go mad , " she say . " what make I do this , and take such pleasure in do it ? " 
 go mad ! of course she be , as we most of we go once in our life and , thank the god , not more than once . 

 Cousin Jonathan be sit with his wife 

 up- 
 upstairs 


 stair ; and when it grow dark Undine build up the fire , blow out the light , and lie down on the sofa . 


 presently down the passage come Cousin Jonathan on the way to his study ; quietly , for Cousin Jonathan 's footfall be never hear . as he pass he look in at the door . the red coal cast a ruddy glow over the little room , and the chair and table cast long flickering shadow on the brown wall . on the sofa in the corner opposite the fire 
 she 
 lay , just visible in her white dress , with arm clasp over her head and dark eye fix on the firelight : not see 
 it 
 , but only a tall figure with a rough dog at its side stand on a leaf - strew bank , with the wintry sky and barren tree for set . 

 long the little figure in its brown coat and plaid trouser stand watch in the doorway ; at last it enter and kneel down softly beside she . 
 he have love she so long , he have love she so passionately , with the good love his nature could give ; and tonight this love speak itself in word as vehement and startling as the passion itself have be long restrain and cover over . 
 she start up and throw he from she , and , quiver with rage , stand before he . 
 still on his knee at her foot , the little man catch her hand and glance up at the face above he . even in the dim firelight , the look of intense loathing it wear be visible . it bring he back to reason . 

 drop the hand , fill with insufferable shame , he crawl from the room almost on hand and knee , as though to hide he in the ground . as he shuffle through the doorway he drop one green slipper on the mat . 
 Undine stand as one in a dream and watch the little figure in its plaid trouser and brown coat as it glide swiftly from the room , to pass out of her sight forever . for the little man , in his green plaid , with his angel eye and beautiful prayer , she be to see no more , though from afar off his shadow might fall on and darken she . 
 as she pass out at the door she draw up her skirt , lest in pass they might touch the shoe that lie there . 

 " ' tis a pretty little thing , " soliloquize Albert Blair as he walk home through the wood the same evening ; " a pretty little thing , and if she be train might be good for something . she would not care to be any man 's wife , she tell my poor fool of a brother . well , if these affair of mine turn out well and I be able to indulge a fancy , who know ? how should you like a certain little eccentricity for a mistress , Prince ? " he say , touch with the tip of his finger the dog 's head . " whether I ever let thing go as far as that or not , I may see what I can do with she . ha , ha ! how wrathful the poor boy would be , and the old one too , for I think 

 he 
 have his thought of she . " and Albert Blair smile his quiet smile . he have but one smile for friend or foe , for prince and beggar , which mean nothing , tell nothing , show nothing . 

 the next morning , when Undine have fall into her first troubled sleep , Mrs. Barnacles ' maid come to rouse she . 
 Cousin Jonathan have be oblige to leave on some unexpected and most important business and might be go for week . he have start before daybreak , and his wife be terribly cut up at his have leave she when she be so ill . she seem bad and want to see Undine at once , the girl say . 
 when Undine enter the room she find the poor invalid in tear . " it be so cruel of he to go away like this , " she say , sob ; " he know how that hateful Miss Mell and Mrs. Goodman will talk and say he care nothing for I , to go away and leave I when I be so ill , and yet he do it . " 
 Undine try to console she and feel she could not tell she , as she have determine , that in a few hour she also would leave . 
 in her cold way she feel pity for the poor woman whose husband care as little for she as she do for he , who love nothing , have no friend , and live in the constant fear and dread of Goodman , Mell ,    Co. 

 " I be think , " Undine say , " of go to stay 

 with my grandmother . since my grandfather 's death she live alone and have often ask I to come to she ; but I will not leave you till you be well . " 

 so all that day Undine sit at her bedside . 

 " why 
 do not 
 you take a book and read ? you could turn up a corner of the blind , " say Mrs. Barnacles . 

 " I do not   care to read today , thank you , " say Undine . 
 " why , what on earth have come to you ? " say the invalid . 
 later on the servant enter , to say that Mr. Albert Blair have call to know how her cousin be . 
 " tell he she be no well , " answer Undine . 
 " but he want to see Miss Bock herself , " say the girl . 
 Undine rise and go downstairs . 
 he be lean against the mantelpiece in the parlour when she enter , and his dog lie at his foot . 
 she look ill and pale , but he have never like her aspect so well as he do at that moment . 
 " your cousin be seriously ill , I hear , " he say as he come forward to meet she ; " and you look as though you have not find much rest last night . " 
 there be kindly feel in the word but none in the tone or in the face that look down at she , only bland politeness . 
 " I have not to sit up last night ; Mr. Barnacles leave only early this morning , " answer Undine . 

 " so I hear just now . would not   you allow I to send some one to sleep here ? you have no man about the place , and it be a long way to the village to the doctor . " 
 " no , thank you , " say Undine , wonder to find in he such thoughtful kindness . " you be very good , but we require no one . " 
 " I be sure you will feel very lonely . will not   you let I leave Prince to keep you company ? " he notice that she have stoop to caress the dog . 
 " he would not stay , " say Undine , smile . 
 " he will do just as I tell he , " say his master , touch the dog with his foot . " here Prince , lie down ! " 
 the dog lie down again on the rug , but watch his master with anxious eye as he turn to leave ; and be only keep from follow he by another stern , " lie down ! " 
 " poor old fellow ! it be very cruel of I to keep you , " say Undine , kneel down beside he after his master have go , and bury her face in his rough curl . 
 " I be very cruel , but I be so lonely , and I love nothing , nothing at all . I think I love my book and nature , but now I find I do not   care anything , even for they . o Prince , I wish I be you ! I do not   want to be love ; I only want to love something . " 

 the dog look up at she with his love , 

 trust- 
 trustful 


 ful eye and try to lick her face , till she bury it again in his neck . 

 Albert Blair call again the next day and every day in the dreary two week that follow , but he never stay more than a few minute , and sometimes do not even come in , only want to hear how the invalid be . 
 Undine as she sit before the fire , not care to read or work , count the slow hour as they pass , for they bring his come nearer . 
 Prince stay with she always . she have think never to love another animal again when Socrates die ; but our heart be often large than our will , and the great curly dog have grow to be almost what the brown - eyed monkey have be to she in other day . 



 VIII . 
 BEAUTIFUL SNOW 

 it be 
 a cold wintry afternoon and the white snow cloud be lie low and heavy . undine , after many almost sleepless night , creep down to the little parlour and have a fire make there , the first that have be make since Cousin Jonathan leave . 

 Miss Mell , now her friend be get well , have offer to come and sit up with she ; and Undine , as she nestle down in the great armchair , look forward to a long evening of drowsy rest . Prince lie sleep before she with his head at her foot , and she , half doze , watch the little spark as they flutter up the chimney . so short , so warm , so bright ; how pleasant the life of a spark must be ! 
 " you seem to find something very absorbing in the contemplation of the fire this evening , " say a voice beside she ; and Prince , wide awake in an instant , leap up to greet his master . 
 " you quite startle I , " she say . " I do not think you would come tonight ; it be get almost dark . " 

 " yes ; we have the promise of a heavy fall of 

 snow , " he say , as he seat himself in an armchair on the other side of the fire . 

 " you can have no idea what a charming picture this room make , come in from the cold outside , " he continue , try at the same time to repulse Prince , who in a transport of joy have put a paw on each shoulder . 
 " you must take he home with you tonight , " say Undine . " I be not go to be so cruel as to keep he here any long ; and you must miss he . " 
 " no , I never miss he . you have well keep he if he be any pleasure to you , " answer the Piece - of - perfection , stretch out one delicate white hand to the dancing flame . 
 after a short silence he say , " do you never wish to return to Africa ? " 
 " no , " she reply . " I know no one there . my stepfather have remarry . but I should like to see the old farm and my little monkey 's grave again . " 
 he be lean back now with his face in the shadow ; she could not see the line she dread at the corner of his mouth , so she answer , " yes , he be the good friend I have . " 
 another pause follow ; then he say , more abruptly than be his will not , " I have a favour to ask of you , Miss Bock . 

 " you rather puzzle I , " he say . " I never feel sure I understand you , and I do most man . at time I form an opinion of you , at time another , but 

 I never feel sure that I be right . I wish you could satisfy my curiosity and explain to I how it be you come to have such extraordinary view and manner . " 

 " why do you not put some other word in the place of " extraordinaryí say , " pernicious , í " reprehensibleí ? that be what you really think , " she reply , use a free speech with he than ever before , for in the firelight the band of speech be loose and the tongue of man and woman do wonder . 
 he never pay her compliment or speak to she as he would to another woman , so he answer quietly , " those word would be almost too strong ; say , unwomanly . " 
 another make this remark would have be answer by a contemptuous silence ; or at good she would have launch out into a denunciation of that singular injustice which cramp and dwarf a woman 's mind , make it an unpardonable offence against her womanhood to entertain a thought or give utterance to an idea that have not be repeat and režchoed till it be as stale and unpalatable as a last year 's loaf . tonight she only say : " why be they unwomanly ? what be your idea of what a woman ought to be ? " 

 " you be ask I a question hard to answer , " he reply , look with his half - close eye into the fire . " a woman to be womanly should have nothing strike or peculiar about she ; she should 

 shun all extreme in manner and mode of expression ; she should have no strong view on any question , especially when they differ from those of her surrounding ; she should not be too reserved in her manner , and still less too affable and undignified . there be between all extreme a happy mediate , and there a woman should always be find . man may turn to one side or the other ; woman never must . " 

 Undine say nothing when he end . she could not help it ; she have be bear with strong and determined idea on every subject , sub- and superlunar , and not one step of her sixteen year ' journey have she walk in the happy mediate road . it be too late to change now . they have tell she that the day would come when she would repent have do nothing to try to conform herself , at least outwardly , to the view of other ; and she do repent it as she sit there that evening . she would have part with all that be high and good in herself to become a little less Undine , a little more like anyone else . who be this man , what be he , that he should make her grovel so ? she ask herself . 
 " you have not yet answer I , " say the Piece - of - perfection , again stretch out his delicate hand to the blaze . " be you go to satisfy my curiosity ? " 

 it seem so strangely delightful to do something at his request , and yet she seem to have nothing to tell , nothing that she could tell 
 he 
 ; and she say so . 


 " nothing ! and you have live for sixteen year and in two continent , and certainly be not trouble with lack of idea . you must excuse I , however . I have no right to press you in this way . " 
 Undine sit lean forward with her arm fold on her knee , look into the bright flame that throw its light full upon she , and begin , awkwardly and stupidly enough at first , to tell of the old african day awkwardly and stupidly enough till she forget the presence of the man who be lean back in the shade on the other side of the fire and watch she with his cold blue eye . then she see only Socrates and her governess , and the little dutch girl , and the old red farmhouse in the Karoo see the little round - stone koppie , with their milk bush and red sand , and be again the little child among they all , with the child 's thought and longing . 
 Albert Blair sit and listen without the shade of a sneer upon his lip . 
 Most man have their moment of insanity , which belie and be at variance with all the day and year of the past and will find no successor in the future , moment when their thought and feeling be oppose to all they have ever deem rational , right or possible . 
 such moment come for the first time and the last to the Piece - of - perfection as he sit listen to Undine in the firelight . 

 a pity , nay , a passionate sympathy , fill his heart for she ; for one moment he forget that the soul which trouble itself far than to find and eat the bread and honey of this life be the soul of a fool forget that the only right of a woman be the right of the rise to smile and be , not to think and live . 
 forget all this , bewitch , befool , infatuate , he stretch out his hand to the little figure opposite he . 
 " your life have be lonely ; no one have understand you ; you may have have no one to guide you , " he say , speak for the first time and in a voice strangely sweet and unlike his own . " will you let I be your friend and take care of you ? " 
 she sit and look at he as one in a dream . 
 " come to I , darling , " he say , hold out his hand to she . 
 still she sit and look at he ; then he draw she softly to his arm , and she nestle close to he . 
 she do not kiss he or speak : only clung to he and rest with her arm round his neck and her head on his shoulder . 
 if she lay there hour or moment , she do not know ; it be enough to be there . 
 " why do you lie so quietly , darling ? why do you not tell I that you love I ? " he say , turn her face round to his . 

 it seem to break her rest , and she only answer he by put her hand softly on his cheek . 
 " be you not go to kiss I , my little girl ? " he ask again , lightly bring his lip down to hers and kiss they . 
 she kiss he and then bury her face in his shoulder . 
 " do you ever care about anyone before you love I ? do you , darling ? " he ask she , run his finger through her hair . 
 what be the past ? what be the future ? the present be enough . she answer , " no . " 
 " you could talk so well a little time ago , and now you can hardly get out one little " noí . tell I that you love I , my little girl . " 
 " I love you more than anything , more than everything , " she say , hold his face between her two hand and put she cheek softly against his ; then she nestle close to he again . 
 " be you happy now ? " 
 " yes . " 

 " how astonished everyone will be when they hear who be to be my little wife , " say the Piece - of - perfection as he think with infinite satisfaction of the discomfiture of his father and brother , also of Lady Edith and other of his worshipper . how would she look among they all ? beautiful ? his wife must shine and eclipse all woman . man must envy 

 he his wife , as they do his dog and his horse . would it be so with this little girl ? 

 " Undine , I want you to do something for I , " he say , after a long pause . " I know you will do whatever I tell you . will you not ? " 
 " yes , " she say , creep very close to he . 
 " you must not spend so much time over your book as you have do . I would rather you leave they alone altogether . you must give two or three hour a day to your music , and learn dancing . I want my wife to be deficient in nothing . do you hear ? " 
 it be the cold Piece - of - perfection with the half - close eye that speak these word , not the lover of half an hour ago , and they strike Undine a little chill ; but she only whisper in his ear that she would do all he tell she . 
 " why do you tremble so , my little darling ? " he say , as he stand she down on the hearth rug . " I must go now , but I will come again early tomorrow . how cold your little hand be . warm they by the fire and then go to bed . now you belong to I , I do not   want you to have dark ring round your eye , as though you have sit up all night . my wife must be always bright and beautiful , you know . good - night , darling . " so he leave she . 
 Undine kneel down before the low window and draw back the blind to watch he as he pass down the garden path . 

 the snow have fall , the cloud have go , and the full moon pour down her light on a white glitter world so white , so pure , so calm . even the iron pal have its coat of crystal , and the dark evergreen that grow beside the window be bent beneath their load . as far as the eye could reach stretch the silent white snow ; only down the little garden path there be his footmark in it . 



 IX . 
 tread SNOW 

 " 
 undine 
 , " say the Piece - of - perfection the next day , as he stand in the doorway put on his greatcoat , preparatory to take his departure ; " do that little old cousin of yours never try to make love to you ? " 

 " no , " say Undine . 
 she hat he so , it would have give she such infinite satisfaction to have injure he ; yet at the same time it seem the height of meanness to speak against he the man who have befriend she . the untruth seem , in the darkness and confusion of the moment , high than the truth , and it pass from her lip to bring forth the poison fruit which the lie bear , be it speak for God 's glory or the salvation of a soul . 

 she would have retract it almost in the same breath , but he answer quickly , " I be glad to hear it ; I have a great respect for my old pedagogue than for almost any man I know , but I have an idea from the way he sometimes speak of you that he care rather more for you than a second cousin 's husband generally do . I be glad it be fancy . 

 I will come again this evening and take you for a walk . " and he be go . 


 he be go , and the untrue word be go also . she stand in the hall and bury her face in both hand , utterly humiliate . she have tell a lie , and tell it to 
 he 
 . in other day her sorrow would have be that anything could have tempt she so to demean herself . now it be all swallow up in this it be to he . 

 she run out through the little garden with nothing on her head and the sleet and snow fall thick upon she . he be just enter the wood . she pause when she have almost reach he at the thought of the cold light that would fall on she when she present herself before he in such plight pause , then turn slowly back to the house . 
 evil time have fall on she , and she ask no more , " be it right ? " but only , " will he think it right ? " 
 " this afternoon I will tell he , " she say , as she walk , damp and chilly , up the garden path . " I wish he have never ask I . " 
 it seem so evil to speak against the man she hat , bad to leave thing as they be ; yet neither on that afternoon nor on any of the day that follow could she look up into the cold half - close eye and say , " I tell you a lie . " 

 the word be always on her tongue , always in 

 her heart ; but the white face with its wonderful crush influence over she keep they unspoken . 

 " I will tell he tomorrow , some day when he love I well , when he understand I , when I be his little wife , " she would say to herself , whenever he have just leave she . but a silent though not less abiding conviction be with she that the day never would come when he would know she well . her one hour of light have pass that night in the little fire - light parlour ; henceforth , strive as she might to annihilate herself and be only what the man might choose , he would never come near she , they would never meet . 
 " I be afraid I make a great fool of myself , " soliloquise the Piece - of - perfection , as he walk alone one sharp frosty evening . " no other woman ever make I lose my head , but I do believe the little creature bewitch I that night with her sentimental talk . she love I , I can do anything with she , I shall make something of she in time ; but I be a great fool . " 
 " what be you do here ? " he ask , come suddenly upon the subject of his thought as she stand below her old tree , wrap in her little red cloak , with Prince at her side . 
 the dog rub his head against his master 's foot ; the human dog creep nearer he . 

 " you know I do not like your wandering about alone , " he say , in the cold , unlover - like tone in 

 which he have always speak to she except on that first evening . 

 " I would not have come if I have think you would not like I to , " she say , glance up into his face . 
 " I want you to go to church tomorrow , " be his next and rather abrupt remark . " your cousin be well ; you will be able to go , will you not ? you will have to go some day ; I would rather you begin now . 
 " yes , I can go , " she answer after a moment 's pause . 
 " ' tis a matter of supreme indifference to I , " continue the Piece - of - perfection , " what you choose to believe ; but you must do nothing to make yourself peculiar . there be nothing so hateful in a woman as eccentricity of any description . " 
 Undine have now hear this remark so often that she have no new reply to make to it , and walk on in silence . 
 " be you very busy this morning , Undine ? " 
 " no , not at all , " she say . " why do you ask I ? " 
 " because your glove be tear , and I be think you might have have some very important matter to attend to which prevent your mending it ; but you have a weakness for torn glove , I fancy . " 
 " you will never see I with one again , " she say , pull it off quickly . 

 " I hope not , " he answer , quietly . " there be few thing which I admire less than a slovenly woman . if a woman care to retain the affection of those about she , she will always be particular as to her dress . " 
 " so that other might love her dress , not herself , " say Undine . 
 " I will care for my wife just as long as she give I reason to be proud of she , " he reply , coolly . 
 " just as you do for your horse and your dog ? " 
 " yes ; I believe I care for that dog as well as for most thing ; but if he become disobedient or vicious , I should care nothing more about he . " 
 he speak gravely ; Undine know he mean what he say ; and the life that lie before she seem to look almost as cheerless and icy as the white frosty world that lie stretch out before her eye . but , she resolve , I will be all he wish I ; he shall be proud of I , prouder than of all his dog and horse , she think , as she clench and loosen the finger of her little gloveless hand . 
 " what cause you always to move your hand in that extraordinary manner whenever you be angry ? it be not very pretty , I can assure you . " 
 " I be not angry ; I be only think . " 
 " what ? " 
 " that I will try and be everything you wish . do you believe I ? " 

 " if I do not believe that you would try and 

 that you would also succeed , I would not care to make you my wife , " he reply . " you be a clever little woman and can do anything you wish . " 

 and Undine feel more exultant at these equivocal word of praise than Lady Edith at his most honeyed compliment . 
 for some time after that they walk on in silence , only the sound of their footstep on the hard frozen ground break the stillness . 
 at last she say , very suddenly and very hurriedly : " you know that if ever , at any moment , at any time , you change and would rather not marry I , if it be the very day before our wedding you must feel quite free you must tell I so it will be all right . " 
 " be you change your mind already ? " he ask , glance down at she . 
 " no , I shall never change , " she answer . 
 " nor be I in the habit of retrace my step , either ; but it be certainly well , if one do repent , to do so before it be too late . " 
 they say no more till they get to the gate of the garden . 
 " be you not go to come in and see my cousin today ? she be up , " say Undine , and while he sit in Mrs. Barnacles ' little sitting - room she run upstairs . 

 there be an ominous pulling about the corner of her mouth but she know if she give way to it her 

 eye would be red and swollen in two minute ; so she tear off her hat and cloak and , change her dress , spend at least five minute in arrange a black - and - red bow in her hair and a few more on her dress . it take she a long time before she be satisfied with her appearance ; then she go downstairs . 

 he be satisfied with it , too , though she could not tell it from his face . poor little fool ! how she do love he ! and he feel a kind of pity for she . 
 it be grow dark and the red lamp in the hall be already light when he rise to go . he have wish her good - night , and she be turn to go upstairs when he call she back softly . he utter her name twice and draw she tenderly to he when she come to his side . 
 " be sure you practise this evening ; you be my own little darling , " he say , and press a long kiss on her lip . " do not   sit up too late , and look as pretty and as sweet when I come tomorrow as you do now . good - night , my little girl . " and again the firm stern lip with their soft golden moustache be press against hers as he fold she close to he . 

 it be late the next morning when undine rise ; for it be very pleasant , when one have delicious vision , to be dream and doze in bed on a winter 's morning . and her vision be sweet , sweet though , God know , they be childish and small enough . she would do her hair so ; she would dress 

 herself so ; she would go to church ; she would do this ; she would do that . he would kiss she , he would kiss she , as he kiss she last night . 

 she be sit on her bed side , as she have be sit for the last five minute , with one stocking half on and the other in her hand , when the maid knock at the door and pass she in a letter . 

 the hand be his , and it be the first she have ever get from he : she tear it open quickly . it run : 




 MY dear little GIRL ! I have just hear that my immediate presence in London be indispensable . ' tis a matter of business and I can not   delay . I have a note from Mr. Barnacles in which he tell I that he have be ill , but return to Greenwood on Monday . as you intend leave for your grandmother 's as soon as he do so , I suppose I shall not find you here when I return . I shall try to run down and see my little girl as soon as I be able . 

 your most affectionately , 
 A. BLAIR . 






 she throw herself down among the pillow , and after half an hour rise slowly to begin her packing . when it be do she go to Mrs. Barnacles ' room , to tell she that she be leave that evening . 
 " it be just another of her freak , " say that lady to Miss Mell , who come to spend the afternoon with she . " no one could have be more kindly treat than she have be here ; quite spoil in fact . there be no tell what she will take into her head next . I wish her grandmother joy of she , I be sure . " 

 " do not   you think Harry Blair 's go away so suddenly , without make she an offer , may have something to do with it ? " say Miss Mell , look enormously sharp and green about the eye . 
 " I be sure from what I have see that she could have have he at any time she choose , but you will not mention it to anyone , I know his father have quarrel with he and will have nothing more to do with he . " 

 " ah , I understand now , " say Miss Mell ; " that will have put my lady out just a little in her pretty little game . a poor penniless boy be not much of a catch . it serve she right . I always think it shameful , the way she use to walk about everywhere with he quite alone . I wonder she have not more regard for her character than to act as she do . 
 I 
 would die soon than be on such intimate term with a man to whom I be not engage ; and even then I think a modest reticence 
 so 
 become in a woman . " and Miss Mell draw herself up stiffly in her chair and draw down the corner of her mouth . 

 " well , anyhow , " say Mrs. Barnacles , sip her tea , " I do wish her grandmother joy of she . there be something one can not   help like about the girl , but she be so peculiar and eccentric I shall be glad to have she off my hand . " 

 " do not   you think she be try it on in another direction ? " inquire Miss Mell , with that wrinkling 

 about the mouth which be all she have to show for a smile . 

 " I do not   think she try it on in any direction ; that be just what I complain of , " reply Mrs. Barnacles . " from what I know , I be sure she could have have old Blair if she have choose . he be much old than she be , but a penniless girl can not   be too fastidious , and he be terribly rich . " 
 " as to she not try it on , I do not   know about that , " say Miss Mell ; " I do not   think she would have say no , if he have give she a chance of say yes , but perhaps she have high game in her eye . what do you think some one come here once and sometimes twice a day for ? " 
 " oh , he be polite to all woman ; his attention mean nothing . he will look high when he choose a wife , " say Mrs. Barnacles . Miss Mell smile a far - see smile and break her cake . 
 while they sit talk of she in the little parlour , Undine be stand for the last time under her old tree in the wood . it be leafless and bare now , and great white icicle hang from its branch . the little stream be silent and noiseless . 

 next summer the green leaf would break forth on it and the little brook would run laugh past , whisper to the long grass and white forest flower , and among its knot swollen root the bright - back beetle and busy ant would run ; but she would rest no more among they . " good - bye 

 old tree , " she say , break off a bit of its dry frosty bark . " good - bye , my friend , my dear old friend . I have have such beautiful dream beneath you ; I have have such happy thought . they will never come to I any more ; my high life be dead , quite dead ; I love only he and I must serve he now . good - bye . " 




 X. 
 melt SNOW 

 how 
 white , how white and dazzling , that road upon the hillside lay ! 

 all day she sit at the window , watch it . in the dusk , when no other eye could mark it , she see it wind in the dimness . all night in her dream it lie before she , in its white ache emptiness . 
 how slowly the chill week crawl over her two , four , six , eight . still she watch it till the colour fade from her cheek and the bright restless light grow strong in her eye . her old grandmother would lay her work aside and , stand behind she , would stroke her hair softly with her old wither hand and say , " you be not well my child ; you be lonely ; the place be too quiet for you ; a young life like yours should not be bury away here . " 
 and Undine would answer nothing , and sit watch , only she know for what . 
 the snow have vanish and the road lay , a white chalky line between the brown field ; only now and then a farmer 's cart or a labourer from the next village would pass along it . 

 " why do you never sit by the fire ? it be so cold and cheerless at the window , and there be nothing to be see , " the old woman would say . but still she sit there , look out and stitch away always at delicate white muslin with pink bow and dreamy blue and white stuff , which the old woman think make she look like an angel when she try they on . 
 " the child have change , " she would say to herself , as she sit knitting and doze in the firelight . " she never read now and think only of dress and music ; but I suppose it be natural ; the young will be young . " 
 the winter go early that year , and the first sign of spring be show themselves . Undine do not count the day any more ; she do not reason or ask herself any question ; she only wait , wait . 
 one day she see a boy come down the road . it be quite midday and the sun be shin with an almost summer - like warmth . she sit there with her hand fold in her lap , look at he yet not see he till he come up to the open window and put a letter in her hand . 
 she start up and pass out through the next room , where her grandmother sit knit in the sunshine of the open door . 
 " what be it ? what have happen ? " ask the old woman ; but Undine only hurry past she with the letter press tight in both hand against her breast . 

 through the long leafless garden she pass , 

 where the soft bud be just begin to swell under the brown bark , through the rough uneven meadow beyond , and sit down at the side of the little cozy river that creep slowly between its muddy reedy bank . she sit long look at the paper in her hand , with its great red seal ; then she tear it open . 

 what that letter say she never could remember ; but she know , when she have read it , that the dream of her life have vanish , to return no more . 
 she put the letter whole into her mouth and chew it fine between her grind tooth ; then she sit still and watch a tiny white feather that lie upon the muddy water bob up and down , up and down . her mind seem a perfect vacancy but for the thought of that little white feather . she wonder if it would be catch by nod leaf of the reed that dip into the water , or whether it would be strand on the oozy bank look at the little white feather and wonder , and grind the letter fine , fine , between her tooth . 
 then , a sudden wild impulse seize she . she must rise she must run she must flee she must go somewhere , anywhere . 

 with nothing on her head , sink ankle deep in the soft mud , she break through the reed and bush and climb up the steep bank with hand and foot . she do not pause an instant , but run on to the rugged hill with its wind sheep track and sharp 

 stone , climb it , and run on among the tree and rock that lie scatter on its summit . she do not seem able to get far ; again and yet again she think she find herself in the same place ; and every time she look up at the great red sun it seem a great , laughing , cruel human eye , look down at she from the clear blue sky . 

 it be on she , on she , wherever she go , that great blood - red eye , and the great brown hill opposite with its white chalk road be like a leer human face that laugh at she , jeered at she , mock at she ; and the stone , and the tree they have all a hide sneer about they . " Fool ! fool ! fool ! " they cry . and the blue cloudless sky overhead be so hard and pitiless , like a righteous human soul which have no mercy for the erring . " o sky , blue cloudless sky , have pity , have pity on I ! " she cry in her madness ; and she throw herself down and lie on a great flat stone in the footpath . gaze up into the sky 's blue depth , she look straight at the dazzle sun with an unnatural strength of sight . 
 they drive her madder , madder , the sky , the sun , the earth ; till she writhe in her pain , like a trodden worm , on the ground and stone . then the old feeling come over she again , and she rise up and run . her sight seem to grow dim and blur at last , and she stumble and fall again and yet again over the stone and stump . bruise , bleed , she feel nothing , only know she must run on , on . 

 her grandmother look out anxiously for she all day , and when it be grow dark that evening , see she walk slowly up the little garden path , with her head droop on her breast and her arm hang heavily at either side . 
 " where have you be , my child ? " she say , come out to meet she . " be you not bitterly cold ? " 
 " no , " say Undine , wearily ; and when they enter the little parlour with its cheerful lamp and firelight her grandmother notice that the bright anxious light she be accustom to see in her eye have vanish . 
 " you look ill , my child , " she say , rest her nervous old hand softly on her arm . 
 " I be not ill , " Undine say , " only tired . no , I be not hungry ; I only want to rest . I be tired , very tired . I want no light , thank you . good - night . " 



 XI . 
 a clever LITTLE man and a poor little FOOL 

 if the 
 ploughboy know how the worm suffer that writhe beneath his foot , surely he would not crush it . if we see the work of the cruel word , surely we should not utter it . if we could see the light of a life vanish and die out , surely we should be loath to extinguish it . but we never can see , never know , never watch these thing ; therefore blight , cursing , and inflict suffering , we go on our way rejoice . 

 Albert Blair be not a cruel man . a man of high principle , the world say . a man to whom no one in trouble ever appeal in vain for help . a man who never give his horse or dog a blow more than be necessary a good master , a good man , as the world go . yet he feel no sorrow for the young life he have crush . it have to be do , and he do it as he beat his dog or discharge his servant when necessary . 

 he have mean to write to she from London , but important affair occupy his attention ; his 

 specula- 
 speculation 


 tion be come to a bad end he have no time to think of she . 

 " I will run down and see she when I go back to Greenwood , " he say . " ' tis a pity , as thing seem to be turn out , that I ever let the poor little thing make such a fool of I , but it can not   be help now . " 
 Lady Edith with her thousand would have mend matter at once , but what be the use of think about she ? 
 the first night after his arrival at Greenwood , Cousin Jonathan come to see he . the little man have hear , on his return , of the frequent visit which have be pay during his absence . passion have eye , as far - seeing in the dark as love 's , and he know both visitor and visit so well that he soon come to certain very definite conclusion on the matter of these visit . he know well that a hundred Harry Blairs be not so to be dread as one Piece - of - perfection , with his cold eye and iron will . 

 it would be hard to say whether the little man start from home that evening with any particularly fiendish purpose in his head , but his heart be feed on by the green - eyed monster and his weak leg tremble and quake beneath he as he think of what 
 might 
 be of what she might have tell . perhaps the reception from his sometime pupil would be a summary dismissal from a boot point . at any day all Greenwood might know that , in place of Jonathan Barnacles the saint , the holy man , and the 

 blessed man of God , they have be bow down at the shrine of a poor sinner , a man of like passion with themselves . for with the exception of one or two benighted individual , Cousin Jonathan stand high of the high in the estimation of the Greenwood world . " he be so pure , so calm , so transparent . if there be more Christians like he , all the world would soon become Christian , " one of his admirer be will not to say , when expatiate on his transcendent virtue . 

 it be a cruel thing they do , who fasten on a man too high a character . ' tis a small hobgoblin on his shoulder , forever push and poke he into the wrong path , lead more straight along the devil 's road than gold , wine , or woman . have commit one action out of keep with it , he must sin on eternally to make a grave wherein to hide that action . 
 Cousin Jonathan feel sick at heart as any girl when he knock at the door and be usher into the presence of the Piece - of - perfection , who meet he just as usual , make he take an armchair , and offer he a cigar . 
 " you have be ill ? " be one of his first remark , notice the pale face and troubled look in the usually serene eye of the little man . 

 Cousin Jonathan declare he be in perfect health , in the good of spirit ; and , after a few more remark have pass , begin to express his gratitude for the 

 kind attention show to his wife and Miss Bock during his absence . 

 " it be exceedingly kind of you , " he continue , rub his hand together as nervously as it be possible for such a very unnervous little animal to do . 
 " it be quite unnecessary , I assure you , " say the Piece - of - perfection , knock the ash from the top of his cigar into the delicate china stand . " you will understand that it be so when I tell you , as perhaps I should have do soon , that in all probability , e'er very long , Miss Bock will become my wife . " 
 the little man have a wonderful command over his feature , and show at this announcement no more feeling than that amount of surprise which it be to be expect he would experience . 
 " you really must excuse I , " say Cousin Jonathan ; " but I be amazed , astonish ; it be so very , so altogether , unexpected . I you really must excuse I , but I be under the impression that , if ever I have the honour of look upon any member of your family as the future husband of my charge , it would be another . " 
 " I do not imagine Miss Bock ever have any very great regard for my poor brother , " he reply contemptuously , curl the corner of his delicate moustache between his finger and thumb . 

 " have she not tell you ? but of course she will 

 have tell you more than even I know , " say Cousin Jonathan . 

 " on what subject ? " ask Albert Blair , close his eye close than usual and play with Prince 's ear . 
 " about this affair with your brother ; but of course it be all pass now , and I wish you both every blessing , every happiness , " say Cousin Jonathan , apparently very much affected . 
 " I always understand from Miss Bock that she be perfectly indifferent to my brother , in fact rather repel than favour his address . I imagine you must have misunderstood she . " 
 " oh , yes , and there can be nothing gain by speak now over thing that be past and go , " say Cousin Jonathan ; " and I can not tell you how grateful , how relieve , I feel to think that the dear child will be in your care . when she seem so devotedly attach to your brother , of course I do not like to interfere , but it be , I can assure you it be a cause of great anxiety to I . if she be my own daughter , I could not feel a great regard for her welfare ; and she be so peculiar , so eccentric , that with all her noble quality and rich and vigorous intellect she have never be able to get on anywhere . " 
 the Piece - of - perfection sit passive , so Cousin Jonathan go on . 

 " it may seem , and I fear be , very selfish on my 

 part , but I could not help feel less concerned at your brother 's trouble and departure than I should otherwise have be . it seem wholly to change her mind , and as thing have turn out I be thankful , how thankful I can not tell you . he be very sincerely attach to she , but he would never have submit to her taste and idea , as it would be absolutely necessary he should if they be to live together . but that be all past now and I can not tell you how relieve , how thankful , I feel . I have love she as if she be my own , " say Cousin Jonathan , screw up the corner of his eye till they begin to look watery . 

 a long pause follow , then the Piece - of - perfection say , " perhaps I ought to explain to you that what exist between myself and Miss Bock be not a definite engagement . it be an understanding which either party may bring to an end at any time he or she should wish to do so , and it might be just as well to say nothing on the subject till matter be more definitely arrange . " 

 " certainly , certainly , if you wish it , " say Cousin Jonathan ; " but I do hope that matter will soon , very soon , be in that condition . I have often fear that she might be tempt for the sake of wealth and position to give herself away to a man who be utterly unworthy of she . she be so young , and therefore it be only natural that she should desire such thing , and have also be bring up in 

 circum- 
 circumstance 


 stance of almost more than poverty , they necessarily appear all the more alluring to she . " 

 " I understand that Miss Bock 's family , though not wealthy , be a very respectable one . take another cigar ; yours have go out , " say Albert Blair , pass his case . 
 " oh , I know nothing , nothing whatever , against the character of any of her relation . her father be a connection of my own , and as far as I be aware his family be all well to do . of her mother I know nothing . he make a great mistake in marry she , I believe . she be some woman he pick up in London and who marry as her second husband some low farmer at the Cape . her grandfather get her home when her mother die , but she could not get on with they ; they do not seem to understand the dear child 's little peculiarity and could not appreciate she . " 

 it would not take more faith and prayer to obtain pardon for one lie than for twenty ; and Cousin Jonathan , have tell one , find that lie flow as easily as truth if only one be use to they . Cousin Jonathan hold great faith in ghost , but nowadays dead people do not rise out of their graf and come to avenge themselves , be they ever so slander ; and ' tis safe talk in an English smoking - room of an african farmer between whom and yourself there be some thousand mile of sea and a hundred of still more separate Karoo . her mother have be 

 the only daughter of a wealthy London merchant and have be disinherit for marry beneath she ; but do not every man who find a wife pick she up , and have not her mother take as her second husband a Cape farmer ? he have only speak the truth judiciously , of course , 
 very 
 judiciously , but only the truth . 


 " I feel so sure , " he continue , " that you of all man will be able to overlook any small deficiency in the dear child , when you consider all the adverse circumstance with which she have have to contend . there be something so original and strong , so noble , in her character , that if she be only a little more open she would be almost perfect in my estimate . not that I mean , " say the little man , apparently recollect himself and speak with great earnestness " not that I mean to say she be not quite truthful , but she be sometimes not quite so open , as one might expect to find she . her nature be , I believe , a 
 thoroughly 
 truthful one in 
 every 
 respect , and it be only the effect of early mismanagement . and be we not , " say Cousin Jonathan , fall into his preach voice , " be we not all of we form during the first few year of our life ? what be do then , can it ever be undo , ever ? " 


 he seem lose in thought for some moment , then he say suddenly : " but it be all right now ; I feel so rejoice to think that for the future she will be shield and care for well than I could care for 

 she . I have feel very anxious about she lately , very anxious ; I could not see clearly where the path of duty lie with regard to she . " 

 " you be a very devil of wickedness or a poor fool of a saint , " think the Piece - of - perfection as he lean back in his chair with the lamplight fall full on the inscrutable white face , the line of which Cousin Jonathan be vainly try to decipher . 
 " I may tell Mrs. Barnacles , of of the understanding , may I not ? " he say . " she have be much grieve at Undine 's sudden freak of leave we ; and I can not myself understand how the idea come into her head , unless she think we be impose on she by leave she alone with an invalid on her hand . she never tell you if that be her reason for leave we , I suppose ? " inquire the little man , cast a quick furtive glance at the face of his companion . 
 " no ; she tell I she be leave because she be weary of the place and wish for change . you be surely not leave yet ? " for Cousin Jonathan have rise to take his departure . 
 if you wish to ruin a man 's character , if you wish to have your revenge on an enemy , if you wish to blight a man 's life because you have do he an injury , be spar with your word . it be the small drop that fall in between the wine and sugar that poison the cup . 

 so Cousin Jonathan , have eye as far - seeing as 

 they be blue and saintly , discover that it be quite impossible for he to remain any long , much as he wish to do so . there be a special prayer - meeting in his house that night , and his presence there be indispensable . 

 People remark , as they walk home after the meeting , that never before have he pray with the eloquence and earnestness of that evening for perfect purity , for perfect truth ; truth that might challenge , not the dull eye of the world , but the deep - seeing , perceive eye of conscience ; truth in thought , truth in word , truth in deed , Godlike truth , he pray for with passionate fervour . and let he who will sneer and raise the ever - ready cry of hypocrite . through a long life free of temptation he have in the main be pure and truthful , as those about he deem he ; but the hour of his trial have come and he have fall , as the son of the morning fall , to rise no more . 
 the great devil among we have his white spot , and the pure saint have ink - black stain which will be clearly visible if he do not keep his white clothing too tight about he . 
 when his visitor have leave he , Albert Blair pace slowly up and down the room . be the little man a fool , or a devil ? he turn the matter over and over in his mind as he pass slowly from one end to the other , with Prince follow close at his heel . 

 the poison take its full effect , and early the next morning he start for London . " I will write when there , " he say . " the little schemer quite deserve to be keep wait , and it give she more time to forget I . they may say what they like , but I do believe the little devil like I or at least my prospect . 
 " I do not   know what be come over Miss Undine , " say Nancy , her grandmother 's maid , as she stand chat with her lover over the gate one evening . " when she come first , why , there she would sit from morning till night , stitch , stitch , stitch , at they lovely white dress , and star out of that there window . if we would not ' a ' make she come and eat , I believe she would just ' a ' starve . well , all of a sudden , just four week go , I go upstairs to make her bed , think as how of course she have be up and out hour ; and there she be a - sit on the floor in the middle of the room , never be in bed the whole blessed night , though one could see as she have be a - lay on it , her dress and ribbon and all her nice thing that she have be a - work at lie in a pile that high before she . 
 " " Nancy , í say she , sort of strange and quiet like , " you can take all these things.í 
 " " Lor ' ! Miss Undine , í say I , " what do you mean?í 

 " " you can have they , í say she ; " and if you do not 

 want they you can burn they , í say she so quiet like , and walk out of the room with her arm a - hang down at each side of she like 
 this 
  and her head a - lie sort of loose like on her chest , as though she have go and get her neck break ; and , Lor ' ! her back be bent as double as an old woman 's . I never see anything like it , ' cept when my poor brother Jim get shoot in the side by they horrid poacher and come back the night afore he die , look just like that . " 

 " and do you get the dress ? " ask she lover . 
 " Course I do , " say Nancy , " and other thing too . and Miss Undine she just go on walk about in that ' ere sort of a way . Lor ' ! and she be queer sometimes ; she take a cloth and begin rub down the chair and thing in the parlour . " I can do that Miss Undine , í say I. 
 " " no , I like to do it , í say she , and there she sit a - rubbing at one leg of a chair for five minute or more , like as if she be in a dream like . 
 " " do not   you think that chair be pretty well about polished down now , Miss Undine?í say I. 

 " " yes , í she say , and go on to another . and , Lor ' bless I , if she do not   go and lie down under they tree in the garden for a whole blessed day sometimes , as still as a corpse . she be just that deep with blossom when I come to call she in of an evening ; and if I do not , why I do believe she would 

 lie there till the morning , " say the puzzled Nancy , emphatically . 

 it be not only Nancy who be puzzle . her grandmother would watch she wonderingly as for hour she would sit under the great tree that grow before the cottage , gaze vacantly at the soft early grass and the bud hedge . it be no use ask if she be ill ; she would only answer , " no , I be well only tired rather tired . " 
 " the flower of last year , when their stalk grow hollow and empty , fall to the ground , to give place and food to the fresh green shoot of this year ; then why must we live on , when we be tired , so tired ? " she would ask herself . sometimes she get out the little wooden box where she keep her paper little song and allegory , fairy tale and half - write essay . they have lift she up to heaven when she write they ; now they be bit of blue paper , scribble over and blot , and she would put they away listlessly without ever look at they . 
 one night , in the middle of the night , she wake up . generally she go to sleep early , and sleep heavily till morning , but tonight she wake and lie still , listen to the wind as it moan around the house . then before her eye lay the little river , with its muddy bank , and the great tree knock their bare branch together over it , and the brown still pool where the little feather have nod up and down , up and down , on that afternoon . 

 it have move very restlessly , but deep down , at the bottom of the pool , it be very still and restful . the mocking sun with his jeer blood - red eye could never look through to see what lie there . 
 she be tired , so tired ; so she get up slowly and draw on her clothe in the dark . she be turn mechanically to feel for her little crimson cloak that hang behind the door , when , " why should I spoil it ? " she think . so without wrap anything around she , she go out into the night wind and the darkness , through the long garden , over the uneven field . she stand at last beside the muddy pool . overhead the leafless branch rattle their dry joint together , and through the rift in the cloudy sky a few stray star cast their uncertain reflection on the water . 
 it seem so still and quiet , it seem to lure she to itself . 
 " I can not help it it be not cowardly I be too tired so tired . he do not want I any more . there be nothing in the world , and I be so weary , " she whisper under her breath , as though excuse herself to some unseen judge . 
 " I shall never trouble he any more , down there . " 

 she press close to the muddy edge and stand look down into the water . then , sudden and unbidden , a thought come to she , as may have come the angel 's touch to the lone prophet when in the 

 wilder- 
 wilderness 


 ness beneath the juniper tree he lay he down to die . 

 might I not serve he ! 
 how or in what way , who could say ? but life be very long , and the wheel turn strangely . how could she tell that he would never need she ! 
 the prophet of old ate of the angel 's bread and go forty day and forty night in the strength of that meal ; she also eat of angel 's meat , the only food which the heaven now yield we , and go forty time forty in the strength thereof . 
 back to the house she turn slowly ; and no one ever know how nearly she have find rest and quiet on that windy night . 
 what a small thing it be sometimes that make life 's kiss sweet than death be to we the light in a pair of blue eye a little applause for a picture we have put on canvas a few comprehender for a song we have write the knowledge that our name mean something when scrawl on the bit of paper which we call a cheque . these mean life for some of we . take these out of life , and what an unbearable weight it become . we walk about in this rich teem world as through an empty , howl wilderness ; and if we do not fear to meet with something more wearying on the other side , how we seek to get out of it by way of a muddy pool , a bullet , or a few drop of arsenic . 

 ' tis very strange , very ridiculous , quite incomprehensible , no doubt ; but some really do require something more to reward they for the trouble of live than black cloth , roast beef , and the power to use they . 



 XII . 
 sell she love 

 the 
 summer have come and the little cottage look like a monster nosegay in its sheath of climb rose . in the great tree that stand before the door the bird have build their nest and sing there all day long , and the blossom in the garden have turn to fruit and the tender green leaf have grow dark and strong . 

 Undine have sit below they , work a little , doze a little , all day . she be glad the blossom be go , for their smell make her heart heavy . 
 " Lor ' ! Miss Undine , you will catch your death of cold ; the dew 's a - fall already , and there be a gentleman in the parlour a - wanting to see you , " say the good Nancy , burst with desire to give an account of the visitor 's appearance , with her idea thereon append . 
 Undine , however , ask no question , but , rise , walk towards the house . 
 the little parlour be almost dark when she enter it , and the man be sit with his back to the window . instantly she recognize the bald crown and tuft of hair belong to George Blair . 

 " this be indeed a great and unexpected pleasure , " he say , rise and take her hand into his own fat and flabby palm , " a great and most unexpected pleasure . I have be in the neighbourhood for some day , engage in inspect a large estate I have just purchase , and it be by the mere chance that I hear of your be here . " 
 then he launch forth into strong and vehement denunciation against the road and inn of the neighbourhood , direct his remark principally to her grandmother . at last the old lady rise to order candle , and Undine and her visitor be leave alone . 
 " have you be to Greenwood lately ? " she inquire . 
 " not since the autumn . " then , after a moment 's pause , " I have be hop continually to hear from you since that time , but have be always disappoint hitherto . " 
 this remark elicit no response , he go on , draw his chair a little near to her . 

 " I trust I need hardly tell you , my dear Miss Bock , that in the month that have pass 
 I 
 have not change in my feeling or wish . what I then ask , I still most earnestly and truly desire . " 

 the timely entrance at this moment of Nancy , bear candle , save Undine from the necessity of make he any reply . she ask he where his son be . 

 " I know nothing of Master Harry 's whereabouts , " 

 he reply ; " and as for his brother , I 
 will 
 know nothing . he have go in for all manner of mad speculation without my knowledge or advise , and of course have get into trouble and expect my help now . he shall not have it , though . I shall have as little to do with he as with his brother for the future . if he want help he may go to his aristocratic relation , who , if they be sell up , blue blood and all , could not raise the sum he want . 
 I 
 could let he have the money and never miss it , " say the old man , very complacently , " but he have see the shine of my cash for the last time , I can assure he . " 

 a fat , disagreeable - looking old man , her grandmother , though not generally very discerning or critical , think he , when she režntere the room at the end of his speech . 
 Undine soon make an excuse for leave they and go out at the front door and stand before the house . the evening air be cool and balmy and the smell of the cluster rose that cover the cottage be sweet , but she only drag a bunch from its stem and crush it in her hand till the thorn pierce it . the time have come , and come so soon , when she could serve he . once or twice she pace up and down the length of the house ; then she režntere the little parlour . 

 she ask her grandmother to leave they alone for a few moment ; and the old man look at she in some astonishment as she stand before he pale 

 and eager . surely she be beautiful , this woman , with a beauty deep than that of form and colour ; and if she be so fair in her rough , careless dress , what should she not look like in the velvet and damask he might give she ! 

 she crush the flower in her hand till the blood fall in a crimson drop on her crumpled white dress ; and , stand straight before he , say : " you ask I once long ago to become your wife . I tell you then that it could never be ; but I be willing now if you will give I what I want . " there be something so strange in her manner and look that the old man , not know how to answer , sit still , and she go on : 
 " if you will settle on I , before our marriage , fifty thousand pound in cash , to be mine absolutely , to do exactly as I please with , then I will marry you as soon as you wish . I do not love you , but I will be a good wife to you . " 
 she look at he and the old man look at she . many woman have sell themselves to he before that night , but not the most abandon in a more open and bareface manner than this : " I do not love you , but you will have no reason to repent marry I if you be willing to do so on my term . " 

 he hesitate for a moment , but his mind be soon make up . that she should consent to marry he for anything except his money he have never dream , and , whether the bargain be express in word 

 or tacitly understand , where be the difference ? so he answer she : 

 " not only what you ask , but everything I have , shall be your ; though of course if you wish it , an arrangement such as that which you mention shall be make . " 
 he stay a little long , and when he have kiss his wife that be to be , upon the lip , he leave she . 
 they be pretty lip and he do not repent his bargain when he think it over at leisure . they have answer he scornfully once ; he might do what he would with they now . his son have covet they once , but gold have win when youth and learning have fail . 
 so it must always be , he think , as he roll his fat joint into bed . youth and learning and love , they be all convertible into term of cash , and have their equivalent . 



 xiii . 
 a VERY wicked woman 

 a few 
 week after the night of the bargain two notice appear in the same paper . the first inform the world that on a certain day George Blair , Esq . , and Undine Bock have become , till death should part they , bone of one bone and flesh of one flesh , by a holy and inscrutable mystery , two in one and one in two . 

 the second notice assert that the like wonderful and miraculous though oft - repeat process have take place between Mr. Albert Blair and Lady Edith Mountjoy . 
 " do I not say so ? " say Miss Mell , excitingly , as , seat beside Mrs. Barnacles ' sofa with the paper in her hand , she read the two notice . " she be not half the poor little fool you all think she ; she understand her game when she let the son slip to catch the father ; she know where the meat lay . 

 " she have a nice nest of it , " continue Miss Mell . " the old man be too stout and apoplectic to last long , and the son be both in his bad book , where you may be sure she will take good care to keep they . 

 she be an innocent little creature , only like her book and her flower , but she know a thing or two . we shall have she here after a few year , " continue the poor little woman , " a widow with her thousand , cut a dash and rid roughshod over our head . " 

 she feel it be an unjust world this , in which one woman win all the cake and bon - bon and another nothing more than dry bread and weak tea . 
 an hour or two late Cousin Jonathan , sit in his study , read they also , and as he read his heart grow light . it have be heavy , strangely heavy , of late . 
 " she could never have care for he or she could not have do this , " he mutter . " to marry for money and so soon : she could never have care for he . " and with these word the little man be will not to quiet unpleasant stirring for month and year to come . 
 Albert Blair , take up the paper to see his own notice , read what stand above it . 

 " what a merciful escape I have have ! " he exclaim , and for once the imperturbable calm that reign within he be almost disturbed . it be never pleasant to find yourself a dupe where you think yourself adore , and a fool where you think your self wise ; and what small pity he have feel for the little girl who love he be change into loathing for the woman who have fool he . from that 

 mo- 
 moment 


 ment his flickering faith in woman die and he hold his father 's creed the creed that all woman have their value in coin , though some mount high . 

 in a poor half - furnish room the owner of the woman 's eye and the crammed head sit beside a bare deal table . before he lie an open newspaper . 
 " there be nothing worth love , nothing true , nothing noble in the world , " he cry , bitterly , and bury his face in the paper before he . when he raise it , it be wet with tear . she be not only as all woman be , but low than many : to sell herself , with her youth and talent , to an old and evil man for his money and land . 
 " o God , my God ! " he cry in bitterness of soul , cover his face with both hand , " and this be the woman whom I have allow to come in between my soul and Thee . " 
 in a richly furnish apartment , envelop in a soft cloud of white lace and delicate azure ribbon , sit Undine Blair . diamond glitter in her hair and her little jewel finger stray listlessly over the leaf of the paper before she . around she on every side lie a profusion of those thing in which a woman 's soul delight the bon - bon and cake that the Miss Mells of this world sigh for . 

 she be sit wait for dinner and the arrival of her husband , and run her eye carelessly over the sheet before she . there , below the notice of her own sale , stand that other notice . she read it and 

 a burn mist gather in her eye . from her ear and neck she tear jewel that hang there and throw they on the ground at her foot . sign of her servitude , wear for his sake , there have be a sweetness in their very bitterness . now they be accurse burn into her very sleep ; she trod upon they with her foot . for nothing , all for nothing ; he have no need of she . poor childish fool , to think that ever he could stand in need of she or of her sacrifice . 

 " dinner be ready and my master be wait , " say a servant who a few moment later come to call she . 
 " say I be ill today and can not come , " she answer , and when the door close behind he sink back in the chair and cover her dry throb eyeball with her hot hand . she grind her tooth in futile rage and helplessness . parched and very bitter be her soul that night . 
 truly , a very fiend 's have be the voice that have call she back to life from the muddy , reed - edge pool , call she back to life to pass from evil on to evil . 
 a soft pulpy hand rest on her bare shoulder and her husband speak to she . 
 " be my little pet ill this evening ? what be the matter with she ? " 

 she throw his hand from she with passion through which involuntary disgust be clearly visible , and , 

 elude the hand with which he strove to detain she , pass quickly from he . 

 " what do you mean by this ? " cry the little man , and stand star at the closed door by which she have vanish . his astonishment be great . in the three week of his married life she have take all his caress , submit to all his wish , as absolutely as though subdue by the most slavish passion . as an automaton be guide by the hand of its master , his will have move her , and of desire or inclination of her own she have seem devoid . 

 be his honeymoon to end so soon ? be his self - congratulation to end in this ? have he really purchase a scourge and a termagant in his fair young wife ? as soon as he could leave the delight of the table , have he not hurry upstairs really concerned at the indisposition of his precious new treasure puffing and red with wine , soup , and exertion ? have he not enter the room to caress and fondle she ? and be he to be meet so ? have he play the fool in his old day ? he ask himself . for the first time in his long life he think he have fall into a bad speculation , but he change his mind as time pass on . in the month that follow the scene of that evening be never repeat . she grow quieter , cold , but more passive and submissive every week . whether it be to sit by his side , to have her lip kiss , to wear a particular dress , to 

 attend a certain ball , the obedience she give he be equally absolute , unquestione , and lifeless . 

 he have pay his price for she faithfully , she realise , and it be not his fault if the thousand he have give she be of as little service as a handful of gravel from his path . she have barter her life for his gold and she must give it . 
 in the autumn they go to the seaside . the restless murmuring of the water stir up old memory which she would fain have leave bury ; but he wish to be there and she say nothing . the winter and spring they spend in London ; when the summer come they go to his new estate . 
 " I shall never be able to live in Greenwood , " she say . and he pay deference to the one wish she have express . 
 " you never ask I to do anything for you , " he say one day . " ask I for something . " and she , obedient in this as in all else , ask he to buy the little rose - cover cottage in which her grandmother live . the gift come too late to profit the one for whom it be intend ; for in the winter her grandmother die . 

 if she feel the loss , no one could tell , for she show no feeling on that or any subject . during the summer their house be fill with guest of many kind , not because either host or hostess have many friend or be well like , but because there be good shooting , good living and good company 

 to be have there . all admire the young wife and pronounce her lovely even woman . they have as little reason to feel jealous of she as of the silent statue that adorn her room . 

 " she be a cold , dull , heartless little creature in whom nothing can awaken the faint spark of womanly emotion , " say one who consider himself prežminently endow with those charm of appearance and manner which cause disturbance in the heart of woman , and who , through a long morning ramble , have be vainly endeavour to exercise his charm upon she . for he , for all , there be one constant smile that go no high than the lip , and that have no meaning save when a little scorn show itself . cold , heartless , and surely money - love must be one who could marry an old , bloated and apoplectic little man who have only gold with which to varnish himself and cake over his deficiency . 
 " she dress well and know how to make herself look beautiful , but that be the only thing she have sense enough to understand , " say the woman . but none of they accuse she of vanity . she be too supremely indifferent as to the impression she make on other . 

 no one offend she , no one care for she : not her inferior in spite of her lavish generosity to they . her kind action be do in an indifferent , feelingless manner that make it as impossible to feel 

 thankful for they as to the rain for fall or the wind for blow . 

 Nancy , be now without employment , come one day to see if Undine would take she into her service . " and , Lor ' ! " say she , when give an account of all that have pass to her lover that evening , " I do not know Miss Undine : she be grow so beautiful and dress so grand ; it kind of take my breath away to look at she . then I just remember how she use to lie under they old tree in the garden and rub down they chair , and so I say , " Miss Undine Mrs. Blair I mean I hope you will be so good as to forgive I for make so bold , but I be out of work now and I think perhaps as how you would be so good as to let I get some work , if as how you have any to give.í 
 " " be not   you marry yet?í say she , a - look straight at the book in her hand . 
 " " Lor ' ! Mrs. Blair , no , í say I. " I have   not get anything to get marry with , í say I. 
 " " if you have that little cottage my grandmother use to live in , I suppose you could do well , í say she ; " it be get a large garden.í 
 " " Lor ' ! mum , í say I , " we could never have a house like that ; it be world too grand for the like of us.í 
 " " well , í say she , " if you think it would help you , you can go and live in it for nothing , í say she , " and I will see that you get work whenever you want it.í 

 " " Lor ' ! Mrs. Blair , you do not   mean it , mum!í say I. 
 " " yes , you can go in as soon as you like , í say she ; " but the housekeeper ask I to let a woman stay in the little shed outside the garden ; you must not trouble she , í say she , and go on reading as though there be not   no one in the room . my head be all of a - whirl like , so I just say thank you , mum , and walk out of the room . " 
 a few day after Nancy 's visit Undine make her morning ramble a long one than usual . she be alone , and a solitary walk be a pleasure she have rarely enjoy since her marriage . mile after mile she wander on till she find herself near to the little rose - cover cottage , very silent and desolate now with its flower - clothe wall and its closed shutter . she do not enter the garden , but pass round to the front of the house , think to rest on the bench beneath the great tree that grow before the door . the spot be occupy , however , and she stand at a little distance , watch its occupant who , not aware of her presence , be stitch quickly at the blue work she hold in her hand . she be an erect , tall , well - proportion woman with lustrous black eye and glisten black hair . 

 she have be very beautiful once , think Undine , more beautiful than i. but the young face be wear now and there be line of suffer round the dark eye and curved lip . something hard , 

 almost repellent , be in the expression of the face she bent over her work , but the look vanish when she pause for an instant in her work to throw down a bunch of green leaf at the baby that lie before she on the soft short grass , a pink - and - white thing with blue eye and yellow hair . she smile a soft , glad smile , and Undine feel sure it be not the first time she have look at that face and smile , though where and when she have look at they she could not tell . the woman be raggedly clothe , not even cleanly ; the child be spotless , and neither in colour nor in feature bear any resemblance to she . 

 she be just resume her work when she notice Undine and rise from her seat as the little silk - clothe lady approach . 
 " do not rise , " say Undine ; " the bench be large enough for we both . " 
 she feel attract by she , not because of her neglect beauty , not by the vague impression that they have meet before , but by a look in the dark eye which draw she , as a look sometimes will in the face of some passenger in a crowd or a woman behind a counter . we may never speak , have no communication , but we feel that we have come near to one who be of our own flesh and blood . 

 " do you live here all alone ? " ask the silken - clothe little beauty as she take her seat beside her rag - clothe sister , who , if she remember meet she 

 be- 
 before 


 fore , do not show it and stitch on quickly with downcast eye . 

 " no . I have he , " answer the woman , look down at the nine - month - old baby at her foot . " have he , how can I be lonely ? how can I want anything ? " the look say ; then she hurry on with her work again . 
 " do you not feel very lonely , live here so far from all other house ? " ask Undine after a moment 's pause . 
 " no , " say the woman , shortly . " I like it . " 
 then Undine sit quietly watch the large , soft , brown hand that have evidently not be accustom to hard work , the proud erect figure , the defiant sullen face , and the pink - and - white thing that laugh at their foot . she be a woman who have come no one know from where , with only a baby , and her story be not difficult to read . her neighbour read it after their fashion and call she a wicked woman , a very wicked woman . 
 when Undine have rest a few minute long she rise to go , but first she kneel down on the grass where the baby lay . 
 " one kiss , for the sake of your bonny blue eye , " she say . 
 as she walk slowly past the garden hedge she come to the shed where mother and child live . ' twas a miserable tumble - down place , yet Undine , as she pass it , envy they . 

 " I be not alone , for I have he , the child of love , " the eye have say ; and Undine with her empty heart , and the knowledge that she , too , soon would be mother of a child , not the child of love , but of loathe Undine with her rich and her good name envy the dark woman her disgrace , her baby , and her rag . 
 " where have you be all day ? not climb the hill and over - exert yourself , I hope ? " say her fat little proprietor as he meet she in the door on her return ; and for the rest of that day she be never free of he ; neither on many day that follow do she find an opportunity for repeat that morning 's walk . 
 the anniversary of their wedding day come . they have give a grand dinner , but the guest have depart early , and her husband , have indulge a little more freely than usual in that which make heavy the heart of man , have fall asleep on the sofa in his dressing - room . she stand at the low open window of her room , look out into the oppressive night . there be that heavy stillness in the air that precede the bursting of a great storm . 

 " you may go . I shall not need you tonight , " she say to she maid ; and when she have withdraw , Undine throw a great shawl over her head and step out of the window , still dress in black velvet and wear on her neck the pearl that have make she the envy of many woman that night . 

 she walk on quickly , not care which path she take and press her foot hard on the ground at every step . it have cause a great strain than usual that evening to wear , without once drop it for a moment , that mask of smile that she wear till the line in her cheek grow stiff and hurt . 


 as she walk on , the line of an old song she have like run through her head : 

 " behind no prison gate , " she say , 
 " that slur the sunshine half a mile , 
 be captive so uncomforted 
 as soul behind a smile . " 


 " God 's pity let we pray , " she say . 
 think of nothing , with these line run , run through her head , she walk while the sky grow dark and yet dark . presently gust of wind come hurry past she , and then the great storm whose forerunner they have be overtake she . fiercely the wind shake the branch of the tree over her head , and the large drop fall heavily through they . she be too far from home to think of return , but she know her grandmother 's cottage could not be far off . she would go and sit in the little porch till the bad be over , she think , and walk on slowly while the fast - fall rain make its way through her shawl and drench she to the skin . 

 as she pass near the broken shed she notice 

 light come through its small crooked window and through the crevice and crack in its old stone wall . when she pass the window she pause for a moment and look in . Most of the pane of glass be go , their place be supply by strip of paste paper , but through the two square that still remain she could clearly see all that the hovel contain . in one corner stand a small stretcher which be now unoccupied , for on a small stool before the fire , with her back turn to the window , sit the woman , her head stoop low over the baby she hold close to she . before the window stand a small table in which a tallow candle fix in a broken brass candlestick be flicker and flaring . in the hearth the smoulder fire be almost extinguish by the rain which come down through the chimney , and the drop which make their way through the roof gather themselves together in pool on the uneven floor . 

 it be a strange reversal in the order of thing the honour wife of the rich man in her velvet and jewel stand out in the night storm and gaze in with envious eye at the home where poverty and shame have take their abode . 

 there come a hush in the storm and Undine could hear the woman be murmur to the child as she bend over it . the first word she do not hear , but some come to she through the crevice and hole in the crazy window frame : " my child , my little child , 

 you will not leave I , you will not forsake I . you be all , all I have . " then there come word Undine do not catch , and then again : " if you will only stay with I , I will live for you , work for you , starve for you ; you shall be rich and clever one day . I be not cruel to want to keep you . you must not die , you can not die , my little baby . I love you so before you live . you be all I have of he . you must not die and leave I , my baby , my little baby . " 

 then the mad storm come back howl after its rest , and the word be lose . uncertain whether to enter or to go on to the cottage , Undine pause for an instant , then knock at the door . there be no response and she lay her hand on the broken latch . the crazy door , open , let she in , with a flood of rain and a gust of wind that almost extinguish the quickly melt candle . 
 " I hope I have not frighten you , " she say , when she have fasten it once more . " I have be overtake in the storm . " 
 the woman make no answer , but look up at she with dull , lustreless eye ; then , recognise her visitor , she say , " you like my baby ; you be the only one who ever kiss he . he be die now . " she say the last word slowly and distinctly in a harsh whisper , and then look down at the little figure wrap in a great shawl that lie upon her knee . 

 Undine kneel down beside she . she would 

 have speak word of comfort , but when her eye fall on the little face , even by the uncertain light of the flickering candle and fire , she see that death 's hand be on the baby and the little life of love and shame would soon be end . 

 in silence she kneel by they , hold in her white jewel finger the tiny cold hand that rest on the shawl , while her long velvet train be curl up in one of the pool on the floor . 
 there be no word speak in the hut for a long time . the storm shake the loose wall in its fury , the great raindrop kill the smoulder fire , and the two woman sit watch in silence for the coming of the awful stranger . 
 at last there come a sudden hush in the storm . no sound be hear but the slow falling of the raindrop as they drip from the roof into the puddle on the floor , and the candle flicker no more but burn up straight and steady . then the little child heave a long weary sigh , and the clasp of the little hand relax , the closed eye partly open , and they know that death have be with they . 
 the mother sit as one who dream , look down at that which lie upon her knee , and their breathing sound loud in the stillness . 
 at last she rise suddenly and , drop the child heavily into Undine 's arm , turn towards the door . 

 at that instant the storm come back , loud and fierce after its rest . she go out into it and to 

 the darkness , and in the hut Undine sit with the dead child on her knee . 

 the light fall full on the little face with its half - close eye that look so strangely old and stern now with the shadow of death upon they . 
 as she look down at it she seem to see , not the face of the little snow - white baby , but that other face that haunt her day and night the face that she would never forget , that come in between she and the blue sky when she try to look upwards , and between her eye and the sunny grass and flower when they smile upon she . 
 be she not to look into the face of a dead child without see it even there , also ? 
 it be like madness , she think , and draw from beneath the small chin a white handkerchief that lie fold there , to cover from her sight the strange white face . 

 as she open and spread it out , her eye fall on a name beautifully work on one corner . she read it and then sit thinking . after a long time she raise the little baby very gently and hold it close to she . 
 his 
 dead baby . for she know now that it be no madness that show she the old haunting face in the feature of the little child . 


 she know now where she have see that woman 's face before , with its lustrous eye and brilliant tint ; remember now the old hint and story which she have regard as lie but which tonight come 

 back to she as truth . and she see it all the deep love of year , give all thing , deny nothing , pour itself out at the foot of that stern strong man to whom it be only a thing to be use , draw upon , and , when no long need , tread on and forget . 


 his 
 little baby ! care nothing for loathe , perhaps but what a difference . 
 his 
 little baby still . if she have only know it while the warm blood run in the lip that strike her cold and chill when she press they now . if she have only know it soon . 

 she gather it up in her arm and move the pearl aside that it might lie close , close against her soft warm breast close , as though she would have give of her life to bring it back . 
 then she lay it down once more and sit look at it , and when the candle fall into its socket she still sit hold it , and the grey dawn when it look in still find she sit here . 
 the storm have go , and when the sun arise the earth be green and laugh . the fresh morning wind help the green branch to shake off the glitter drop that still hang on they , the flower open their eye by thousand , the warm earth send up a delicious smell , and the heavy grass raise their wet head and the tender plant shoot out of the moist ground through every crack . 

 the storm have go ; only here and there a strong bough hung break , or a great tree lie upon its side , 

 whispering of last night 's work . for nature keep her secret well and hide away from the sunshine the thing which she do in darkness . 

 yes , well she keep her secret ! 

 when the curious morning sunbeam force their way through the tall reed and matted bough that grow over the muddy pool , they see nothing , they know nothing ; 
 they 
 could not tell what it be that lie across the old rotten trunk deep under the thick still water , with its brown hair bury in the mud . they do not know it , and the small bird do not know it , or how be it possible they should sing in the branch overhead such joyous lie ? " life be sweet , " they say . " life be sweet , and love be long ; it last all summer time . " 

 " tell I all about it , Nancy , " say her lover as he conduct her home through the quiet field that evening . 
 " so I will , " say Nancy , " but Lor ' bless I if I know where to begin , there be be so much a - happen today . " 
 " begin at the beginning , " be her lover 's very sage advice , which Nancy follow . 

 " well , this morning , afore ever the sun get up , I go to the cottage to have a look at they shutter which we forgot to shut after we have be a - cleaning up last night and which I think as how the wind 

 would have blow off . well , just as I go past the little shed outside the garden , what should I see but Mrs. Blair a - standing in the door as large as life , and a great shawl over her head and all . 

 " " good - morning , í say I , wonder how she come there at this time of day . 
 " " Nancy , í say she , " there be a little child dead in here . I wish you would call your mother and come and see to it , and see to the mother , too.í 
 " " where be the mother?í say I , look in . 
 " " I do not   know , í say she , and walk off . " 
 " what do you think she come there for ? " ask she lover , curiously . 
 " Lor ' ! I do not   know , " respond Nancy . " nobody can not   give no reason for her going - on . I would not   be in no way surprised to hear she have be and go and drunk poison , or go up in a balloon , or be a - do anything unlike other folk . " 
 " well , I go and call mother and we seed to the baby : and the prettiest fat little thing I ever seed , it be . 
 " Mother say , " Nancy , í say she , " look in that there little box under the bed and see if you can not   find no clothe for it . the woman do not   seem to be a - come yet.í 

 " " yes , í say I , and pull out the box . the thing be lock , but , Lor ' ! it be so rotten , afore you would touch it it be break open , and there be not   much in it , neether just a pair of baby ' clothe 

 and the beautifull little box that ever I see ; and , Lor ' ! I do believe it be real gold and write all over the top , and mother and I , we spelt out , Alice Brown and something about a drowning , but the other word be a sight too long . " 

 " and what be in the box ? " ask her lover . " money ? " 
 " money ? " say Nancy . " no . I just open it afore I think , and what do you think I seed in it ? why , the likeness of the beautifull young man I ever set eye on in all my bear day . the man on the hairpin box be not   nothing to he , nothing . curly hair and moustache just the same , but a sight more handsome . " 
 " be that all ? " say her companion , not feel in any way entertain by the rapture of his lady love over the pictured perfection . 
 " yes , that be all , " say Nancy , " ' cept a couple of bit of cigar , half burn out , and an old glove a sight too big for she I should say , though she be pretty considerable big . " 
 " what do she say when she come back and find you would be a rummaging all her thing ? " 

 " come back ! she 
 never 
 come back , " say Nancy , " and it be my belief she never will neither . she be come from nowhere and she be go to nowhere . she think as how other folk can see to its burying , but it be always the way with the like of she . woman that do the sort of thing she be be 

 a - doing of , they never have no natural feeling , " say the virtuous Nancy . and her lover agree with she . 

 " do you tell Mrs. Blair about she never come back ? " inquire the swain . 
 " well , that be what I be just a - come to , " say Nancy . " at four o'clock I say ; " Mother , í say I , " have not   I well be go down to Mrs. Blair 's just for to tell she that the woman have not   come ? " 
 " " I be just a - thinking so , í say mother . so off I go . when I get there , " can not   I see the mistress?í say I. 
 " " do not   you know?í say he . 
 " " Know what?í say I. 
 " " that she be a - dying , and the baby , too , í say he . 
 " " Baby , í say I. " Lor ! you do not   mean it.í 
 " " yes , í say the housemaid , a - come up , " she be take ill this morning , and the baby be not   much big nor your hand and more like a rat nor a baby.í 
 " well , afore I could say anything in come the nurse . 
 " " how be Mrs. Blair?í say I. 
 " " she be pretty near gone , í say the nurse , " but she be ask after somebody . I can not   hear the name very clear , but I think it be Nancy grey.í 
 " " if it be , í say I , " here I be , í and so she take I upstairs . 

 " the room be so dark I could see nothing at first , but , Lor ' ! when I do it be awful sad to see 

 her a - lie there so white and dead like . she do not   take no notice of I , so after I wait a bit she say as how I have well come out . and I be just a - go out at the door when the nurse bring her baby for to put it by her side . 

 " take it away , take it away!í she cry out , quite strong like , and then I come out . " 
 " and what be you go to do with the other baby ? " inquire Nancy 's lover . 
 " have it bury , to be sure , " say Nancy . " Mr. Blair he will pay for it if she be dead . " 
 but Undine do not die . and the baby live , a puny shrivelled thing , but still it live . one Sunday afternoon , four week later , they carry she from her bed to a sofa , wrap in a richly embroider dressing - gown and a great shawl . near she , in its white - and - blue - satin - cover cradle , they lay her baby . 

 why would they always bring that thing into her sight and keep it near she ? be it not enough that its little weak cry have ring loud in her ear when she be insensible to every other sound and have make she lose all love of life , all wish to keep it , even more 

 then 
 than 

 the kiss of its father have do . 


 for every few hour the little man would steal softly into the room on tiptoe , with his hand open and his finger stretch out , and , breathe very hard , would come up to her bedside to see how matter stand . when the death scale seem to be 

 go down he be seriously concern , and refuse to find consolation in devilled turkey , allow the gravy on his plate to congeal there several time before he touch it , an event wholly unprecedented in the past . now , however , he could sip his wine at ease and smoke his cigar in tranquillity , for the doctor have pronounce she out of danger and the baby still live . true , it look as though the first ball come its way must inevitably bowl it out of the game , but a baby be not very much . baby be plentiful , and he have his wife and would have another baby some day . 

 on this Sunday afternoon he sit doze peacefully in his chair , and the nurse sit by his wife . 
 " I think I shall sleep . I do not   want to be disturb , " say Undine ; and the nurse , not unwilling to take the hint , rise and leave she . the room be very cool and still . a soft light come in through the dark - green curtain . she lie on the soft pillow with her face rest on her thin hand , and look at the baby , a mere speck of red amid the blue and white . her baby and his , therefore she hat it . her baby she look at it , and then lie thinking . 

 it be strange to know its life have spring from her . strange to have hang another tiny wheel in the great world machine that grind on so mysteriously with its ever - jarring , never - rest wheel fly round forever . and what do it all mean ? what be they all , really that little life the 

 purple violet the dark - green curtain herself lie there and think ? be they all nothing , dream , shadow ? or something ? and , if something , o God ! what ? 

 it be the old question she have ask so often when she stand , a little child , look at the dry Karoo bush on the old farm ; and it meet , as then , the old oppressive silence for an answer silence like the hush which come when we sit by the seashore on a dark night and hold our breath to hear the great restless water run up and down . 
 presently she move her hand quickly across her eye , and then rise slowly and move with tremble step to the cradle - side . 
 " poor little soul , " she say and stoop down over it , " life be too wonderful to hate in . poor little soul , we be all too nearly bind for hat " ; and she take the baby to she . when her husband come in half an hour later he be surprised to find his child in her arm and a bunch of soft violet clasp in its tiny hand . 
 " why do you do that ? " he ask as he sit down beside she . 
 " because I be go to call she Violet , " his wife answer , and look up at he with a smile so bright and unlike her own that it make he feel uncomfortable for a moment . surely she be not go to die . 

 but after that day he often see it , and other see 

 it also . the very servant whisper that their mistress have change strangely ; and surely it be the coming of the baby that have change she , they say , speak like the little child who fancy that the swallow bring the summer . 

 in the long bright day that follow she would have an armchair put out under the great tree on the other side of the lawn , and would sit there all day with the child in her arm , drink in the sunny beauty of grass and sky , as though bird sing to she what other could not hear . 
 sometimes she read in those still sweet day ; and book , which to she have so long be meaningless and dumb , have again voice and life . whether they be the hot word of a passion - fill heart sing to appease its own intolerable hunger , or the calm record of thing long past , or the exact statement of some savant concern a flower he have dissect , there be life in they all and music . to she they be as food to one who wake hungry after a long dark dream . 
 oh , the beauty of those day , the glory of the brown that rest on the hilltop , the brightness that hang over the cut stone of the house wall ! 

 so sweet be that first draught of a new life that she have no eye to mark shadow , and do not notice , as all other do , that the life of the little child be grow weak and fainter as the autumn day draw near . she know so little of child that 

 its slow growth do not trouble she ; it know she , and would open its dark eye and lie smile up at she for long time together , as they sit out in the sunshine . 


 " my little friend , " she use to call it softly , and whisper 
 all 
 to it of thing which could not have be speak in any other ear . 

 " my little friend , who love I . " 
 " some one ought to tell she ; she do not dream of it , " they all say . " she will wake up some morning and find the child lie dead in her arm . " the doctor say so , her husband say so , they all say so ; yet no one care to tell she . 
 at last one evening , when the sun be almost set , the old doctor go out to look for she . he find she sit on the grass with the baby on her lap , bath in the rich regretful sunset light that warm the soft tint of the flower in the little wreath she have wind around the child 's head . he look down at the little face below the wreath , and wonder that love could look at it without read it . he ask she very gently how it be . 
 Undine only smile softly for an answer , and say , as she stick tiny leaf of grass among the flower : " she be so fond of flower , and do not tear they to piece as other child do . she hold they so carefully in her hand and turn they round and look at they . we do not   give baby credit for half wisdom enough , " she say . 

 " it be grow very thin , " say the doctor , take its small clench fist into his hand , " very thin . " 
 " not thin than it be , " say Undine ; " and when next summer come we will go to the sea ; it will soon be strong and well then . " 
 " that be a long time to wait , " say the doctor , gravely . " many thing may have happen before next summer . " 
 Undine look up into his grave face , and down at the little one with its crown of flower . after a long pause she say , " what do you mean ? " and he know she have read what be write there . 
 it be not needful to say much more . he soon leave she sit in the sunlight . " oh , my little friend , " she say ; " be it to be always so ? be we only to lift our head above the water to be push down again ? do we only rise up because , if we do not , we could not be fling down to earth ? be light only send to make the darkness visible ? " 
 she sit there till the last glow have fade from the hilltop and the grass on which they sit begin to grow damp and cold . 

 " my little friend , I be very cruel to wish to keep you . would life have more of happiness for you than it have have for I ? a little gladness out of colour and light ; a little sweetness out of dream ; one hour of bliss look at footmark in the white snow ? be that enough to make it worth keep ? oh , my little friend , it will be well to go . you 

 have make a little brightness . there be nothing well wait for you if you stay . " 

 " not in bed yet ? " say her husband when , return late the next evening from a dinner he have be attend in the neighbouring town , he find his wife still up and sit on a low chair with the child on her knee . " you might as well have go with I if you mean to sit up so late . you will never get your rose back if you go on in this way . 
 " I can not go to bed tonight , " she say , quietly , smooth softly the crumple in the child 's little nightdress . " it be very ill . " 
 " Ill ? what be the matter ? " he say , peer down into its face for a moment . " it look just as usual to I . I suppose that fool of a doctor have be frightening you . " 
 " no ; he say there be no cause to be anxious just tonight , but I can see more than he can . " 
 " oh , we all know you can see through a wall , but it would be more sensible of you to go to bed and rest , " respond her master , sullenly , as he turn away and leave the room . 
 " would not touch the baby at first , or have it bring near she ; go and make a fool of herself over it now , " he grumble . " could not   see that it be ill , and think it be die now . she be a queer composition . " 

 it be a warm night for that time of year , and 

 Undine have open the great door and window on both side of the room to let in the air . yet the lamp that hang overhead burn steadily and throw down its unwavering steady light over mother and child . on the mantelpiece the bronze clock tick regularly , but the breathing of the child be so low it could not be hear . 

 perhaps she be very foolish , after all ; the doctor must know good ; and she look down inquiringly . there be just the faint smile about the little mouth and the hand be cross loosely on the little breast . as she look the smile pass slowly and the child open wide its eye and fix they on the lamp overhead those large , unearthly deep brown eye . 
 Undine would not move for fear of disturb it , but the baby turn its head round slowly , and look up into her face with those great calm eye . do they speak to she or do she only fancy it ? those dark awful eye of her own little child . there be no dread , there be no questioning in they , but a calm , solemn light . 
 Undine look deep , deep into they . she do not hear the clock strike or know how the moment pass , till the white lid drop slowly . there be no sigh , there be no change , but when she lay her hand upon its breast she know that the baby be dead . 

 she rise up and carry its body to the large white 

 bed , and lay it down just as it be with its peacefully cross hand . then she drop down on her knee beside it with her forehead on the ground , and the dead be not more motionless than the living . 

 the next morning when her husband , have be rouse early and tell of his child 's death , go out in search of Undine , he find she sit in the sunshine on the dewy grass . 
 " it be dead , " she say , look up at he with a calm , cloudless face , as though she have say , " it be asleep . " he wonder , for how should he understand the love she bear her child , the passionless love , love it in spite of its be her ? the baby I love , because it be mine ; the woman I cling to against my reason I must hear they , see they , touch they , or be devour by a senseless gnawing ; but the friend whose soul have reach mine , the thing I have love for what it teach I , I let they pass without a tear , for my part of they remain with I , and for the rest , let it go . 

 " you have hear the news , of course , " say Miss Mell one morning before she have enter Mrs. Barnacles ' room . she be very much out of breath , for she be grow asthmatic of late . " Harry Blair have come . I see he myself half an hour ago , and he say his father be dead . do you ever hear of such a thing ? some people 
 be 
 lucky , " say Miss Mell with energy . 


 " why , I do not   think he will get much . do his father leave he anything ? " 
 " leave he anything ! of course he do not . you may be sure she would take good care of that . I can see it now just as well as if it be past how she will come here lord it over everybody and marry a big swell before the year 's out . with all her money and her bold , free manner , man be sure to be take by she . I be sure she have no good look to talk of , but they be such fool they never see it . they be so easily take in . " 
 " even if they be , I do not   wonder that you never manage to do it , " think Mrs. Barnacles ; but she only reply : " I do not   know anything about she . I have   never hear she mention since her baby die two year ago . I have   never have but two note from she since she leave . Gratitude be and never will be one of Undine Blair 's virtue . " 
 Mrs. Barnacles refrain from make any further animadversion on the character of her connection ; for it strike she that should Miss Mell 's prognostication be verify , it would be just as well to have a smile for the young heiress and get the benefit of some of the fruit and game that would be plentiful at Blair House . indeed , it would be rather pleasant than otherwise to have all Greenwood ride over the head by a connection of her , provide only that she be not include in the everybody . 

 Miss Mell , whose aversion for Undine be of the 

 same nature as that of a cat for water , or a Kaffir for work , quite irrepressible , inherent and inextinguishable , continue to express her opinion of the character of her natural enemy with asperity that might not be rival . she be just remark on the perfidy of her behaviour towards Harry Blair , when Cousin Jonathan 's mild blue eye look in at the door . 

 " do come in , Mr. Barnacles . you have   hear the news , no doubt ; perhaps you have   see Mr. Blair ? " 
 " yes , he call on I as soon as he arrive . he be on the continent when he get the news of his father 's illness , and come to find he dead . " 
 " poor fellow ! do he really expect to get anything ? " say Miss Mell , in a voice expressive of infinite scorn at his credulity . 
 " no ; he be astonish when he get home to find that the property be to be divide equally between the two brother . he have no idea of any such thing . " 
 " so the old man leave she nothing ? " say Miss Mell . 
 " no , " assure Cousin Jonathan ; " he leave she everything , but she be go off , nobody know where , and have leave an order that everything be to be divide between they . Harry Blair have come here to enquire whether I know anything about she . " 

 " I should say the good thing would be to let she alone , " say Miss Mell ; " she have evidently get some nice little game of her own to play . " but Miss Mell 

 be discomfit . Hitherto her abhorrence of that red - cheeked , scheme affectation have be of a groundless kind , accountable only on the hypothesis of natural antipathy . other girl as pretty do not arouse the latent feline propensity of her nature in anything like the same degree ; it would not have give she half the infinite satisfaction to efface 
 their 
 beauty with thumb and finger nail that she would have have in operate on the cheek of the scheming affectation . but now , to be prove a daughter of Belial , a false prophetess , by Undine obstinately refuse to commit the evil prophesy of she : be it not just cause for bitterness ? 

 saint make perfect forgive such injury , but not a wrinkle woman on the rotten side of forty , with no money or intellect to keep the wine of life from turn sour in her bottle . 
 she sit there wish Undine might be go to the devil , as Alice Brown have go in verification of her prophecy of six year before . she do not stay long , however , and find it hard work to change the expression of her countenance to one of serene affability as she pass young Mr. Dunstables in the street . 

 after she have go , Cousin Jonathan sit down to smoke and read a sermon . it be a good cigar , but it have not   any flavour ; it be a nice sermon , original , by Henry Ward Beecher , but he do not   like it . he have not feel so many nasty twinge since he 

 have read a certain marriage notice in the paper year before . " I be grow too studious , " he say ; " my nerve be debilitate , seriously debilitate . I must take a tonic . I must take a walk . " 

 exercise be good for debility of many kind , and he come home feeling well . 
 while he be walk in a desperate hurry with fly arm up the hill , Harry Blair be wander in a desultory manner among the tree below . Cousin Jonathan be more light of heart than he have be for many a brown day : 
 " she be not so evil as they think she , not so mercenary , " he say , and rejoice . 



 XIV . 
 ON BOARD SHIP to south AFRlCA 

 on that 
 Wednesday morning the cause of the violent exercise of the former and the joy of the latter be stand on board a steamer bind for South Africa . 

 Undine be lean over the side of the ship and turn back no wistful look to the fast recede english shore . like a great impassioned living creature whose burn , strive heart impel it to wander on forever , the steamer pass over the blue , breezy , swell sea , leave its track of foaming bubble to dance and die in sunshine . the wild free sea - bird , as they dip their wing into the water and spread they out in the morning light , be glad and full of life . 
 it be such rest to stand and watch they , it be long before she turn her eye to the little world on deck . there be motion enough there also , and happiness too for all that might be see ; but Undine look back longingly at her sea - bird as they float over the water , as though it might be pleasanter to be among they than among the wise fowl that trot on the deck . 

 near she be sit two Africander girl who have be send home for their education , and who be return sublimely ignorant of everything in general and their own deficiency in particular , to make a grand sensation in their little up - country town , to be worship and seek after by the sterner sex and woefully traduce and servilely copy by the gentler , who would for a short time look up to they as Young Lady 's Journals in the flesh and worthy of all imitation from their collar to their walk . 

 far off there be a portly dame wear the stiff of black silk with the stiff of neck , who could by no conceivable effort bring her eye low than the great gold ring that adorn her short finger , and who devoutly believe this ball have be launch into space and continue suspend there to serve as a floor whereon might be place her well - shod foot . long ago she have do her own ironing , and her own washing too at a pinch when no Kaffir maid be to be get , but her husband have be a lucky emigrant and those day be forget now . her husband , who sit not far from she , look as though the rolling of the ship be considerably more than he could stand and fervently wish himself in old Africa again : old Africa , to which he would return small and wise after his travel , the truth have be reveal to he 

 dur- 
 during 


 e his wandering that the world have great thing than a british settler . to his wife no revelation have be make , for the darkness that surround the female soul be dense . 


 a little to the right of this couple be stand a pimply young missionary , bite his nail and star very hard at a very pretty blonde who be go to the Cape to be marry and who fill his bosom with those gentle stirring to which the sacerdotal breast be strangely prone . she look not at he , but from under her black silk hat her dove 's eye glance softly at a group of young Englishmen , bird of a feather , who stand together smoke and chatting . a fish in the hand be worth six at the hook , and more than one bride have come out to her beloved to find herself unwanted ; so , if there be any golden fish on board , it might be as well to angle for they . the young gentleman on whom her eye be rest now be small game , however puny , white - faced young Londoners , " raw Englishmen " they would be call out in the colony , where they would no doubt go into store as clerk or become petty diamond - buyer at the Fields . there be one or two german Jews on deck , smoking cigar and sun themselves , some go out for the first time and some return to the cape : not the little snivel , weasel - like creature who come out third class and , as soon as they land , supply themselves with a waggon and a couple of mule 

 and become " smouse , " 
 1 
 hawk false jewellery and damage clothing among the dutch farmer , and grow rich on it ; but gentlemen Jews , with their polite foreign manner and their fascinating break English , who will make you swear round be square and sell you to the devil before your face , and you shall never know it ; who will squeeze you to pulp to get your last shilling today , and tomorrow , when your wife be starve and no Christian will help she , will give she ten . 

 there be man and woman of all shape and quality to be see , but nothing so pleasing as two little child with pretty face who stand near to she . innocent blue eye and pink - and - white dimpled face be surround by a maze of fine yellow hair . presently a very diminutive and equally ugly terri with a white body and little yellow ear come up , and receive from the foot of the small of the two an astonishingly lusty kick . 
 " oh , Lily , how can you ! " say her sister . " it belong to that lady in the black - silk dress . " 
 " no , it do not , or I would not have kick it , " respond the little one ; " it belong to that woman with the plait hair and the old grey frock . " 
 " oh , then it be all right , " answer the elder , complacently . 

 1 
 " smouse " hawker , peddler . use in English , the word rhyme with " house " ; in Afrikaans it rhyme with the english word " dose . " 


 Undine stoop down to caress the shabby little creature whom the world ill use because its mistress have not a chin or a silk dress . even in a morsel of humanity not three foot high , with a baby face and golden curl , must one find the world , the flesh , and the devil full grow ? 
 she look away from they to the woman with the plait hair and the grey dress . she be shabby , dreadfully shabby . her grey skirt have be turn not only inside out but upside down ; her loose cloth jacket have once be black but be now brown , and , to judge from its cut , be the last relic of a long - deceased fashion . on her head she wear a great round hat ornament round the crown by a piece of brown lace which must have be young when the jacket be black . her black glove be three size too large for she and yet do not conceal the knobby condition of her long thin hand . she have a weak , nervous mouth and sit on the edge of the bench , as though hardly sure she have a right to be there at all . her hand be cross in her lap and her eye look out across the water . Immense wonderful steel - grey eye that be strangely out of keep with the wrinkle wizened face in which they be set . 
 " I wonder who that woman in the grey dress be , " say a gentleman stand in earshot of Undine to his companion , a military man who boast an immense pair of moustache and a most elegant drawl . 

 " woman in grey dress ? I see one just now . deuce pretty little thing . try to get up a conversation ; could not . well - look thing on board . " 
 " then she be not the woman I mean , " respond his companion . " she be not your style , would not exactly attract you , but she have marvellous eye . " 
 " who have ? " inquire the captain 's pretty sister , come up at that moment . possess a pair of eye as remarkable for their brilliancy as the shabby woman 's be for their shadowy deepness , she think the remark refer to none other than herself . 
 " I can not   say that I admire your taste , " she say when the owner of the grey eye have be point out to she . " a living song they be , you say ? you who have so much of the poet 's blood should really try and translate they into something intelligible to we poor mortal who see nothing in she but a piece of very shabby gentility . you poet should not absorb all the light that fall on you without reflect a ray on we . " 

 " I be afraid it take more to make a poet than nature have pour into my mould , " he answer , laugh lightly , as he offer she his arm and walk off with the graceful black - eyed beauty . undine think his dance blue eye as pleasant to look at as the ripple wave , and stand watch as he pass to and fro , now stop to throw bonbon to the child or stoop to stroke the yellow- 

 and - white terri they have kick , then stand to chat with a lady or raise his hat and turn his face against the breeze to let it toss and play with his brown curl . a boy he seem in his perfect enjoyment of life in spite of his rich brown beard , the only glad childish thing on board . Undine 's eye follow he and she forget the shabby woman till she go down to her cabin and find that she be to be her companion there . 

 it be well than have the captain 's pretty sister or any of the gay butterfly on board ; and truly well she find it when , lie down in her berth , she do not rise from it for week . the strain under which she have live for year , the excitement of the last few week , have tell on she , and now when it be all past she break down utterly . after a few day she be well enough to lie still and enjoy the quiet rest , but be weak enough to feel grateful for the silent constant attention of her companion , who sit beside her night and day . 
 " you be very good to I , very good , " say Undine one day , when the woman sit bath her head with vinegar and water . " you do everything for I so much well than the stewardess can . " 
 " I ought to be able to , " say the woman in a low , nervous voice . " I have be nurse for twelve year . I do nothing else . " 

 all day Undine 's occupation be to lie and watch she , for she never go on deck but sit there 

 sew- 
 sewing 


 ing at innumerable little white shirt and petticoat , with those great marvellous grey eye which always seem look beyond the object on which they be fix to something far away . 

 she might have be any age between twenty and forty , for in spite of the wrinkle in her sallow face there be something more of the girl than the woman about she . 
 she never speak unless speak to , till one day Undine have scribble half a dozen line of rhyme in which she tell what she feel when there have be rain in the night and she go out to see the rose knock their face together and send down a second shower into the face of the moist sweet earth . she be look radiantly happy , for it be as thrill as a lover 's hot kiss to have fix on paper something that have look beautiful to we . 
 " be you go to some one ? " ask the woman suddenly . 
 " go to some one ? " repeat Undine inquiringly . 
 " yes . I beg your pardon , " say the woman , seem terribly abash and speak more nervously than usual . " I hope you will forgive I . but I mean you look so happy and I I think you must be go to some one . " 
 " no , I have no one to go to , " say Undine . " be you go to friend ? " 
 " yes , " say the woman . 

 Undine lean back wearily on her pillow . so it be only she who be utterly alone ; even this queer grey woman have friend . 
 " where be the friend you be go to ? " she ask presently . 
 the woman wait for a long time , then she say , suddenly , " I have one ; I be go to he . " and then , after a short pause , " he be dead . " and a smile as sad as the last red light that burn on the high crag of a mountain pass over the worn face and the great grey eye . 
 Undine ask no more question . some great sorrow have shake her reason , she think . 
 the next day the woman sit at her interminable sewing and , Undine , who lay reading feel as a generous child do who be eat something sweet and can not understand that it could be less sweet to another . " would you like I to read aloud to you a little ? you must grow so tired of sit here always and sewing , " she say . 
 " thank you , " say the woman in a tone that be as far away as the look in her eye . " long ago I use to like book ; they say it be that make I so stupid . " 
 " how could that be ? " ask Undine , rest her cheek on her hand and look at she . 

 " I do not   know , but I never could learn , and I use to sit in the window in the moonlight read the book I like ; and they say it be that make 

 I so stupid ; but I do not   think it be ; I would have be stupid anyhow . " 

 then she remember the work which have drop from her hand while she speak and she stitch on fast than ever . 
 " read make no one stupid . they must be strange to say so , " say Undine . 

 " I do not   know . you see , I could only remember poem and tale , I could not   do sum or remember the table ; I be very stupid , but I understand some of 
 they 
 ; Shelley be the name of one man I use to like , but I do not understand he ; I only feel sorry for he . it be wicked , I know , but I use to wish I could have see he . I use to like he . " she speak this in the low tone peculiar to she , and more as though she be speak to herself than to anyone else . 

 " I do not   think he be wicked , " say Undine . " it be so long ago , perhaps I have forget . " 
 " I do not   know , but I think he and his wife go away from each other , and I think he love another woman ; but I forget . " 
 " he do love another woman , but I do not   think that that be any reason for not like he . it be always right to love , love as much as we can , and as long as we can , and as strong as we can , " say Undine , emphatically , raise herself on her elbow and watch the busy finger as they move to and fro . 

 the exertion tire she , so presently she lie down again , forget all about the book , and be follow her roving fancy , when the woman lay her hand softly on her arm . 
 " do you really believe it ? " she say . " say it again . " 
 " say what ? " ask Undine , look into the grey eye which for the first time be really look at she . 
 " that it be not wrong , " she whisper . 
 " not wrong to do what ? not wrong to love ? how can it be ? it be not wrong to feel warm or to feel strong , and we can as little help love as feel either . " 
 " but if it hurt other people , " say the woman slowly . 
 " then it must be silent as the dead be , who they say live , yet we never hear they . " 
 the woman sit with her hand fold in her lap . undine lie and watch she wonderingly . 
 suddenly , with the abruptness which be at all time common to she , she draw from her bosom an old gold locket that be tie to a black - velvet string , and put in into Undine 's hand . 
 " look at it , " she say . " I never feel so before but I would like to tell you . I never feel so before but I would like to tell . " 

 like to tell ! yes , we all like it . it be not only the purple dove in the deep shade of the bush , it be 

 not only the poet in his rhapsody , talk to stone and tree , but the coldest hard sinner among we who pass through life without give a sign . we all like to tell , but , alas ! too often find no comprehender , and walk through life dumb and mute with our burden . 

 Undine open the old gold locket . in it there be the face of a young girl , a pretty , weak , sensitive face , with a setting of abundant brown curl and great , timid , fawn - like eye . 
 Opposite be the face of a man a dark , handsome , sensual face with bold black eye . 
 Undine lie look at the picture , while the woman talk on in a low dreamy voice , so softly that a time she could hardly hear she . 

 " I be always stupid , " she say . " I think that must have be the reason why no one ever love I . they send I to school when I be quite a little child to see if it would do I any good , but I use to get so frightened I could never remember when we have to come up and say our lesson , and so I always stay in the class with the little girl . I think they use to like I , the very little one ; I could dress their doll and even help they with their lesson a little . you see , I be not stupid to they , but to the big girl , and they could not bear I , but they use to let I darn their stocking for they and , when any of they get into a scrape , then they use to come to I and say , " do not 

 say it be not you if the teacher ask , because you be sure not to get a prize anyhow . " and I use to say yes , because I think it would make they love I ; but it never do , it only make the teacher hate I . one of they I think like I , she always talk so softly to I ; but one day when I be shut up all alone in the dark room that open out of the schoolroom , I hear some of the teacher talk . I think they have forget I and I hear they say I be the stupid girl in the school and that they could not think how she could like I . " I do not like she , " she say , " I feel sorry for she , she be such a poor thing ; but there be not a girl in the school I care less about . " then I lie down and cry . I have be so happy when I think she love I , and when I come out the girl all laugh at I because I have be cry , and say I be afraid of the dark ; and I be not afraid at all , I like it , but I do so want some one to help I , some one big and cleverer than I be . 

 " afterwards , when I grow a great girl , I leave off try to make people love I , because it be no use . 

 " I use to get away from the other whenever I have time and sit and read all by myself . I have not many book , only some book of poetry and a tale call 
 the wide wide world 
 , and some other little book that I forget , but I read they over and over till I could repeat they by heart . I do not   know how 

 it be I could remember such thing and not my lesson . I know I try to learn they , but somehow I never could . 

 " when I be grow and wear long dress my mother die , and my father a little time after , so I have to go away from school , and I have nothing and no one to go to except one aunt . she have a beautiful little house close to the sea , with a balcony and a flower garden in front , with little white gravelled path , and she and her three little child live there alone . I think I would be so happy there and make her love I , and I think I would not read my book any more , because they say it be that make I so stupid that no one could like I . 

 " when I come there she give I a pretty little green - and - white room all to myself , and she tell I I should only have to teach the eld two child and help she a little with her needlework ; but I would make she love I if I work very hard and try to do everything I could for she . so I use to get up very early and help the nurse to dress the child and the cook to get the breakfast , and I use to work all day and late in the evening . when the child be in bed I use to get out the needlework ; and when she use to ask I if I be not tired yet , I use to say no , though sometimes I be so tired when I go up to my room I use just to lie across the foot of my bed and cry for tiredness till I go to sleep . I know it be very 

 wicked of I , but somehow it seem as though she would like I well if I say I be never tired . after a little time she send the nurse away and I have to go and sleep with the child and look after they all day and take they for walk , and she never ask I if I be tired any more , however late I sit work . you see it be all my own fault . she believe what I tell she , but it seem so hard that she should not care about I a little bit . if she have sometimes look at I as she look at the child , I do not   think I should ever have feel tired . 

 " at last one day she tell I she be expect visitor ; a friend of hers and her husband and child be come to board with we for six month , because she be very delicate and want to be near the sea . 

 " I be half sorry and half glad when I hear it . it would give I more work , but then I always fancy , before I see people , that perhaps they would like I and not find I so dull as all the other have . by and by they come . she be a pretty woman and use to sit in the parlour all day , make wax flower and basket . my aunt use to sit and talk with she , but she never take any notice of I , even when I put fresh flower on her table or bring she pretty seaweed for her basket ; and her husband I be very frightened of . I could not bear he . he use to sit in an armchair on the balcony just before the schoolroom window all day , and I 

 use to feel as if I could not teach the child anything , especially when he look in . I be so afraid of he , I wonder how anyone could love he , till one day when I see he sit there with his little girl on his knee . her head be on his shoulder and both his arm be about she , and he look down at she with such a look in his face , and he be so strong , that I run away to my room that the child might not see I . for I could not help cry ; I wish so I be that little girl . 

 " after that , early in the morning , when I use to walk on the beach with the child and his little girl , he would often meet we when he be come back from his bath and stand and talk to his little girl and sometimes to I . I wonder he do not mind be see talk to I by the other gentleman who go past we , because I always have my aunt 's baby and look like a nurse girl . I think it be very kind of he , but I do not like he and I be afraid of he . I go round another way when I see he come . he always talk so kindly to I . he say my arm be not strong enough to carry such a big baby , and he ask I if I be not tired . no one else ever do . 
 " one day he have bring a beautiful painting of a woman and hang it up in the parlour . I be pass the door with a cup of arrowroot for the baby , when he call I to come in and look at it . it be a very pretty picture . 

 " " do you know why I buy it?í he say . " because it be like you.í 
 " I could not think how anyone could think such a beautiful face be like mine , so I look at the picture again . then I feel he take my hand softly in both his , and when I look up into his face it seem to have just the look that have be there when he look at his little girl . 

 " I pull my hand out of his and run away to the child 's room and kneel down by my bed and cry , I be so happy . I never think anyone would look at I like that , and all the day I be so glad ; I never feel tired or miserable . in the evening two or three gentleman come to play whist with he , and my aunt tell I to make some eggflip for they . he have show I how to make they before and I could make they very nicely , but this evening he come into the dining - room just as I have finish , because he say he be afraid I would not do it right . we be all alone , and as he go out of the room he put his arm so softly round I and kiss my mouth . it seem as if there be a great river run past my ear , and I sit down and put my head on the table . I do not think there be any wrong in it ; I do not think at all . it be all so strange , and I be so happy . I do not think that day or for many day after . I have no time to think . you see , I be work , work all the time with the child or at housework , from early 

 in the morning when all the other people be in bed till late in the evening , and at night I be so tired I could not undress . I go to sleep in my clothe . I only know that I be happy . they say when people be idle and have nothing to do they sin , but I think people do more sin when they have no time to think , because you can love without time , you see . one Sunday evening I have time to think . they have all go to church and the little one I be take care of be asleep , and I could sit at the foot of the bed and think . I see that his love for I be not like his love for his little girl , else why do he never kiss I when even the child be by ? there must be something wrong in it . so I think I would ask he to go away very soon . I do not love he ; I hardly know if I like he , except just when I be talk to he ; but I know it would be very hard to lose he . you see , nothing else have ever love I like that . 


 " just as I be think so , I see he stand in the door . he have go with the other to church ; I do not   know how it be he come back . he come into the room and stoop down over I and ask I what I be think of . then I tell he , and he say I be a foolish little girl and tell I there be nothing wrong in his love I ; he say some kind of love between man and woman be wrong , of course , but he only love I as if I be his little girl . I be his little sunshine , he say , and 

 he do not show his love to I before other because his wife be so queer ; she do not like he to have a friend , even a man , though she do not care for he at all , he say . he have never have anyone to love he , and he long so to have some one who care for he utterly ; he ask I if I would not . then I feel as if I have be quite wrong to think it be not right to love he , and when he ask I to kiss he I do , though I never have before . then I love he well , and I feel quite glad and happy till the next day . I be dust the parlour , and I hear his wife talk to he in the other room . 

 " " I be not a fool , or quite blind either , í she say . " I understand your small game by this time . I know very well why you buy that picture , and the meaning of your pleasant look . oh , yes , I be not such a fool as you take I for , nor she , either , with her flower and her seaweed and her pretty innocent little face.í 

 " I go out of the room then , because I do not want to hear more ; but suddenly , I do not   know why , the thought come to I that they be talk about I . I ask he that evening , and he say : " you must not mind she ; she would be jealous of your aunt if you be not here . it be only her nature.í I feel very unhappy after that whenever I have time to think and be alone , but when I be near he I be quite happy , and I get to love his little 

 child so . I have it near I all day long , but I could not bear to see he play with it . I do not feel jealous of anything else , but when I use to see he kiss she , I get a sick feeling at my heart . he always call I his little girl and his little sunshine when we be alone , and at last it seem to I as if he be the only real thing in the world ; all the other people seem like dream . I like so to go and put his room neat ; it be so nice to touch the brush he use every morning and to fold up his clothe and put they away , and it be so nice to touch his great - coat when I pass through the hall . one day I pick up a torn likeness of his on the floor , and I put it in my mother 's locket by mine , and that be nice , too . 


 " one afternoon , when all the other be out on the beach and I be leave at home to get tea ready , he come in . I be kneel on the pantry dresser , fill a glass pot with jam , when I look round and see he stand behind I . he come up and lift I down in his arm and carry I into the dining - room . then he sit down with I in the great armchair and hold I very close to he , and ask I if I love he , utterly , well than anything else in the world . when I say yes , he put his face down close to mine and say very softly . " then you must come away with I , far away , to another land where you and I can be alone with each other till we die , and we will make each other happy , 

 so happy.í he tell I he love nothing in the world but I ; and when I look up at he it seem as though his eyelid be wet . I lay quite still for a minute and then I try to jump up and run away , but he do not let I go . 

 " " how can you leave your wife and your little child?í I ask he , and then I creep close to he again and tell he that I love he . I do not   know what else I say ; I do not   think I even know then . 
 " but after that day I love he with another kind of love , not like the love I love he with before ; and I could not bear to be in the same room with he when there be other people , because it seem as though they must see in my face how much I love he . and every day he beg I to go away with he , but I always say , " no , no , no.í it would have be wrong of I to go , but I do not care about that , I be so wicked ; I could not bear that he should be selfish and leave his wife and his little child . if he have ask I to do anything I would have do it , I would not have care ; but I do not like he to be wicked . 

 " so many week go on and sometimes I use to get miserable and ask he to go away . then he use to hold I in his arm and kiss I , and I forget everything . you see , I be work , work all the day and at night I be tired , so tired . sometimes when I be with the child on the 

 beach in the morning I be so sleepy that I go to sleep sit on the sand . 

 " at last one day they all go away to see a great show in the next town . they go for two or three day , and I be leave to take care of the house . it seem so dreadful to have to think of be there alone for two whole day and never see he once . I cry , and in the afternoon I fall asleep on the sofa wrap in his great - coat , and do not wake till next morning . then I put the house in order and get a great heap of his stocking to darn . when I go to bed that night I be not very tired . 
 " I lay thinking and thinking , and I can not tell how it be , I seem to see so suddenly all at once how wicked I have be , and how wicked I have make he . it be just like be in hell to think of it all . I feel as if I should go mad , and at last I get up and light the candle and sit down and write to he . I do not   know just what I write , but I know that I tell he I have be very wicked ; it have be all one great lie ; I have try to look and act as though I do not care for he , and I have make he do wrong . I tell he I would never speak to he again or touch his hand , and that I would go away , but I would always love he . I must have say something more , for I write many sheet , but I do not   know what it be . perhaps it be the same thing over and over . 

 " it seem to I as though the morning would never come and I would go mad before it come . he have call I his little angel and his sunshine and I have be like a devil to he , make he sin , and now it be do and could never be undo . 

 " the next day they come . I think he have get tired of I , for when he come into the dining - room where I be stand he hardly say good - day to I or look at I . he take the letter from my hand and we never be together again . I tell my aunt that evening that I be go away . she be very angry and say I be mad and very ungrateful , but that she would be glad when I be go . then I go into the nursery and write to the teacher of the school I have be to , and ask she if she would let I come and teach the little one . I would not want money if only she would let I come at once . when I have do I sit think and it seem to I as though I must go and tell his wife everything ; it be sin , nothing else matter , and it seem as though if we tell everything that it would be less . so I get up , but when I get to the door of her room I think how angry he would be and so I go back . by and by , I go again ; but now the light be out , and when I stand close by the door I could hear her breathing and his . I listen for a little time and then I go back again to my room . the next morning when I look out at the window I see he walk on the road that lead to the beach , 

 and I never see he any more . I get an answer from my old teacher and I start that day , but I do not stay with her long . perhaps I be very foolish , but it seem to I as though , if I work very hard all my life for other people and at work I do not like , it might make it right for he a little bit . I be very foolish , but I could not help think it would be of use , a little use . I always hat so to see blood and people that be in pain ; so I get they to let I help in a great hospital , and I learn to be a nurse . I use to feel faint at first , and as though I want to run away , when I see anything dreadful , but I use to think it be help , and then I feel strong . I never hear of he any more , I think he be tired of I before I go away , and that he would soon forget I . I think so for twelve year and I never hear his name . but the other night I be sit up with another old nurse . she be tell about a gentleman with whom she have go out to South Africa . I be stir the gruel before the fire and I do not listen to what she say till I hear a name ; it be his name . then I ask she to tell I all she could about he . she tell I that he have some disease and the doctor say he must take a long voyage ; but it do he no good . at last when they get to a little town in Africa they see that he be die . he do not like his wife to come near he or do anything for he , and all the day and all the night he lie groan . 

 at last one night just before the light come they see that he be go . he lie quite still , but at last he open his eye and look all round the room . 

 " come to I , come to I , " he say . 
 " they ask he if he want his wife , but he say , " no , no ; my darling , my little sunshine , once , just once , darling.í he do not say anything more . and so now I be go to he , " say the grey woman , very quietly . 
 when Undine turn to put the locket in her hand , tear be in her own eye ; but on the woman 's face be only that strange smile , sad than any tear . 
 the voyage be almost end . that night they would be in Table Bay . 
 Undine sit with her companion on the deck . 

 " do you stay here or go on to Algoa Bay ? " 
 1 
 she ask she . 

 " I must stay here , " the woman answer . " I must earn money to take I on . I never work for money before . " 
 " it be not very hard to live without it , " say Undine . 
 " no , I never want it till now , " say the woman , " and a lady whom I have take care of pay my passage and my dog 's . I do not   know what make she so kind to I . " 

 a little while after , Undine get up and go down to their cabin . she get her little bag from under 

 1 
 Port Elizabeth . 


 her pillow and take out her purse . it be not heavy ; there be only ten pound in it , the price of a brooch her grandmother have leave she . she count out five and quickly pull out the small black portmanteau that contain the woman 's work and slip they into it ; then she go up on deck again . 

 the woman be go , and she sit there by herself watch the captain 's pretty sister as she walk up and down with her hand on the arm of the handsome boy - man . he be not chat with the other lady this morning , nor play with the child , but he carry her great white hat in his hand and look down at the little black head beside he . 



 XV . 
 in AN ox WAGGON 

 " 
 gold 
 ! what be gold ? " so we ask scornfully in the day of our ignorance . " gold ! what be gold ? " we ask it derisively . 

 King Gold sit on his throne and laugh secure , for well he know that soon or later , if he withhold his cold light , the proud knee will bend and the stubborn hand will rise and the old prayer of humanity will come from the derisive lip : 
 " oh , Gold , thou art King and Lord ; if not the God , yet a God forever , in whose hand lie health oftentime , and joy oftentime , and the desire of the heart and of the eye . pour down upon we the light of thy countenance we beseech thee , o Lord ! " 
 but the God of Gold be grow old and deaf now , like the other god , and he often let our prayer rise and die unanswered . 
 " Gold ! what be gold ? " 

 Undine have ask it and laugh her glad mocking laugh in the frosty lane year before . she have think it with a bitter heart and envy , as she look in at the broken window of the wicked woman who 

 have her baby . she have ask it of herself , when two month before she have throw it from she and make up her mind to wander free over the world and enjoy life and learn . and she be wander free and learning , but the enjoyment be still yet on the hill before . yet she have not bow her knee to King Gold only think that a purse heavy , a little heavy , be an improvement . 

 she be walk through the street of Port Elizabeth , her head bend down to preserve her eye from the rain of sand and fine stone that fall on the flat roof with a sound as dismal and disheartening as the fall of sand on a coffin lid . 
 she have sit in the hotel till she think it be well to go out and face it than sit there listen to its dreary music . moreover , no work or any other good thing would find she while she sit there , and her money be surely take wing at the rate of twelve - and - sixpence a day ; so she go out into the street to escape the tap - tapping and to seek her fortune . 

 Africa , as it appear in that desolate and sand - smite seaport , be not the Africa of her memory . the old Africa with its great grass and karoo flat and rough rock - crown mountain , unridden and un - man - defile old Africa , be little like the sand - smother town in which she stand , which might have be in any country in Europe but for the ragged nigger slouch about the street and the 

 dark , dirty , half - clothe fish - boy who drag their ware along with tail draggle in the sand . 


 one thing be certain , here she would not stay ; though how to get away remain as yet an unsolved problem . one of her pound be already go , and four pound take one nowhere in a country where all locomotion be at the expense of muscle and sinew . she be attract , like all other who be near enough to feel its influence , by the great magnet that draw to itself all who be good - for - nothing vagabond , wanderer , or homeless the Diamond Fields . 
 1 
 three hundred mile of bush flat and karoo be not to be bridge over by four pound , however . Cobb and Co. , as it tear past she as she labour up the street , make thick , if it be possible , the thick cloud of dust around she ; but it be not for beggar with four pound to enter its red swollen body or perch on its crowded roof . presently she stop to take breath in front of a large store , before which be stand an ox waggon with a long span of red oxen . she stand rest and consider what be next to be do . 


 why should a woman not break through conventional restraint that enervate her mind and dwarf her body , and enjoy a wild , free , true life , as a man may ? wander the green world over by the help of hand and foot , and lead a free rough life in 

 bond- 
 bondage 


 1 
 Kimberley . the distance be 485 mile . Cobb    Co. be the line of horsedrawn coach . 


 age to no man ? forget the old morbid love and longing ? live and enjoy and learn as much as may before the silence come ? 

 so she have ask herself on the first morning of her freedom , the morning after her husband 's death , as she lie back in the velvet armchair of her boudoir while the maid stand behind she comb out her hair . 
 now she have break through conventional restraint and be free free to feel that a woman be a poor thing carry in herself the band that bind she . now she be free , but how to extract enjoyment from the present state of thing be more than she could accomplish at that instant ; and how long would she be able to maintain herself without get under some one 's thumb ? 

 if she have be a man she might have throw off her jacket and set to work instantly , carry the endless iron bucket and coil of rope and wire with which the waggon beside which she stand be be laden . she might have make enough in half an hour to pay for a bed at one of the low hotel , might have wander about the town , see something of life , and enjoy herself in a manner . as it be , be only a woman and a fine little lady with the scent not yet out of her hair nor the softness rub from her hand , she stand there in the street , feel very weak , bodily , after her illness , 

 and mentally , after her long life of servitude and dependence very weak and very heartsick . 


 two man pass she carry a large packing - case , and even through the dust that descend before they her eye could distinguish the " New Rush Diamond Fields " 
 1 
 that be paint in great black letter on its lid . she stand still a moment to consider , and then step up to the back of the waggon , on the back of which a small tent be fix . between a gap in the closed sail a woman 's kappie 
 2 
 be visible . Undine raise one corner of the flap and look in . 


 the part of the waggon occupy by the tent be not more than six foot square , and be one great bed cover by a vel - kombaars 
 3 
 on which be seat the owner of the kappie and two fat child . the former hold in her arm a great baby whose clothe she pull quickly down to hide its not over - delicate foot . it be a shrewd , bright face that be conceal by the kappie , the face of a woman of about thirty - two , which would not have be without its claim to beauty have it not be for the marvellous display of stump make visible whenever her thin sharp lip move . she be dress in a black - and - white print , as be the fat 

 1 
 the Kimberley mine of " the Diamond Fields " be , on discovery in 1871 , call " Colesberg Koppie , " then " New Rush , " before the town be officially name Kimberley in 1873 . 


 2 
 Kappie sunbonnet . 


 3 
 Skin rug . 


 and dirty baby at her breast . the two child be busy wrangle over a brown paper of sweet which their father have just throw in for they , but they stop as soon as the strange face present itself under the sail . 

 " be this waggon go to the Diamond Fields ? " inquire Undine , while the woman , not well pleased at be find in her waggon trim by a stranger , be busy pull down her sleeve . she answer in the affirmative graciously enough , but star curiously at the intruder and wonder what could bring a lady to the back of her waggon on such a day with such a question . 
 " do you know what the owner of the waggon would charge for take a passenger to the Fields ? " Undine ask again , with no hope that the content of her purse would be sufficient , but think hurriedly that her shawl and one or two good clothe might bring she something . 
 " the waggon belong to my husband , " answer the woman , " and I be sure he can not   take anyone . you see , there be I and the three child , and the tent be small , and I could not undertake to care for anyone else . I would rather try and get some one to help I . " 
 " I would do all I could to assist you , " say Undine , " and I have very little luggage . if you could make it convenient to take I I would pay four pound and should not mind do anything . " 


 the woman look at she 
 very 
 shrewdly now . there be nothing visible except a pretty pale face and a little black velvet hat , but they be scrutinize closely . she could not quite make up her mind , so resolve to solve this difficulty as she do many other by find what view her husband take of the matter . she poke her head out in front , between the tent and a great box , and hail he . 

 Mr. Snappercaps , a huge , sluggish English Africander , with mild light eye and a red beard , approach , and she proceed to inform he of the offer . 
 " you do not   mean to take she , do you ? you do not   know what sort of a character she may be , " say Mr. Snappercaps . " if she be dress up it do not say much for she that she be knock about by herself and want to go to the Fields . be she marry ? " 

 " I suppose she can mind the child just as well if she be married or unmarried , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , " but you never think 
 I 
 need any help . " 

 " I do not   expect it be much help you will get from she , but do as you like , " he say , and walk off to his work . his wife draw her head in , and , it be evident that he be decidedly opposed to she accept the offer , all hesitation on the subject be at once put an end to . 

 after ply she with half a dozen question , Mrs. Snappercaps inform she that , if she would have 

 her box there and be ready to start in fifteen minute , she might come . 

 the tone and manner in which this information be convey contrast somewhat sharply with that of ten minute before ; but when first the little black hat make its appearance she could not tell that its owner be not possess of a phaeton and a score of silk dress ; now she be wise , and act accordingly . 
 in the middle of the afternoon a day or two after , the great buck waggon , with its long span of red oxen and heavy freight of wire and bucket , be creep slowly along the sandy road . it be a swelter day , and the small oven - like tent at the back of the waggon be buzz and alive with little black fly of every shape and a pair of drone blue - bottle . 

 the oxen , reluctant as they be to lift their weary foot only to put they down again on the burn road , and leisurely as they plough up the heavy sand with the great waggon wheel , yet raise a cloud of the fine dust which , cover hand and face and clothe with a thick red coat , seem to enter the very windpipe . Undine be seat at the extreme edge of the waggon , Mrs. Snappercaps have declare that under any other state of affair she could not possibly find room to extend herself . she lie now with her arm and leg stretch out , her head on one pillow and another on her face 

 to keep off the dust . very fast asleep she be , if judge by the periodical snort that at regular interval proceed from beneath it ; but in truth very wide awake , with a small cylindrical curve make in the pillow straight from her eye to the little black hat , now fast change to a reddish brown . 

 Ferdinando Shakespeare and Algernon Sidney be fast asleep , the former with the piece of fat mutton still between his lip which he have be engage in consume when overpower by the heat and the motion of the waggon . it attract to his countenance a score of black fly and one of the blue - bottle , make it , if possible , a more interesting scene of animal activity than that of Master Algernon Sidney , whose infant charm be totally conceal by a coating of syrup , coffee , sand and fly . 

 the baby , otherwise Master John Wesley , be not asleep , however , but awake and endeavour with furious kick and struggle to precipitate himself into the road , or at the good on to the " trap . " 
 1 
 it seem hardly impossible that he would ultimately succeed , for he be fat and powerful and there be not much strength in the " bit of paw " that hold he " bit of paw " be Mrs. Snappercaps ' designation for those useful appendage in the object of her scrutiny . 


 1 
  pronounce " trop . "   " trap " : the little movable stepladder at the back . 


 the baby be dirty , astonishingly dirty , several day of ox - waggon dirt have accumulate on he . Mrs. Snappercaps see this , and see that some one else hat dirt , be always wash her hand and try to rub the grease spot off her clothe ; and so , by way of bring down the thing that be mighty and do exalt themselves exceedingly , Mrs. Snappercaps ordain that no ablution should be perform on the person of Master John Wesley , and , moreover , that except when absolutely necessary , he should never be out of the " bit of paw " for a moment . 
 now also Mrs. Snappercaps be desirous of ascertain whether her employee would , when think herself unobserve , maintain that serene urbanity of manner which irritate and exasperate she yet more than her constant ablution and her good English . would she still keep her leg curve in that most awkward posture , to prevent it from touch Ferdinando Shakespeare 's face ? would she yet do she good to keep the baby from bump its head against the bottle bag , though it be clearly to be see that she loathe it to the tip of her finger ? 
 to discover all this Mrs. Snappercaps snore and breathe hard and look out from under the pillow , only to see that , as far as any desire result be concern , she might as well have save herself the trouble . Ferdinando Shakespeare 's face be not press nor the baby allow to knock its head . 

 she be just about to throw off the pillow and declare that she do not   know when she have have such a sound sleep , when Mr. Snappercaps , who be engage in put a new lash to his whip , drop behind the waggon . 

 he be a great , good - hearted fellow , though he 
 be 
 fond of a glass of brandy and water when in pleasant company ; so , when he look up and see the pale little woman endeavour to manage his great baby and sit on the very edge of the waggon and look wear out and weary , his good nature and his ignorance lead he up to the back of the waggon , and he say , " expect you be pretty near do up ; not use to rid in an ox waggon and mind baby . " 

 these be the first word he have ever address to she , and , his conversational resource be exhaust by they and his whip be need , he step out in front to try it on the back of his oxen . 

 Mrs. Snappercaps throw the pillow off her face , sit up and rub her eye . John W. have scream himself stiff by this time , so she take he and , have pacify he , proceed to loosen the comb - and - brush bag and , put its not very delicate content into the " bit of paw , " remark that there be nothing so wretched as have nothing to do and that Undine have well clean they . " it be miserable to have nothing to do , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , assert a fact the truth of which she have have ample 

 opportunity for verify during the last few day , during which the sum of her own labour have be to eat , sleep , and slap the child . truly , Mrs. Snappercaps have underestimate her own ability and womanliness when she imagine she might fail to extract her bread - and - meal ' worth of labour from her passenger . not that she be a hard woman , or a cruel one . Mrs. Snappercaps be look upon among her female acquaintance as an exceptionally kind - hearted and generous woman , well than the run of themselves , and no doubt they be right . she shut her eye and run away scream if she hear they be go to kill a sheep ; and she use to call Mr. Snappercaps a cruel beast when he lash his sticking 
 1 
 oxen except she be very anxious to get on , when she sit still in the waggon and think he do not cut half deep enough . 


 no , she be not a hard woman , only a woman , and she envy her white - handed soft - voice little dependent as one feminine thing envy another . she be the daughter of a Lower Albany farmer who have send she to a Grahamstown boarding - school , where Miss Sarah Jane have teach she to play the piano and make slipper and cap and use long dictionary word without the slight idea of their meaning , and long word that be not find in any dictionary and whose meaning be know only to herself . 

 1 
 when the waggon " stick fast "   in mud or deep sand , for instance , it be say to be " stick . " 


 when she go home she be regard by her elder sister with mingled awe and envy and by her mother with unfeigned admiration . she reign supreme , and only in her own mind be there a dim perception that , after all the money that have be expend on she , she be not quite the lady , not quite the genuine article . 


 her mother never let she make bread or salt the meat , her sister iron her petticoat , and her father give she an extra pound whenever they go into town , yet she end by marry Will Snappercaps , who ride transport and be the son of a neighbour . when she meet in the street any of her old schoolfellow who have since married attorney or merchant , they always look up into the sky , onto the ground , or at the house , at anything but the particular spot of earth on which she stand . they be out of her reach , that upper ten who talk good English , dress in taste , and go to ball ; she could never retaliate on they . but now , good fortune have put into her hand one of the order , soft - voice , white - handed , and refine as any of they , and for many stiff bow and for many clear cut Mrs. Snappercaps have to indemnify herself . her heart rejoice as the heart of a homeopathic quack might do who hold under his thumb a licensed practitioner . Mrs. Snappercaps ' faith in the efficacy of vicarious atonement be not strong than in other uncultivated mind , so she do not allow her joy to 

 express itself clearly in her own mind , but it be there all the time as she sit on that swelter afternoon watch the " bit of paw " at their comb - cleaning . she be certain , she remark inwardly , that there be something wrong about she ; there always be about people who be so agreeable and never get out of temper , never get savage with the fly , never be ruffle or put out by the jolt or the grouty 
 2 
 coffee or any of the innumerable evil attendant on an ox - waggon journey . and then , to be sure , as her husband have remark , would a woman who be good for anything be knock about in that way by herself ? no , there be no doubt of it , she be a bad character , a very bad character ; and her own Mrs. Snappercaps ' great goodness of heart have prompt she to do a very foolish thing in take she . if she be not a sinner , where do she come by that diamond ring ? if she have friend of the right sort , rich enough to give it she , would they not have look after she ? and a nice story this be about her husband be dead and she have no relation . Mrs. Snappercaps be not a child and she be not bear yesterday ; no , not she ! 


 " you have well leave the comb alone , " she say ; " you do not   seem to understand it ; you spring a tooth again without clean it . if a thing be not well do I would rather it be not   do at all . " with which remark , the comb be now fully clean , 

 2 
 Grouty : full of coarsely ground coffee grain . 


 Mrs. Snappercaps seize they and the brush and with great energy put they into the bag and hang they up ; while Undine , her hand empty for the first time that day , sit watch the deep oscillating track of the waggon wheel in the red sand . 

 after a time Mrs. Snappercaps find the heat and closeness become something really unbearable , and she be about to direct Undine to loosen the front clap by way of produce a current of air , when that individual proceed on her own responsibility to roll it up . Mrs. Snappercaps instantly discover that her neck be stiff , that she have neuralgia in all the tooth on one side of her head , both of which complaint would be infinitely aggravate by such a proceeding ; so the clap be carefully fasten down again , and Mrs. Snappercaps endure suffocation for the rest of the afternoon with a martyr 's fortitude . 
 but even Mrs. Snappercaps must sometimes really sleep , and so it come to pass that night that she and her three child be snore in chorus , while Mr. Snappercaps plod along at the side of his oxen , call out to they every now and then drowsily as they step on steadily in the cool night air . 
 up above the still star glitter and give out just light enough to make visible the great round clump of bush through which they pass . 

 Undine crouch down in her corner at the back of the waggon and listen to the rink , tink of the 

 tin coffee pot and mug that be tie to the roof and the tom , tom of the great iron kettle and gridiron that be fasten on the trap , and the creak , creak of the waggon . she could rest her head on the wooden blackboard and look out and feel herself again a little child , Socrates curl close in her arm . Frank 's clear light - hearted whistle come from the front box , her mother 's voice sing the evening hymn as they ride home in the starlight from the town , and the love and passion of her womanhood look strange and unreal to she in the creak waggon , under the light of her childhood 's star the still , unchanging star that shine on unaltered while our poor little system go to ruin and desolation the silent star that can hold so many memory , which but for they would be forget , that we sometimes dread to look up at their white , faraway light , for fear of hear whisper and feel the touch of finger that can bring only coldness now . 

 yes , the old faith and the old love , they be write up there ; and when we have put they from we and bury they deep , the night sky give they all back to we . 

 about eleven the waggon stop , and Mrs. Snappercaps , by no mean in the good of humour after be rouse from her slumber , allow Undine and Mr. Snappercaps to spread a skin counterpane at the side of the waggon and make as 

 comfortable a seat as might be with half a dozen pillow against the hind wheel . here she bestow herself and her baby , while Undine take out of the back box the coffee , bread and rib of mutton that be to form their repast . 

 Mr. Snappercaps , wear out with his day 's work , fling himself down at full length on that part of the counterpane which his wife have not appropriate , and in five second be sound asleep . undine , when all be finish , saunter off to a little distance among the bush , where she could have a good view of the waggon as it show in the light of the blaze fire . 

 it look picturesque enough , the great red waggon with its little white tent and row of iron bucket that glitter in the firelight . a little far on the tired oxen be dimly visible , lie down just where the yoke have be take off their neck , too weary to look for food . even Mrs. Snappercaps , as she sit in her spot print and white kappie hush her baby , add to the scene ; and her husband also , lie close to the fire with his hat draw down and his head rest on his crossed shirt - sleeve arm . among the bush , a little to the right , the driver and leader have make their fire . the driver , a great heavy Basuto , lie in his master 's fashion on the ground ; the leader , a sprightly little Hottentot , sit watch the meat on the roaster with his wicked little black eye . he have a more than usually apish 

 appearance as he sit there with his knee draw up to his chin . 

 after some time , when the meat be ready and the coffee make , Undine return to the waggon . 
 " I think you be inside , " say Mrs. Snappercaps . 
 " no , " say Undine , " I be walk about . " 
 " walk about ? " say Mrs. Snappercaps . " what on earth for ? " 
 " it look so nice at a little distance , the waggon and the fire , " say Undine . 
 Mrs. Snappercaps give her long flexible lip a little screw . 

 " I should think you have see enough of ox waggon and fire by this time , " she say , and look upon this proceeding as an additional proof of the badness of her employee 's character ; though why she do so she could not very easily have explain to herself . she could hardly fancy that Undine have make love to the green bush , or galavante with the dry stump even in the dark . but Mrs. Snappercaps be unable to assign any reason for she walk off in the dark , and the story about the beauty of the waggon be on the face of it a lie ; and , as there must incontrovertibly have be 
 some 
 reason , she feel sincerely persuade it must have be a bad one . 


 Undine 's wandering about in the dark prove she a bad woman ; and that be prove , one do she 

 no injustice in suspect she of evil , even though there might be no harm in she wander about . 

 Mrs. Snappercaps ' logic be conclusive , so she give the coffee - pot an energetic shake as she pour out Undine 's basin , by way of win her disapproval . she could hardly drink her own cup when she see with what apparent unconsciousness and exasperating indifference the content of the basin be drunk , ground and all . " all put on . what a hypocrite ! that be the bad part of she , " think Mrs. Snappercaps , as with her stump she try to masticate a piece of tough mutton . " it be bad than her immorality ; I could get over that . think she look beautiful now , with her head on her hand , star into the fire , and her hair fly about like a mad thing 's . " 
 whether she think so or not , great good Mr. Snappercaps , as he sit drink his coffee , think she look tired and sad , and feel sorry for she , as he do for his Hottentot leader when he think he be overwork . 
 when he have finish he roll himself up in his blanket under the waggon . 
 " there be no use to tie the oxen , " he say to his driver . " they be too tired to stray tonight . " 
 the morning come and bring woe to he who have trust to the weariness of his oxen 's leg , and double woe to he who hop to recover they through those of his Hottentot . 


 the oxen have vanish and Jan be send to look for they . he have follow on their spoor 
 1 
 for a little distance , when it suddenly come to his recollection that he have not have his sleep out . accordingly , he ensconce himself snugly under a large stone , and in three minute be wander amid quid of tobacco as large as himself and brandy the very fume of which make he merry . 

 from these vision he do not return till the sun , now incline to the west , have burn he out of his hole , when he rise and instantly retrace his step . he appear before the waggon with a limp and an air of extreme dejection . he have search up hill and down kloof , but have see no trace of they , and he rub his weary foot with his right hand as he speak . 
 Mr. Snappercaps see there be nothing for it but to give he a good feed and himself to set off on the search . 
 " the poor devil of a Hottentot must be tired , " he remark . 
 Mrs. Snappercaps smile a mingled smile of pity and contempt . she be not a child , and she be not bear yesterday , and she be up to Hottentots at least . 

 Mr. Snappercaps return late that night after a fruitless search ; and neither on that day nor on the next nor on several after that be there any sign of the oxen . it be weary work , wait there day 

 1 
 Spoor footprint . 


 after day . Sunday morning come . it be six day since they have decamp six day of endurance of half the plague of Egypt : six day of fly ; six day of water red as blood , alive with monstrosity of every shape ; six day of be devour by red ant if one seek for shade under the bush ; six day pass in the care and company of three wretched , screaming , sun - oppress child . 

 they have wellnigh exhausted everyone 's patience and have make Mrs. Snappercaps very desirous of improve other , and very virtuous . her desire to improve other be make manifest by the copious correction she administer to the Masters Ferdinando Shakespeare and Algernon Sidney ; her virtue , by the petty but constant mortification of the flesh which she cause to be feel by the immoral person whom chance have place in her hand . 
 on this Sunday morning Mrs. Snappercaps wake early and poke her head softly out at the back of the waggon to take , unperceive , a survey of her antagonist 's proceeding . that individual , in happy unconsciousness , sit on the trap just below she , read a small shabby book . 
 " a Bible , no doubt , " soliloquize Mrs. Snappercaps , as she draw her head softly back into the waggon . " I could get over anything else , but she pretend to be religious it be too much . " 

 she prepare a nice little homily to be deliver at breakfast - time on the duty of serve God in 

 secret and unseen ; and when she have finish lace her boot , she poke her head cautiously out again . 

 on a second and close inspection the book appear to be no Bible , but , judge from its long word and dry look , she conclude it to be a volume of sermon . it be not so good as if it have be the Bible , but still , if judiciously modify , the homily might still be deliver with great effect . 
 at this moment Mr. Snappercaps , who have be to the top of the mountain to see if any sign of the man or oxen be visible , return . 
 " have a read ? " he say , wish to say something kindly but not exactly know how . 
 " yes , " say Undine , smile and close her book . 
 " no go to church today , " he say again . " I do not   mind it . I be use to it . but I expect it will not   seem like Sunday to you without . " 

 Undine make no answer , so , wish to be very agreeable , he continue : " what church do 
 you 
 belong to ? now 
 I 
 like the Methodists . " 

 " I belong to no church , " say Undine as she climb off the trap and , slip the unfortunate book , cause of many sorrow , into her pocket , proceed to make the fire . 

 now , make a fire seem a particularly easy and pleasant occupation when watch a nimble little nigger throw a dozen stick on one another and in half a minute produce a blaze big enough to roast a lamb by ; but when once the stick be in 

 her own hand it seem a very different matter . surely they must be wet or of the wrong kind ; for after she have expend a whole box of match , two Grahamstown 
 Journals 
 , and all her breath in try to blow they into flame , they remain as obstinately cold as though there be no combustibility about they . 

 Undine , have blow herself red and dizzy , be about to give up in despair when Mr. Snappercaps ' good nature bring he to the rescue . he handle the stick with as much science as his own Hottentot could have show , and in no time produce a roar blaze . 
 Mrs. Snappercaps from her spy point in the waggon see all that pass and , perceive a weak point in the enemy , she proceed to place her artillery accordingly . 
 presently the baby cry . Undine climb up into the waggon and take he , but he be not easily pacify . " of course he cry , and he will cry till you take the hard thing out of your pocket , " say Mrs. Snappercaps ; " it hurt his leg . " Undine take the book out ; Mrs. Snappercaps take it up . 

 " " Spencer 's 
 First Principles 
 .í who write these sermon ? " ask Mrs. Snappercaps . 

 " Spencer , " say Undine . 

 " Spencer , of course ; I know that , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , perceive for the first time that Spencer be the name of the author and not of the 

 book . " of course I know his name 's spencer , but who be he ? what be he ? what do he believe ? " 

 " I shall be glad to lend you the book , " say Undine , " if you care to read it . " 
 " not unless I know who he be , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , comb the hair down over her eye . " what church do he belong to ? " 
 " none , " say Undine . 
 " none ! no church ! " cry Mrs. Snappercaps . " what church do you belong to ? " 
 " to no church , " say Undine , quietly . 

 " to no church , 
 no 
 church ! but of course you do not   mean to say you never go to chapel anywhere . " 

 " it be a long time since I last go , " say Undine . 
 " why , surely you be not a Roman Catholic , be you ? " ask Mrs. Snappercaps , put down the comb and brush and divide the hair that hang over her face with both hand . 

 " no , " say Undine , and prepare to follow Ferdinando Shakespeare , who have just descend from the waggon . but her interlocutor scent a rat and be not to be thus elude . " you must be 
 something 
 ; everybody be 
 something 
 , " continue Mrs. Snappercaps , fix her dark eye on her antagonist to make her word more impressive . " you 
 must 
 be something ; nobody 's 
 nothing 
 . you be not   a Unitrinitarian nor anything of 
 that 
 sort , be you ? " 


 Undine very gravely disclaim all knowledge of 

 or participation in the error of so deluded and extraordinary a body as the Unitrinitarians ; but Mrs. Snappercaps be not satisfied . 

 " well , what be you , then ? " she ask . " you be not an atheist , or a deatheist , like Shakespeare or Votter or that wicked Bishop Colso who live at Delagoa Bay , be you ? you believe the Bible , do not   you ? " 
 " ferdinando will be get into the fire , " say Undine , quietly slip down onto the trap , and show her astonished catechiser that there really be limit to what she would endure in return for her bread and meat . 
 at night , a corner not big enough for a rat to crouch in ; grouty coffee ; meat which John Wesley have maul ; work to which the amen be never say : all these she accept with smile indifference ; but Mrs. Snappercaps have speak with a woman 's own shrewdness when she remark that it be those very agreeable quiet people who have the devil 's will and spirit in they in spite of all their softness . 
 " there be no need to rush away in a rage , " she continue , speak very rapidly and her lip become very moist . Undine , who stand lean against the trap with the baby in her arm , might have edge in some answer , but Mrs. Snappercaps ' speech be as voluble as it be energetic and carry all before it . 


 " of course you will try to get away , of course you do not   like to speak about it , when you know it be true . if it be not   true , would not   you be glad to disown it , would not   you be glad to disclaim it , when charge with it ? if that book you have   get in your pocket be not some monotheistical nonsense , would you read it alone on the sly , in secret when there be no eye to see you ? oh ! no ! no ! I wonder you be not afraid to say such dreadful , terrible thing lest the God you do not   believe in should strike you dead . I wonder that you be not   afraid , when the waggon go over the bridge , that God would break it down and let you tumble into the water . I wonder you be not . if it be not   if it be not   that I want to act like a Christian by you , I would not let my oxen take you one step far . how do 
 I 
 know how you may divert my poor innocent little child . give I the baby ! " say Mrs. Snappercaps . Undine give it , with all the more alacrity as Algernon Sidney have just fall over the pole , to the great damage of his skin and nose . 

 at breakfast Mrs. Snappercaps maintain a rigid silence ; she eat with a purpose and drink copiously and with energy , and her husband clearly perceive that evil be approach . he pick his chop and drank his coffee in silent uneasiness , though in what direction the storm would burst he could form no conjecture . 

 Breakfast be end , Mrs. Snappercaps climb 

 into the waggon , and after some trouble produce from one of the low box a great red bible and a copy of Wesley 's hymn with great shin clasp . arm with these weapon , she again descend , and take her seat on a camp - stool that stand against the back wheel on the shady side of the waggon . her husband , have already assume his favourite posture , lie at full length on the ground , with his head rest on his arm . 

 " Mr. Snappercaps , do you intend to listen ? " say his wife . 
 " listen to what ? " ask Mr. Snappercaps , look up sleepily . 

 " to the word of God , " respond Mrs. Snappercaps . when the question be convert into these term it be impossible to reply in the negative , so he pick himself up and , lean back against the front wheel , pull his hat low over his eye and wonder what on earth this new turn of affair portend . six year he have be marry , and never yet have she use such instrument for administer to he the reward of his numerous transgression ; but today he feel a vague yet strong conviction that the book be to become the instrument of his correction for some as yet unknown dereliction from the path of duty . to Undine , who sit on the ground nurse the baby , she say , " 
 you 
 , no doubt , will not wish to remain ; you may go . I compel no one to stay , " she continue . " the worship and the love of 

 God flow from the inner mind , from the outer soul it must be free it must be like the ray of heaven . I compel 
 no one 
 to stay . " 

 " if you have no objection , I shall remain , " say Undine , who feel no inclination to leave the shade of the waggon and march off into the broiling sun with Master John Wesley in her arm . 
 Mrs. Snappercaps now seize Masters Algernon Sidney and Ferdinando Shakespeare , and seat they with great force very flat on the ground on each side of she proceed to loosen the clasp of her Wesley 's hymn . have give out in the most approve style the whole of Hymn 1 , she proceed to sing it with great energy . Mr. Snappercaps pull the hat yet low over his eye and reckon out for the hundred and fiftieth time how much he be lose by this delay with the oxen . nor be the rest of the audience very attentive . Ferdinando Shakespeare be engage in count his finger , Algernon Sidney in catch the ant that run up his leg , while Undine sit wonder for how long a time John Wesley might be count upon to remain quiet . that young gentleman sit motionless , with a finger hook in his mouth , star with wide - open eye and rapt attention at the marvellous display of maternal stump make visible on Mrs. Snappercaps ' upper and low jaw during her vocal effort . 

 the last verse have at last be reach , Mrs. Snappercaps put the hymn - book down on the ground 

 exactly in front of she with great precision , and proceed to open the red book . from its page she make a careful and apt selection of passage applicable , she deem , to the case of at least one of her hearer . these she read with much emphasis and many a long and ominous pause ; denunciation against Pharisees , hypocrite and unbeliever she deliver with equal fervour and point . have bring this part of the proceeding to a termination , she go on to part two of the programme . this consist in read the eleventh and twelfth chapter of the second book of Samuel , wherein be record how the amorous king of Israel walk on his roof at evening tide and behold the limb of the beautiful wife of Uriah the Hittite ; how for love of they he cause the faithful soldier to meet his death before the wall at Rabbah ; how the wife of Uriah the Hittite , when she hear that her husband be dead , mourn for he many day , and when the day of her mourning be end go to the arm of the king . 

 Mrs. Snappercaps have just reach this point in the very appropriate narrative she have select , when John Wesley , no long entertain by the dental display , make the most emphatic demonstration of disapproval and oblige his nurse to carry he off . 

 Mrs. Snappercaps now turn one eye on her husband , otherwise King David , and behold he , much to her wrath , either pretend to be or really fast 

 asleep . prefer to act upon the assumption that he be pretend , she address he thus , but in a tone loud enough to awaken he , however far go in the land of dream : 

 " thank you , Mr. Snappercaps , thank you , but I be not quite such a child as you fancy I , no , not by a long , long way . " 
 Mr. Snappercaps open his eye . 

 " no , I be not a child ! I be not bear yesterday ! you be no more sleep than I be , Mr. Snappercaps ; but I wonder , yes , I 
 do 
 wonder that you can act as you do . I wonder you can act so . you can sit there still , you can listen , when even that vile , lowly , venomous outcast feel it ; she could not sit still and hear it ; she have to get up and go away ; but you , you have no more heart than a stone , than a Kaffir , than an adamantine . when David hear the voice of the Prophet 
 he 
 repent , but you , you have no faith , no pity , no affection . Ho - o - o ! Ho - o - o ! Ho - o - o ! " 

 this latter sound be as the whistling of the wind through a keyhole , produce by draw her lip into the small possible circle and move her head to and fro . 

 it be her way when she reach a climax and language fail she , and Mr. Snappercaps be accustomed to it ; but wake suddenly he feel confused , and look out over the still Sunday landscape , the clear blue sky , the hazy brown hill clothe with clump of dark green bush , look out and wonder 

 whether he be still asleep , whether Sarah Jane have take leave of her sens , or whether he have . 


 " oh , it be very nice to put on that innocent look , " say Sarah Jane . " very nice , so nice ; but it will not   do with I , no it will not . you think I have   not see it , do you ? I have   never hear you call my baby heavy , have I ? I never see you go down on your knee to blow the fire for she . I be asleep , fast asleep , of course , in the waggon . oh yes no , do not   speak , do not   try and deny it ; it be no use , William , it be 
 no 
 use . it be not once , it be not twice ; it be four time : it be 
 four 
 time that I have   see you with these eye turn the chop over to find a raw one because she say she like they raw . I see it once " Mrs. Snappercaps ' tone be now low and subdue " I see it once , and I keep still . I say , " I will see if he do it again , and you do it again , and you do it 
 again 
 . no , do not   speak ; I do not   wish you to take more guilt upon your guilty soul . that puff - adder , 
 1 
 that ringhal 
 2 
 have cause you to do sin enough without add any more to they . oh , William ! William ! how can you ? how can you ? how can you ? " 

 " I do not   know what you be talk about , Sarah Jane . you have   go mad , " say her husband , star stupidly at she . 

 " that be right , Mr. Snappercaps ; say I be mad , send I to Roben Island , 
 3 
 slaughter I , murder I , as 
 1 a snake . 

 2 
 a snake , one of the cobra . 


 3 
 where lunatic use to be keep . 


 David do Uriah . there will be no one to trouble you then . but you shall not , no , you shall not ; for the sake of my child I mean to live . " so say , she raise the Masters Ferdinando and Algernon from the ground , with each arm and with as much energy as she have seat they . 


 " the man who stab my body I can forgive , " say Mrs. Snappercaps ; " but the man who run a sword into your 
 soul 
  no - o - o ! no - o - o ! " 

 " oh , damn it all , Sarah Jane ! " say Mr. Snappercaps , rise , " what confound nonsense you do talk ! " 
 " curse and swear , Mr. Snappercaps , curse and swear ; that be right . they curse the prophet and apostle , but it do not   hurt they . you can not   deny what I have   say ; you know it be true ; you love she , you know you do ! " 
 " oh , hang it ! damn it ! confound it all ! " say Mr. Snappercaps . " I wish the woman would go to blaze , to the devil . " 
 " there be no need to wish that , " respond Mrs. Snappercaps ; " every step that your oxen take they be bring she nearer to he . what do you think she be go to the Fields for , if it be not to go to he ? 
 " oh , do not   try and defend yourself any more , William , " see he be about to speak ; " do not , do not . " 

 " look here , Sarah Jane , " say her husband as he 

 turn to go away , " if you give I any more of this nonsense I will put the woman down at the first hotel we come to . 

 " no , you will not , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , who have no intention of lose her drudge , and he well know it . " no , you will not . Vile as she be , I will act to she as a Christian should . I have   say I would take she to the Fields , and I shall take she there . " 

 " do not   know Christians take folk to the devil , " say Mr. Snappercaps under his breath , as he walk off in the direction of the muddy kloof 
 1 
 from which they get their water , to seek for a sleep - place under some brush . 

 it be near evening , and as he have not return , Mrs. Snappercaps , after doze all day in the wagon , descend to resume her old seat on the camp stool , and take her baby . undine , now her arm be free , sit with the child at the side of the road , make house in the sand for they . 

 as mischance would have it , Master Ferdinando Shakespeare bethink he at this moment of get a mug of water from the iron bucket that stand under the waggon , the well to moisten their sand . stumble over the disselboom 
 2 
 with the mug in his hand , its content be deposit on his person , drench his begrimed white pinafore . 


 " that be what come of play on a Sunday , " 

 1 
 Ravine . 


 2 
 Pole of the waggon . 


 say his mother . " you wicke little boy ! leave that sand alone . " 

 " it be my fault ; I begin the play , " say Undine . 
 " well , I wish you would take his pinafore and wring it out ; and if you have his , it would not be more trouble to take Algernon Sidney 's and the baby 's and give they a rub , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , loosen the pinafore as she speak . 
 Undine roll they up with a piece of soap , and be just start off in the direction of the kloof when Mrs. Snappercaps , speak in a high shrill voice , detain she . 
 " oh yes , do go to he , go at once . I do not   wish to hinder you , not at all . go to he ! go ! go ! " 
 " go to whom ? " ask Undine , look round in blank astonishment , for she have be out of earshot when the little encounter of the morning take place , and imagine that Mr. Snappercaps have go in search of his oxen . 

 " oh , you 
 sweet 
 little thing ! " say Mrs. Snappercaps . " 
 you 
 do not   know that he be over at the kloof , do you ? you never sit with your head stick on your hand star at the fire , just to try and look sentimental and make he feel sorry for you . 
 you 
 never do , do you ? you would not do such a thing ! and you never pretend you could not make a fire on purpose to get he to come and help you ! and you do not   get up early , " continue Mrs. Snappercaps , speak very rapidly , with the solitary 

 canine , the only complete tooth she boast , look very strangely like a fang ; " you do not   get up in the grey dawn and sit on the trap and try and look melancholy till he come to talk with you . you would not think of do such a thing ! I be glad to see you do not   deny it ; you can not , " say Mrs. Snappercaps , rock herself and her baby energetically to and fro . 

 the true state of affair now dawn on Undine , who stand irresolute with the soap and pinafore in her hand , half inclined to laugh , half to enter a protest . 
 it end in she do neither , but ask very quietly whether Mrs. Snappercaps could tell she in which kloof she would find the little fountain the driver have discover that morning . 
 this cool manner of receive her attack bring yellow spot to the corner of Mrs. Snappercaps ' mouth . her only reply be a passionate and often repeat injunction to go to he , go to he , go , go , at once . 

 in direct opposition to these kindly instruction , Undine walk off through the bush in the direction of a small kloof where , instead of the great clump of elephant - food 
 1 
 and coonie with which the hill be cover , a thin line of forest tree show , at least sometimes , the presence of water . 


 the sun be almost set ; his ray make the great round clump cast long oval shadow , and the 

 1 
 elephant - food and coonie be hardy shrub . 


 busy red and black ant be hurry home with their last load of stick . Undine kill many of they as she walk on quickly , and her heart be not very light as she pass in and out among the bush . she have work till she feel as though she have no head leave , and no soul , and the golden glory of the sky and the still beauty of the bush say nothing to she . in her ear ring the yell of a baby ; with its weight her arm ache , and her whole body too , from head to foot , for want of rest . she be tired ; she be wretche ; she be find out that there be ache other than those of the heart , and weariness unutterable that be not of the spirit . may a man 's soul be tap out through his muscle ? be there thing more enervate and destructive to its life than be the idle plaything of a rich man ? be it cruel pain to be prick by a woman 's pin than lash by a great affliction ? when we labour like brute , do our heart become like theirs , till to eat and have rest become all our ambition ? 

 the busy ant as they hurry home have no answer for her question , nor the still green bush . only one feathery outstretche arm of wild asparagus catch at her dress as she pass by and tear it , because she would not stay to loosen it , but hurry on angrily , petulantly . she be tired , she be wretche , she be disappoint . 

 to rush the world over seek for happiness be a fool 's work . be it also a fool 's to look for a life 

 which , however hard and rough , shall be high and noble , a life worth live ? 

 from be the useless plaything of a man , from dress and eating and lounge on sofas , to nurse another woman 's child , to make another woman 's bed ! will life 's change be always so , shall we never get any high ? oh , the thing of life be very little , and the soul be great . 

 she walk on till , just as the sun set , she reach the little kloof and , force her way through the rock and tree , come to the bed of the mountain torrent . she clamber down its steep bank and leap on to the smooth white sand that line its bottom . then she pause to take breath and lean against one of the great dark boulder that lie about on every hand . long year ago the rush torrent have tear they down from their home on the mountain - side , but they lie very quiet and unmovable now on their bed of white sand . over one of they , a little high up in the bed of the torrent , a tiny stream of water trickle . the drop as they fall down slowly on the face of the flat stone below have the soft silver sound of far - away evening bell , and everything else be very silent . the silver band of water as it creep through the sand make no sound , and the long low tremulous bank of maiden - hair fern , though it heave and sway to and fro in the stillness , make no sound . high on the western bank of the stream against the white dreamy evening sky , 

 the branch of the oliven 
 1 
 tree be visible , with pale , quivering , up - point leaf . all the dark tree around lay glittering and motionless , but the air stir those pale green upward - point leaf till they shake against the still white night sky ; and on Undine , as she stand look up at it , a great hush come and a great joy ; for heaven be not a long way off , nor the beautiful for which we thirst . she drop the pinafore she hold in her hand and kneel down on the smooth white sand , and when she rise , just above the treetops the first star be shin . 

 she wash out the pinafore and then walk back with they to the wagon . 
 Mrs. Snappercaps wonder that she sing so softly to the baby as she put it to sleep and sit half smile in the firelight with only the remnant of their supper before she . 
 " she be a fool and out of her sens , " say Mrs. Snappercaps as she lean back against the wheel , munch the last biscuit . 
 Aye , and a fool see more than a wise man , sometimes . 

 1 
 oliven wild olive . 




 XVI . 
 new RUSH 

 EVERY 
 grace must come to an end , so philosophise the hungry child ; and even the dominion of a Mrs. Snappercaps have a limit and a termination . she and her little soul and her little torture may shut out all the great varied world for a little time ; she may seem to engulf everything for a little time , till all above , around , below be Mrs. Snappercaps and her baby ; but land must be gain at last , if it be only the land of death . 


 for Mr. Snappercaps that land might be the only one in which his poor good old soul should find refuge ; but Undine 's deliverance come near at hand when the white tent of Du Toit 's Pan 
 1 
 come in sight , gather like a flock of white bird round their monster sandheap . 


 the next evening , free and emancipate , she stand before a store in New Rush , where Mr. Snappercaps have just unload his wire and bucket . she feel very strong and very free as she stand there , with her box at her side and two shilling in her pocket , and 

 1 
 Du Toit 's Pan now a suburb of Kimberley . 


 watch the wagon roll slowly up the street and out of sight . 

 it be glorious to be alone again . alone , though the street be so thronged with the stream crowd of nigger and digger return home from the work that they kick up the red sand into a lurid cloud over their head stark - naked savage from the interior , with their bent spindle leg and their big - jaw foreheadless monkey - face , who , though they be go home to fire and meal , could hardly get out of their habitual crawl colonial nigger half dress , not half civilized , and with some hundred per cent more of evil in their black countenance than in those of their wilder brother great muscular fellow , almost tall and strong than their master , the white digger , who form a thin sprinkling in the crowd and who , in spite of the thick dust that envelop they , might be distinguish by their more quick and energetic movement . 
 Undine stand watch the crowd as it roll past , till the sound of some one close the window just behind she make she look round . a very swell nigger with a real gold chain and a black cloth suit be put up the bar . 
 he be a gentleman who make his live principally at night , but he find it useful to have some ostensible employment which might serve to account for his gold chain and black cloth , if ever he find himself in the close hand of the law . 

 she ask whether she might leave her box there till the morning . 
 " no , " be the prompt rejoinder , " not if you do not   give I a shilling . " 
 she give it , for it be impossible to carry it with she or yet to leave it there in the street . she see it safely deposit in the store , and then walk off in search of a bed of some kind , nothing doubting but that her shilling would gain she a resting - place , if it be only a little square of hard ground in the corner of a tent . 
 she go to a greasy - look yellow canvas house with some kind of sign over it , in front of which half a dozen man be lounge . in the house there be only one woman , very gaudily dressed and very florid , whose eye Undine imagine see right through her pocket and purse and beheld the one poor shilling that lie there in solitude . she wish herself out in the street again , but it be too late now . 
 " can I get a bed here for tonight ? " she ask . 
 " she be a bad one , " think the woman , who , be one herself , ought certainly to have judge rightly . 
 " you can get a bed for four and six , " she say ; and Undine with her shilling make a very speedy exit . 

 out in the street once more , she plod on through the wilderness of canvas , past round tent , square tent , tear tent , and whole tent ; past canvas 

 house and wooden house and iron house , and non - descript . there be place enough and people enough , but just no place for she . the fresh night breeze as it creep among the tent strike her chill and make she feel cold and heavy to her heart . she be now in the poor and most wretched part of the camp which lie around the Circus , and be walk on slowly when an empty scotchcart , come home from the Kop 
 1 
 and tear down the street in the gathering darkness , cause she to step quickly out of its road and almost into a small open tent . 

 it be hardly dark yet but there be a candle alight in it , and at a great packing - case a dark bright - eyed malay woman stand iron white shirt . on another case close at her side , a heap of article , still wait to be do , lie pile . there be little else in the room except a tear red curtain cover with lion , which mark off the sleep - place . on the floor sprawl the woman 's brood , form a motley forest of dusky arm and leg . she be so engross in her work that she do not notice the intruder 's presence till she have wish her good evening , then she look up quickly and curiously . 
 " could you tell I where I could get lodging for tonight ? " inquire Undine when her salutation have be return . 

 " no , not in this part of the Camp , " say the 

 1 
 Colesberg Koppie , now the Kimberley Diamond Mine . 


 woman ; then eye she sharply , " have yer be long in New Rush ? " 

 " no , " reply Undine . " I arrive this evening . " a pause follow , then Undine say : 
 " perhaps you would be so kind as to tell I where I might be able to get work . I should be very much oblige to you if you could . " 
 " work ? " say the woman . " there be work enough if there be only hand to do it . what sort of work do yer want ? " 
 " iron any kind of work , " say Undine . " I do not   care what . " 
 the woman look at the great pile of iron on the case beside she . she must get it do that night though she stand over it till morning . so she say : 
 " if yer can iron , yer can come in and help I get these thing do and stay here tonight , but I can not   give yer a bed ; we have   only one and that be only sack . " 

 so Undine step into the tent , to pass she first night at New Rush in iron gentleman 's pocket handkerchief and nightshirt , leave the other shirt for the more experienced iron of Mrs. Snods , which glide over they with marvellous rapidity and ease , leave no singe or crease in its track . by - and - by the noise and squalling of the child cease as one by one they fall asleep on the ground or creep off to the sack ; only the eld , whose occupation it be to carry the iron in and out , remain awake . 

 he be an over - work , under - grow boy of about nine year , with a very solemn face and a pair of squint bead - like eye that be always try to see each other across his nose . he wear a narrow - brim crownless hat , from the top of which his curly black hair rise in a great bunch ; the tattered remain of a red tancord jacket and trouser cover his body ; on his foot he carry a solitary boot , whose sole be loose and , at every step , flap solemnly as he pass in and out with the iron . when not so occupy he stand bolt upright before the packing - case , with his hand clasp in front of he , slowly twirl his thumb , always in the same direction and always very regularly . 


 about twelve the last shirt be finish , and Undine , half asleep , creep into one of the great packing - case and sleep soundly till morning . when she awake she find the woman already busy put fresh clothe into starch , and Tommy just start off with last night 's work . it be agree that Undine be to remain there that day , and in consideration of her assistance be to get food and a bed in the packing - case that night . before set to work , however , she start off in search of her box . it be a real New Rush morning . the fresh air seem thrill with a life that even in the close man - defile camp it could not be rob of ; it creep among the tent and house and bring back for the moment the rose to the sunburnt sallow 

 face of the dirty child , and make Undine feel brave and able to face anything . she be almost sorry when , after wander about for a little while , she discover the store at which her box have be leave . before it stand a digger examine some pick that have be place outside and a couple of naked nigger who be gaze affectionately at a row of gun . in the doorway lean the swell nigger with his leg cross , play with his watch chain . 

 " I have   come for the box I leave here yesterday evening , " say Undine . the nigger point with his thumb over his shoulder . 
 " there it be , " he say . 
 Undine go in and see it stand against the counter . 
 " be there anyone here I could get to carry it ? " she ask . " it be not very heavy . " 
 " no , " say the nigger . 
 " can not   you ? it be not very far , " she say , hold out the shilling . 
 he take it without make any reply , and spread out his white handkerchief upon his shoulder to prevent the nap from rub off his coat , he raise the trunk . 

 Undine lead the way ; he follow close behind ; but they have not go very far when the sound of his loudly creak boot suddenly cease , and look round she be astonish to behold her box 

 depos- 
 deposit 


 ited in the middle of the street , and the tall black form of the nigger disappear round the corner . 

 " this be not the place ; you have make a mistake , " she say . 

 the nigger be not a man of many word , so he merely screw up one eye very tight and open the other very wide , and walk off . Undine go back to her box and stand by it , look at the passer by , but none be available for her purpose . there be troop of nigger go to work at the Kop , 
 1 
 and sharp little diamond - buyer go to look for the worm , 
 2 
 and busy digger in a desperate hurry , with their sleeve roll up above their elbow . to none of they could she apply . at last a good stupid - look Kaffir make his appearance . he have no bucket or pick and seem to have nothing to do , and though he star stupidly at her English and broken Dutch , he soon comprehend the meaning of the scarf she hold out to he ; and the trunk be shoulder once more , Undine take care to walk behind he . when she reach the tent Tommy have just return with three loaf of bread , and the solitary knife of which the establishment boast not be forthcoming , Undine open her box and produce a handsome silver - mount penknife . the bright black eye of the malay woman mark it eagerly , and mark also the rich red shawl that 

 1 
 Kop : an abbreviation for " Colesberg Koppie "   the Mine . 


 2 
 presumably the " worm " that the " early bird " be out to " catch . " 


 cover the content of the box . she watch the knife as it cut the bread and watch it as it go back into the box , and then begin iron again . presently she call to Tommy to come out with she to the back of the tent and help she chop some wood . Tommy go , but there be no sound of chop , nor , when they come in a few moment after , be there any wood to be see . 

 Undine , who be busy iron , never notice this ; something in one of the child 's face have remind she of what lie in a little english grave far over the water . 
 the woman begin iron , too , but presently she stop and , lean both elbow on the table and fix her bright eye on her companion 's face , she say : 

 " I have   be think that perhaps yer'd like rather to get work on yer own account ; if yer 
 would 
 , why , I know a Mr. MacCuligan who pay well , he do , and he be not over - particular neither . I would not give he up , but , yer see , I have   get more work than I can manage , as ' tis . you see , everybody know I , that be the thing ; they know that I be a 
 honest 
 woman , would not touch a button . it be the character as bring the work . if nobody know yer , why , yer will not   get a shirt to iron , " say the woman , still fix her bright eye on Undine 's face . 


 Undine wonder , if that be the case , how anyone ever come to be know , but she answer that , 

 until she get iron and a place of her own and know something of iron , it be useless for she to think of take work . 


 " oh , yer could use some of my iron ; I have   get a lot yer see ; and wood and such like yer could pay for , yer know , and Mr. MacCuligan 
 he 
 do not   care how his shirt be neither . " 

 somehow Undine do not take vastly to this idea of do Mr. MacCuligan 's iron , but she feel touch by the woman 's kindness ; she could not pain she by refuse to take advantage of it . 
 it be very hard to be a stranger at the Fields , the woman say ; she have know what it be ; but when once a person get know , why , there be more work than they have hand for . 
 " it be an awful pay thing , iron be , " say the woman , " awful paying . it be as good as have a claim in New Rush Kop , it be " ; and when she see Undine cast a glance round the empty tattered tent she add quickly : 
 " to yer it would be , of course , I mean . I have   get so many brat , what I make go . " 
 after a little more conversation it be decide that Undine , with Tommy for a guide , should set off to Mr. MacCuligan 's to fetch the ironing . 

 " it be a long way , " say the woman , " and perhaps yer'll think it round about , but the way in this Fields 
 be 
 round about . Tommy , he know the way to 

 Mr. MacCuligan 's well , he do . do not   yer , Tommy ? " 

 Tommy nod his head very confidently and be soon patter along the road in front of Undine , the fly sole of his boot flap up and down at every step . 
 they turn in the direction of the West End , and Undine , as she trudge behind he , try to be profoundly philosophical and to place before herself very clearly her own advanced idea on the subject of labour . 
 how superficial be the general idea on the subject . be not all work , if it be earnestly do , noble and ennoble ? be not all labour worship , be it only scrap a carrot or iron a shirt ? no long would she be bind by prejudice , but , lead a life base on reason , she would enjoy the greatness of the man who labour . 

 they have now reach the West End , that most desolate wilderness of gravel - heap 
 1 
 and tent , the tent for the most part not arrange with any attempt at order but form acute and obtuse angle of every degree . they with their gravel - heap be pervade by a melancholy air of decayed greatness . to Undine it seem a more desolate spot than the most barren plain of the Karoo as they wander in and out among the gravel - heap on which the 

 blaz- 
 blaze 


 1 
 the " 
 dťbris 
 " heap the residue after the diamond have be wash and sift from the diamondiferous " earth " in which they occur . 


 ing sun be now pour down dazzle light blue gravel - heap and yellow gravel - heap , new gravelheap beside tent , old gravel - heap , where once , in well day , tent have be . up they and down they , over they and round they , before they and behind they , their course be like that of the wind which goeth to the south , and turneth to the north , and whirleth about continually . 

 " be you sure this be the right road ? " she inquire of her dilapidated little guide , who be trot on steadily before she . 
 " it be the way , " he answer confidently , turn his head but not his body , and with both eye still fix most solemnly on his nose ; " it be the way . " so Undine plod on . 
 " why , I think we pass this tent with the barrel before it a little while ago ! be we not almost at Mr. MacCuligan 's yet ? " she ask again after a little time . 
 " it be the way , " say Tommy , shake his head confidently three or four time , but not even look round ; and soon they find themselves in the Circular Road . 

 the Road be lively and busy enough , and the glare of the sun on the white road be almost blind . a scotchcart draw by a wretched mule and contain a huge barrel of water rattle past they . it leak , and some ragged little savage , one white and the rest black , be cling to the cart with 

 their mouth wide open and upturned to catch the drop as they fall . 

 " where can I get a drink of water ? " inquire Undine of her guide , the bright drop make she more thirsty than ever . 
 " you can buy some at the well , " be Tommy 's answer . 
 buy some ! Undine walk on and try to forget she be thirsty , and wonder what the charm of these strange Fields might be that draw all to they . 
 " if we be not near Mr. MacCuligan 's yet , " say Undine , " I think I shall turn back . I can not   go on any more . " she be grow dizzy from the fierce heat of the sun , and the white tent seem to throb before she , and the burn sand into which they sink ankle - deep at each step blister her foot . 
 " it be the way , but yer do not   get there if yer do not   keep on , " say Tommy , look back over his shoulder but never pause for an instant . 
 Undine , fix her eye on the flap sole of his shoe , follow on . 
 they be in the good part of the Camp now , where tent be scarce and pretty little canvas house with veranda and reed fence line the road on every side . 
 before one of these Tommy stop . 
 " there be Mr. MacCuligan 's , " he say , " and I will run round to the back and see if he be in . " 

 while Undine stand wait for his return , she 

 lean against the reed fence of the house that stand at her right and look over into the enclosure . there be a new canvas house with a pretty veranda , at the end of which hang great venetian blind to keep off the sun and wind . on the veranda be some green garden bench and two large cane armchair . in one of they sit a lady , a delicate milk - white thing dress in pale blue , with ripple gold hair that be simply gather into a knot at the back of her small head . Undine look at she breathlessly . woman as beautiful , more beautiful , she have often see , but none have ever look to she as that woman do , contrast with the coarse clay she have look at for so many week , and contrast with the boiling , toiling , sandy , grimy world around they . the lady 's white slender hand be cross softly over the gamboge cover of the novel that lie in her lap , and she lean back with closed eye , look like some fairy queen whom a strange chance have transport into the land of dust and diamond . Undine lean long against the fence , watch she till she slowly open her eye and look up . they be straight - out - look , cloudless baby - blue eye ; there be not much expression in they when they fix themselves on the head and battered hat that show themselves over her fence ; but Undine limp away quickly and look down at her own " bit of paw , " already brown and rough , and at her own dust - begrime garment , and feel a little 

 ashamed of they . what be fine clothe , and a fine skin ? well , nothing , just nothing , when you come to reason about they , and just everything when you come to look at they . 

 Undine limp away as quickly as might be to the back of Mr. MacCuligan 's compound , but when there she be astonish to find no opening by which Tommy could have gain an entrance to make his inquiry , and no Tommy be to be see . the fence be very high , but , mount on a gravel heap that lie against it , she be able to look over . a coolie be squat in the shade , clean a pair of boot . Undine inquire whether he have see anything of her guide and whether the compound be Mr. MacCuligan 's . to both these question the coolie reply by shake his head and star . do he know where Mr. MacCuligan live ? the coolie shake his head again . do not   live in that part of the Camp . do not   know he if he do . 
 Undine drop down on the ground in the shade of the high fence and hold her throb head between her hand . she try to think , but before she know she have drop into a heavy sleep . 

 when she awake it be almost evening and the cool breeze be blow in her face . she feel well after her sleep , though her foot be still blister and her leg tremble a little . she make her way back into the street , and after not many inquiry find herself once more in the neighbourhood of the 

 Circus , and be soon in sight of the iron 
 1 
 canteen , that she know stand next the tent she be in search of . 

 when she stand before it , Undine raise her hand to her forehead , for surely the terrible heat of the day have touch her reason . she look and look again . there be the iron canteen on this side ; there be the shoemaker 's tent on the other ; but the tent she look for and the box she come for be nowhere to be see . a good - natured man who stand at the door of the canteen notice her bewilderment and call out : " if you be look for the malay woman who use to take in iron , she be shift early this morning . if she be get work of yours there be not much chance of your see it again , I be afraid . she be a bad lot , " say the man , step back into his house to serve a customer . 
 it take she a moment fairly to understand her situation , and then she soon persuade herself that it be a most fortunate occurrence that have befall she and free she from her possession . be they not more trouble than they be worth ? and have not experience teach she a lesson which , as that bitter dame teach nothing for nothing , leave she nothing to complain of ? 

 she begin slowly to retrace her step , think the while that she clearly perceive where her mistake have be . she have allow her pride to keep she 

 1 
 corrugated iron . 


 from her own class , from the white - handed , silver - voice people of refinement and polish that be the only reason why she have fare so ill . 

 with that cool veranda and its milk - white blossom in her eye , she press on through the now crowded and busy evening street till she come in sight of it once more . 
 just as she have sit there in the morning , the lady sit there now , only that she have now a pure white dress , and in place of the gamboge - cover book she hold now a small china cup . a few ray of the set sun have find their way under the veranda and play on the ripple hair till it glitter like burnish gold . 
 when Undine 's dusty figure and battered hat appear before she , she raise her clear blue baby - eye from her teacup and look at she look very straight , and say : " what do you want ? work ? yes , I have plenty of work . " 
 Undine 's eye follow her tall graceful figure as it move into the house . 
 she return in a moment with a small child 's garment in her hand and hold it out . 
 " you can take this first , " she say . " if it be well make I will give you two shilling for make it if it be well make , " she say in a clear measure voice , and , without give the dusty little figure before she a second glance , sink down into her chair and resume her teacup . 

 Undine hesitate and speak again , for work , without needle or thimble or cotton to do it with , would be small help . 
 " I will give you needle and cotton , if you wish it , " the lady say , " but not a thimble . I never do that ; and sixpence must be take off for the needle and cotton . " 

 the little reed gate close behind Undine , and soon she be again thread her way through the crowded street crowd with home - goer . they be all go to a place of their own ; even the naked Mahoras 
 1 
 have a pot of mielie 
 2 
 pap and a skin wait for they ; but she wander on till she find herself at the entrance of the Kop 
 3 
 they have just desert . she sit down to rest on the side of one of the mountain of gravel 
 4 
 between which the road pass , and , when the camp below be aglow with evening light , and the noise and stir in its tent and street become loud and strong , she rise up and walk into the Kop in the bright moonlight . it be like enter the city of the dead in the land of the living , so quiet it be , so well do the high - pile gravel heap keep out all sound of the seethe noisy world around . not a sound , not a movement . she walk to the edge of the reef and 

 1 
 native . 


 2 
 pap of ground maize . 


 3 
 the Kop be the actual site of the mine . 


 4 
 Dťbris . 


 look down into the crater . 
 1 
 the thousand wire that cross it , glisten in the moonlight , form a weird , sheeny , mistlike veil over the black depth beneath . very dark , very deep it lie all round the edge , but , high tower into the bright moonlight , rise the unworked centre . she crouch down at the foot of the staging and sit look at it . in the magic of the moonlight it be a giant castle , a castle of the olden knightly day ; you might swear , as you gaze on it , that you see the shadow of its castellated battlement , and the endless turret that overcrowne it : a giant castle , lull to sleep and bind in silence for a thousand year by the word of some enchanter . you might gaze until you almost see the ivy cling to its yellow crumble wall , till you almost see the figure of brave knight and lovely lady , whom the death - like sleep have overtake as they wander on the castle terrace , till the motionless horse and the small arched window and the mighty dragon rest in the gateway be all visible . 

 Undine , as she crouch beneath the staging , look at that silent moonlight wonder world , forget she be hungry and forget she be weary , and , when she grow drowsy , drop asleep on the ground with her head rest on her work . 

 1 
 the mine be then work by surface haulage . this immense circular hole be now claim to be the large hole ever sink into the earth by man . the diamond be find on a huge perpendicular pipe , not in the reef surround it . 



 the next morning the turning of the wheel 
 1 
 overhead arouse she . it be hardly light , but the Kop wake early , and there be many man at work already among the staging . none of they seem to notice she , and she get up feel a little stiff and a little cold . there be nothing of beauty about the scene before she now ; 
 that 
 have go with the moonlight . it be nothing now but a great oval hole in the ground where worshipper of King Gold burrow and scrape and scratch , all in his service . 

 very dull , and very prosaic now unless indeed one have happen to be so high mount above earth that all thing fall into perspective , when even Colesberg Kop with its grovel and grasp might , like nigger and blue - bottle fly and rouge pot , have a charm , a beauty of its own . 

 but Undine be not high mount nor be her soul incline to soar that morning ; rather to grovel very pitiably . she be cold , she be stiff , she be hungry , and she hold the creed of the hungry that idea be a delusion and sentiment a snare , that the way of the world be the wise way and lead to bread and butter , and that all way which lead elsewhere be invention of the devil and must be forsake . she make her way into Main Street , and as she turn the corner she see a great naked nigger devour a huge lump of mielie - meal pap which he hold in both hand as he pass down the street on 

 1 
 a haulage wheel on the rim of the mine . 


 his way to work . she think he the happy soul she have pass that morning as she walk on look for a place where she might sit down and work . 

 no such present itself till she find herself free of tent and house on the long low grassy ridge that separate New Rush from Du Toit 's Pan . there she sit down , screen by the low scraggy bush , and begin to work . 
 she stitch as one stitch who stitch for bread , but the calico be stiff , and without a thimble the needle hardly go through , and it make long stitch and little one , and work a small hole in her finger which stain the work with little drop of blood . yet she work away , without pausing , for an hour , then she sit still for a moment and lie down upon the ground . 
 it be so strong and drawing , that earth ; she stretch out both her hand and clung to it as she use when a little child , as we can cling only when we be weary and heartsick and lonely , as we must cling to something if it be only a tree stump or a stone , feel as if we be not then so forsaken . 

 it be a bright warm morning , but she be cold from hunger , and underneath the ground it must be warm , so warm . the earth , the dear old earth that have be mother to we all and must cover we all again soon or later it would be so easy to 

 drop asleep upon it , so much well than to go on live with nothing worth live for . 

 " I will die , " she think . " why should I go on like a fool , labour and strive to keep a life that be worthless ? I will lie still and die . " 
 she turn her face round and look at the grass on which she lay . mingle with it be tiny blue and red bell and a bright creeper with yellow flower . the sunshine come through the low bush and dance on their golden face , and up above the bush she could see the clear blue sky . 

 it be not 
 all dark 
 , it be not 
 all 
 evil in this life ; while the sky hang overhead and the many - tint earth lie at our foot , there will always be what be beautiful , always be what make life worth the battle ; and her heart grow strong again . very empty life may be , very useless , but worth have while there be sunshine . 

 hour after hour Undine sit there stitch , and the work become more stained and the stitch big and her hand tremble more . at last by mid - day it be finish . she roll it up and seek her way back to the canvas house with its cool veranda and green venetian blind . the lady be inside and open the door , look as fresh and fleecy - white as she have do the day before . she take the work from Undine and examine it carefully . 

 " I do not   take such work , " she say , raise her round baby - blue eye to Undine 's face . " you must 

 take it back and unpick it carefully and wash it , or if you wish you can leave it here ; but of course I can not   pay you for it . it be for a bazaar and should have be keep very clean . " 

 they be so pitiless , those baby - blue eye . 
 Undine feel the tear start to her own ; so without give any answer she turn round quickly and go out again to the hot sandy street . 
 as bad as a beggar ! cry for sixpence ! Faugh ! she hat herself . 
 she have undertake to do the work , she have do it badly , she have get what she deserve . besides , be it not for a bazaar that be to pay for a church ? there should be no stain or long stitch in work intend for such a purpose . she be in fault , no one else . 

 " old clothe buy here , " be write in large letter on a piece of batter cardboard that hang at the door of a little wooden house . Undine notice it and go in . she have nothing to sell but a fine white handkerchief , for which the woman give her sixpence , which at the next shop she exchange for a drink of water and a small piece of bread , such a small piece . when she sit down on the shady side of some gravel heap that lie behind the house , she hold it in her hand and sit look at it for a long time before she begin to eat . she have feel so hungry in the morning , she could have make friend with the naked Kaffir for the sake of 

 his mielie - meal pap ; and now she sit there with the lump of bread in her hand and could hardly eat it . slowly break off little bit of crust here and there , she get through half , and with the remainder still in her hand lay her head drowsily on the gravel and for half an hour lie there almost sleep , but hear always the rumbling of the cart as they pass in the street . when she arouse herself she feel gnawingly hungry and very glad of the bread , which she still eat very slowly to make it go the far . 

 not far from she , crouch on the ground with his head between his paw , be a great brown dog ; surely the leanest and lankest that walk New Rush . while she have sleep he have crouch there , watch the piece of bread in her hand , and now with half - close eye he look at it still . 
 Undine look at it too and then at he , and then take another bite , and then look at he again , and then at the bread in her lap ; and feel sure that if she wait it would not be there much long , she take it up and throw it from her straight into the hungry jaw that be open wide to receive it . 

 almost without a gulp it be go , and , resume his old posture , the dog wait for more , but none come . pick up the crumb that lie in her lap , she rise to go . the dog spring up too , and , sidle near to she , proceed to perform around she 

 a grotesque dance , at every step of which the sharp bone threaten to protrude through the brown skin . 

 when she walk away he try to follow she , but she drive he from she again and again . " go away , " she say . " go away . do not follow I . if you do I shall learn to love you , and I be tired ; I have have pain enough . " 
 the afternoon light be begin to grow old and yellow when Undine , pass among the tent at the North Side , be attract by a small figure seat on the ground between two tent . ' twas a child of it might be twelve year . she be lean back against an old box , with her naked foot stretch out in front of she , and the afternoon sun look full into her face and on the great shock of red hair that hang around it . everyone else Undine have pass have seem so hard at work and so engrossed , even the little child in their play and the woman in their talk ; but here sit some one alone and do nothing except gaze down at the half of an old iron three - legged pot which she hold in her lap . 
 Undine come near she . 
 " what have you get there ? " she ask , softly . 

 the girl raise her head quickly and look up . it be a broad freckle face with very little forehead , and that little wrinkle and knit in every 

 direction , with a great heavy mouth and a pair of clear grey eye . 

 before she answer Undine she fix they on she , and then say in a low , sullen tone , " look at my plant . " 
 Undine stoop down and see , surely enough , grow in the broken pot , the tiny of rose slip not half an inch high and crown with two tiny green leaf . 
 " do you like flower ? " Undine ask . 
 " yes . " 
 for a moment the sullen look vanish and a smile that part the heavy lip show a set of dazzle white tooth ; then it settle down on the child 's face again and she look at her pot . 
 " it be the first flower I have see grow here , " say Undine , touch it softly with her finger . 
 " a gentleman throw it away one day . it have a wither rose on it then ; but I put a white bottle over it , and I hold it in the sun all day , and now it be grow , you see . " she touch its little leaf softly and caressingly with her finger as she speak . 
 " do not   you get very tired of sit still with it all day ? " ask Undine . 
 a very black look come over the child 's face as she answer shortly , " I can not   walk ; my back 's hurt . " 
 " and so you sit here alone all day nurse your flower . " 

 " mostly , but sometimes the woman who stop with father do not   always go out . I wish she always do . when mother be here she always stay in , but she be dead , " say the child . there be infinite satisfaction in the tone in which the last three word be utter . 
 " have you be long unable to walk ? " say Undine , lay her hand softly on the red head . 
 " since she beat I the night before she die . " she speak more sullenly than ever and twitch her little brown toe backwards and forwards . 
 " what do you do to try and get well ? " 
 " nothing , " say the child . " one of those gentleman that go about with the little black bag and the sugar pill , he stop and talk to I one day and he give I something to rub with , but I can not   rub it and there be no one can . " 
 " can not   I rub it for you ? " 
 the child look up half suspiciously , then her eye brighten a little . 
 " it be in the tent , and Mary Jones would be angry if anyone go in when she be go out . do you live far from here ? " 
 " I do not   live anywhere , " say Undine . " I be look for work . " 
 the child scrutinize she from head to foot , with the shrewd suspicious old woman 's look that the face of field child so soon learn to wear . then she say : 

 " what kind of work ? " 
 " anything ironing . " she would have add , " needlework , " but a short experience have make she very wise , and she know that a man 's dog be an animal more enviable than a woman 's friend if so be the one be mistress and the other maid . needlework must be do for woman , ironing might be for man , so she decide in favour of the ironing . 
 her red - headed little companion meditate for a time , then she say , " Mary Jones have lot of iron in the tent , and she always drink too much to do it . if you stay till she come I think she will let you get some . 
 so Undine sit down on the ground beside she and wait . 



 XVII . 
 LITTLE iron 

 six 
 month after , Undine stand in her own little tent , sort and pile into heap the ironing she have just finish . 

 ' twas a New Rush winter 's morning ; in the blue sky there be not a cloud , and if it be cold and numb in the inside of tent and on the shady side of gravel - heap , out in the sunshine it be warm and genial . 

 she be hurry to get out into it , and truly to impartial eye there be nothing very alluring in the interior of the little tent . ' twas a small place , six foot by eight , and hold three packing - case . the large be a table , cover over with shirt . the second be a bed ; it have low side which lie flat on the ground and serve to keep off the wind which at night blow in chill under the skirting . the small have a kind of tick ; it be a desk and general repository . it do not lock , but that matter less , as its only content be paper scribble over and clothe that would not have pay a Kaffir the time it take to steal they . it be an empty place , and cheerless it would have look to other eye ; but to 

 Undine not a yellow water stain in the canvas nor a mark in the cracked pole , nor a knot in the rough case but have its own story , and a pleasant familiar face show itself in each of they . even the old black bottle stand in the corner make home , more home . she might have change it now for a candlestick , but so many pleasant thought hang round its old black neck that the bottle keep its ground . 

 place on a tray one of the pile of iron , and put on the huge white kappie which have replace the battered silk hat and very much add to the respectability of the iron woman , she go out into the sunshine , button down the door after she . 

 the tent stand in a quiet corner of the Camp on the outskirt of the North End . the only very near neighbour be a family of dutch Boers who camp on the right . on all other side it be surround by low gravel - heap , 
 1 
 among which the tent nestle like a white bird in a yellow nest , as Undine say when describe it to her little break - back friend . 

 she go to visit she this morning before take her work to its destination , and find she bask in the warmth at the back of the tent , a veritable diogene , with only her head and shoulder stick out of the great tub in which she have ensconce herself . 

 1 
 Dťbris . 


 in answer to her visitor 's look of inquiry , she say , " the ground 's so wet I can not   lie on it , and in here it be so nice . I can rock from side to side . just see ! " and she put the tub in motion , lean heavily first on one elbow and then on the other . 
 " and the rose ? " 
 " oh , it be all right , but it seem as though spring would never come , " say the girl , touch with her thick little forefinger the still leafless and brown slip that stand in the side of the old three - legged pot . 
 " you only stay such a little while yesterday , you must not go soon today , " she say ; and Undine put down her tray and sit down on the ground beside she . 
 " I can not stay very long today , " she say . " I must try and find the owner of those shirt . three month ago they be bring I , and no one have ever call for they ; I be afraid the person to whom they belong must be poor and need they , they be so fine and so old and worn . " 
 " he be wait so long , he will not   mind wait a little long , " say the girl , rest her head in her companion 's lap and look up into her face with her clear grey eye . 
 " tell I what you write about last night , " she say . 

 Undine 's hand rest on the same great shock of wild red hair , and the broad freckle face that look up at hers be the same that six month 

 before she have see for the first time ; yet it resemble that face only as a face awake resemble the same face asleep . it be like a dark room into which the sunshine have look . 

 " I do not write anything , " say Undine , as she pass her finger tenderly along the line in the low forehead ; " I be so tired I go to sleep with the pen in my hand , and when I wake the candle have quite burn out . " 
 " and have you not anything to tell I ? " 
 " no . I have be so busy all the morning . " 
 " and can not   you think while you work ? " 
 " sometimes , not often ; but yesterday evening , when I be put the collar into starch , a little story come to I that seem beautiful then , though it do not now . shall I tell it to you ? " 
 the child nod ; and Undine , run her finger through and through her coarse hair , begin : 
 " a mother be lie on her bed , dying , and at her side be a very little baby . the people who stand round her thought she know nothing , see nothing ; and truly she see none of they . she feel only the touch of the little baby 's finger upon her breast , but she see what no one else could see in the far end of the room be two , draw ball from a box which have no bottom ; and Death 's ball be the pure white and Life 's be the blood red . 

 " death be very tall and calm and his face be smooth and white , like a face cut out of marble ; his 

 eyelid be half closed and in the eye beneath they lie the shadow of wonderful dream . round he be a mantle of many cold grey tint , and his wing be fold close against his side . 

 " a ball be draw , and it be Death 's white ball ; so the mother know that she must go to he ; but when they be go to draw again , she pray and say : 
 " " stay ! stay ! o death ; give Life my child!í for she fear he , he be so still and cold , and they be strange wonderful dream that wander beneath his eyelid . 
 " and Life say , " let the mother see what we have to give it , and she shall decide who be to have the child.í 
 " and Death bow his head slowly . 

 " now Life be very beautiful ; her hair be like the yellow glory of the sunset , and her limb be strong and soft and round , and her breast be as white as an open lily . her cheek be red , so red that the tear trace could hardly be see on they , and her white dazzle wing be always quiver and expand , yet they never raise she or take she from the earth . she be very lovely , and the bright robe she wear be of spotless tender green , the colour of the first shoot on the white - thorn tree ; only here and there , where it turn up a little , the lining show it be red and have clot on as though it have be dip in blood . she be very beautiful ; but 

 when the mother look at her forehead , knit with thought and pain , and at her large wide - open eye through which the light and darkness chase each other endlessly , she fear she also . 

 " life speak first , and her voice be like the singing of the bird in spring - time , and the murmuring of the crowd in a great city , and the weeping of a lonely woman at a graveside , all strangely blend . 
 " " look in my eye , í she say , " and see what I have to giveí ; and the mother look . 
 " in the street of a great city roll the carriage of a rich man , and the mud from its wheel spring up into the face of two who be poor and hungry and stand at the corner of the street talk . 
 " " whose carriage be that?í ask the one . 
 " " the man who rid in it be the rich and most fortunate man in all this city , í answer the other . " from his boyhood upwards all that his hand have touch have turn to gold . Misfortune have never cross he . his very dog live long than another be and die easy death . we be friend once in our youth , but now he count his gold by million , and I have nothing but a starve wife.í 
 " " and why do you not go to he for help?í 
 " " because how should he pity I who have never know want , and how should he remember I who have entertain lord and princes?í but still when they part the poor man turn his step towards the house of the great . 

 " " if I have but half that one of his horse eat I would be happy , í he think . 
 " the fortunate man be walk in his garden . he be very fat , and the only walk he ever take be up and down its gravel path . the air be rich with the scent of the flower , and the light of the afternoon sun make the drop of the leap fountain sparkle more brightly than the diamond on his finger . a small bird be bath itself in the water . 
 " " now , í say the rich man , " if it be not too much trouble , and the shot worth more than the fruit it eat , I would kill that bird.í 
 " then he think of the grand dinner he be to give the next day , and how his beautiful daughter be to marry one of the great lord who would be there . 
 " then he think how they all envy he his grand old mansion and his priceless horse ; then he look up and see the poor man stand between he and the sun . he do not know he , for it be very hard to remember people who be so shabby , and so he ask he who he be . the poor man tell his story , and when he have finish go back out of that beautiful garden sorry that he have enter it . 

 " then the rich man walk up and down again and bask in the sunshine . it be a man 's own fault if he have trouble and be poor and friendless , 

 for the world be a good world . there be no help for he but in the grave , the poor man have say , and the fortunate man think , as he walk up and down , what a very great fool he must be . it be such a nice pleasant world this , with its great red sun warm one on a chilly afternoon all for nothing , and ripen one 's fruit and vegetable and ask for no pay . it be such a nice pleasant world this , with such a nice pleasant sea , over which pleasant ship could bring pleasant wine and turtle from other pleasant land . he moisten his lip when he think of his old , old wine ; and then he think of another disagreeable dark place that the man have speak of , where there be great cobwebs which be not round old bottle and live thing that be not gay horse . that be the place he do not like to think of ; it make the sweat stand in great drop on his red neck . life have be so good to he ; she have give he all the sweet and keep back all the bitter ; she have bring no tear to his eye since he have be old enough to tell a sixpence from a penny ; it would be hard to leave she now , when all man envy he . so he pull out his watch with its setting of jewel and wonder when the dinner hour would come , and try to forget that other hour . and at last the dinner hour come , with its guest and its laughter and its wine . and at last that other hour come also the only hour of which we be all sure ; and the 

 fortunate man , who have never suffer and never weep and never pity , go to the place he fear where the live thing and cobwebs be . nobody miss he , nobody want he back again not his pretty daughter , for she have all his money . 

 " now , when the mother see all this , she would have give the child to Death , for she say , " it be as well he have die a baby.í 
 " but Life prevent she : " I have other thing to give , í she say . 
 " and the mother look . it be a garden again , a wild neglect garden where the flower and creeper grow rank and free in each other 's arm , and beauty be not measure out . at the root of a great tree , almost enfold and hide by the shrub that grow around it , stand a man . his face be young and one to be pity by the old and wise , for it be very glad and full of hope . in his arm , press close to he , be a woman , and not one of the flower have a face so fair as her ; but , deep in her eye , creep a look like the look which creep in the eye of the serpent in that First Garden long ago . they be sweet long kiss ; and the word she speak to he be sweet , the sweet old word of love and faith which woman speak to man ; and he believe she . 

 " his heart grow very strong and great through the mighty love that come to he , and their life path lie before he in a mist of light and beauty . truly 

 God 's world be good , and the life he give great and beautiful , and only the pure and true of heart be worthy of it . so he think ; and look in the eye of the woman he love , and press his lip to her , and draw she close to he , for he never see the serpent 's look that glide in they . 

 " but the day come , at last , when he do see it when she look into his face and laugh , and he know that when he press the woman he love to his heart it be only the grey old father of lie he have hold . now , life be for he that woman and that woman be evil , he become evil too . for the sake of what he have once love , he deceive all woman , and drank and curse , and gain gold by evil , and spend it in sin ; and man say that , wherever he pass , you might trace he by the ruin and evil he leave behind . yet they envy he , for the woman love he , and where other man would have starve he make gold . he might eat of the fruit of the earth and satisfy himself : its gold , its wine , or its woman they be all free to he who have no conscience to restrain and no faith in a high power . 
 " the woman he have once love be tell of he how the devil befriend his own , how he sin and come to no evil , and enjoy life as other man could not . 

 " then she say , softly : " it be well that I deceive he , very wellí ; but in her inmost heart she fear to meet he , and when she know that he be 

 dead the world seem large to she and her breath come light . 

 " " I have that to give , í say Life . 
 " " and I have sleep , í say death . 
 " and the mother would have give the child to he , but life say : " I have yet other thing to giveí ; and again she look . 
 " there be a street with great and noble house , and out at the door of one of they come a young man . his shoulder be bent and , as he walk , his eye be fix upon the ground ; only once he look up at the great house at his side and see the face of two soft woman look out of a large window . then he clench the finger of the hand that hang at his side till the nail go into the flesh , and clench his tooth and swear under his breath a bitter oath . 
 " ' twas a strange presumptuous oath for a man to swear who wear brown threadbare clothe out at elbow and boot that be split and who live in a garret ; for he swear that the day should come when those rich man should ask he to their table and he would refuse to come , when those white proud woman whom he curse in his bitterness should covet a smile or a word from he , when the world should know he and call he great . this he swear and go home to his garret . 

 " it be a dreary empty place where the sunlight never enter and where dry bread be eat and 

 where nothing pleasant ever come except only a young girl with hard work - wear hand . she be the landlord 's daughter , and she creep in every day to rub the dust off the rotten table and turn the straw mattress and carry out the ash , if there be any . in the long evening , when to save light he would sit there think in the dark , she would sit there too , close beside he with her hard little hand in his , just as she have do when he come there three year before . she have be a child then ; she be a woman now ; but it make no difference to she . 

 " one evening she do not come , and he sit there alone , think , think . the room be very quiet , but there be a great war rag in the man 's heart . at last he bring his hand down on the table and swear between his clenched tooth , as he have swear that day before the rich man 's house . 
 " " she will not help I in my work , í he say ; " she and her child will be a weight on I , drag I down . if I stay here it will conquer I . I must leave she , I must leave she , for she can not help me.í 
 " so in the grey dawn of the winter morning he stand in the door of his room , ready to leave it for the last time . she be labour up the stair with a great heap of coal in her arm . 
 " " these be for you , í she say , her breath come quick with pleasure : " the lodger belowstairs give they to I . see , how many!í 

 " there be burn drop under his eyelid , but he let she pass into the room ; then he say , " I be go away.í 
 " she look up into his face , for his voice sound strange , but it be too dark to see he . 
 " " will you stay long?í she ask . 
 " then he tell she he be go away forever , that he would never come again ; and he shut the door behind he very quickly for fear he might turn back . quickly he shut it , but it be not quick enough , for he hear the coal fall on the floor , and a low short cry that follow he out into the street and on and on into the long year that follow . 
 " year come , year go ; his hair grow whiter ; his shoulder stoop lower yet ; and alone and in bitterness he labour on . 
 " " oh , you rich and noble , í he say , " you who think no more of I than of the dog in your kennel ; when you vanish and your name be as forget as theirs I shall live on , my name shall be immortal!í and then he press his lip together and work on . 
 " and at last it come . the world call he great ; it write of he in its paper ; man talk of he on the street , and woman in their house . the child learn to lisp his name ; rich man ask he to their dinner ; noblewomen come to visit he , only that they might say that they have see he . 

 " he be very great , and his fame be very great , 

 and his rich be very great ; but he be old with work and his life be do . 

 " " put I in my great chair beside the fire , í he say to his servant , " and leave I . you say I be die why should you stay for that ? you can not help me.í so they go out and leave he . 
 " Nodding , doze in the firelight , he look up and see before he , sit in a velvet armchair , an old man with cap of crimson and a silver silken tassel that be shake in the firelight . ' twas the phantom of himself who sit there , nod in the golden firelight . 
 " " you have be fortunate , í say the phantom ; you have succeed as few man in the world succeed . you be very rich , and all man pray for riches.í 
 " I never care for gold , í say the great man . " of what use be it to I , alone ? once í 
 " he have grow a little deaf of late , and now he could hear less ; there be often a low short cry ring in his ear . 
 " " fool pray for gold , í he say , " not wise men.í 

 " the phantom nod . " in your youth , í he say , " you swear you would be great and that the high and noble should receive you into their house , fair woman should covet your notice and proud man your visit . you have gain all that ; surely you be bless . it be true you have pay something for it a little some pleasure , the rest of a few 

 thou- 
 thousand 


 sand night , the woman you love but what be that ! many pay all that and die in a garret , or on a dung - heap . you be blessed!í 

 " " if that be all , then well never have be bear , í say the great man , bitterly . " they write of I in their paper ; I never read their praise now . my house be well why should I go to theirs ! fair woman come to see I what be fair woman to I ! they only disturb I with their childish chatter ; and sometimes , if they have blue eye ha ! if that be all , well to have die a baby.í 
 " the phantom lean his hand upon his knee and leer across the firelight . 

 " " what 
 have 
 it be for then ? all this battling , all this strive , all this heartache ? surely it have not be for nothing?í 


 " " no , í say the great man ; " it have not be for nothing . the man who look for happiness in this life be a fool . I live for the future . 
 I 
 would be immortal . Immortal!í 

 " the phantom lean back in his armchair and laugh till the silvered tassel of his red cap tremble again in the firelight ! 

 " " Immortal ! I think you be a great man , yet you juggle with this word immortal , like the rest of your kind . what do 
 you 
 mean by it now ? that your name shall live after you be dead ? well , if that be all you seek , you shall have it . they will give you a grand funeral , and write of you in paper 

 border deep with black , and for a few day , a very few , everyone will speak of you . but there will be no woman to wear one flower the less in her hair , and no man to drink one glass less of wine , because you die that morning . you be a great man , a very great man , so perhaps they will raise a statue of you , and for a few hundred year , now and then , some one will speak of you , oftenest in praise at first , oftenest in blame at last ; for to man of the new idea and the new light the great man of old look very small . immortal ! ha ! ha ! who be you ? what be you?í laugh the phantom . " a paltry two thousand year have dim the radiance of her redeemer and prophet ; how long do you think earth will remember you?í 


 " the phantom laugh again and look into the fire : " that coal that be burn there : five million year ago or so it be a great tree grow in the green old forest . perhaps 
 it 
 think 
 it 
 be to be immortalise immortalise into coal . and so it be , for five million year ; but in five minute it will be ash now . in five million year where will you be ? immortal ha ! ha ! Ha!í laugh the phantom . " Fool ! Fool ! Fool!í 

 " with his hand clasp over his face and his head bow down to his knee , the old man sit . 
 " " oh , my life , í he cry , " my life ! I have give it , I have give it , and I have gain nothing.í 

 " three day later the great man die , and the 

 noble and the great follow he to his grave , and they write of he in their paper . they say , " weep , weep , for a great man be dead ; weep , weep!í but for all that , no one weep . only one half - starve man who live alone in the garret where he labour and toil , he weep for envy , for he say , " why should he have all the good , I all the evil?í 

 " then Life drop her lid for a moment . 
 " " and I have rest , í say death . 
 " and the mother would have give he her child , but life say : " look again , once more;í and the mother look for the last time . 
 " it be four o'clock in the morning , and beside a table , with his forehead rest in his two hand , a man be sit . the candle be almost burn out , and soon it would be time for he to go out to his day 's work ; for all day he stand behind a counter , sell yard of print and muslin to the lady that come in . 
 " the other clerk call he fool ; if they have know how his night be spend they would have call he so more often . when their day 's work be over they go out to amuse themselves , but he only shut himself up in his room and walk up and down and pray and write himself half mad before the morning come . 

 " it be well there be no live thing to see he but the little brown mouse that look out of its hole and wish it could have nibble at the candle . 

 but the candle stand safe and do nothing but devour the bit of paper scribble over with song that be always be put to she . she have just devour two great blue page , on which be much of such hot talk as come from young pen at four o'clock in the morning . 

 " she would get no more , however , for the pen be lie under the table , and the man look very disconsolate as he sit beside it . 
 " if he have write anything just now , it would have be : " yes , I be a great fool , as they say . let we eat and drink , for tomorrow we die . let we do as the sheep do ; they only be wise . beauty be an angel that no man ever catch ; truth be a deception that change to falsehood while you finger it . we be shadow among shadow . why be so in earnest ? why make oneself so hot about it all ? why strive and pray and make so great a bluster ? life be not   worth it . something , nothing , here , go ; let we make the good of it , wear the nice clothe , eat the nice meat , and love the easy love , and believe what come to hand ; tread on , steady and safe , step by step , in the narrow sandy path our father clear from stone and bush long ago . if this can not be , why , curse life and die it be the good thing left.í 
 " so he think then , for he be weary , and throw himself down on his bed . perhaps he sleep , but his eye be heavy and red the next morning as he stand behind the counter , sell ribbon and print . 

 " so this poor clerk go on , month after month , pray and write all night and measure off dress by the yard all day ; but at last it happen that one of his dream take a human shape , and a pair of clear still eye look into his life and make he rich than the great prince of the Golden Isles , whose house and whose shoe be cover with jewel . it be true , as man speak , that the eye belong not to he but to a woman who be nothing to he a woman who be high above he and who would surely be carry , some day , to another man 's home . yet when he be beside she she speak to he kindly , and in her face he find the beauty in her mind , the truth he dream of . he know that she be his though she do not love he , for he love she , and no one could ever take she from he , not she herself . 
 " he hear at last that she be go to be marry , and then he leave the town and go far , far away , and for a little time there be a heavy aching at his heart all day as he stand behind the counter or sit alone in his silent room . but at last the ache go , and there be only gladness leave . he have not her body , it be true , but her beautiful soul be live somewhere and it be true and real , and the earth be never again quite empty for he . 

 " the year pass on , and they still call he a fool , for he make no money . he never stay long enough in any place , but wander on from town 

 to town and land to land , just when the longing seize he . sometimes a child 's face , or a reach of sea beach , or the charm of snow - crown mountain make he pause a little , but have get all they have to give , he wander on again . 

 " he make no money and no friend , this poor fool of a clerk . only sometimes , when pain or sorrow would draw people to he , they would enter his life for a little time ; but when they be comfort they would go out of it again , and he would go on with his wandering and sing his song and smile and love the beautiful green old earth . 
 " sometimes his song be sad , but oftener they be glad , for it do not take much to make he happy a little stream of sunlight break in through the good within the window , or the shadow which the tree cast as he pass below they on his way to work or to lie on the grass on Sunday morning and watch the rippling in the pool of water ; that be enough to make life sweet to he so sweet that , when the death he have once long for come to he , he be almost sorry to leave it . yet it seem so pleasant to think of lie deep in the soft old earth he love , and he be glad he have live . there be not one night of sleepless agony , nor one hour of bitterness he would have miss , even if he might . it be all good , look at from the end . life lie very beautiful behind , and death be not terrible , only very strange . 

 " he die young and they bury he in the earth he love ; but there be not a tear shed over he . for why ? what have he do all his life ? sell a few yard of print and ribbon , cast up a few account , suffer a little agony , pray a little , doubt a little , comfort a few people who be sad ; and for the rest live much as the bird live , sing and love and revel in the sunshine . 
 " " I have that to give , í say Life . 
 " and the mother say : " take my child . your good be bitter sweet , but it be sweet.í 
 " so Death take the mother and Life the child . " 
 when Undine have finish her story they sit quiet for a little time . then the girl say , " it be because such beautiful story come to you that you be never miserable and be always smile . I like this story . " 
 " I like they too , " say Undine , " when they come to I as I be at my work . they seem so beautiful , they make the blood run all through my body with little throb ; but when I try to write or tell they I wonder what I like in they . but I must be go now , Diogenes , or Mr. William Brown will be without a shirt and dying of the cold . " and Undine get up and put her tray upon her arm . 
 " diogene what do that mean ? " 

 " why , Diogenes be a man who live in a tub , as you be do today ; and I call you diogene 

 be- 
 because 


 cause I like to call my friend by name that no one else have for they . " 

 " be I your friend ? " a strangely bright look come into the little freckled face that look up at she out of the tub . 
 Undine answer , " yes , my only little friend . " 
 she be turn to go when Diogenes stop she : 
 " do you really think people do nothing but dream after they be dead ? you say death 's eye be full of dream . " 
 " no , I do not   think so , " say Undine , try to balance the tray on her head and finally return it to her arm . " the story come to I just as they like . I never think about they . " 
 " I be sorry , " say Diogenes , still rest her fold arm on the ground and look up . " last night I dream my rose bush have a great white rose and you have it in your hair , and you and I be walk over little sandhill . the air be so cool and it be dark as though there be go to be a great storm ; I be look up into your face , and you be look straight out before you , and your eye be so strange . and at last we come to the sea , and you say you be go over it . it be a sad dream , but I like it , and when I wake up father be drunk and they be all quarrel and I wish I have never wake up any more . it be so nice to dream . " 

 " yes , dream be nice . good - bye . " and the little iron woman trudge off with her shirt , leave Diogenes with enough food for reverie , conjecture and enjoyment for the rest of the day . 
 the owner of the shirt , she have be tell by the Kaffir who bring they , live near the Circus ; that his name be W. Brown the shirt themselves tell she ; but to discover his whereabouts seem a hopeless task . 
 Most people answer she shortly enough . one old woman , in answer to her question , begin the long story of one Bill Brown , who might be the Bill Brown she be in search of , who have live at Graaff Rienet , who have set out for the Fields , but who , as turn out in the sequel , have die before reach they . 
 he could hardly be the owner of the shirt , nor yet the widow Brown to whose tent some well - dispose digger send she . Undine be give up the quest when a Kaffir woman , hear her question , direct she to a small tent the top of which be just visible behind its large compeer . 
 make her way between the tent over broken bottle , empty tin and rubbish of all kind , Undine soon find herself before it , and a glance through its open door convince she that she have find the right place at last . 

 ' twas a tent of about the size of her own , but its interior present an infinitely more comfortless 

 ap- 
 appearance 


 pearance , though it be furnish with a wooden stretcher , two camp stool and a huge padlock sea - chest . 

 the gravel that cover the floor be tread into mound and heap of all size . More lath of the wooden stretcher hang down break than be leave to support the red sand - colour bedding that lie on it . on the sea - chest that stand in the middle of the tent be such a multifarious and miscellaneous collection of article as surely never sea - chest bore before . there be tin and bottle of every description , the latter crown with the remain of half burn candle ; there be old newspaper and shoe blacking , book and a pepper caster , pen and cigar end , a paint box and a break look - glass , a microscope and comb , hair brush , tooth brush , boot brush , nail brush and a papi - mache desk on which be a silver - clasp album across which lie the broken head of a pick ; these with an infinitude of other small and large article cover it . on the ground at its side lie an empty meal sack , the last of whose content have evidently be use to compose the great leadeny - look roaster - cake that be stand beside a tin mug of water on the sea - chest ; the look of the roaster - cake be not invite , except it be to throw at the head of an enemy , yet some one have evidently try to put it to some other use , for there be small piece chip off every here and there . 

 close beside the sea - chest , on one of the camp stool lean against the central pole , with his head hang on his breast , sit a man . he be in digger trim , with his shirt sleeve roll up above his elbow , perhaps to hide their frayed and worn condition , certainly not for work , for the long arm they leave uncover seem hardly strong enough to raise themselves , still less to handle sieve or pick . his eye be closed , but a very light tap at the door - post cause he to raise his head and look up heavily at the white - clothe figure that stand in his doorway . 
 if he be Mr. Brown , she say , she have bring his shirt . 
 a slight flush come into his face . 
 " I do not   want they ; you have well take they and keep they as payment , " he say ; then he droop back into his old posture . 
 he be greatly change , but , when he look up , Undine at once recognise he as the passenger who , on that first morning on board the steamer have seem the only glad thing in harmony with the fresh breezy water and the sweeping sea - bird . 
 he be in harmony with his surrounding now also , for the break tin and bottle and the old stretcher do not look more hopelessly down - and - out and good - for - nothing than their master . 

 Undine look at his waste arm , at the empty meal sack , and the leaden roaster - cake , and listen to his hollow cough , and wonder where the long- 

 whisker captain and his brilliant sister might be . perhaps they be only of the sunflower specie whom only fool think to find grow in the shade . 

 she watch he in silence for a minute , then she step lightly into the tent and , put her tray down on the floor , come and stand beside he . it be not till she have speak twice and touch he softly on the shoulder that he seem to hear she . 
 " you be very ill , " she say . " have you much pain ? " 
 " no , " he answer , heavily , without raise his head or open his eye . 
 " have you be ill long ? " 
 " yes no I do not   know ; " and a long hollow cough follow . 
 " would you not feel a little well if you try to lie down ? it must be very hard to sit up here , " she say , gently . 
 " I would , but it be such a long way . " 
 he raise his head again and look with his heavy eye across the three foot that separate he from his stretcher as a man might to a land of promise across an ocean . 
 Undine shake out the pillow and smooth the blanket , and put his hand on her shoulder help he to reach it . 

 he do not thank she , but drop down on it with a weary sigh . he have bonny light curl like 

 some one she have care for long ago , and he have break boot and stocking so old that the red flesh show through . she hardly know which draw she to he most , the curl or the boot , for there be something achingly pitiable in broken boot . 

 when a man who have call himself a gentleman fall to that , he can fall no low . 



 XVIII . 
 little iron and a digger 

 DIOGENES ' 
 little red head peep out of her tub and she roll herself from side to side and feel sadly disconsolate . her rise bush be full of tender leaf , her back be not bad and the weather be glorious , but for three whole week she have have no story , and for three whole week her daily visitor have come only to go . she feel aggrieved and greatly wrong . 


 " I wish he have stop in England ; it would have be a great deal nicer for 
 he 
 , " she soliloquise , her little forehead all gather up into knot and pucker . 

 " England 's such a nice country , they say , and there be nothing nice in this land . I wonder why he come . " 
 just at that moment Undine arrive . 
 " be he well ? " inquire Diogenes , evidently with great interest , and her lip seem to grow yet heavy when she have receive her answer . 
 " I do not   believe he try to get well , " she say in an aggrieved tone . " do not   you get tired to keep run up here all day ? " 

 " not tired , but I be go to look for some Kaffir man to carry his tent down next to mine ; then I will be able to take care of he and iron too . how be your back this morning ? " 
 " well , " say Diogenes , sullenly . 
 " I be glad , " say Undine . " I will come back again when I have get the Kaffirs . good - bye . " and she be go . 

 " I wish 
 he 
 be go , " say Diogenes . " it be not a bit nice any more . Heigh - ho ! " and she trace with her finger on the ground the B 's and C 's Undine have teach she to make . 

 as Undine have think , it be a change for the well which bring the second tent into her little nest among the gravel - heap . while one pair of hand and four iron have to skim over shirt enough in the twenty - four hour to pay for doctor , egg , milk , medicine , and sufficient bread to keep the hand themselves go , they could ill afford to be long at rest . now she could go on iron all day without interruption , peep in at his tent every time she pass to change an iron at the fire , which be build between three round stone at the back of the tent . 

 the doctor do not give much hope of his recovery . he be completely break down , say the doctor , with hard work and bad living . all day he lie there as helpless as a little child , never speak but when his mind wander . then he would often 

 fancy himself talk with the mine - captain and beg he not to give up yet , to keep on a little long , to advance a little more money . luck must turn soon . or sometimes he be walk on the deck with the captain 's pretty sister , and he would be whisper on softly for hour . 

 when Undine hear he she sometimes wonder whether it would not almost have be good to let he die alone , with his bit of roaster - cake in his solitary tent . he do not look much like win the heart of any woman as he lie there moaning , with even his bonny curl cut off . 
 at last he grow well , and then it be hard to find time for the inevitable ironing . let he seem ever so fast asleep , his eye be sure to open if she rise to leave he . if she have nothing else to do for he , he like she to sit beside he and talk . 
 one day she look in at the door with a furiously red face and in one hand a hot iron that she have just be to fetch at the fire . 
 " put that iron away " , he say , feebly , " till it get cool . my eye ache with they . they be always in your hand . I want you to answer I a question I can not   answer for myself . " 
 " well ? " say Undine , push back her cap a little and lean over to one side to balance the iron she hold in the other . " what be it ? I do not   think the iron have absorb quite all my intellect yet . " 

 " as the spade and pick do mine . tell I how it be that I be quite contented to lie here and be feed and nurse by you , and do not   feel as though I ought even to thank you , when I would die soon than take a broken sixpence from my own flesh and blood ? how be it ? I be too weak to think . " 

 " you must be weak if you can not   think 
 that 
 out , " she say , twist one arm round the tent - post to keep she steady , and look , he think , almost beautiful in spite of her redness . " do not   you know there be thing we have to be more grateful for than be nurse and feed ? you have   give I something to take care of , and so , though you do not   think it , you feel you have do more for I than I for you . as for get help from our relation , " say Undine , rest her head against the pole , " they be just the last people to go to unless one like get a pain in one 's pride bone . one always have a lurking suspicion they be do it from principle or necessity or something equally disagreeable ; and that be why their money hurt . but my iron be get cold , " she say , turn to go . 

 " do not   you ever get tired of they ? " he ask . " it be so burn hot today . " 
 " oh no , I never get tired , and it be not so hot today as it might be . I get to like it . " 

 she walk off , but the iron she be use must have be a very heavy one , for when she be take 

 it back to the fire she stumble two or three time as though she would have fall . 

 " what a very uneven little path this be , " she say to herself , thereby greatly malign the very smooth little path over the gravel that lead from the door of her tent to the fireplace . perhaps it be by way of smooth it that she kneel down by the water barrel and damp the crown of her head and lie there for half an hour look very white . anyhow , she do not say any more about the path be uneven after that . 
 a few day later , Undine pay her daily visit to diogene , who as usual lie in her tub with her rise bush before she . the discern eye of that small individual perceive something unusual and amiss in the face of her friend , and when Undine sit down beside the tub and lean her hand against it , she say , 
 " be you very tired today ? " 
 " no , not at all . " 
 " you do not   look happy . I wish I know what be the matter ; I wish you need never be tired or sad " ; and diogene take Undine 's rough little hand and rub it softly up and down with her chin . it be her way of show sympathy ; and it show it more effectually than any word could have do so effectually that it end in make Undine cry . she press her face against the tub , and diogene fancy she hear a sob . 


 " oh dear ! what be it ? " say Diogenes , look up , terribly trouble at the sound . " I do not know you could be 
 so 
 miserable . I think you see such beautiful thing , you be always happy . I be sure it be all that man 's fault " ; and Diogenes ' clear grey eye fill with wrathful but partly sympathetic tear . 

 " no , it be not ; only I be weak and faint , and I want money . " 
 if she rise bush have stir its tender leaf and say it want high - heel boot and a fashionable bonnet , it would not have astonish Diogenes more . 
 " thou shalt not love money ; thou shalt not desire it ; thou shalt despise it ; it be the child of the devil , and his eld bear . " this be the little bit of ethical teaching which be sure to lift up its head in the wildest of Undine 's fairy story , and the effect on Diogenes have be so great that she often seriously debate in her own mind whether , see a pound lie at her foot , there would not be a certain amount of degradation in stoop to pick it up . to look up , therefore , and see her instructor 's face wet with tear because she want money , want money , so puzzle Diogenes that she remain quiet for a few minute . 
 then she begin to use she very practical little brain , and quickly come to certain conclusion . 

 " can not   you get money enough to pay the doctor ? " 

 she ask , look up softly from under her great shock of red hair . 

 " no , I can get that . I want much money , almost a hundred pound . if I can not   get that I do not   want any , I do not   want anything . " 

 diogene draw a long breath . she feel sure that disagreeable 
 he 
 be at the bottom of it all , but she would ask no more question . she be rub her chin softly up and down Undine 's hand when it touch the ring upon it Aunt Margaret 's ring . 

 " if you be to sell this , perhaps you would get much money ; diamond be so dear and it be so beautiful . " 
 Undine lift her head quickly and look down at it . she have as little thought of it as a thing to be part with as the hand which wear it . the one link between she and the old day . she have wear it till it seem to have grow a part of herself . her baby friend have touch it , pleased with its flash and gleam . it have whisper to she that truth and love be possibility when she have sit toy with it in the great , gayly fill , empty room of her husband 's house . it have shine on a soft hand that have so often rest tenderly on her head . it have be the sign of a great love , faithful even unto death . she move it softly round her finger two or three time ; then she draw it off . 

 why sacrifice the living to the dead , the present 

 to the past ? the past be a fruitless dream , the present only be live and demand all thing . 

 " be you go to sell it ? " ask Diogenes . 
 " yes , at once , " say Undine , rise quickly , " and I will come back soon . " 

 " I know she like that ring , and now she have get to sell it , " say diogene to herself as soon as Undine be out of hearing . " it be all his fault , I know it be . perhaps she want to send he to England . she say yesterday he be bad and would never get well if he could not   go . I do wonder why he do not stay there , " say Diogenes , in her anger pull so vigorously at one leaf of she rise that it come off . " 
 I 
 do not   go about everywhere make everybody miserable . " lose in the contemplation of her own virtue in abstain from a crime which by no possibility she could have commit , and find immense satisfaction in so do , diogene lie still in her tub and wait for Undine 's return . 

 she be long go , but when she do make her appearance , it be so radiantly , joyfully , that Diogenes feel ashamed of her tear . if she have not like part with her ring , there be no sign of it in her face . she have get as much as she want , almost more ; now he would know that he could go to England , and the hope would make he well . 

 " I know it be for he , " mutter Diogenes under her breath ; but Undine be too glad to hear it , too glad to sit down , and soon flutter off . she 

 hardly feel the sandy road she plod in , but only the little roll of note tight - clasped in her hand , the little roll that mean hope and strength and life for he and , it might be , more than life gladness in place of long year of weary loneliness . even if he get well and , stay at New Rush till he have money , at last go home to find the woman who have charm away his soul give to another , would he not curse the hand that have keep he from a quiet sleep in the New Rush graveyard ? 

 it might be that , go home even now , he might find the bright eye have fool he ; but Undine put the thought from she and enjoy the sunshine of the moment . 

 he should never know from whom it come ; it should be burden with no debt of gratitude . generally the work be heart - sickening , that of try to bring joy and good to our heart 's own , work in which failure be in number as gravel bort , 
 1 
 and the success as diamond . but for once Undine find success . the mysterious little parcel which the post bring he seem to work in he all the wonder of the old life water . 


 there be no more refusal to eat ; no more weary day of stupor and relapse come when he have weary himself out with calculation as to the 

 1 
 " Bort " diamond dust ; 
 i.e. 
 , the " dust " infinitely outnumber the " diamond . " 


 length of time it would take he to get strong and then to earn money enough for the long journey . 

 when the day grow warm , he be strong enough to sit outside , among rug and cushion on the shady side of the tent ; sometimes to use his pencil ; sometimes to watch Undine through the tent door as she stand smooth away at her packing - case . 
 pleasant day they be , fly all too quickly , for one at least , who work and enjoy the present and put the future from she . 
 at last the time come when they be only hour that could be count before his departure . he be still so weak that it take he a long time to get from one tent to the other , but he be to leave by the next morning 's coach . the last evening come . he lie on his stretcher , and Undine sit at its foot on the skirting in the doorway , try to make the most of the daylight . she be darn the good of his old stocking , and he all the while chat on eagerly of the future , in spirit unnaturally high , spring quickly from one subject to another . 

 " you be such a genius , Little Irons , in spite of your big kappie and your shirt . the world shall know of you some day , and I shall be so proud of the Little Irons who come to help I when all the world would have leave I to drop out of life like a dog . " then he speculate as to where the money could have come from , then on his own course for 

 the future ; then talk of those first dreadful day of labour and failure , of the time it would take he to reach the Bay , 
 1 
 and at last talk himself to sleep . then she stand up and put the stocking she have mend into his bag , and move softly about the tent collecting pencil and various trifle that still lie about . 


 she have just pack the last of they when a coolie , 
 2 
 late out , pass the tent with his tray of ware upon his head . there be still two orange leave on it , so she tell he to wait , and go into her tent to the broken ink pot where she keep her money . there be only one shilling in it , so one of the orange have to go ; the other she put in the pocket of the coat he be to wear tomorrow , which lie on the box at his side . there be no more money leave in the ink pot , but what do it matter ? there would be nobody to care for after tomorrow . what do anything matter ? she go to her own tent and sit down in the doorway and try to eat her supper ; but eating do not answer ; so presently she sit still with her head lean against the door - post . 

 across the road be the child of the Dutchwoman , shout and tumble over one another in their play . they have do so every night for the last six month , but do that night seem just like every other night to they ? 

 1 
 Port Elizabeth . 


 2 
 Indian . 


 he do not wake to eat his supper , and sleep on straight till morning . just at daybreak she step softly into his tent to wake he . the cart they have order to take he to the hotel would be there soon . he be scarcely ready , and Undine be still busy cut up his tobacco when she catch the sound of the approach wheel . he do not hear they till they be just before the tent ; then he rise quickly and press the cut tobcacco into his pouch while the driver carry out his luggage . then he turn to wish her good - bye . the grey light be just turn into white , and gust of cold early wind blow in through the roll up door . 
 " good - bye , my friend , my dear little iron , " he say , warmly yet very gladly , and he stoop down to kiss she ; but it be such a cold , tremble little face he touch that something smite his heart . 
 " I have   be a great bother to you , dear little iron , " he say , rest his right hand tenderly on her shoulder . " you will have rest when I be go and go back to your happy , quiet old life ; and I shall never forget you , never . how could I ? " 
 she stand on tiptoe and wound a scarf round his neck . 
 " do not   take it off till the sun get warm , " she say . 

 " oh , I will take good care of myself , " he answer as he pass out of the door . then he turn round to say good - bye once more . " good - bye , but not for 

 very long ; I feel sure we shall soon meet again , " he say , as he take her hand in his . 

 he climb up at the back of the cart , and a moment after only the faint rumbling of the wheel break the stillness . Undine stand in the tent door . 
 " meet again ! meet again ! " poor human heart that must still their ache with such vain word . meet again ! who ever meet again ? the child we love go from we and come back to we a man , and all other praise the change ; but we , even while we run our finger through his curl , we hunger for the little child that sit upon our knee . 
 we part with the friend of our childhood , and we say , " we part only for today ; through life we shall often meet again , " and it may be we clasp hand often in the year that come and talk of the old day ; but we know , though we never say it , that the two who part have never meet again , that the sea of time have run up between we , and we can not touch . who can part , forever ; only when we come so close that nothing separate we can we meet again , only when what bind we be not my need of you or your need of I nor any chance circumstance , but a deep ingrain likeness of nature that can not pass away . 
 " we shall meet again some day , " say Undine as she stand in the tent door , comfort herself with this great lie . 

 a little after the sun have rise , she hurry along 

 the path in the direction of the Toit 's Pan Road , and stop when she come to the last of the enclosure that line it on either side . the coach would have to pass there , and she must see it ; so she stand there wait while the quickly move passenger cart from Toit 's Pan pass and repasse she , break the stillness of the quiet morning . 

 at last , after long waiting , it come with its great red tent , with its blow bugle , with its eight prance horse , with its crowded roof ; and inside , just as it tear past she , she see he . it be only a glimpse , but that be enough , for he look bright and glad . he be speak to the passenger who sit next he and laugh and peel the orange he have find in his pocket . a piece of peel he throw out fall at the roadside , and she pick it up after the coach have pass . 
 " it be all right . he be happy , very happy , " she say , and turn to go back to her tent . " he be happy , very happy , " she keep on repeat to herself when she get back to the tent . remnant of the tobacco she have be cut still lay on the old sea - chest , the boot he have wear yesterday still lie beside it , and the half drunk cup of chocolate be hardly cold . she look in at the door for a minute , and then go to her own tent . 

 her own little tent , which she have say be so full and rich to she , which be so empty and silent now . she walk up and down , not dare to sit 

 down and rest . well have she say to that hungry dog on that day long ago : " go away , and do not follow I . if you follow I I shall love you and I , I have have pain enough . " 

 at last she sit down by the old packing - case and draw out the old paper , and the pen that have be unused so long . she take up the newspaper and scribble all over the edge one of those story in which the heart of Diogenes delight . its keynote be the very safe and comfort reflection that all love die soon or later ; only that which have no existence , which the young dream of , last forever . it comfort she greatly that morning . after a few month she would be happy without he and almost forget this boy whom she have love with a more yearning tenderness than her own little child . 
 " I will forget , I will forget everything , and live only in the present ; then , soon , there will be no reason to forget , for this little love will fade away like the yearning for my monkey and the madness that look so grotesque , and unreal now and which nothing could ever again bring back nothing . " 
 the margin of the newspaper be full to overflow and she be already cross it over in every direction , when a shadow fall across the sunlight that stream in through the tent door . 

 some coolie bring the milk he be accustom to sell there , she think , as she look up to see 

 the figure of a man with his back turn to the entrance . the opening be so low that his head be not visible , but an elegant little black cane move slowly backwards and forwards , and there be that in the cut of the black cloth coat and the hang of the trouser that carry she back from New Rush to that first meeting before the picture in Blair House . soon the figure turn and Undine hardly know what she expect to see , but it be only the very ugly face of a very black nigger that stick itself in at the doorway . 

 " have you do the shirt a girl bring here yesterday ? " he ask in very good English and in a very leisurely and self - possess manner . evidently he have take some Englishman , probably his master , as the model upon which to form himself . Undine bring he the shirt , which the swell nigger take with the extreme tip of his finger , as though it be greatly derogatory to his dignity and he only submit to a most painful necessity . touch gracefully his woolless upper lip with the hand in which he hold the cane , he say : 
 " if you want more work , I dare say you could get it if you come to our place Mr. Albert Blair 's . " 

 the nigger roll out the name very full and with evident satisfaction , at the same time hold out a five - shilling piece to Undine with an air that clearly evince how greatly he scorn the performing of so trivial an action . he think the ironing- 

 woman be certainly half daft , or it might be drunk , for she stand in the tent door star at he and never hold out her hand to receive the money . he be on the point of inform she of his opinion in very plain language when she say , " you can keep the money for yourself . " 

 there be no doubt now as to the iron - woman 's daftness or drunkenness , for who give five shilling for nothing ? but the nigger no long feel himself under the painful necessity of inform she of the fact , and , great as his scorn for the five - shilling piece have appear to be , it quickly find its way into his waistcoat pocket . in reply to a question from Undine he proceed to inform she where his master 's house might be find , and wrap up the shirt in a newspaper he have bring for the purpose , and tuck they under his arm , he walk off switch his black cane . 
 near evening Undine too go out , but in an opposite direction , and forget today even to button down her tent door . there be not a shilling in the bottle nor a whole slice of bread in the box , yet she be not go to look for work now . she be go to diogene , but the walk seem a weary long one ; it have never seem so long before . her leg ache , her head ache , and sometimes she grow dizzy . 

 diogene be not in her tub today . she be greatly excited and the tub seem to confine she . 

 she be lean against it and almost start to her foot when Undine appear round the tent 's corner . 

 " I have   be so tired of wait for you all these two day . I think you would never come . stoop down before the tub and shut your eye tight and then look in and see what I have   get for you , " cry Diogenes , give two gentle clap with her hand , for once a perfect child in her delight . undine do as she be tell and look in , to see the tiny rose bush adorn with one deep - bosom red rosebud . 
 " be not   it beautiful ? be not   it beautiful ? " say Diogenes , enthusiastically clasp her hand . " pick it ; it be for you . no you must not pick it . I will and fasten it in your hair just like it be in my dream . oh , how beautiful ! " 
 Undine put the iron pot down in Diogenes ' lap , but diogene ' finger be so tremulous with gladness that she almost uproot the rose bush before the flower be sever from the stem . " now , " she say , put the old pot down at one side , " lie down your head and I will put it in . " 
 Undine sit down beside she and put her head in Diogenes ' lap , and the child do and undo the hair half a score of time before the flower be fix to her satisfaction . 
 " now turn round and look at I , " she say , when all be do . but it be such a weary face that look up at hers that Diogenes ' face fall also . 

 " I have quite forget he go away this 

 morn- 
 morning 


 ing , and you must be sorry , you have   take care of he so long , " say Diogenes , who , in truth , for the last forty - eight hour have be gloriously oblivious of every existence save that of her wonderful rosebud . 

 diogene do not know what to say ; so she resort to dumb sympathy , which she do understand , and draw Undine 's face very close to she and smooth it with the palm of her little hand . 
 after a long quiet she say , " I love you well than anything , well even than my rose bush . " it be only a child 's way of comfort , those few word of love and that smooth her cheek with her little hand . a child 's way , yet by it she pay back more than all the good that have be bring to she . 
 " it be nice to lie here and rest , but I must go , " say Undine , when the last ray of the sun be shin on the little green leaf of the rose bush , which stand just beyond the end of the tent where it could catch they . 
 " you be sick , too , " say Diogenes , notice how she lean her hand against the tub to help herself in rise . 
 " not sick , only tired . I have not be so tired for many year . I want to sleep for a long , long time . I shall be well then . " 
 she smile as she look down into the earnest eye that be fix on she . 

 " come again soon , very soon , " say Diogenes , as Undine be go out of sight . 
 she do not answer , but turn round for a moment and look back at she , still smile . the rose have fall out of her hair and she hold it in her hand . 
 " you look just like you do in my dream , " diogene say ; but Undine do not hear she , for she have turn to go . 
 it may be that in the year to come diogene shall grow into a great , coarse , red woman as her mother be before she the mother of many child , the wife of many husband whom she may drop as easily as she do every hour the word that be not choice . 
 it may be but there will come hour when the one pure and tender memory of her childhood will come back to she , and her child will wonder why she speak so softly and the man why she have no oath to throw back at they . they would wonder if they know it be only the picture of that summer evening at New Rush and the little slight figure stand at the tent corner with the red rosebud in its hand , and its great white kappie , and the yellow evening sunlight stream over it from behind . 
 as Undine have say , she be tired , very tired ; but instead of go home she turn slowly to that part of the camp to which her little squint - eyed guide have once conduct she . 

 she stop when she come to the reed fence that encircle the home of the baby - face golden - haired lady . she be on the veranda again this evening , but she be not alone now . over her chair be lean a man , whose head be bent so low over hers that the black beard mingle with the golden ripple on her forehead . they speak very soft and low , and they do not notice Undine , for their back be to she and their talk be very interesting . but a little boy , who sit behind they play , now lift his blue eye to look at the woman on the other side of the hedge and catch sight of the bright rise she hold . he slip down from the veranda and stand before she . 
 " Give , " he say , and hold out imperiously one small hand . 
 Undine drop the rose into it and turn to go back to her tent . 

 " you must come , " whisper the dark - whisker gentleman as he stoop low over the golden head . " come if it be for only one short half hour . 
 you 
 may allow yourself to be rob of all pleasure , but other must not be quite forget , you know ; even if our claim to be consider be not 
 very 
 strong . " 

 the lady smile very softly and smooth out the fringe on her sleeve with her little pink finger . 

 " surely you have do enough in come to such a place as this . you need not renounce the world 
 altogether 
 ; you be too young to do penance yet " ; 

 and the gentleman 's breath be warm on her cheek . then she lift her baby face up to his , and her eye be just as they have be when she look down at Undine , placid , smile ; there be no harm in they . 

 " I have   be out two night this week , " she say , " and people might think it strange , you know . the doctor say he be much bad today , and he would be so angry if they tell he . " 
 it might have end in she not go to the ball that night , but at that moment the child pass they with the bright flower in its hand . 
 " what a lovely flower ! " say the mother , and she hold out her hand for it ; but the child clasp it tightly in his fist and hold it close against his little breast . 
 it be only a moment 's work for the gentleman to unclasp the little finger and put the flower into the mother 's hand . the child do not cry ; he only press his little thin arched lip together and droop the lid over the blue eye with which he look at they . he be only a baby : there be no sin in take it . " you see the very god have condescend to interfere in my behalf , " whisper the gentleman . " this rise mean that you be to go and wear it here tonight . " 

 he lie it very softly on her breast and whisper word , so softly that only the ear in which they be speak could catch they ; and when the mother rise 

 to go into the house she say , " well just for one hour , just for one , you know . " 

 and so she go to the ball that night and dance , the lovely of all the woman there , with that bright flower at her heart ; and all praise she and look at she . 
 and that night , alone , when the nigger who have be leave to watch he have go out to spend the five shilling , Albert Blair die . 



 XIX . 
 ALBERT BLAIR 


 " Vat jou go en trek , Ferreira , 
 Vat jou go en trek ; 

 Swaar dra , swaar dra ... " 
 1 


 whistle the swell nigger next morning as he walk , switch his cane , in the direction of Undine 's tent . 

 generally she rise early , but this morning she be sleep late and so heavily that he have to knock two or three time at the tent pole before she come to unbutton the sail . 
 " do you want any needlework ? " ask the nigger , touch his hat quite respectfully , for , even with a salary of six pound a month , five shilling be not to be despise . 
 Undine say she want no work . 

 the nigger look disappointed . he have hop she would take the work , and show as great an 

 1 

 " take your thing and go , Ferreira , 
 take your thing and go ; 
 heavy to carry , heavy to carry ... " 

 these word be from the Afrikaans folk - song   lie   " 
 Jannie meet die hoepelbeen , Ferreira 
 "   Johnny with the bandy leg , Ferreira   perhaps the well know folk - song in South Africa . Ferreira be a not uncommon Afrikaner surname . 


 objection to accept payment for black skirt as for iron shirt . 

 " you see , my master die last night , and Mrs. Blair want she mourning quickly . do not   you think , if I be to bring some stuff now , you would be able to do it for she ? " 
 there be no doubt today about the iron - woman 's daftness . she take no notice of his question , but say , after a pause , " what do your master die of ? " 
 " well , you see , " reply the nigger , rest his hand on the head of his cane and lean elegantly forward , " I do not   just rightly know . he come here just to have a look at everything , and he take ill , something wrong inside , and the doctor they will not   let he travel ; and this six month he be be lie here , and they have   be say he be go to die , but he never do till last night . " 
 have get so far , the nigger turn round and look across the road to see what it might be the iron - woman see that make her eye look so strange . he could see nothing but just a blade or two of grass which have not yet be tread down and which be heavy with the morning dew ; so he look at she again . 
 " when be they go to bury he ? " 
 " tomorrow morning . they have   put he in a house in the yard ; for Mrs. Blair she be frightened of ghost . " 

 there be nothing to be gain by waste more word over she just now , so the nigger resume his " Swaar dra , swaar dra , " and , without touch his hat , turn away and walk jauntily whistle down the road . 
 Undine stand in the doorway and look after he . there be sparrow hop about at the tent - side , pick up crumb and insect ; and digger pass with their sleeve roll up above their elbow , walk briskly , whistle , some of they , for the morning air be fresh and make they feel that life , though it might mean small find and hard work , be a pleasant thing and worth the having . some of her child die every day , and nature might go about forever in deep weed and mourn if she take the trouble to lament for they ; so she go on smile , though the well love and the dear have just go smile , smile , when our heart be break . why should the sky be cloud and the bird fly home hungry , because in one small tent a man lie stiff and white ? man whom woman 's heart have yearn over die just so every week , and the world rock on the same . 

 Undine sleep heavily all day , a heavy sleep but trouble by many dream ; and when she wake the sun have long set . she go out to the barrel that stand at the back of the tent , and drain the last drop of water into the mug . she be thirsty , parch with thirst , but she feel no hunger . the slice of 

 bread , very dry now , still lie upon the box unfinishe . 

 she sit down on the side of her bed and hold her head between her hand and try to think , but her brain seem very numb . after about an hour she stand up and go out , take the road by which she have come yesterday evening . it be very dark , but she know her way well . 
 the Compound be very quiet tonight . there be no one on the veranda , no light in the house . only in the little tent at the back there be a light visible , and presently two man come out . the night be still and , though they speak low , she could hear every word that pass : 
 " put the candle and match down , Jack , just there inside the door and button it down tight , " say the first man . " I wonder they like leave it alone like this without a soul in the place . dog might get in . " 
 " no fear of that while this dog lie here , " say the second . " if I be not with you , I expect you would rather be pretty near anywhere than here ; he would think no more of tear you than of growl , if you try to go in there alone ; he do not   half like it as it be , for all that I have   have the feeding of the beggar for the last six month . down , Prince , down ! " 
 the man pass close to where Undine stand . 
 " I tell you what , Jack , " say the first , " that coffin be damn heavy . my shoulder ache . " 

 " charge it all in the bill , " say the second with a laugh : 

 " ten little nigger boy 
 fiddle over wine ; 
 one get so jolly drunk , 
 and then there be nine , nine , nine . " 

 then they go out at the gate , and the Compound be silent once more . 
 by and by Undine go round and open the gate and walk in . 
 " Prince , Prince , old boy , " she call softly ; for Prince have rise to his foot and utter a low growl at the sound of approach footstep . " Prince , have you quite forget I ? " 
 the dog do not leave his post , but when she come close to he he lay his head against her knee . 
 " Prince , Prince ! oh , Prince ! " 

 he seem to understand she , for he utter a long low growl , and they crouch down together at the entrance . be 
 he 
 listen for the sound of his master 's breathing in the quiet tent ? or be it only 
 one 
 who remember how they two wait and listen , long ago ? 

 only the heavy breathing of the dog and the quick low breath of the woman break the stillness and be hear loud and clear in the quiet night ; but in the tent , in the tent , there be deadly stillness . 

 it be near midnight now , and in the street passenger - cart rumble past , bear home Toit 's Pan 

 visitor from the fast - close house of amusement . 

 now she stand up and loosen the low button that fasten down the canvas door . stoop low , she go in , and the dog follow she , lie down close to the doorway and utter a low short howl . then it be quite silent in the tent , and very dark . feel her way along its side , her finger touch at last the cold back of a chair , but that be not what she look for ; then the edge of a small table ; then something low than the table , long and narrow but with nothing inside . she feel that it be empty , so she move on softly . her hand be on the iron bedpost , then on the smooth sheet , and then on something cold O , God how cold ! 
 she take the sheet down off his face , and the cheek of the live woman be press close to the cold face of the dead man . in his ear she whisper the wild word of love that to the living she would never utter wild passionate word , the outpouring of a life 's crush - out love , the breaking forth of a fiercely suppress passion . and the dead man lie so still ; he do not send she from he ; he do not silence she ; he understand she now ; he love she now . she will see his face once more before it go , and then she will creep close to he , and lie there , and never leave he . 

 in its place near the door she find the glass candlestick and match , and when she have strike a light she come and stand with it in her hand at the 

 bed 's foot till her eye have grow accustomed to it ; then she look up . 

 it be a calm white face that lie there above the sternly fold arm a calm white face with the old smile , half scornful , half defiant , on the delicate arched lip . 
 the old face ! what use to cry aloud to it ! mad , mad , and fool ! be there room in those sternly fold arm for she ! he have live alone and self - sufficient ; he have die alone . there be no room for she now . 
 with a cry , as of one whose last hope have pass away , she let the light fall upon the floor , and the glass break into a thousand fragment . but she stay at the bed 's foot till the grey light glimmer through the canvas . then she creep out and leave he . 
 a few hour afterwards , when all New Rush be astir again , the young wife come in to see her husband for the last time . she have never look so lovely as that day in her flow crape , with the great tear of fear in her baby eye when they tell she to stoop down and kiss he . 
 " I can not , I can not , " she cry ; " I be so afraid . " and as she turn to go out , the trail crape roll the broken glass upon the floor . 
 that be all that tell of last night 's watch . 



 XX . 
 alone with the star 

 water 
 ! Water ! 

 she have sleep again all day , and now that she awake it be dark , and she be parch with thirst and there be no water none in the barrel , none in the jug ; her tongue clave to the roof of her mouth and her vein seem scorch by liquid fire . she shake the barrel fiercely in her anger and try to draw the tap out with her tooth . there must be some water in it , if only one could get it ; it seem to she some cruel living thing withhold life from she ; and when she find she could do nothing she run round and round the tent in the vain hope of grow cool . in her delirium it seem that behind she a whole host of small hideous being follow , howl old woman with long canine tooth that touch their breast , old man with hunchback and little twinkle eye which they close tight and then open suddenly : before , behind , they follow she ; at every side they press she ; and her thirst grow great , till her tongue refuse to move and keep they off by word . 

 " Water , water , water ! " be all she could murmur . and at last , as if in answer to her cry , water come . the great cloud that have make the night so dark burst , and the great torrent pour down on the earth . in an instant the heavy canvas sail be drench , and she kneel down eagerly , hold they in both hand and suck they . then she lie down and let the rain fall on she till the fever leave she and a great shivering seize she . 
 she go into her tent and climb into the box , but her hand seem powerless to undo her wet clothe , so she draw the blanket over she and lie there till morning . 
 " Mother , " say the child of the Dutchwoman opposite " mother , perhaps some wicked man have be to kill the Englishwoman in the little tent . three day the sail be hang loose , but we never see she come out or do iron . we think she must be dead . " 
 " nonsense ! " say the mother . " do not   you have anything to do with she ; she be a bad woman . " 
 " how do you know that ? " ask her husband , who sit at the door , smoke his pipe . 
 " because I ask she the other day if the man who live with she be her husband , and she say no . and I ask she if he be any relation of her , and she say no . so she must be bad , " say the wife . 

 nevertheless , when her work be do , curiosity 

 lead the dame over to the Englishwoman 's tent . she look in at the door and at first thought there be nothing but the three packing - case in the tent ; then , in the farth of these , which lie bottom downward , she notice the purple blanket move , and go up to it . 

 " you be very sick , " say the Dutchwoman in English , well than boer generally speak . 
 Undine open her eye , but do not answer . 
 " you be very sick , " repeat the Dutchwoman . " what be your name ? " 
 " Undine , Undine Bock , " say Undine , slowly , as though puzzle to remember what it really be , and go back to the old name of her childhood . 
 " great heaven ! " say the Dutchwoman . " do you remember I Sannie Muller ? " 
 " yes , " say Undine ; but her eye have close again . 
 " can I do anything for you ? " Sannie ask with some real kindness in her voice , as the memory come to she of the little schoolmate who , in company with her monkey , have be first and foremost in all evil and forever in disgrace . 
 " no , thank you , " say Undine . 
 but the woman remain sit by she till it grow dark ; then she light a candle and stand at her side , say as she do so : " I will come again during the night and see you . " 

 " Mother , " ask the little child who have be 

 wait for she in the road , as she trot along at her side , " be the Englishwoman very sick ? " 

 " yes , " say the mother . " she will be dead in the morning . " 
 the Dutchwoman have work hard all day , and when once she fall asleep she do not awake . 
 but the little tent have another visitor that night . 
 not long after the Dutchwoman leave , a great , rough curly head push itself in at the door , sniff for a moment , and then four black paw carry it up to the side of the box . Undine be rouse by a soft warm touch on her hand and when she open her eye the rough old face be close above her , look down at she . her mind be too confused and dull for his presence there to cause she even the vague wonder . she only move her finger feebly and call his name , " Prince , Prince . " 
 he step over the low side of the packing - case and lie down across her foot , with his head turn to one side so that he could watch she as he lie there . 
 a very quiet sleep follow , and Undine do not know when the candle drop into the bottle , or when Prince move high up so that his head rest on her breast . she know nothing till she wake at one o'clock . then she raise herself a little on her elbow , look round , and fall back heavily again on her pillow . 

 the rack pain , the fever , the dull confusion 

 of brain , all have vanish . free from pain , calm and clear as she have never feel before , she lie there , yet cold , strangely cold . what do it mean , this strange feeling ? she lie wonder , think , with her hand fold on the dog 's black head . then the truth come to she suddenly . 

 death only that , nothing more . what she have long and pray for ; what she have look for in the muddy pool ; what she have sigh for in day of emptiness it have come at last . 
 again she raise herself and again fall back heavily upon the pillow . " not death , not death ! " she say , " not death ! anything else death be too horrible and I , I be so young , so young to die ! " 

 what be the use of cry out ! she only grow stiff and cold and her breath come slow and heavy in the closed tent . she would leave it and go out into the starlight , she would be braver there . the great horror that be upon she give her strength , and she push the dog from she and creep slowly over the side of the low box . there she lie long , and then again , inch by inch , crawl on hand and knee , she reach the doorway . the skirting that cross it , three inch high , be hard to pass , and again she lie still ; but when she turn her head and catch sight of clear starlight outside , she creep on once more . still on her hand and knee , and fall sometimes with her face into the 

 dust , she gain at last one of the low gravel - heap 
 1 
 and lie down on its side . 

 she look up at the old star that she have look up to and love from her childhood as other man love their friend of flesh and blood the dear old star that have shed their light on the thatched roof and stone wall of the old farm on the Karoo ; that have look in at the window of the little whitewashed room and on the leaf of the small brown Testament and the little child who cry and pray there ; the same and yet , tonight , look so strange and new to she . over the tumult and agony that reign within , they speak a great peace , and she lie still and watch they . 
 ' twas one of the gorgeous night when the sky , shoot light from a million point , overwhelm and silence we ; and the little circle of our life , that have seem to fill all creation , sink to its proper size a shadow , a breath of wind that , be or not be , matter not . 
 high over her head be one great blue star that give a steady and unflickering light . at this she look with dark wide - open eye till it seem to speak to she as clearly as the priest speak who stand at the bedside of the dying with bread and wine , reproof and blessing , whereby he hop to help the soul in its last struggle among the water . 

 " be death so horrible and ghastly to you ? " say 

 1 
 Dťbris . 


 the star , " so ghastly that even the pain and suffering and despair that be in life grow beautiful in your eye ? I be only your brother , " say the star , " a few million year old than you , and I know nothing ; but I have see some thing a few . I have see the sun pour forth his light and heat as a great heart pour its life - blood for other . I have see it fall on a world dead and silent , and awake it ; till in place of death there be life , and for silence sound and ceaseless change . I have see a world find birth through that light , even those strange and tiny creature 
 1 
 who deep at the floor of the sea have form their graf and a new land ; the wave have roll back from it and the land that be build from their skeleton have become tree and grass and a million form of life ; on these other creature have live ; and these again have die that other might have life ; and at last man have come , to bring one of whom from the shapeless germ in which he lie plant innumerable die , and his very next of kin be sacrifie that he may grow and be . I have look long and carefully , " say the star , " and I have see that the thing which you call death be the father of all life and beauty . till life go , till blood flow , no high life can come . there be nothing add to nature , nothing take from she . she have only so much in her hand , and with that she must do all thing . would she build well , she must pull down 

 1 
 Coral . 


 first ; would she raise a new world , an old must sink ; would she double a flower , the seed of the single must go ; and to make a man a million million form have be and be not . 

 " without death there be no change , without change no life ; without the shedding of blood no good thing . 
 " if what you fear in the death that be upon you be not change but a fearful endless silence and annihilation , then take comfort , " say the star ; " I have be young and now be old ; I have see great ebb and great flow , and myriad never - end change ; but such death as you dream of I have nowhere see . nature be too poor to lose , too poor to let rest ; her work be not yet do ; she have other thing to make . 
 " Mark you well , I know nothing , " say the star ; " and what you be , or I be , or the gravel be on which you lie , I can not tell , and what we mean I can not tell ; only that which I have see I speak of . 
 " the stump now burn at your side , it be a great brown lifeless stump an hour or two ago , now a lurid glow mass shoot out flame and heat , crack and change every moment . it will be a small heap of ash soon , but the light and heat be in it before the match touch it , and I know they be not lose , only do other work in other form . 

 " I have be young and now be old , " say the 

 star ; " yet if I should say I have see death as you fear it , I should lie . Change I have see and desolation , but no death . take comfort . " 

 and she be comfort and look upwards with her arm fold and almost a smile on her lip . 
 for , as in our hour of sin and weakness , we weep because the great ever - change , many - wave current on which we find ourselves will flow on just the same when our small wave have spend itself , so , in our moment of sight and strength , a joy , calm and mighty , come to we when we see that the great current will flow on uninjured , unchanged by our loss , in its deathless progress . 
 she lie still and be comfort . and what if the star never speak , and only her own thought be throw back to she ! if it be to a bedside with priest , wafer , and book , or to a gravel - heap under the star , that peace and strength come , be they not the child of the soul , and no outcome of wafer , priest , or star ? though bless be all three if they can call they forth in the hour of that battle the last and strong . 
 she rest till it seem as though a mist be creep over the brilliant night sky , and then as though the smoke from the fire pass before her eye . she raise her hand slowly as though to wave it from she ; but it grow dark , and one by one the star vanish . then she know that it be the shadow of death that lie between she and they . 

 slowly she turn away her head , and even in that darkness could see lie between the two great stone the stump , now coal from end to end with blood - red crack upon its surface . 
 the cold be grow great , so she creep a little nearer the coal and lie with her face to it . 
 be it because the glow light , see through the mist , bring back a night of long ago , that she hear in the dim delicious confusion the voice that have call she so tenderly under the red lamplight in the little hall ? 
 " my little girl , my own little girl Undine , " it say over and over , and the soft tear of gladness fill her eye , and in delicious dreamy darkness it seem as though his arm be close around she . 
 presently the moon rise and look over the ridge of the tent into the little yard among the gravel - heap . the glow stump have burn out and go to ash between the great round stone . 
 before they , in her little purple print , with her foot cross and her head rest on one arm , lie Undine . 
 her white kappie lie near she and cast a grotesque shadow , like a man 's face with long nose and chin ; and the light glisten on her soft brown hair . 
 there be nothing else to be see in the little yard . 

 the END 
