THE STORY of an AFRICAN FARM 
 A novel . 


 BY 
 RALPH IRON . 

 in two VOLUMES . 
 VOL . I. 

 1883 . 
  all Rights reserve . 


 " we must see the first image which the external world cast upon the dark mirror of his mind ; or must hear the first word which awaken the sleep power of thought , and stand by his early effort , if we would understand the prejudice , the habit , and the passion that will rule his life . the entire man be , so to speak , to be find in the cradle of the child . " 

 ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE . 



 the story of an AFRICAN FARM 

 PART I. 

 CHAPTER I. SHADOWS from child - LIFE . 

 the Watch . 

 the 
 full african moon pour down its light from the blue sky into the wide , lonely plain . the dry , sandy earth , with its coating of stunted " karroo " bush a few inch high , the low hill that skirt the plain , the milk - bush with their long finger - like leaf , all be touch by a weird and an almost oppressive beauty as they lie in the white light . 


 in one spot only be the solemn monotony of the plain break . near the centre a small 

 solitary " kopje " rise . alone it lie there , a heap of round ironstone pile one upon another , as over some giant 's grave . here and there a few tuft of grass or small succulent plant have spring up among its stone , and on the very summit a clump of prickly - pear lift their thorny arm , and reflect , as from mirror , the moonlight on their broad fleshy leaf . at the foot of the " kopje " lie the homestead . first , the stone - wall " sheep kraal " and Kaffir hut ; beyond they the dwelling - house a square , red - brick building with thatched roof . even on its bare red wall , and the wooden ladder that lead up to the loft , the moonlight cast a kind of dreamy beauty , and quite etherealize the low brick wall that run before the house , and which enclose a bare patch of sand and two straggle sun - flower . on the zinc roof of the great open waggon - house , on the roof of the outbuilding that jut from its side , the moonlight glint with a quite peculiar brightness , till it seem 

 that every rib in the metal be of burnish silver . 

 Sleep rule everywhere , and the homestead be not less quiet than the solitary plain . 
 in the farm - house , on her great wooden bedstead , Tant ' Sannie , the boer - woman , roll heavily in her sleep . 
 she have go to bed , as she always do , in her clothe , and the night be warm and the room close , and she dream bad dream . not of the ghost and devil that so haunt her wake thought ; not of her second husband , the consumptive Englishman , whose grave lie away beyond the ostrich - camp , nor of her first , the young boer ; but only of the sheep 's trotter she have eat for supper that night . she dream that one stick fast in her throat , and she roll her huge form from side to side , and snort horribly . 

 in the next room , where the maid have forget to close the shutter , the white moonlight fall in in a flood , and make it light as day . 

 there be two small bed against the wall . in one lie a yellow - haired child , with a low forehead and a face of freckle ; but the love moonlight hide defect here as elsewhere , and show only the innocent face of a child in its first sweet sleep . 

 the figure in the companion bed belong of right to the moonlight , for it be of quite elfin - like beauty . the child have drop her cover on the floor , and the moonlight look in at the naked little limb . presently she open her eye and look at the moonlight that be bath she . 
 " Em ! " she call to the sleeper in the other bed ; but receive no answer . then she draw the cover from the floor , turn her pillow , and pull the sheet over her head , go to sleep again . 

 only in one of the outbuilding that jut from the waggon - house there be some one who be not asleep . the room be dark ; door and 

 shutter be close ; not a ray of light enter anywhere . the german overseer , to whom the room belong , lie sleep soundly on his bed in the corner , his great arm fold , and his bushy grey and black beard rise and fall on his breast . but one in the room be not asleep . two large eye look about in the darkness , and two small hand be smooth the patchwork quilt . the boy , who sleep on a box under the window , have just awaken from his first sleep . he draw the quilt up to his chin , so that little peer above it but a great head of silky black curl and the two black eye . he star about in the darkness . nothing be visible , not even the outline of one worm - eat rafter , nor of the deal table , on which lie the Bible from which his father have read before they go to bed . no one could tell where the tool - box be , and where the fire - place . there be something very impressive to the child in the complete darkness . 


 at the head of his father 's bed hang a great 

 silver hunting watch . it tick loudly . the boy listen to it , and begin mechanically to count . tick tick tick ! one , two , three , four ! he lose count presently , and only listen . tick tick tick tick ! 


 it never wait ; it go on inexorably ; and every time it tick 
 a man die 
 ! he raise himself a little on his elbow and listen . he wish it would leave off . 

 how many time have it tick since he come to lie down ? a thousand time , a million time , perhaps . 
 he try to count again , and sit up to listen well . 
 " die , die , die ! " say the watch ; " die , die , die ! " 
 he hear it distinctly . where be they go to , all those people ? 
 he lie down quickly , and pull the cover up over his head : but presently the silky curl reappear . 

 " die , die , die ! " say the watch ; " die , die , die ! " 

 he think of the word his father have read that evening " 
 for wide be the gate , and broad be the way , that leadeth to destruction and many there be which go in thereat . 
 " 

 " many , many , many ! " say the watch . 

 " 
 because strait be the gate , and narrow be the way , that leadeth unto life , and few there be that find it . 
 " 

 " few , few , few ! " say the watch . 

 the boy lie with his eye wide open . he see before he a long stream of people , a great dark multitude , that move in one direction ; then they come to the dark edge of the world and go over . he see they pass on before he , and there be nothing that could stop they . he think of how that stream have roll on through all the long age of the past how the old Greeks and Romans have go over ; the countless million of China and India , they be 

 go over now . since he have come to bed , how many have go ! 

 and the watch say , " eternity , eternity , eternity ! " 
 " stop they ! stop they ! " cry the child . 
 and all the while the watch keep tick on ; just like God 's will , that never change or alter , you may do what you please . 
 great bead of perspiration stand on the boy 's forehead . he climb out of bed and lie with his face turn to the mud floor . 
 " oh , God , God ! save they ! " he cry in agony . " only some , only a few ! only for each moment I be pray here one ! " he fold his little hand upon his head . " God ! God ! save they ! " 
 he grovel on the floor . 

 oh , the long , long age of the past , in which they have go over ! oh , the long , long future , in which they would pass away ! oh , 

 God ! the long , long , long eternity , which have no end ! 

 the child weep ; and creep close to the ground . 


 the Sacrifice . 

 the 
 farm by daylight be not as the farm by moonlight . the plain be a weary flat of loose red sand , sparsely cover by dry karroo - bush , that crack beneath the tread like tinder , and show the red earth everywhere . here and there a milk - bush lift its pale - colour rod , and in every direction the ant and beetle run about in the blaze sand . the red wall of the farm - house , the zinc roof of the out - building , the stone wall of the " kraal , " all reflect the fierce sunlight , till the eye ache and blench . no tree or shrub be to be see far or near . the two sunflower that stand 

 before the door , out - star by the sun , droop their brazen face to the sand ; and the little cicada - like insect cry aloud among the stone of the " kopje . " 

 the boer - woman , see by daylight , be even less lovely than , when , in bed , she roll and dream . she sit on a chair in the great front room , with her foot on a wooden stove , and wipe her flat face with the corner of her apron , and drink coffee , and in Cape Dutch swear that the beloved weather be damned . less lovely , too , by daylight be the dead Englishman 's child , her little step - daughter , upon whose freckle and low , wrinkle forehead the sunlight have no mercy . 
 " Lyndall , " the child say to her little orphan cousin , who sit with she on the floor thread bead , " how be it your bead never fall off your needle ? " 
 " I try , " say the little one gravely , moisten her tiny finger . " that be why . " 

 the overseer , see by daylight , be a huge german , wear a shabby suit , and with a childish habit of rub his hand and nod his head prodigiously when pleased at anything . he stand out at the kraal in the blaze sun , explain to two Kaffer boy the approach end of the world . the boy , as they cut the cake of dung , wink at each other , and work as slowly as they possibly could ; but the German never see it . 

 away , beyond the " kopje , " Waldo his son herd the ewe and lamb a small and dusty herd powder all over from head to foot with red sand , wear a ragged coat and shoe of undressed leather , through whose hole the toe look out . his hat be too large , and have sink down to his eye , conceal completely the silky black curl . it be a curious small figure . his flock give he little trouble . it be too hot for they to move far ; they gather round every little milk - bush , as though they 

 hop to find shade , and stand there motionless in clump . he himself creep under a shelving rock that lie at the foot of the " kopje , " stretch himself on his stomach , and wave his dilapidated little shoe in the air . 


 soon , from the blue bag where he keep his dinner , he produce a fragment of slate , an arithmetic , and a pencil . proceed to put down a sum with solemn and earnest demeanour , he begin to add it up aloud : " six and two be eight and four be twelve and two be fourteen and four be eighteen . " here he pause . " and four be eighteen and four be eighteen . " the last be very much drawled . slowly the pencil slip from his finger , and the slate follow it into the sand . for a while he lie motionless , then begin mutter to himself , fold his little arm , lay his head down upon they , and might have be asleep , but for the muttering sound that from time to time proceed from he . a curious old ewe come to sniff at he ; but it be 

 long before he raise his head . when he do , he look at the far - off hill with his heavy eye . 


 " ye shall receive ye shall receive 
 shall , shall , shall , 
 " he mutter . 

 he sit up then . slowly the dulness and heaviness melt from his face ; it become radiant . Mid - day have come now , and the sun 's ray be pour down vertically ; the earth throb before the eye . 

 the boy stand up quickly , and clear a small space from the bush which cover it . look carefully , he find twelve small stone of somewhat the same size ; kneel down , he arrange they carefully on the clear space in a square pile , in shape like an altar . then he walk to the bag where his dinner be keep ; in it be a mutton chop and a large slice of brown bread . the boy take they out and turn the bread over in his hand , deeply consider it . finally he throw it away and walk to the altar with the meat , and lay it down on 

 the stone . close by in the red sand he kneel down . sure , never since the beginning of the world be there so ragged and so small a priest . he take off his great hat and place it solemnly on the ground , then close his eye and fold his hand . he pray aloud . 

 " oh , God , my Father , I have make Thee a sacrifice . I have only twopence , so I can not buy a lamb . if the lamb be mine , I would give Thee one ; but now I have only this meat ; it be my dinner - meat . please , my Father , send fire down from heaven to burn it . Thou hast say , Whosoever shall say unto this mountain , be thou cast into the sea , nothing doubt , it shall be do . I ask for the sake of Jesus Christ . amen . " 

 he kneel down with his face upon the ground , and he fold his hand upon his curl . the fierce sun pour down its heat upon his head and upon his altar . when he look up he know what he should see the glory of God ! for fear his very heart stand still , his breath 

 come heavily ; he be half suffocated . he dare not look up . then at last he raise himself . above he be the quiet blue sky , about he the red earth ; there be the clump of silent ewe and his altar that be all . 

 he look up nothing break the intense stillness of the blue overhead . he look round in astonishment , then he bow again , and this time long than before . 
 when he raise himself the second time all be unaltered . only the sun have melt the fat of the little mutton chop , and it run down upon the stone . 
 then , the third time he bow himself . when at last he look up , some ant have come to the meat on the altar . he stand up and drive they away . then he put his hat on his hot curl , and sit in the shade . he clasp his hand about his knee . he sit to watch what would come to pass . the glory of the Lord God Almighty ! he know he should see it . 


 " my dear God be try I , " he say ; and he sit there through the fierce heat of the afternoon . still he watch and wait when the sun begin to slope , and when it near the horizon and the sheep begin to cast long shadow across the 

 karro 
 karroo 

 , he still sit there . he hop when the first ray touch the hill till the sun dip behind they and be go . then he call his ewe together , and break down the altar , and throw the meat far , far away into the field . 

 he walk home behind his flock . his heart be heavy . he reason so : " God can not lie . I have faith . no fire come . I be like Cain I be not his . he will not hear my prayer . God hat I . " 
 the boy 's heart be heavy . when he reach the " kraal " gate the two girl meet he . 

 " come , " say the yellow - haired em , " let we play " coop.í there be still time before it get quite dark . you , Waldo , go and hide on the 

 " kopjeí ; Lyndall and I will shut eye here , and we will not look . " 

 the girl hide their face in the stone wall of the sheep - kraal , and the boy clamber half way up the " kopje . " he crouch down between two stone and give the call . just then the milk - herd come walk out of the cow - kraal with two pail . he be an ill - look Kaffir . 
 " ah ! " think the boy , " perhaps he will die to - night , and go to hell ! I must pray for he , I must pray ! " 

 then he think " where be 
 I 
 go to ? " and he pray desperately . 


 " ah ! this be not right at all , " little Em say , peep between the stone , and find he in a very curious posture . " what 
 be 
 you do Waldo ? it be not the play , you know . you should run out when we come to the white stone . ah , you do not play nicely . " 


 " I I will play nicely now , " say the boy , 

 come out and stand sheepishly before they ; " I I only forgot ; I will play now . " 

 " he have be to sleep , " say freckle Em . 
 " no , " say beautiful little Lyndall , look curiously at he ; " he have be cry . " 
 she never make a mistake . 


 the Confession . 

 one 
 night , two year after , the boy sit alone on the " kopje . " he have creep softly from his father 's room and come there . he often do , because , when he pray or cry aloud , his father might awake and hear he ; and none know his great sorrow , and none know his grief , but he himself , and he bury they deep in his heart . 


 he turn up the brim of his great hat and look at the moon , but most at the leaf of the prickly pear that grow just before he . they glint , and glint , and glint , just 

 like his own heart cold , so hard , and very wicked . his physical heart have pain also ; it seem full of little bit of glass , that hurt . he have sit there for half an hour , and he dare not go back to the close house . 

 he feel horribly lonely . there be not one thing so wicked as he in all the world , and he know it . he fold his arm and begin to cry not aloud ; he sob without make any sound , and his tear leave scorch mark where they fall . he could not pray ; he have pray night and day for so many month ; and to - night he could not pray . when he leave off cry , he hold his ache head with his brown hand . if one might have go up to he and touch he kindly , poor , ugly little thing ! I think his heart be well nigh break . 

 with his swollen eye he sit there on a flat stone at the very top of the " kopje " ; and the tree , with every one of its wicked leaf , blink , and blink , and blink at he . 

 presently he begin to cry again , and then stop his crying to look at it . he be quiet for a long while , then he kneel up slowly and bend forward . there be a secret he have carry in his heart for a year . he have not dare to look at it ; he have not whisper it to himself , but for a year he have carry it . " I hate God ! " he say . the wind take the word and run away with they , among the stone , and through the leaf of the prickly pear . he think it die away half down the " kopje . " he have tell it now ! 

 " I love Jesus Christ , but I hate God . " 
 the wind carry away that sound as it have do the first . then he get up and button his old coat about he . he know he be certainly lose now ; he do not care . if half the world be to be lose , why not he too ? he would not pray for mercy any more . well so well to know certainly . it be end now . well so . 

 he begin scramble down the side of the " kopje " to go home . 
 well so ! but oh , the loneliness , the agonize pain ! for that night , and for night on night to come ! the anguish that sleep all day on the heart like a heavy worm , and wake up at night to feed ! 
 there be some of we who in after year say to Fate , " now deal we your hard blow , give we what you will ; but let we never again suffer as we suffer when we be child . " 
 the barb in the arrow of childhood 's suffering be this its intense loneliness , its intense agony . 




 CHAPTER II . 
 plan and BUSHMAN - PAINTINGS . 

 AT 
 last come the year of the great drought , the year of eighteen - sixty - two , I think . from end to end of the land the earth cry for water . man and beast turn their eye to the pitiless sky , that like the roof of some brazen oven arch overhead . on the farm , day after day , month after month , the water in the dam fall lower and low ; the sheep die in the field ; the cattle , scarcely able to crawl , totter as they move from spot to spot in search of food . week after week , month after month , the sun look down from the cloudless sky , till the karroo - bush be leafless stick , break into the earth , and the earth itself be naked and bare ; 

 and only the milk - bush , like old hag , point their shrivelled finger heavenward , pray for the rain that never come . 


 it be on an afternoon of a long day in that thirsty summer , that on the side of the " kopje " furth from the homestead the two girl sit . they be somewhat grow since the day when they play hide - and - seek there , but they be mere child still . 
 their dress be of dark coarse stuff ; their common blue pinafore reach to their ankle , and on their foot they wear home - make " vel - schoen . " 
 they sit under a shelve rock , on the surface of which be still visible some old Bushman painting , their red and black pigment have be preserve through long year from wind and rain by the overhang ledge ; grotesque oxen , elephant , rhinoceros , and a one - horn beast , such as no man ever have see or ever shall . 

 the girl sit with their back to the painting . in their lap be a few fern and ice - plant leaf , which by dint of much search they have gather under the rock . 
 em take off her big brown kappje and begin vigorously to fan her red face with it ; but her companion bent low over the leaf in her lap , and at last take up an ice - plant leaf and fasten it on to the front of her blue pinafore with a pin . 
 " diamond must look as these drop do , " she say , carefully bend over the leaf , and crush one crystal drop with her delicate little finger . " when I , " she say , " be grow up , I shall wear real diamond , exactly like these in my hair . " 
 her companion open her eye and wrinkle her low forehead . 
 " where will you find they , Lyndall ? the stone be only crystal that we pick up yesterday . Old Otto say so . " 


 " and you think that I be go to stay 
 here 
 always ? " 

 the lip tremble scornfully . 
 " ah , no , " say her companion . " I suppose some day we shall go somewhere ; but now we be only twelve , and we can not marry till we be seventeen . four year , five that be a long time to wait . and we might not have diamond if we do marry . " 
 " and you think that I be go to stay here till then ? " 

 " well , where 
 be 
 you go ? " ask her companion . 

 the girl crush an ice - plant leaf between her finger . 

 " Tant ' Sannie be a miserable old woman , " she say . " your father marry she when he be die , because he think she would take well care of the farm , and of we , than an Englishwoman . he say we should be teach and send to school . now she save every 

 farthing for herself , buy we not even one old book . she do not ill - use we why ? because she be afraid of your father 's ghost . only this morning she tell she Hottentot that she would have beat you for break the plate , but that three night ago she hear a rustling and a grunting behind the pantry door , and know it be your father come to " spookí she . she be a miserable old woman , " say the girl , throw the leaf from she ; " but I intend to go to school . " 

 " and if she will not   let you ? " 
 " I shall make she . " 
 " how ? " 
 the child take not the slight notice of the last question , and fold her small arm across her knee . 
 " why do you want to go , Lyndall ? " 
 " there be nothing help in this world , " say the child slowly , " but to be very wise , and to know everything to be clever . " 

 " but I should not like to go to school ! " persist the small freckle face . 
 " and you do not need to . when you be seventeen this boer - woman will go ; you will have this farm and everything that be upon it for your own ; but I , " say Lyndall , " will have nothing . I must learn . " 

 " oh , Lyndall ! 
 I 
 will give you some of my sheep , " say em , with a sudden burst of pity generosity . 

 " I do not want your sheep , " say the girl slowly ; " I want thing of my own . when I be grow up , " she add , the flush on her delicate feature deepen at every word , " there will be nothing that I do not know . I shall be rich , very rich ; and I shall wear , not only for good , but every day , a pure white silk , and little rose - bud , like the lady in Tant ' Sannie 's bedroom , and my petticoat will be embroider , not only at the bottom , but all through . " 

 the lady in Tant ' Sannie 's bedroom be a gorgeous creature from a fashion - sheet , which the boer - woman , somewhere obtain , have paste up at the foot of her bed , to be profoundly admire by the child . 
 " it would be very nice , " say Em ; but it seem a dream of quite too transcendent a glory ever to be realize . 
 at this instant there appear at the foot of the " kopje " two figure the one , a dog , white and sleek , one yellow ear hang down over his left eye ; the other , his master , a lad of fourteen , and no other than the boy Waldo , grow into a heavy , slouch youth of fourteen . the dog mount the " kopje " quickly , his master follow slowly . he wear an aged jacket much too large for he , and roll up at the wrist , and , as of old , a pair of dilapidated " vel - schoen " and a feel hat . he stand before the two girl at last . 

 " what have you be do to - day ? " ask 

 Lyndall , lift her eye to his face . 

 " look after ewe and lamb below the dam . here ! " he say , hold out his hand awkwardly , " I bring they for you . " 
 there be a few green blade of tender grass . 
 " where do you find they ? " 
 " on the dam wall . " 
 she fasten they beside the leaf on her blue pinafore . 
 " they look nice there , " say the boy , awkwardly rub his great hand and watch she . 
 " yes ; but the pinafore spoil it all ; it be not pretty . " 
 he look at it closely . 
 " yes , the square be ugly ; but it look nice upon you beautiful . " 
 he now stand silent before they , his great hand hang loosely at either side . 

 " some one have come to - day , " he mumble out suddenly , when the idea strike he . 
 " who ? " ask both girl . 
 " an Englishman on foot . " 
 " what do he look like ? " ask Em . 
 " I do not notice ; but he have a very large nose , " say the boy slowly . " he ask the way to the house . " 
 " do not   he tell you his name ? " 
 " yes Bonaparte Blenkins . " 

 " Bonaparte ! " say em , " why that be like the reel Hottentot Hans play on the violin 


 " Bonaparte , Bonaparte , my wife be sick ; 
 in the middle of the week , but sunday not , 
 I give her rice and bean for soupí 


 it be a funny name . " 

 " there be a live man call Bonaparte once , " say she of the great eye . 
 " ah yes , I know , " say Em " the poor prophet whom the lion eat . I be always so sorry for he . " 

 her companion cast a quiet glance upon she . 
 " he be the great man who ever live , " she say " the man I like well . " 
 " and what do he do ? " ask Em , conscious that she have make a mistake , and that her prophet be not the man . 
 " he be one man , only one , " say her little companion slowly , " yet all the people in the world fear he . he be not bear great , he be common as we be ; yet he be master of the world at last . once he be only a little child , then he be a lieutenant , then he be a general , then he be an emperor . when he say a thing to himself he never forget it . he wait , and wait , and wait , and it come at last . " 
 " he must have be very happy , " say em . 

 " I do not know , " say Lyndall ; " but he have what he say he would have , and that be well than be happy . he be their master , and all the people be white with fear of he . they join together to fight he . he be 

 one and they be many , and they get he down at last . they be like the wild cat when their tooth be fast in a great dog , like cowardly wild cat , " say the child , " they would not let he go . there be many ; he be only 
 one 
 . they send he to an island on the sea , a lonely island , and keep he there fast . he be one man , and they be many , and they be terrify at he . it be glorious ! " say the child . 

 " and what then ? " say Em . 
 " then he be alone there in that island with man to watch he always , " say her companion , slowly and quietly , " and in the long lonely night he use to lie awake and think of the thing he have do in the old day , and the thing he would do if they let he go again . in the day when he walk near the shore it seem to he that the sea all around he be a cold chain about his body press he to death . " 
 " and then ? " say Em , much interested . 

 " he die there in that island ; he never get away . " 
 " it be rather a nice story , " say Em ; " but the end be sad . " 
 " it be a terrible , hateful ending , " say the little teller of the story , lean forward on her fold arm ; " and the bad be , it be true . I have notice , " add the child very deliberately , " that it be only the make - up story that end nicely ; the true one all end so . " 
 as she speak the boy 's dark , heavy eye rest on her face . 
 " you have read it , have you not ? " 
 he nod . " yes ; but the brown history tell only what he do , not what he think . " 

 " it be in the brown history that I read of he , " say the girl ; " but I 
 know 
 what he think . book do not tell everything . " 

 " no , " say the boy , slowly draw nearer to she and sit down at her foot . " what you want to know they never tell . " 

 then the child fall into silence , till Doss , the dog , grow uneasy at its long continuance , sniff at one and the other , and his master break forth suddenly , 

 " if 
 they 
 could talk , if 
 they 
 could tell we now ! " he say , move his hand out over the surround object " then we would know something . this " kopje , í if it could tell we how it come here ! the " Physical Geographyí say , " he go on most rapidly and confusedly , " that what be dry land now be once lake ; and what I think be this these low hill be once the shore of a lake ; this " kopje " be some of the stone that be at the bottom , roll together by the water . but there be this how do the water come to make one heap here alone , in the centre of the plain ? " it be a ponderous question ; no one volunteer an answer . " when I be small , " say the boy , " I always look at it and wonder , and I think a great giant be bury under it . 

 now I know the water must have do it ; but how ? it be very wonderful . do one little stone come first , and stop the other as they roll ? " say the boy with earnestness , in a low voice , more as speak to himself than to they . 

 " oh , Waldo , God put the little " kopjeí here , " say Em with solemnity . 
 " but how do he put it here ? " 
 " by want . " 
 " but how do the wanting bring it here ? " 
 " because it do . " 
 the last word be utter with the air of one who produce a clinching argument . what effect it have on the questioner be not evident , for he make no reply , and turn away from she . 
 draw close to Lyndall 's foot , he say after a while , in a low voice , 

 " Lyndall , have it never seem to you that the stone 
 be 
 talk with you ? sometimes , " he add in a yet low tone , " I lie under there 

 with my sheep , and it seem that the stone be really speak speak of the old thing , of the time when the strange fish and animal live that be turn into stone now , and the lake be here ; and then of the time when the little Bushmen live here , so small and so ugly , and use to sleep in the wild dog hole , and in the " sloot , í and eat snake , and shoot the buck with their poison arrow . it be one of they , one of these old wild Bushmen , that paint those , " say the boy , nod toward the picture " one who be different from the rest . he do not know why , but he want to make something beautiful he want to make something , so he make these . he work hard , very hard , to find the juice to make the paint ; and then he find this place where the rock hang over , and he paint they . to we they be only strange thing , that make we laugh ; but to he they be very beautiful . " 


 the child have turn round and look at the picture . 
 " he use to kneel here naked , painting , painting , painting ; and he wonder at the thing he make himself , " say the boy , rise and move his hand in deep excitement . " now the Boers have shoot they all , so that we never see a little yellow face peep out among the stone ; and the wild buck have go , and those day , and we be here . but we will be go soon , and only the stone will be on here , look at everything like they look now . of course I know , " the fellow add slowly , " that it be I who be think , not they who be talk ; but it seem as though it be they . have it never seem to you that thing that do not live be talkig to you , Lyndall ? " 
 " no , it never seem so to I , " she answer . 
 the sun have dip now below the hill , and the boy , suddenly remember the ewe and lamb , start to his foot . 

 " let we also go to the house and see who have come , " say em , as the boy shuffle away to rejoin his flock , while Doss run at his heel , snap at the end of the tear trouser as they flutter in the wind . 



 CHAPTER III . 
 I be a stranger , and ye take I IN . 

 as 
 the two girl round the side of the " kopje , " an unusual scene present itself . a large group be gather at the back door of the homestead . 


 on the door - step stand the boer - woman , a hand on each hip , her face red and fiery , her head nod fiercely . at her foot sit the yellow Hottentot maid , her satellite , and around stand the black Kaffir maid , with blanket twist round their half - naked figure . two , who stamp mealie in a wooden block , hold the great stamper in their hand , and star stupidly at the object of attraction . it certainly be not to look at the old german overseer , 

 who stand in the centre of the group , that they have all gather together . his salt - and - pepper suit , grizzly black beard , and grey eye be as familiar to every one on the farm as the red gable of the homestead itself ; but beside he stand the stranger , and on he all eye be fix . ever and anon the new - comer cast a glance over his pendulous red nose to the spot where the boer - woman stand , and smile faintly . 


 " I be not a child , " cry the boer - woman , in low Cape Dutch , " and I be not   bear yesterday . no , by the Lord , no ! you can not   take 
 I 
 in ! my mother do not   wean I on Monday . one wink of my eye , and I see the whole thing . I will have no tramp sleep on my farm , " cry Tant ' Sannie blowing . " no , by the Devil , no ! not though he have sixty - time - six red nose . " 


 there the german overseer mildly interpose that the man be not a tramp , but a highly 

 respectable individual , whose horse have die by an accident three day before . 


 " do not   tell I , " cry the boer - woman ; " the man be not   bear that can take 
 I 
 in . if he have have money would not   he have buy a horse ? man who walk be thief , liar , murderer , Rome 's priest , seducer ! I see the Devil in his nose ! " cry Tant ' Sannie shake her fist at he ; " and to come walk into the house of this boer 's child , and shake hand as though he come on horseback ! oh , no , no ! " 

 the stranger take off his hat , a tall , battered chimney - pot , and disclose a bald head , at the back of which be a little fringe of curl white hair ; and he bow to Tant ' Sannie . 
 " what do she remark , my friend ? " he inquire , turn his cross - wise look eye on the old German . 
 the German rub his old hand and hesitate . 

 " ah well ah the Dutch you know 

 do not like people who walk in this country ah ! " 

 " my dear friend , " say the stranger , lay his hand on the German 's arm , " I should have buy myself another horse , but crossing , five day ago , a full river , I lose my purse a purse with five hundred pound in it . I spend five day on the bank of the river try to find it could not . pay a Kaffir nine pound to go in and look for it at the risk of his life could not   find it . " 
 the German would have translate this information , but the boer - woman give no ear . 
 " no , no ; he go to - night . see how he look at I a poor unprotected female ! if he wrong I , who be to do I right ? " cry Tant ' Sannie . 
 " I think , " say the German in an undertone , " if you do not   look at she quite so much it might be advisable . she ah she might imagine that you like she too well , in fact ah " 

 " certainly , my dear friend , certainly , " say the stranger . " I shall not look at she . " 
 say this , he turn his nose full upon a small Kaffir of two year old . that small naked Kaffir become instantly so terrified that he flee to his mother 's blanket for protection , howl horribly . 
 upon this the new - comer fix his eye pensively on the stamp - block , fold his hand on the head of his cane . his boot be break , but he still have the cane of a gentleman . 
 " Yo vaggabond se Engelschman ! " say Tant ' Sannie , look straight at he . 
 this be a near approach to plain English ; but the man contemplate the block abstractedly , wholly unconscious that any antagonism be be display toward he . 
 " you might not be a Scotchman , or anything of that kind , might you ? " suggest the German . " it be the English that she hat . " 

 " my dear friend , " say the stranger , " I be 

 irish every inch of I father Irish , mother Irish . I have   not a drop of english blood in my vein . " 

 " and you might not be marry , might you ? " persist the German . " if you have a wife and child , now ? dutch people do not like those who be not married . " 
 " ah , " say the stranger , look tenderly at the block , " I have a dear wife and three sweet little child two lovely girl and a noble boy . " 
 this information have be convey to the boer - woman , she , after some further conversation , appear slightly mollify ; but remain firm to her conviction that the man 's design be evil . 
 " for , dear Lord ! " she cry ; " all englishman be ugly ; but be there ever such a red - rag - nosed thing with broken boot and crooked eye before . take he to your room , " she cry to the German ; " but all the sin he do I lay at your door . " 

 the German have tell he how matter be arrange , the stranger make a profound bow to Tant ' Sannie and follow his host , who lead the way to his own little room . 

 " I think she would come to her well self soon , " the German say joyously . " Tant ' Sannie be not wholly bad , far from it , far . " then see his companion cast a furtive glance at he , which he mistook for one of surprise , he add quickly , " ah , yes , yes ; we be all a primitive people here not very lofty . we deal not in title . every one be Tanta and Oom aunt and uncle . this may be my room , " he say , open the door . " it be rough , the room be rough ; not a palace not quite . but it may be well than the field , a little well , " he say , glance round at his companion . " come in , come in . there be something to eat a mouthful : not the fare of emperor and king ; but we do not starve , not yet , " he say , rub his hand together and look 

 round with a pleased , half - nervous smile on his old face . 

 " my friend , my dear friend , " say the stranger , seize he by the hand , " may the Lord bless you , the Lord bless and reward you the God of the fatherless and the stranger . but for you I would this night have sleep in the field , with the dew of heaven upon my head . " 

 late that evening Lyndall come down to the cabin with the German 's ration . through the tiny square window the light stream forth , and without knock she raise the latch and enter . there be a fire burn on the hearth , and it cast its ruddy glow over the little dingy room , with its worm - eat rafter and mud floor , and break white - wash wall . a curious little place , fill with all manner of article . next to the fire be a great tool - box ; beyond that the little bookshelf with its well - wear book ; beyond that , in the corner , a heap 

 of filled and empty grain - bag . from the rafter hang down strap , " reim , " old boot , bit of harness , and a string of onion . the bed be in another corner , cover by a patchwork quilt of fade red lion , and divide from the rest of the room by a blue curtain , now draw back . on the mantelshelf be an endless assortment of little bag and stone ; and on the wall hang a map of South Germany , with a red line draw through it to show where the german have wander . this place be the one home the girl have know for many a year . the house where Tant ' Sannie live and rule be a place to sleep in , to eat in , not to be happy in . it be in vain she tell they they be grow too old to go there ; every morning and evening find they there . be there not too many golden memory hang about the old place for they to leave it ? 


 long winter night , when they have sit round the fire and roasted potato , and ask riddle , 

 and the old man have tell of the little german village , where , fifty year before , a little german boy have play at snowball , and have carry home the knitted stocking of a little girl who afterward become Waldo 's mother ; do they not seem to see the german peasant girl walk about with their wooden shoe and yellow , braided hair , and the little child eat their supper out of little wooden bowl when the good mother call they in to have their milk and potato ? 

 and be there not yet well time than these ? moonlight night , when they romp about the door , with the old man , yet more a child than any of they , and laugh , till the old roof of the waggon - house rang . 

 or , good of all , be there not warm , dark , starlight night , when they sit together on the door - step , hold each other 's hand , sing german hymn , their voice rise clear in the still night air till the German would draw 

 away his hand suddenly to wipe quickly a tear the child must not see ? would they not sit look up at the star and talk of they of the dear Southern Cross , red , fiery Mars , Orion , with his belt , and the Seven Mysterious Sisters and fall to speculate over they ? how old be they ? who dwelt in they ? and the old German would say that perhaps the soul we love live in they ; 
 there 
 , in that little twinkling point be perhaps the little girl whose stocking he have carry home ; and the child would look up at it lovingly , and call it " Old Otto 's star . " then they would fall to deep speculation of the time and season wherein the heavens shall be roll together as a scroll , and the star shall fall as a fig - tree casteth her untimely fig , and there shall be time no long ; " when the Son of man shall come in his glory , and all his holy angel with he . " in low and low tone they would talk , till at last they fall into whisper ; then they would 

 wish good night softly , and walk home hushed and quiet . 

 to - night , when Lyndall look in , Waldo sit before the fire watch a pot which simmer there , with his slate and pencil in his hand ; his father sit at the table bury in the column of a three - week - old newspaper ; and the strange lay stretch on the bed in the corner , fast asleep , his mouth open , his great limb stretch out loosely , betoken much weariness . the girl put the ration down upon the table , snuff the candle , and stand look at the figure on the bed . 
 " Old Otto , " she say presently , lay her hand down on the newspaper , and cause the old German to look up over his glass , " how long do that man say he have be walk ? " 

 " since this morning , poor fellow ! a gentleman not accustomed to walk horse die poor fellow ! " say the German , push out his lip and glance commiseratingly over his 

 spectacle in the direction of the bed where the strange lay , with his flabby double chin , and break boot through which the flesh shine . 

 " and do you believe he , Uncle Otto ? " 

 " believe he ? why of course I do . he himself tell I the story three time 
 distinctly 
 . " 

 " if , " say the girl slowly , " he have walk for only one day his boot would not have look so ; and if " 

 " 
 if ! 
 " say the German start up in his chair , irritated that any one should doubt such irrefragable evidence " 
 if ! 
 why , he tell I himself ! look how he lie there , " add the German pathetically , " wear out poor fellow ! we have something for he though , " point with his forefinger over his shoulder to the saucepan that stand on the fire . " we be not cook not french cook , not quite ; but it be drinkable , drinkable , I think ; well than nothing , I think , " he add , nod his head 

 in a jocund manner that evince his high estimation of the content of the saucepan and his profound satisfaction therein . " bish ! bish ! my chicken , " he say , as Lyndall tap her little foot up and down upon the floor . " bish ! bish ! my chicken ; you will wake he . " 

 he move the candle so that his own head might intervene between it and the sleeper 's face ; and , smooth his newspaper , he adjust his spectacle to read . 
 the child 's grey - black eye rest on the figure on the bed , then turn to the German , then rest on the figure again . 

 " 
 I 
 think he be a liar . good night , Uncle Otto , " she say slowly , turn to the door . 

 long after she have go the German fold his paper up methodically , and put it in his pocket . 

 the stranger have not awaken to partake of the soup , and his son have fall asleep on the ground . take two white sheep - skin from 

 the heap of sack in the corner , the old man double they up , and lift the boy 's head gently from the slate on which it rest , place the skin beneath it . 

 " poor lambie , poor lambie ! " he say , tenderly pat the great rough head ; " tired be he ! " 
 he throw an overcoat across the boy 's foot , and lift the saucepan from the fire . there be no place where the old man could comfortably lie down himself , so he resume his seat . open a much - wear Bible , he begin to read , and as he read pleasant thought and vision throng on he . 
 " I be a stranger , and ye take I in , " he read . 
 he turn again to the bed where the sleeper lay . 
 " I be a stranger . " 

 very tenderly the old man look at he . he see not the bloated body nor the evil face of the man ; but , as it be , under deep disguise 

 and fleshly concealment , the form that long year of dream have make very real to he . " Jesus , lover , and be it give to we , weak and sinful , frail and err , to serve 
 Thee 
 , to take 
 thee 
 in ! " he say softly , as he rise from his seat . full of joy , he begin to pace the little room . now and again as he walk he sing the line of a german hymn , or mutter break word of prayer . the little room be full of light . it appear to the German that Christ be very near he , and that at almost any moment the thin mist of earthly darkness that cloud his human eye might be withdraw , and that make manifest of which the friend at Emmaus , behold it , say , " it be the Lord ! " 


 again , and yet again , through the long hour of that night , as the old man walk he look up to the roof of his little room , with its blacken rafter , and yet see they not . his rough , bearded face be illuminate with a radiant gladness ; and the night be not short 

 to the dream sleeper than to he whose wake dream bring heaven near . 

 so quickly the night flee , that he look up with surprise when at four o'clock the first grey streak of summer dawn show themselves through the little window . then the old man turn to rake together the few coal that lie under the ash , and his son , turn on the sheep - skin , mutter sleepily to know if it be time to rise . 
 " lie still , lie still ! I would only make a fire , " say the old man . 
 " have you be up all night ? " ask the boy . 
 " yes ; but it have be short , very short . sleep again , my chicken ; it be yet early . " 
 and he go out to fetch more fuel . 



 CHAPTER IV . 
 blessed be he that BELIEVETH . 

 BONAPARTE blenkin 
 sit on the side of the bed . he have wonderfully revive since the day before , hold his head high , talk in a full sonorous voice , and eat greedily of all the viand offer he . at his side be a basin of soup , from which he take a deep draught now and again as he watch the finger of the German , who sit on the mud floor mend the bottom of a chair . 


 presently he look out , where , in the afternoon sunshine , a few half - grow ostrich might be see wander listlessly about , and then he look in again at the little white - washed room , and at Lyndall , who sit look at a book near 

 the door . then he raise his chin and try to adjust an imaginary shirt - collar . find none , he smooth the little grey fringe at the back of his head , and begin , 

 " you be a student of history , I perceive , my friend , from the study of these volume that lie scatter about this apartment ; this fact have be make evident to I . " 
 " well a little perhaps it may be , " say the german meekly . 
 " be a student of history then , " say Bonaparte , raise himself loftily , " you will doubtless have hear of my great , of my celebrated kinsman , Napoleon Bonaparte ? " 
 " yes , yes , " say the German , look up . 

 " I , sir , " say Bonaparte , " be bear at this hour , on an April afternoon , three - and - fifty year ago . the nurse , sir she be the same who attend when the Duke of Sutherland be bear , bring I to my mother . " there be only one name for this child , í she say : " he have 

 the nose of his great kinsman;í and so Bonaparte Blenkins become my name Bonaparte Blenkins . yes , sir , " say Bonaparte , " there be a stream on 
 my 
 maternal side that connect I with a stream on 
 his 
 maternal side . " 

 the German make a sound of astonishment . 
 " the connection , " say Bonaparte , " be one which could not be easily comprehend by one unaccustomed to the study of aristocratic pedigree ; but the connection be close . " 
 " be it possible ! " say the German , pause in his work with much interest and astonishment . " Napoleon an Irishman ! " 

 " yes , " say Bonaparte , " on the mother 's side , and that be how we be relate . there be not   a man to beat he , " say Bonaparte , stretch himself " not a man except the Duke of Wellington . and it be a strange coincidence , " add Bonaparte , bend forward , " but 
 he 
 be a connection of mine . his nephew , the Duke of Wellington 's nephew , marry a cousin of 

 mine . 
 she 
 be a woman ! see she at one of the court ball amber - satin daisy in her hair . worth go a hundred mile to look at she ! often see she there myself , sir ! " 

 the German move the leather thong in and out , and think of the strange vicissitude of human life , which might bring the kinsman of duke and emperor to his humble room . 
 Bonaparte appear lose among old memory . 
 " ah , that Duke of Wellington 's nephew ! " he break forth suddenly ; " many be the joke I have   have with he . often come to visit I at Bonaparte Hall . grand place I have then park , conservatory , servant . he have only one fault , that Duke of Wellington 's nephew , " say Bonaparte , observe that the German be deeply interested in every word : " he be a coward what you might call a coward . you have   never be in Russia , I suppose ? " say Bonaparte , fix his crosswise - look eye on the German 's face . 

 " no , no , " say the old man humbly . " France , England , Germany , a little in this country ; it be all I have travel . " 

 " 
 I 
 , my friend , " say Bonaparte , " I have be in every country in the world , and speak every civilized language , except only dutch and german . I write a book of my travel noteworthy incident . Publisher get it cheat I out of it . great rascal those publisher ! upon one occasion the Duke of Wellington 's nephew and I be travel in Russia . all of a sudden one of the horse drop down dead as a doornail . there we be cold night snow four foot thick great forest one horse not be able to move the sledge night come on wolf . 

 " " spree!í say the Duke of Wellington 's nephew . 
 " " Spree , do you call it?í say I. " look out.í 

 " there , stick out under a bush , be nothing less than the nose of a bear . the Duke 

 of Wellington 's nephew be up a tree like a shot ; I stand quietly on the ground , as cool as I be at this moment , load my gun , and climb up the tree . there be only one bough . 

 " " Bon , í say the Duke of Wellington 's nephew , " you would well sit in front.í 
 " " all right , í say I ; " but keep your gun ready . there be more coming.í he would get his face bury in my back . 
 " " how many be there?í say he . 
 " " Four , í say I. 
 " " how many be there now?í say he . 
 " " Eight , í say I. 
 " " how many be there now?í say he . 
 " " Ten , í say I. 
 " " Ten ! ten!í say he ; and down go his gun . 
 " " Wallie , í I say , " what have you do ? we be dead man now!í 
 " " Bon , my old fellow , í say he , " I could not   help it ; my hand tremble so!í 

 " " Wall , í I say , turn round and seize his hand , " Wallie , my dear lad , good - bye . I be not afraid to die . my leg be long they hang down the first bear that come and I do not   hit he , off go my foot . when he take it I shall give you my gun and go . you may yet be save ; but tell , oh , tell Mary - Ann that I think of she , that I pray for her.í 
 " " good - bye , old fellow!í say he . 
 " " God bless you!í say I. 

 " by this time the bear be sit in a circle all around the tree . yes , " say Bonaparte impressively , fix his eye on the German , " a regular , exact , circle . the mark of their tail be leave in the snow , and I measure it afterward ; a drawing - master could not   have do it well . it be that save I . if they have rush on I at once , poor old Bon would never have be here to tell this story . but they come on , sir , systematically , one by one . all the rest sit on their tail and wait . the first fellow come 

 up , and I shoot he ; the second fellow I shoot he ; the third I shoot he . at last the tenth come ; he be the big of all the leader , you may say . 

 " " Wal , í I say , " give I your hand . my finger be stiff with the cold ; there be only one bullet left . I shall miss he . while he be eat I you get down and take your gun ; and live , dear friend , live to remember the man who give his life for you!í by that time the bear be at I . I feel his paw on my trouser . 
 " " oh , Bonnie ! Bonnie!í say the Duke of Wellington 's nephew . but I just take my gun and put the muzzle to the bear 's ear over he fall dead ! " 
 Bonaparte Blenkins wait to observe what effect his story have make . then he take out a dirty white handkerchief and stroke his forehead , and more especially his eye . 

 " it always affect I to relate that adventure , " he remark , return the handkerchief to his 

 pocket . " ingratitude base , vile ingratitude be recall by it ! that man , that man , who but for I would have perish in the pathless wild of Russia , that man in the hour of my adversity forsook I . yes , " say Bonaparte , " I have money , I have land ; I say to my wife , " there be Africa , a struggle country ; they want capital ; they want man of talent ; they want man of ability to open up that land . let we go.í 

 " I buy eight thousand pound ' worth of machinery winnowing , plowing , reaping - machine ; I load a ship with they . next steamer I come out wife , child , all . got to the Cape . where be the ship with the thing ? lose go to the bottom ! and the box with the money ? lose nothing save ! 
 " my wife write to the Duke of Wellington 's nephew ; I do not   wish she to ; she do it without my knowledge . 

 " what do the man whose life I save do ? do he send I thirty thousand pound ? say , " Bonaparte , my brother , here be a crumb?í no ; he send I nothing . 
 " my wife say , " Write.í I say , " Mary Ann , NO . while these hand have power to work , no . while this frame have power to endure , no . never shall it be say that Bonaparte Blenkins ask of any man.í " 
 the man 's noble independence touch the German . 

 " your case be hard ; yes , that 
 be 
 hard , " say the German , shake his head . 

 Bonaparte take another draught of the soup , lean back against the pillow , and sigh deeply . 
 " I think , " he say after a while , rouse himself , " I shall now wander in the benign air , and taste the gentle cool of evening . the stiffness hover over I yet ; exercise be beneficial . " 

 so say , he adjust his hat carefully on 

 the bald crown of his head , and move to the door . after he have go the German sigh again over his work 

 " ah , Lord ! so it be ! ah ! " 
 he think of the ingratitude of the world . 
 " Uncle Otto , " say the child in the doorway , " do you ever hear of ten bear sit on their tail in a circle ? " 
 " well , not of ten exactly : but bear do attack traveller every day . it be nothing unheard - of , " say the German . " a man of such courage too ! terrible experience that ! " 
 " and how do we know that the story be true , Uncle Otto ? " 
 the German 's ire be rouse . 

 " that be what I do hate ! " he cry . " know that be true ! how do you know that anything be true ? because you be tell so . if we begin to question everything , want proof , proof , proof , what will we have to believe left ? how do you know the angel open the prison- 

 door for Peter , except that Peter say so ? how do you know that God talk to Moses , except that Moses write it ? that be what I hate ! " 

 the girl knit her brow . perhaps her thought make a long journey than the german dreamed of ; for , mark you , the old dream little how their word and life be text and study to the generation that shall succeed they . not what we be teach , but what we see , make we , and the child gather the food on which the adult feed to the end . 
 when the German look up next there be a look of supreme satisfaction in the little mouth and the beautiful eye . 
 " what dost see , chicken ? " he ask . 
 the child say nothing , and an agonizing shriek be bear on the afternoon breeze . 

 " oh , God ! my God ! I be kill ! " cry the voice of Bonaparte , as he , with wide open mouth and shake flesh , fall into the room , follow by 

 a half - grow ostrich , who put its head in at the door , open its beak at he , and go away . 

 " shut the door ! shut the door ! as you value my life , shut the door ! " cry Bonaparte , sink into a chair , his face blue and white , with a greenishness about the mouth . " ah , my friend , " he say tremulously , " eternity have look I in the face ! my life 's thread hang upon a cord ! the valley of the shadow of death ! " say Bonaparte , seize the German 's arm . 
 " dear , dear , dear ! " say the German , who have close the low half of the door , and stand much concerned beside the stranger , " you have have a fright . I never know so young a bird to chase before ; but they will take dislike to certain people . I send a boy away once because a bird would chase he . ah , dear , dear ! " 

 " when I look round , " say Bonaparte , " the red and yawning throat be above I , and the reprehensible paw raise to strike I . 

 my nerve , " say Bonaparte , suddenly grow faint , " always delicate highly strung be break broken ! you could not give a little wine , a little brandy my friend ? " 

 the old German hurry away to the bookshelf , and take from behind the book a small bottle , half of whose content he pour into a cup . Bonaparte drain it eagerly . 
 " how do you feel now ? " ask the German , look at he with much sympathy . 

 " a little , 
 slightly 
 , well . " 

 the German go out to pick up the battered chimney - pot which have fall before the door . 
 " I be sorry you get the fright . the bird be bad thing till you know they , " he say kindly , as he put the hat down . 

 " my friend , " say Bonaparte , hold out his hand , " I forgive you ; do not be disturb . whatever the consequence , I forgive you . I know , I believe , it be with no ill - intent that 

 you allow I to go out . give I your hand . I have no ill - feeling . " 

 " you be very kind , " say the German , take the extended hand , and feel suddenly convinced that he be receive magnanimous forgiveness for some great injury , " you be very kind . " 
 " do not   mention it , " say Bonaparte . 
 he knock out the crown of his cave - in old hat , place it on the table before he , lean his elbow on the table and his face in his hand , and contemplate it . 
 " ah , my old friend , " he thus apostrophize the hat , " you have serve I long , you have serve I faithfully , but the last day have come . never more shall you be bear upon the head of your master . never more shall you protect his brow from the burn ray of summer or the cut wind of winter . henceforth bare - headed must your master go . good - bye , good - bye , old hat ! " 

 at the end of this affecting appeal the german rise . he go to the box at the foot of his bed ; out of it he take a black hat , which have evidently be seldom worn and carefully preserve . 
 " it be not exactly what you may have be accustom to , " he say nervously , put it down beside the battered chimney - pot , " but it might be of some use a protection to the head , you know . " 
 " my friend , " say Bonaparte , " you be not follow my advice ; you be allow yourself to be reproach on my account . do not make yourself unhappy . no ; I shall go bare - headed . " 
 " no , no , no ! " cry the german energetically . " I have no use for the hat , none at all . it be shut up in the box . " 

 " then I will take it , my friend . it be a comfort to one 's own mind when you have unintentionally injure any one to make reparation . I know the feeling . the hat may not 

 be of that refined cut of which the old one be , but it will serve , yes , it will serve . thank you , " say Bonaparte , adjust it on his head , and then replace it on the table . " I shall lie down now and take a little repose , " he add ; " I much fear my appetite for supper will be lose . " 

 " I hope not , I hope not , " say the German , reseat himself at his work , and look much concerned as Bonaparte stretch himself on the bed and turn the end of the patchwork quilt over his foot . 
 " you must not think to make your departure not for many day , " say the German presently . " Tant ' Sannie give her consent , and " 

 " my friend , " say Bonaparte , close his eye sadly , " you be kind ; but be it not that to - morrow be the Sabbath , weak and tremble as I lie here , I would proceed on my way . I must seek work ; idleness but for a day be 

 painful . 
 work , labour 
  that be the secret of all true happiness ! " 

 he double the pillow under his head , and watch how the german draw the leather thong in and out . 
 after a while Lyndall silently put her book on the shelf and go home , and the german stand up and begin to mix some water and meal for roaster - cake . as he stir they with his hand he say , 
 " I make always a double supply on Saturday night ; the hand be then free as the thought for Sunday . " 
 " the blessed Sabbath , " say Bonaparte . 
 there be a pause . Bonaparte twist his eye without move his head , to see if supper be already on the fire . 
 " you must sorely miss the administration of the Lord 's word in this desolate spot , " add Bonaparte . " oh , how love I Thine house , and the place where Thine honour dwelleth ! " 

 " well , we do ; yes , " say the German ; " but we do our good . we meet together , and I well , I say a few word , and perhaps they be not wholly lose , not quite . " 
 " strange coincidence , " say Bonaparte ; " my plan always be the same . be in the Free State once solitary farm one neighbour . every Sunday I call together friend and neighbour , child and servant , and say , " rejoice with I , that we may serve the Lord , í and then I address they . ah , those be bless time , " say Bonaparte ; " would they might return . " 
 the German stir at the cake , and stir , and stir , and stir . he could give the stranger his bed , and he could give the stranger his hat , and he could give the stranger his brandy ; but his Sunday service ! 
 after a good while he say , 

 " I might speak to Tant ' Sannie ; I might 

 arrange ; you might take the service in my place , if it " 

 " my friend , " say Bonaparte , " it would give I the profound felicity , the most unbounded satisfaction ; but in these wear - out habiliment , in these deteriorated garment , it would not be possible , it would not be fitting that I should officiate in service of one whom , for respect , we shall not name . no , my friend , I will remain here ; and , while you be assemble yourselves together in the presence of the Lord , I , in my solitude , will think of and pray for you . no ; I will remain here ! " 

 it be a touching picture the solitary man there pray for they . the german clear his hand from the meal , and go to the chest from which he have take the black hat . after a little careful feeling about , he produce a black cloth coat , trowser , and waistcoat , which he lay on the table , smile knowingly . they 

 be of new shin cloth , wear twice a year , when he go to the town to " nachtmaal . " he look with great pride at the coat as he unfold it and hold it up . 

 " it be not the late fashion , perhaps , not a West End cut , not exactly ; but it might do ; it might serve at a push . try it on , try it on ! " he say , his old grey eye twinkle with pride . 
 Bonaparte stand up and try on the coat . it fit admirably ; the waistcoat could be make to button by rip up the back , and the trowser be perfect ; but below be the ragged boot . the German be not disconcert . go to the beam where a pair of top - boot hung , he take they off , dust they carefully , and put they down before Bonaparte . the old eye now fairly brim over with sparkling enjoyment . 
 " I have only wear they once . they might serve ; they might be endure . " 

 Bonaparte draw they on and stand upright , his head almost touch the beam . the German look at he with profound admiration . it be wonderful what a difference feather make in the bird . 



 CHAPTER V. 
 SUNDAY SERVICES . 

 SERVICE NO . I. 

 THE 
 boy Waldo kiss the page of his book and look up . far over the flat lie the " kopje , " a mere speck ; the sheep wander quietly from bush to bush ; the stillness of the early Sunday rest everywhere , and the air be fresh . 

 he look down at his book . on its page a black insect creep . he lift it off with his finger . then he lean on his elbow , watch its quivering antenn ? and strange movement , smile . 

 " even you , " he whisper , " shall not die . even you he love . even you he will enfold 

 in his arm when he take everything and make it perfect and happy . " 

 when the thing have go he smooth the leaf of his Bible somewhat caressingly . the leaf of that book have drop blood for he once ; they have take the brightness out of his childhood ; from between they have spring the vision that have clung about he and make night horrible . adder - like thought have lift their head , have shoot out fork tongue at he , ask mockingly strange , trivial question that he could not answer , miserable child : 


 why do the woman in Mark see only 
 one 
 angel and the woman in Luke 
 two 
 ? could a story be tell in opposite way and both way be true ? could it ? could it ? 
 then again : 
 be there nothing always right , and nothing always wrong ? could Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite " put her hand to the nail , and her right hand to the workman 's hammer ? " and could the Spirit of the Lord chant p?an over she , loud p?an , high p?an , set in the 


 book of the Lord , and no voice cry out it be a mean and dastardly sin to lie , and kill the trusting in their sleep ? could the friend of God marry his own sister , and be belove , and the man who do it to - day go to hell , to hell ? be there nothing always right or always wrong ? 

 those leaf have drop blood for he once : they have make his heart heavy and cold ; they have rob his childhood of its gladness ; now his finger move over they caressingly . 

 " my father God know , my father know , " he say ; " we can not understand ; he know . " after a while he whisper " I hear your voice this morning when my eye be not yet open , I feel you near I , my Father . why do you love I so ? how be it in the last four month all those old question have go from I ? I know you be good ; I know you love everything ; I know it be all right ; I 
 feel 
 it . I could not have bear it any more , not any more . I be almost mad . and all the while 

 I be so miserable you be look at I and love I , and I never know it . but I know it now . I 
 feel 
 it , " say the boy , and he laugh low ; " I 
 feel 
 it ! " he laugh . 

 after a while he begin partly to sing , partly to chant the disconnected verse of hymn , those which speak his gladness , many time over , and loudly and always louder . the sheep with their senseless eye turn to look at he as he sing . 
 at last he lapse into quiet . then as the boy lie there , star at bush and sand , he see a vision . 

 he have cross the river of death , and walk on the other bank in the Lord 's land of Beulah . his foot sink into the dark grass , and he walk alone . then , far over the field , he see a figure come across the dark green grass . at first he think it must be one of the angel ; but as it come near he begin to feel what it be . and it come close , close 

 to he , and then the voice say , " come , " and he know surely who it be . he run to the dear foot and touch they with his hand ; yes , he hold they fast ! he lie down beside they . when he look up the face be over he , and the glorious eye be love he ; and they two be there alone together . 

 he laugh a deep laugh ; then start up like one suddenly awaken from sleep . 
 " oh , God ! " he cry , " I can not wait ; I can not wait ! I want to die ; I want to see he ; I want to touch he . let I die ! " he fold his hand , tremble . " how can I wait so long for long , long year perhaps ? I want to die to see he . I will die any death . oh , let I come ! " 
 weep he bow himself , and quiver from head to foot . after a long while he lift his head . 

 " yes ; I will wait ; I will wait . but not long ; do not let it be very long , Jesus . I want you ; 

 oh , I want you soon , soon ! " he sit still , star across the plain with his tearful eye . 



 SERVICE NO . II . 

 in 
 the front room of the farmhouse sit Tant ' Sannie in her elbow - chair . in her hand be her great brass - clasp hymn - book , round her neck be a clean white handkerchief , under her foot be a wooden stove . there too sit Em and Lyndall , in clean pinafore and new shoe . there too be the spruce Hottentot in a starch white " cappje , " and her husband on the other side of the door , with his wool oil and very much comb out , and star at his new leather boot . the Kaffir servant be not there because Tant ' Sannie hold they be descend from ape , and need no salvation . but the rest be gather for the Sunday service , and wait the officiator . 


 meanwhile Bonaparte and the german approach arm in arm Bonaparte resplendent in the black cloth clothe , a spotless shirt , and a spotless collar ; the german in the old salt - and - pepper , cast shy glance of admiration at his companion . 
 at the front door Bonaparte remove his hat with much dignity , raise his shirt collar , and enter . to the centre table he walk , put his hat solemnly down by the big Bible , and bow his head over it in silent prayer . 
 the boer - woman look at the Hottentot , and the Hottentot look at the boer - woman . 

 there be one thing on earth for which Tant ' Sannie have a profound reverence , which exercise a subduing influence over she , which make she for the time a well woman that thing be new , shin black cloth . it make she think of the " predikant ; " it make her think of the elder who sit in the top pew of the church on Sundays , with the hair so nicely oil , so holy 

 and respectable , with their little swallow - tail coat ; it make she think of heaven , where everything be so holy and respectable , and nobody wear tan - cord , and the little angel have a black tail - coat . she wish she have not   call he a thief and a roman Catholic . she hop the German have not   tell he . she wonder where those clothe be when he come in rag to her door . there be no doubt , he be a very respectable man , a gentleman . 

 the German begin to read a hymn . at the end of each line Bonaparte groan , and twice at the end of every verse . 

 the boer - woman have often hear of person groan during prayer , to add a certain poignancy and finish to they ; she would have look upon it as no especial sign of grace in any one ; but to groan at hymn - time ! she be startle . she wonder if he remember that she shake her fist in his face . this be a man of God . they kneel down to pray . the boer - woman 

 weigh two hundred and fifty pound , and could not kneel . she sit in her chair , and peep between her cross finger at the stranger 's back . she could not understand what he say ; but he be in earnest . he shake the chair by the back rail till it make quite a little dust on the mud floor . 

 when they rise from their knee Bonaparte solemnly seat himself in the chair and open the Bible . he blow his nose , pull up his shirt collar , smooth the leaf , stroke down his capacious waistcoat , blow his nose again , look solemnly round the room , then begin , 
 " all liar shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone , which be the second death . " 
 have read this portion of Scripture , Bonaparte pause impressively , and look all round the room . 

 " I shall not , my dear friend , " he say , " long detain you . much of our precious time have 

 already flee blissfully from we in the voice of thanksgiving and the tongue of praise . a few , a very few word be all I shall address to you , and may they be as a rod of iron divide the bone from the marrow , and the marrow from the bone . 

 " in the first place : what be a liar ? " 
 the question be put so pointedly , and follow by a pause so profound , that even the Hottentot man leave off look at his boot and open his eye , though he understand not a word . 
 " I repeat , " say Bonaparte , " what be a liar ? " 
 the sensation be intense ; the attention of the audience be rivet . 

 " have you any of you ever see a liar , my dear friend ? " there be a still long pause . " I hope not ; I truly hope not . but I will tell you what a liar be . I know a liar once a little boy who live in Cape Town , in Short Market 

 Street . his mother and I sit together one day , discourse about our soul . 

 " " here , Sampson , í say his mother , " go and buy sixpence of " meiboss " from the Malay round the corner.í 
 " when he come back she say : " how much have you got?í 
 " " Five , í he say . 
 " he be afraid if he say six and a half she would ask for some . and , my friend , that be a lie . the half of a " meibossí stuck in his throat and he die and be bury . and where do the soul of that little liar go to , my friend ? it go to the lake of fire and brimstone . this bring I to the second point of my discourse . 
 " what be a lake of fire and brimstone ? I will tell you , my friend , " say Bonaparte condescendingly . " the imagination unaide can not conceive it : but by the help of the Lord I will put it before your mind 's eye . 

 " I be travel in Italy once on a time ; 

 I come to a city call Rome , a vast city , and near it be a mountain which spit forth fire . its name be Etna . now , there be a man in that city of Rome who have not the fear of God before his eye , and he love a woman . the woman die , and he walk up that mountain spitting fire , and when he get to the top , he throw himself in at the hole that be there . the next day I go up . I be not afraid ; the Lord preserve his servant . and in their hand shall they bear thee up , lest at any time thou fall into a volcano . it be dark night when I get there , but in the fear of the Lord I walk to the edge of the yawning abyss , and look in . that sight that sight , my friend , be impress upon my most indelible memory . I look down into the lurid depth upon an incandescent lake , a melt fire , a seething sea ; the billow roll from side to side , and on their fiery crest toss the white skeleton of the suicide . the heat have burn the flesh from off 

 the bone ; they lie as a light cork upon the melt , fiery wave . one skeleton hand be raise upward , the finger pointing to heaven ; the other , with outstretched finger , point downward , as though it would say , " I go below , but you , Bonaparte , may soar above.í I gaze ; I stand entrance . at that instant there be a crack in the lurid lake ; it swell , expand , and the skeleton of the suicide disappear , to be see no more by mortal eye . " 

 here again Bonaparte rest , and then continue 

 " the lake of melted stone rise in the crater , it swell higher and high at the side , it stream forth at the top . I have presence of mind ; near I be a rock ; I stand upon it . the fiery torrent be vomit out and stream on either side of I . and through that long and terrible night I stand there alone upon that rock , the glowing , fiery lava on every hand a monument of the long - suffer and tender providence of 

 the Lord , who spar I that I might this day testify in your ear of he . 

 " now , my dear friend , let we deduce the lesson that be to be learn from this narrative . 
 " firstly : let we never commit suicide . the man be a fool , my friend , that man be insane , my friend , who would leave this earth , my friend . here be joy innumerable , such as it hath not enter into the heart of man to understand , my friend . here be clothe , my friend ; here be bed , my friend ; here be delicious food , my friend . our precious body be give we to love , to cherish . oh , let we do so ! oh , let we never hurt they ; but care for and love they , my friend ! " 
 every one be impressed , and Bonaparte proceed . 

 " thirdly ; let we not love too much . if that young man have not love that young woman , he would not have jump into Mount Etna . the good man of old never do so . be Jeremiah 

 ever in love , or Ezekiel , or Hosea , or even any of the minor prophet ? no . then why should we be ? thousand be roll in that lake at this moment who would say , " it be love that bring we here.í oh , let we think always of our own soul first . 



 " " a charge to keep I have , 
 a God to glorify ; 
 a never - die soul to save , 
 and fit it for the sky . ' 


 " oh , beloved friend , remember the little boy and the " meibossí ; remember the young girl and the young man ; remember the lake , the fire , and the brimstone ; remember the suicide 's skeleton on the pitchy billow of Mount Etna ; remember the voice of warning that have this day sound in your ear ; and what I say to you I say to all watch ! may the Lord add his blessing ! " 

 here the Bible close with a tremendous thud . Tant ' Sannie loosen the white handkerchief 

 about her neck and wipe her eye , and the coloured girl , see she do so , sniffle . the do not understand the discourse , which make it the more affecting . there hang over it that inscrutable charm which hover forever for the human intellect , over the incomprehensible and shadowy . when the last hymn be sing the German conduct the officiator to Tant ' Sannie , who graciously extend her hand , and offer coffee and a seat on the sofa . leave he there , the german hurry away to see how the little plum - pudding he have leave at home be advance ; and Tant ' Sannie remark that it be a hot day . Bonaparte gather her meaning as she fan herself with the end of her apron . he bow low in acquiescence . a long silence follow . Tant ' Sannie speak again . Bonaparte give she no ear ; his eye be fix on a small miniature on the opposite wall , which represent Tant ' Sannie as she have appear on the day before her confirmation , 

 fifteen year before , attire in green muslin . suddenly he start to his foot , walk up to the picture , and take his stand before it . long and wistfully he gaze into its feature ; it be easy to see that he be deeply move . with a sudden movement , as though no long able to restrain himself , he seize the picture , loosen it from its nail , and hold it close to his eye . at length , turn to the boer - woman , he say , in a voice of deep emotion , 

 " you will , I trust , dear madam , excuse this exhibition of my feeling ; but this this little picture recall to I my first and good belove , my dear depart wife , who be now a saint in heaven . " 
 Tant ' Sannie could not understand ; but the Hottentot maid , who have take her seat on the floor beside her mistress , translate the English into Dutch as far as she be able . 

 " ah , my first , my beloved ! " he add , look tenderly down at the picture . " oh , 

 the beloved , the beautiful lineament ! my angel wife ! this be surely a sister of your , madame ? " he add , fix his eye on Tant ' Sannie . 

 the Dutchwoman blush , shake her head , and point to herself . 
 carefully , intently , Bonaparte look from the picture in his hand to Tant ' Sannie 's feature , and from the feature back to the picture . then slowly a light break over his countenance , he look up , it become a smile ; he look back at the miniature , his whole countenance be effulgent . 
 " ah , yes ; I see it now , " he cry , turn his delighted gaze on the boer - woman ; " eye , mouth , nose , chin , the very expression ! " he cry . " how be it possible I do not notice it before ? " 
 " take another cup of coffee , " say Tant ' Sannie . " put some sugar in . " 

 Bonaparte hang the picture tenderly up , and 

 be turn to take the cup from her hand , when the german appear , to say that the pudding be ready and the meat on the table . 

 " he be a God - fear man , and one who know how to behave himself , " say the boer - woman as he go out at the door . " if he be ugly , do not the Lord make he ? and be we to laugh at the Lord 's handiwork ? it be well to be ugly and good than pretty and bad ; though of course it be nice when one be both , " say Tant ' Sannie , look complacently at the picture on the wall . 
 in the afternoon the German and Bonaparte sit before the door of the cabin . both smoke in complete silence Bonaparte with a book in his hand and his eye half close ; the german puff vigorously , and glance up now and again at the serene blue sky overhead . 

 " suppose you you , in fact , make the 

 remark to I , " burst forth the german suddenly , " that you be look for a situation . " 

 Bonaparte open his mouth wide , and send a stream of smoke through his lip . 
 " now supposing , " say the german " merely supposing , of course that some one , some one , in fact , should make an offer to you , say , to become schoolmaster on their farm and teach two child , two little girl , perhaps , and would give you forty pound a - year , would you accept it ? just supposing , of course . " 
 " well , my dear friend , " say Bonaparte , " that would depend on circumstance . money be no consideration with I . for my wife I have make provision for the next year . my health be break . could I meet a place where a gentleman would be treat as a gentleman I would accept it , however small the remuneration . with I , " say Bonaparte , " money be no consideration . " 

 " well , " say the German , when he have take 

 a whiff or two more from his pipe , " I think I shall go up and see Tant ' Sannie a little . I go up often on Sunday afternoon to have a general conversation , to see she , you know . nothing nothing particular , you know . " 

 the old man put his book into his pocket , and walk up to the farmhouse with a peculiarly knowing and delighted expression of countenance . 
 " he do not   suspect what I be go to do , " soliloquize the German ; " have not   the least idea . a nice surprise for he . " 
 the man whom he have leave at his doorway wink at the retreating figure with a wink that be quite indescribable . 




 CHAPTER VI . 
 bonaparte blenkin makes his nest . 

 " 
 AH 
 , what be the matter ? " ask Waldo , stop at the foot of the ladder with a load of skin on his back that he be carry up to the loft . through the open door in the gable little Em be visible , her foot dangle from the high bench on which she sit . the room , once a store - room , have be divide by a row of " mealie " bag into two part the back be Bonaparte 's bedroom , the front his school - room . 

 " Lyndall make he angry , " say the girl tearfully ; " and he have give I the fourteenth of John to learn . he say he will teach I to behave myself when Lyndall trouble he . " 
 " what do she do ? " ask the boy . 


 " you see , " say em , hopelessly turn the leaf , " whenever he talk she look out at the door , as though she do not hear he . to - day she ask he what the sign of the Zodiac be , and he say he be surprised that she should ask he ; it be not a fit and proper thing for little girl to talk about . then she ask he who Copernicus be ; and he say he be one of the Emperors of Rome , who burn the Christians in a golden pig , and the worm eat he up while he be still alive . I do not   know why , " say Em plaintively , " but she just put her book under her arm , and walk out ; and she will never come to his school again , she say , and she 
 always 
 do what she say . and now I must sit here every day alone , " say Em , the great tear drop softly . 

 " Perhaps Tant ' Sannie will send he away , " say the boy , in his mumbling way , try to comfort she . 

 " no , " say Em , shake her head ; " no . 

 last night , when the little Hottentot maid be wash her foot , he tell she he like such foot , and that fat woman be so nice to he ; and she say , I must always put he pure cream in his coffee now . no ; he will never go away , " say Em dolorously . 

 the boy put down his skin and fumble in his pocket , and produce a small piece of paper contain something . he stick it out toward she . 
 " there , take it for you , " he say . this be by way of comfort . 
 Em open it and find a small bit of gum ; but the great tear drop down slowly on to it . 
 Waldo be distressed . he have cry so much in his morsel of life that tear in another seem to burn he . 
 " if , " he say , step in awkwardly and stand by the table , " if you will not cry I will tell you something a secret . " 

 " what be that ? " ask Em , instantly become decidedly well . 
 " you will tell it to no human being ? " 
 " no . " 
 he bend near to she , and with deep solemnity say , 

 " 
 I have make a machine ! 
 " 

 the girl open her eye . 
 " yes ; a machine for shearing sheep . it be almost do , " say the boy . " there be only one thing that be not right yet ; but it will be soon . when you think , and think , and think , all night and all day , it come at last , " he add mysteriously . 
 " where be it ? " 
 " here ! I always carry it here , " say the boy , put his hand to his breast , where a bulging - out be visible . " this be a model . when it be do they will have to make a large one . " 
 " show it I . " 

 the boy shake his head . 
 " no , not till it be do . I can not let any human be see it till then . " 
 " it be a beautiful secret , " say Em ; and the boy shuffle out to pick up his skin . 

 that evening father and son sit in the cabin eat their supper . the father sigh deeply sometimes . perhaps he think how long a time it be since Bonaparte have visit the cabin ; but his son be in that land in which sigh have no part . it be a question whether it be not well to be the shabby of fool , and know the way up the little stair of imagination to the land of dream , than the wise of man , who see nothing that the eye do not show , and feel nothing that the hand do not touch . the boy chew his brown bread and drink his coffee ; but in truth he see only his machine finish that last something find out and add . he see it as it work with beautiful smoothness ; and over and above , as he chew 

 his bread and drink his coffee , there be that delightful consciousness of something bend over he and love he . it would not have be well in one of the court of heaven , where the wall be set with row of the King of Glory 's amethyst and milk - white pearl , than there , eat his supper in that little room . 

 as they sit in silence there be a knock at the door . when it be open the small woolly head of a little nigger show itself . she be a messenger from Tant ' Sannie : the German be want at once at the homestead . put on his hat with both hand , he hurry off . the kitchen be in darkness , but in the pantry beyond , Tant ' Sannie and her maid be assemble . 

 a Kaffir girl , who have be grind pepper between two stone , kneel on the floor , the lean Hottentot stand with a brass candlestick in her hand , and Tant ' Sannie , near the shelf , with a 

 hand on each hip , be evidently listen intently , as be her companion . 

 " what may it be ? " cry the old German in astonishment . 
 the room beyond the pantry be the store - room . through the thin wooden partition there arise at that instant , evidently from some creature ensconce there , a prolonged and prodigious howl , follow by a succession of violent blow against the partition wall . 
 the German seize the churn - stick , and be about to rush round the house , when the boer - woman impressively lay her hand upon his arm . 
 " that be his head , " say Tant ' Sannie , " that be his head . " 
 " but what might it be ? " ask the German , look from one to the other , churn - stick in hand . 
 a low hollow bellow prevent reply , and the voice of Bonaparte lift itself on high . 
 " Mary - Ann ! my angel ! my wife ! " 

 " be not   it dreadful ? " say Tant ' Sannie , as the blow be repeat fiercely . " he have get a letter : his wife be dead . you must go and comfort he , " say Tant ' Sannie at last , " and I will go with you . it would not be the thing for I to go alone I , who be only thirty - three , and he an unmarried man now , " say Tant ' Sannie , blush and smooth out her apron . 
 upon this they all trudge round the house in company the Hottentot maid carry the light , Tant ' Sannie and the german following , and the Kaffir girl bring up the rear . 
 " oh , " say Tant ' Sannie , " I see now it be not   wickedness make he do without his wife so long only necessity . " 

 at the door she motion to the German to enter , and follow he closely . on the stretcher behind the sack Bonaparte lie on his face , his head press into a pillow , his leg kick gently . the boer - woman sit down on a box at 

 the foot of the bed . the german stand with folded hand look on . 

 " we must all die , " say Tant ' Sannie at last ; " it be the dear Lord 's will . " 
 Bonaparte , hear her voice , turn himself on to his back . 
 " it be very hard , " say Tant ' Sannie , " I know , for I have   lose two husband . " 
 Bonaparte look up into the German 's face . 
 " oh , what do she say ? speak to I word of comfort ! " 
 the german repeat Tant ' Sannie 's remark . 
 " ah , I I also ! two dear , dear wife , whom I shall never see any more ! " cry Bonaparte , fling himself back upon the bed . 
 he howl till the tarantula , who live between the rafter and the zinc roof , feel the unusual vibration , and look out with their wicked bright eye , to see what be go on . 

 Tant ' Sannie sigh , the Hottentot maid sigh , the Kaffir girl who look in at the 

 door put her hand over her mouth and say " Mow wah ! " 

 " you must trust in the Lord , " say Tant ' Sannie . " he can give you more than you have lose . " 
 " I do , I do ! " he cry ; " but oh , I have no wife ! I have no wife ! " 
 Tant ' Sannie be much affected , and come and stand near the bed . 
 " ask he if he will not   have a little pap nice , fine , flour pap . there be some boiling on the kitchen fire . " 
 the German make the proposal ; but the widower wave his hand . 
 " no , nothing shall pass my lip . I should be suffocate . no , no ! speak not of food to I ! " 
 " pap , and a little brandy in , " say Tant ' Sannie coaxingly . 
 Bonaparte catch the word . 

 " perhaps , perhaps if I struggle with myself 

  for the sake of my duty I might imbibe a few drop , " he say , look with quivering lip up into the German 's face . " I must do my duty , must I not ? " 

 Tant ' Sannie give the order , and the girl go for the pap . 

 " I know how it be when my first husband die . they could do nothing with I , " the boer - woman say , " till I have eat a sheep 's trotter and honey , and a little roaster - cake . 
 I 
 know . " 

 Bonaparte sit up on the bed with his leg stretch out in front of he , and a hand on each knee , blubber softly . 

 " oh , she be a woman ! you be very kind to try and comfort I , but she be my wife . for a woman that be my wife I could live ; for the woman that be my wife I could die ! for a woman that be my wife I could ah ! that sweet word 
 wife 
 ; when will it rest upon my lip again ? " 


 when his feeling have subside a little he raise the corner of his turn - down mouth , and speak to the German with flabby lip . 
 " do you think she understand I ? oh , tell she every word , that she may know I thank she . " 
 at that instant the girl reappear with a basin of steam gruel and a black bottle . 
 Tant ' Sannie pour some of its content into the basin , stir it well , and come to the bed . 
 " oh , I can not , I can not ! I shall die ! I shall die ! " say Bonaparte , put his hand to his side . 
 " come , just a little , " say Tant ' Sannie coaxingly ; " just a drop . " 
 " it be too thick , it be too thick . I should choke . " 

 Tant ' Sannie add something from the bottle and hold out a spoonful ; Bonaparte open his mouth like a little bird wait for a worm , and 

 hold it open , as she dip again and again into the pap . 

 " ah , this will do your heart good , " say Tant ' Sannie , in whose mind the relative function of heart and stomach be exceedingly ill - define . 
 when the basin be empty the violence of his grief be much assuage ; he look at Tant ' Sannie with gentle tear . 
 " tell he , " say the boer - woman , " that I hope he will sleep well , and that the Lord will comfort he , as the Lord only can . " 
 " bless you , dear friend , God bless you , " say Bonaparte . 
 when the door be safely shut he get off the bed and wash away the soap he have rub on his eyelid . 

 " Bon , " he say , slap his leg , " you be the ' cute lad I ever come across . if you do not   turn out the old Hymns - and - prayer , and pummel the ragged - coat , and get your arm round the 

 fat one 's waist and a wedding - ring on her finger , then you be not Bonaparte . but you 
 be 
 Bonaparte . Bon , you be a fine boy ! " 

 make which please reflection , he pull off his trouser and get into bed cheerfully . 



 CHAPTER VII . 
 he set his TRAP . 

 " 
 MAY 
 I come in ? I hope I do not disturb you , my dear friend , " say Bonaparte , late one evening , put his nose in at the cabin door , where the German and his son sit finish their supper . 


 it be now two month since he have be instal as schoolmaster in Tant ' Sannie 's household , and he have grow mighty and more mighty day by day . he visit the cabin no more , sit close to Tant ' Sannie drinking coffee all the evening , and walk about loftily with his hand under the coat tail of the German 's black cloth and fail to see even a nigger who wish he the time of day . it be 

 therefore with no small surprise that the german perceive Bonaparte 's red nose at the door . 

 " walk in , walk in , " he say joyfully . " boy , boy , see if there be any coffee leave . well , none . make a fire . we have do supper , but " 
 " my dear friend , " say Bonaparte , take off his hat , " I come not to sup , not for mere creature comfort , but for an hour of brotherly intercourse with a kindre spirit . the press of business and the weight of thought , but they alone , may sometimes prevent I from share the secret of my bosom with he for whom I have so great a sympathy . you perhaps wonder when I shall return the two pound " 
 " oh , no , no ! make a fire , make a fire , boy . we will have a pot of hot coffee presently , " say the German , rub his hand and look about , not know how good to show his pleasure at the unexpected visit . 

 for three week the German 's diffident 

 " good evening " have meet with a stately bow ; the chin of Bonaparte lift itself higher daily ; and his shadow have not darken the cabin doorway since he come to borrow the two pound . the German walk to the head of the bed and take down a blue bag that hang there . blue bag be a speciality of the German 's . he keep above fifty stow away in different corner of his room some fill with curious stone , some with seed that have be in his possession fifteen year , some with rusty nail , buckle , and bit of old harness in all , a wonderful assortment , but highly prized . 


 " we have something here not so bad , " say the German , smile knowingly , as he dive his hand into the bag and take out a handful of almond and raisin ; " I buy these for my chicken . they increase in size , but they still think the old man must have something nice for they . and the old man well , a big boy 

 may have a sweet tooth sometimes , may he not ? ha , ha ! " say the German , chuckle at his own joke , as he heap the plate with almond . " here be a stone two stone to crack they no late patent improvement well , Adam 's nut - cracker ; ha , ha ! but I think we shall do . we will not leave they uncracked . we will consume a few without fashionable improvement . " 

 here the German sit down on one side of the table , Bonaparte on the other ; each one with a couple of flat stone before he , and the plate between they . 

 " do not be afraid , " say the German , " do not be afraid . I do not forget the boy at the fire ; I crack for he . the bag be full . why , this be strange , " he say suddenly , crack upon a large nut ; " three kernel ! I have not observe that before . this must be retain . this be valuable . " he wrap the nut gravely in paper , and put it carefully in his waistcoat - pocket . 

 " valuable , very valuable ! " he say , shake his head . 

 " ah , my friend , " say Bonaparte , " what joy it be to be once more in your society . " 
 the German 's eye glisten , and Bonaparte seize his hand and squeeze it warmly . they then proceed to crack and eat . after a while Bonaparte say , stuff a handful of raisin into his mouth , 
 " I be so deeply grieve , my dear friend , that you and Tant ' Sannie have some slight unpleasantness this evening . " 
 " oh , no , no , " say the German ; " it be all right now . a few sheep miss ; but I make it good myself . I give my twelve sheep , and work in the other eight . " 
 " it be rather hard that you should have to make good the lost sheep , " say Bonaparte ; " it be no fault of your . " 

 " well , " say the German , " this be the case . last evening I count the sheep at the kraal 

 twenty be miss . I ask the herd ; he tell I they be with the other flock ; he tell I so 
 distinctly 
 ; how can I think he lie ? this afternoon I count the other flock . the sheep be not there . I come back here : the herd be go ; the sheep be go . but I can not no , I will not believe he steal they , " say the German , grow suddenly excited . " some one else , but not he . I know that boy . I know he three year . he be a good boy . I have see he deeply affect on account of his soul . and she would send the police after he ! I say I would rather make the loss good myself . I will not have it ; he have flee in fear . I know his heart . it be , " say the German , with a little gentle hesitation , " under my word that he first feel his need of a Saviour . " 


 Bonaparte crack some more almond , then say , yawning , and more as though he ask for the sake of have something to converse 

 about than from any interest he feel in the subject 

 " and what have become of the herd 's wife ? " 
 the German be alight again in a moment . 
 " yes ; his wife . she have a child six day old , and Tant ' Sannie would turn she out into the field this night . that , " say the german rise , " that be what I call cruelty diabolical cruelty . my soul abhor that deed . the man that could do such a thing I could run he through with a knife ! " say the German , his grey eye flash , and his bushy black beard add to the murderous fury of his aspect . then suddenly subside , he say , " but all be now well ; Tant ' Sannie give her word that the maid shall remain for some day . I go to Oom Muller 's to - morrow to learn if the sheep may not be there . if they be not , then I return . they be go , that be all . I make it good . " 

 " Tant ' Sannie be a singular woman , " say Bonaparte , take the tobacco bag the German pass to he . 

 " Singular ! yes , " say the German ; " but her heart be on her right side . I have live long year with she , and I may say , I have for she an affection , which she return . I may say , " add the German with warmth , " I may say , that there be not one soul on this farm for whom I have 
 not 
 an affection . " 


 " ah , my friend , " say Bonaparte , " when the grace of God be in our heart , be it not so with we all ? do we not love the very worm we tread upon , and as we tread upon it ? do we know distinction of race , or of sex , or of colour ? 
 no ! 


 " " love so amazing , so divine , 
 it fill my soul , my life , my all.í " 



 after a time he sink into a less fervent mood , and remark , 

 " the coloured female who wait upon Tant ' 

 Sannie appear to be of a virtuous disposition , an individual who " 

 " virtuous ! " say the German ; " I have confidence in she . there be that in she which be pure , that which be noble . the rich and high that walk this earth with lofty eyelid might exchange with she . " 
 the German here get up to bring a coal for Bonaparte 's pipe , and they sit together talk for a while . at length Bonaparte knock the ash out of his pipe . 
 " it be time that I take my departure , dear friend , " he say ; " but , before I do so , shall we not close this evening of sweet communion and brotherly intercourse by a few word of prayer ? oh , how good and how pleasant a thing it be for brother to dwell together in unity ! it be like the dew upon the mountain of Hermon ; for there the Lord bestow a blessing , even life for evermore . " 
 " stay and drink some coffee , " say the German . 


 " no , thank you , my friend ; I have business that must be do to - night , " say Bonaparte . " your dear son appear to have go to sleep . he be go to take the waggon to the mill to - morrow ! what a little 
 man 
 he be . " 

 " a fine boy . " 
 but though the boy nod before the fire he be not asleep ; and they all kneel down to pray . 
 when they rise from their knee Bonaparte extend his hand to Waldo , and pat he on the head . 

 " good night , my boy , " say he . " as you go to the mill to - morrow , we shall not see you for some day . good night ! good - bye ! the Lord bless and guide you ; and may he bring you back to we in safety , to find we all 
 as you have leave we 
 ! and you , my dear friend , " he add , turn with redouble warmth to the German , " long , long shall I look back to this evening as a time of refresh from the presence of 

 the Lord , as an hour of blessed intercourse with a brother in Jesus . may such often return . the Lord bless you ! " he add , with yet deep fervour , " richly , richly . " 

 then he open the door and vanish out into the darkness . 
 " he , he , he ! " laugh Bonaparte , as he stumble over the stone . " if there be not   the rare lot of fool on this farm that ever God Almighty stick leg to . he , he , he ! when the worm come out then the blackbird feed . ha , ha , ha ! " 
 he look in at the kitchen door . the Hottentot maid who act as interpreter between Tant ' Sannie and himself be go , and Tant ' Sannie herself be in bed . 
 " never mind , Bon , my boy , " he say , as he walk round to his own room , " to - morrow will do . he , he , he ! " 



 CHAPTER VIII . 
 he catch the OLD BIRD . 

 AT 
 four o'clock the next afternoon the german ride across the plain , return from his search for the lost sheep . he ride slowly , for he have be in the saddle since sunrise and be somewhat weary , and the heat of the afternoon make his horse sleepy as it pick its way slowly along the sandy road . every now and then a great red spider would start out of the karroo on one side of the path and run across to the other , but nothing else break the still monotony . presently , behind one of the high of the milk - bush that dot the roadside , the german catch sight of a Kaffir woman , seat there evidently for such shadow as the milk - bush 

 might afford from the slop ray of the sun . the German turn the horse 's head out of the road . it be not his way to pass a living creature without a word of greeting . come nearer , he find it be no other than the wife of the absconding Kaffir herd . she have a baby tie on her back by a dirty strip of red blanket ; another strip hardly large be twist round her waist , for the rest her black body be naked . she be a sullen , ill - look woman , with lip hideously protrude . 

 the German question she as to how she come there . she mutter in broken Dutch that she have be turn away . have she do evil ? she shake her head sullenly . have she have food give she ? she grunt a negative , and fan the fly from her baby . tell the woman to remain where she be , he turn his horse 's head to the road and ride off at a furious pace . 
 " hard - hearted ! cruel ! oh , my God ! be this the way ? be this charity ? " 

 " yes , yes , yes , " ejaculate the old man as he ride on ; but , presently , his anger begin to evaporate , his horse 's pace slacken , and by the time he have reach his own door he be nod and smile . 
 dismount quickly , he go to the great chest where his provision be keep . here he get out a little meal , a little mealie , a few roaster - cake . these he tie up in three blue handkerchief , and put they into a sail - cloth bag , he string they over his shoulder . then he look circumspectly out at the door . it be very bad to be discover in the act of giving ; it make he red up to the root of his old grizzle hair . no one be about , however , so he ride off again . beside the milk - bush sit the Kaffir woman still like Hagar , he think , thrust out by her mistress in the wilderness to die . tell she to loosen the handkerchief from her head , he pour into it the content of his bag . the woman tie it up in sullen silence . 

 " you must try and get to the next farm , " say the German . 
 the woman shake her head ; she would sleep in the field . 
 the German reflect . kaffir woman be accustom to sleep in the open air ; but then , the child be small , and after so hot a day the night might be chilly . that she would creep back to the hut at the homestead when the darkness favour she , the German 's sagacity do not make evident to he . he take off the old brown salt - and - pepper coat , and hold it out to she . the woman receive it in silence , and lay it across her knee . " with that they will sleep warmly ; not so bad . ha , ha ! " say the German . and he ride home , nod his head in a manner that would have make any other man dizzy . 
 " I wish he would not come back to - night , " say em , her face wet with tear . 
 " it will be just the same if he come back to - morrow , " say Lyndall . 

 the two girl sit on the step of the cabin weep for the German 's return . Lyndall shade her eye with her hand from the sunset light . 
 " there he come , " she say , " whistle " Ach Jerķsalem du schŲneí so loud I can hear he from here . " 
 " perhaps he have find the sheep . " 
 " find they ! " say Lyndall . " he would whistle just so if he know he have to die to - night . " 

 " you look at the sunset , eh , chicken ? " the German say , as he come up at a smart canter . " ah , yes , that 
 be 
 beautiful ! " he add , as he dismount , pause for a moment with his hand on the saddle to look at the evening sky , where the sun shoot up long flaming streak , between which and the eye thin yellow cloud float . " ei ! you weep ? " say the German , as the girl run up to he . 

 before they have time to reply the voice of Tant ' Sannie be hear . 

 " you child , of the child , of the child of a Kaffir 's dog , come here ! " 
 the German look up . he think the dutch - woman , come out to cool herself in the yard , call to some misbehave Kaffir . the old man look round to see who it might be . 
 " you old vagabond of a pray german , be you deaf ? " 
 Tant ' Sannie stand before the step of the kitchen ; upon they sit the lean Hottentot , upon the high stand Bonaparte Blenkins , both hand fold under the tail of his coat , and his eye fix on the sunset sky . 
 the German drop the saddle on the ground . 

 " bish , bish , bish ! what may 
 this 
 be ? " he say , and walk toward the house . " very strange ! " 

 the girl follow he : em still weep ; Lyndall with her face rather white and her eye wide open . 

 " and I have the heart of a devil , do you 

 say ? you could run I through with a knife , could you ? " cry the dutch - woman . " I could not drive the Kaffir girl away because I be afraid of 
 you 
 , be I ? oh , you miserable rag ! I love you , do I ? I would have like to marry you , 
 would 
 I ? would I ? would I ? " cry the boer - woman ; " you cat 's tail , you dog 's paw ! be near my house to - morrow morning when the sun rise , " she gasp , " my Kaffirs will drag you through the sand . they would do it gladly , any of they , for a bit of tobacco , for all your praying with they . " 

 " I be bewilder , I be bewilder , say the German , stand before she and raise his hand to his forehead ; " I I do not understand . " 

 " ask he , ask he ! " cry Tant ' Sannie , point to Bonaparte ; " he know . you think he could not make I understand , but he do , he do , you old fool ! I know enough English for that . you be here , " shout the dutch - woman , 

 " when the morning star rise , and I will let my Kaffirs take you out and drag you , till there be not one bone leave in your old body that be not break as fine as bobotie - meat , you old beggar ! all your rag be not worth that they should be throw out onto the ash - heap , " cry the boer - woman ; " but I will have they for my sheep . not one rotten hoof of your old mare do you take with you ; I will have she all , all for my sheep that you have lose , you godless thing ! " 

 the boer - woman wipe the moisture from her mouth with the palm of her hand . 
 the German turn to Bonaparte , who still stand on the step absorb in the beauty of the sunset . 

 " do not address I ; do not approach I , lose man , " say Bonaparte , not move his eye nor lower his chin . " there be a crime from which all nature revolt ; there be a crime whose name be loathsome to the human ear that crime be your ; that crime be ingratitude . this 

 woman have be your benefactress ; on her farm you have live ; after her sheep you have look ; into her house you have be allow to enter and hold Divine service an honour of which you be never worthy ; and how have you reward she ? basely , basely , basely ! " 

 " but it be all false , lie and falsehood . I must , I will speak , " say the german , suddenly look round bewilder . " do I dream ? be you mad ? what may it be ? " 
 " go , dog , " cry the Dutchwoman ; " I would have be a rich woman this day if it have not be for your laziness . pray with the Kaffirs behind the kraal wall . go , you Kaffir 's dog ! " 
 " but what then be the matter ? what may have happen since I leave ? " say the German , turn to the Hottentot woman who sit upon the step . 

 she 
 be his friend ; she would tell he kindly the truth . the woman answer by a loud , ring laugh . 


 " give it he , old missis ! give it he ! " 
 it be so nice to see the white man who have be master hunt down . the coloured woman laugh , and throw a dozen mealie grain into her mouth to chew . 
 all anger and excitement fade from the old man 's face . he turn slowly away and walk down the little path to his cabin , with his shoulder bend ; it be all dark before he . he stumble over the threshold of his own well - know door . 
 em , sob bitterly , would have follow he ; but the boer - woman prevent she by a flood of speech which convulse the Hottentot , so low be its image . 
 " come , Em , " say Lyndall , lift her small proud head , " let we go in . we will not stay to hear such language . " 

 she look into the boer - woman 's eye . Tant ' Sannie understand the meaning of the look if not the word . she waddle after they , and 

 catch em by the arm . she have strike Lyndall once year before , and have never do it again , so she take Em . 

 " so you will defy I , too , will you , you Englishman 's ugliness ! " she cry , and with one hand she force the child down , and hold her head tightly against her knee ; with the other she beat her face , first upon one cheek and then upon the other . 
 for one instant Lyndall look on , then she lay her small finger on the boer - woman 's arm . with the exertion of half its strength Tant ' Sannie might have fling the girl back upon the stone . it be not the power of the slight finger , tightly though they clinch her broad wrist so tightly that at bedtime the mark be still there ; but the boer - woman look into the clear eye and at the quiver white lip , and with a half - surprised curse relax her hold . the girl draw Em 's arm through her own . 

 " move ! " she say to Bonaparte , who stand in 

 the door ; and he , Bonaparte the invincible , in the hour of his triumph , move to give her place . 

 the Hottentot cease to laugh , and an uncomfortable silence fall on all the three in the doorway . 
 once in their room , Em sit down on the floor and wail bitterly . Lyndall lie on the bed with her arm draw across her eye , very white and still . 
 " Hoo , hoo ! " cry Em ; " and they will not   let he take the grey mare ; and Waldo have go to the mill . Hoo , hoo , and perhaps they will not   let we go and say good - bye to he . Hoo , hoo , hoo ! " 
 " I wish you would be quiet , " say Lyndall without move . " do it give you such felicity to let Bonaparte know he be hurt you ? we will ask no one . it will be supper - time soon . listen , and when you hear the clink of the knife and fork we will go out and see he . 

 em suppress her sob and listen intently , kneel at the door . suddenly some one come to the window and put the shutter up . 
 " who be that ? " say Lyndall , start . 
 " the girl , I suppose , " say em . " how early she be this evening ! " 
 but Lyndall spring from the bed and seize the handle of the door , shake it fiercely . the door be lock on the outside . she grind her tooth . 
 " what be the matter ? " ask Em . 
 the room be in perfect darkness now . 
 " nothing , " say Lyndall quietly ; " only they have lock we in . " 

 she turn , and go back to bed again . but ere long Em hear a sound of movement . Lyndall have climb up into the window , and with her finger feel the wood - work that surround the pane . slip down , the girl loosen the iron knob from the foot of the bedstead , and climb up again , she break with it every pane of glass 

 in the window , begin at the top and end at the bottom . 

 " what be you do ? " ask Em , who hear the fall fragment . 
 her companion make she no reply ; but with all her weight lean on every little cross - bar , which crack and give way beneath she . then she press with all her strength against the shutter . she have think the wooden button would give way , but by the clinking sound she know that the iron bar have be put across . she be quite quiet for a time . clamber down , she take from the table a small one - bladed penknife , with which she begin to peck at the hard wood of the shutter . 
 " what be you do now ? " ask Em , who have cease cry in her wonder , and have draw near . 
 " try to make a hole ? " be the short reply . 
 " do you think you will be able to ? " 

 " no ; but I be try . " 
 in an agony of suspense Em wait . for ten minute Lyndall peck . the hole be three - eighth of an inch deep then the blade spring into ten piece . 
 " what have happen now ? " em ask , blubber afresh . 
 " nothing , " say Lyndall . " bring I my night - gown , a piece of paper , and the match . " 
 wonder , Em fumble about till she find they . 
 " what be you go to do with they , " she whisper . 
 " burn it down . " 
 " but will not   the whole house take fire and burn down too ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " but will it not be very wicked ? " 
 " yes , very . and I do not   care . " 

 she arrange the night - gown carefully in the corner of the window , with the chip of the 

 frame about it . there be only one match in the box . she draw it carefully along the wall . for a moment it burn up blue , and show the tiny face with its glisten eye . she hold it carefully to the paper . for an instant it burn up brightly , then flicker and go out . she blow the spark , but it die also . then she throw the paper on to the ground , trod on it , and go to her bed , and begin to undress . 

 em rush to the door , knock against it wildly . 
 " Tant ' Sannie ! Tant ' Sannie ! oh , let we out ! " she cry . " oh , Lyndall , what be we to do ? " 
 Lyndall wipe a drop of blood off the lip she have bite . 
 " I be go to sleep , " she say . " if you like to sit there and howl till the morning , do . perhaps you will find that it help ; I never hear that howling help any one . " 

 long after , when Em herself have go to bed and be almost asleep , Lyndall come and stand at her bedside . 
 " here , " she say , slip a little pot of powder into her hand ; " rub some on to your face . do it not burn where she strike you ? " 
 then she creep back to her own bed . long , long after , when Em be really asleep , she lie still awake , and fold her hand on her little breast , and mutter , 
 " when that day come , and I be strong , I will hate everything that have power , and help everything that be weak . " and she bite her lip again . 
 the German look out at the cabin door for the last time that night . then he pace the room slowly and sigh . then he draw out pen and paper , and sit down to write , rub his old grey eye with his knuckle before he begin . 






 " my CHICKENS , 

 " you do not come to say good - bye to the old man . might you ? ah , well , there be a land where they part no more , where saint immortal reign . 
 " I sit here alone , and I think of you . will you forget the old man ? when you wake to - morrow he will be far away . the old horse be lazy , but he have his stick to help he ; that be three leg . he come back one day with gold and diamond . will you welcome he ? well , we shall see . I go to meet Waldo . he come back with the waggon ; then he follow I . poor boy ! God know . there be a land where all thing be make right , but that land be not here . 
 " my little child , serve the Saviour ; give your heart to he while you be yet young . life be short . 
 " nothing be mine , otherwise I would say , Lyndall , take my book , Em my stone . now I say nothing . the thing be mine ; it be not righteous , God know ! but I be silent . let it be . but I feel it , I must say I feel it . 

 " do not cry too much for the old man . he 

 go out to seek his fortune , and come back with it in a bag , it may be . 

 " I love my child . do they think of I ? I be Old Otto , who go out to seek his fortune . 

 " O.F. " 





 have conclude this quaint production , he put it where the child would find it the next morning , and proceed to prepare his bundle . he never think of enter a protest against the loss of his good ; like a child , he submit , and weep . he have be there eleven year , and it be hard to go away . he spread open on the bed a blue handkerchief , and on it put one by one the thing he think most necessary and important a little bag of curious seed , which he mean to plant some day , an old german hymn - book , three misshapen stone that he greatly value , a Bible , a shirt and two handkerchief ; then there be room for nothing more . he tie up the bundle tightly and put it on a chair by his bed - side . 

 " that be not much ; they can not say I take much , " he say , look at it . 
 he put his knot stick beside it , his blue tobacco bag and his short pipe , and then inspect his coat . he have two leave a moth - eat over - coat and a black alpaca out at the elbow . he decide for the over - coat ; it be warm , certainly , but then he could carry it over his arm and only put it on when he meet some one along the road . it be more respectable than the black alpaca . he hang the great - coat over the back of the chair , and stuff a hard bit of roaster - cake under the knot of the bundle , and then his preparation be complete . the german stand contemplate they with much satisfaction . he have almost forget his sorrow at leave in his pleasure at prepare . suddenly he start ; an expression of intense pain pass over his face . he draw back his left arm quickly , and then press his right hand upon his breast . 
 " ah , the sudden pang again , " he say . 

 his face be white , but it quickly regain its colour . then the old man busy himself in put everything right . 
 " I will leave it neat . they shall not say I do not leave it neat , " he say . even the little bag of seed on the mantel - piece he put in row and dust . then he undress and get into bed . under his pillow be a little story - book . he draw it forth . to the old German a story be no story . its event be as real and as important to himself as the matter of his own life . he could not go away without know whether that wicked Earl relent and whether the Baron marry Emilina . so he adjust his spectacle and begin to read . occasionally , as his feeling become too strongly move , he ejaculate , " ah , I think so ! that be a rogue ! I see it before ! I know it from the beginning ! " More than half - an - hour have pass when he look up to the silver watch at the top of his bed . 

 " the march be long to - morrow ; this will not do , " he say , take off his spectacle and put they carefully into the book to mark the place . " this will be good reading as I walk along to - morrow , " he add , as he stuff the book into the pocket of the great - coat ; " very good reading . " he nod his head and lie down . he think a little of his own trouble , a good deal of the two little girl he be leave , of the Earl , of Emilina , of the Baron ; but he be soon asleep sleep as peacefully as a little child upon whose innocent soul sorrow and care can not rest . 

 it be very quiet in the room . the coal in the fire - place throw a dull red light across the floor upon the red lion on the quilt . eleven o'clock come , and the room be very still . one o'clock come . the glimmer have die out , though the ash be still warm , and the room be very dark . the grey mouse , who have its hole under the tool - box , come out and sit on the sack in 

 the corner ; then , grow bolder , the room be so dark , it climb the chair at the bedside , nibble at the roaster - cake , take one bite quickly at the candle , and then sit on his haunch listen . it hear the even breathing of the old man , and the step of the hungry Kaffir dog go his last round in search of a bone or a skin that have be forget ; and it hear the white hen call out as the wild cat run away with one of her brood , and it hear the chicken cry . then the grey mouse go back to its hole under the tool - box , and the room be quiet . and two o'clock come . by that time the night be grow dull and cloudy . the wild cat have go to its home on the kopje ; the Kaffir 's dog have find a bone , and lie gnaw it . 


 an intense quiet reign everywhere . only in her room the boer - woman toss her great arm in her sleep ; for she dream that a dark shadow with outstretche wing flee slowly over 

 her house , and she moan and shiver . and the night be very still . 

 but quiet as all place be , there be a quite peculiar quiet in the German 's room . though you strain your ear most carefully you catch no sound of breathing . 

 he be not go , for the old coat still hang on the chair the coat that be to be put on when he meet any one ; and the bundle and stick be ready for to - morrow 's long march . the old German himself lie there , his wavy black hair just touch with grey throw back upon the pillow . the old face be lie there alone in the dark , smile like a little child 's oh , so peacefully . there be a stranger whose come , they say , be bad than all the ill of life , from whose presence we flee away tremble ; but he come very tenderly sometimes . and it seem almost as though Death have know and love the old man , so gently it touch he . and how could it deal hardly 

 with he the love , simple , childlike old man ? 

 so it smooth out the wrinkle that be in the old forehead , and fix the pass smile , and seal the eye that they might not weep again ; and then the short sleep of time be melt into the long , long sleep of eternity . 
 " how have he grow so young in this one night ? " they say when they find he in the morning . 
 yes , dear old man ; to such as you time bring no age . you die with the purity and innocence of your childhood upon you , though you die in your grey hair . 



 CHAPTER IX . 
 he see a ghost . 

 BONAPARTE 
 stand on the ash - heap . he espy across the plain a move speck , and he chuck his coat - tail up and down in expectancy of a dainty morsel . 

 the waggon come on slowly . Waldo lie curl among the sack at the back of the waggon , his hand in his breast rest on the sheep - shear machine . it be finish now . the right thought have strike he the day before as he sit , half asleep , watch the water go over the mill - wheel . he mutter to himself with half - close eye , 

 " to - morrow smooth the cog tighten the screw a little show it to they . " then after a 

 pause " over the whole world the whole world mine , that I have make ! " he press the little wheel and pulley in his pocket till they crack . presently his muttering become loud " and fifty pound a black hat for my dad for Lyndall a blue silk , very light , and one purple like the earth - bell , and white shoe . " he mutter on " a box full , full of book . they shall tell I all , all , all , " he add , move his finger desiringly : " why the crystal grow in such beautiful shape ; why lightning run to the iron ; why black people be black ; why the sunlight make thing warm . I shall read , read , read , " he mutter slowly . then come over he suddenly what he call " the presence of God ; " a sense of a good , strong something fold he round . he smile through his half - shut eye . " ah , Father , my own Father , it be so sweet to feel you , like the warm sunshine . the Bibles and book can not tell of you and all I feel you . they be mix with man 's word ; but you " 


 his muttering sink into inaudible confusion , till , open his eye wide , it strike he that the brown plain he look at be the old home farm . for half an hour they have be rid in it , and he have not know it . he rouse the leader , who sit nod on the front of the waggon in the early morning sunlight . they be within half a mile of the homestead . it seem to he that he have be go from they all a year . he fancy he could see Lyndall stand on the brick wall to watch for he ; his father , pass from one house to the other , stop to look . 

 he call aloud to the oxen . for each one at home he have bring something . for his father a piece of tobacco , buy at the shop by the mill ; for Em a thimble ; for Lyndall a beautiful flower dig out by the root , at a place where they have " out - span " ; for Tant ' Sannie a handkerchief . when they draw near the house he throw the whip to the Kaffir leader , and sprang 

 from the side of the waggon to rush on . Bonaparte stop he as he run past the ash - heap . 

 " good morning , my dear boy . where be you run to so fast with your rosy cheek ? " 
 the boy look up at he , glad even to see Bonaparte . 
 " I be go to the cabin , " he say , out of breath . 
 " you will not   find they in just now not your good old father , " say Bonaparte . 
 " where be he ? " ask the lad . 
 " there , beyond the camp , " say Bonaparte , wave his hand oratorically toward the stone - wall ostrich - camp . 
 " what be he do there ? " ask the boy . 
 Bonaparte pat he on the cheek kindly . 

 " he smell so , we could not keep he any more . we have   bury he , my boy , " say Bonaparte , stick his finger into the boy 's cheek . " he be quite bad already . he , he , he ! " laugh Bonaparte , as the boy flee away 

 along the low stone wall , almost furtively , as one in fear . there be a gurgling of enjoyment in the man 's stomach . 


 at five o'clock Bonaparte kneel before a box in the German 's room . he be busily unpack it . 

 it have be agree upon between Tant ' Sannie and himself , that now the German be go he , Bonaparte , be to be no long schoolmaster , but overseer of the farm . in return for his past scholastic labour he have express himself willing to take possession of the dead man 's good and room . Tant ' Sannie hardly like the arrangement . she have a great deal more respect for the german dead than the german living , and would rather his good have be allow to descend peacefully to his son . for she be a firm believer in the chink in the world above , where not only ear , but eye might be apply to see how thing go on in this world below . 

 she never feel sure how far the spirit - world might overlap this world of sense , and , as a rule , prudently abstain from do anything which might offend unseen auditor . for this reason she abstain from ill - use the dead Englishman 's daughter and niece , and for this reason she would rather the boy have have his father 's good . but it be hard to refuse Bonaparte anything when she and he sit so happily together in the evening drinking coffee , Bonaparte tell she in the broken Dutch he be fast learn how he adore fat woman , and what a splendid farmer he be . 

 so at five o'clock on this afternoon Bonaparte knelt in the German 's room . 

 " somewhere , here it be , " he say , as he pack the old clothe carefully out of the box , and , find nothing , pack they in again . " somewhere in this room it be ; and if it be here Bonaparte find it , " he repeat . " you do not   stay here all these year without make a little pile 

 somewhere , my lamb . you be not   such a fool as you look . oh , no ! " say Bonaparte . 

 he now walk about the room , dive his finger in everywhere : stick they into the great crevice in the wall and frightening out the spider ; rap they against the old plaster till it crack and fall in piece ; peer up the chimney , till the soot drop on his bald head and blacken it . he feel in little bag ; he try to raise the hearth stone ; he shake each book , till the old leaf fall down in shower on the floor . 

 it be get dark , and Bonaparte stand with his finger on his nose reflect . finally he walk to the door , behind which hang the trouser and waistcoat the dead man have last wear . he have feel in they but hurriedly just after the funeral the day before ; he would examine they again . stick his finger into the waistcoat pocket , he find in one corner a hole . press his hand through it , between the 

 lining and the cloth , he presently come into contact with something . Bonaparte draw it forth a small , square parcel , sew up in sail - cloth . he gaze at it , squeeze it ; it crack , as though full of bank note . he put it quickly into his own waistcoat pocket , and peep over the half - door to see if there be no one come . then he sit down on the near chair , and take out his pen - knife , rip it open . the first thing that fall be a shower of yellow , faded paper . Bonaparte open they carefully one by one , and smooth they out on his knee . they be certainly something very valuable to be hide so carefully , though the german character he could not decipher . when he come to the last one , he feel there be something hard in it . 

 " you have   get it , Bon , my boy ! you have   get it ! " he cry , slap his leg hard . edge nearer to the door , for the light be fade , he open it carefully . there be nothing inside but a plain gold wedding - ring . 

 " well than nothing ! " say Bonaparte , try to put it on his little finger , which , however , prove too fat . 
 he take it off and set it down on the table before he , and look at it with his crosswise eye . 

 " when that auspicious hour , Sannie , " he say , " shall have arrive , when , panting , I shall lead thee , light by Hymen 's torch , to the connubial altar , then upon thy fair amaranthine finger , my joyous bride , shall this ring repose . 


 " thy fair body , oh , my girl , 
 shall Bonaparte possess ; 
 his finger in thy money - bag , 
 he therein , too , shall mess . " 



 have give utterance to this flood of poesy , he sit lose in joyous reflection . 

 " he therein , too , 
 shall 
 mess , " he repeat meditatively . 

 at this instant , as Bonaparte swear , and swear truly , to the end of his life , a slow and distinct rap be give on the crown of his bald head . 

 Bonaparte start and look up . no " reim , " or strap hang down from the rafter above , and not a human creature be near the door . it be grow dark ; he do not like it . he begin to fold up the paper expeditiously . he stretch out his hand for the ring . the ring be go ! go , although no human creature have enter the room ; gone , although no form have cross the doorway . go ! 
 he would not sleep there , that be certain . 
 he stuff the paper into his pocket . as he do so , three slow and distinct tap be give on the crown of his head . Bonaparte 's jaw fall : each separate joint lose its power : he could not move ; he dare not rise ; his tongue lie loose in his mouth . 
 " take all , take all ! " he gurgle in his throat . " I I do not want they . take " 

 here a resolute tug at the grey curl at the back of his head cause he to leap up , yell wildly . be he to sit still paralyze , to be 

 drag away 
 bodily 
 to the devil ? with terrific shriek he flee , cast no glance behind . 


 when the dew be fall , and the evening be dark , a small figure move toward the gate of the furth ostrich camp , drive a bird before it . when the gate be open and the bird drive in turn away , but then suddenly pause . 
 " be that you , Waldo ? " say Lyndall . 
 the boy be sit on the damp ground with his back to the wall . he give she no answer . 
 " come , " she say , bend over he , " I have be look for you all day . " 
 he mumble something . 
 " you have have nothing to eat . I have put some supper in your room . you must come home with I , Waldo . " 
 she take his hand , and the boy rise slowly . 
 she make he take her arm , and twist her small finger among his . 

 " you must forget , " she whisper . " since it happen I walk , I talk , I never sit still . if we remember , we can not bring back the dead . " she knit her little finger close among his . " forget be the good thing . he do not watch it come , " she whisper presently . " that be the dreadful thing , to see it come ! " she shudder . " I want it to come suddenly to I too . why do you think I be drive that bird ? " she add quickly . " that be Hans , the bird that hat Bonaparte . I let he out this afternoon ; I think he would chase he and perhaps kill he . " 
 the boy show no sign of interest . 
 " he do not ; but he put his head over the half door of your cabin and frighten he horribly . he be there busy steal your thing . perhaps he will leave they alone now ; but I wish the bird have tread on he . " 
 they say no more till they reach the door of the cabin . 

 " there be a candle and supper on the table . 

 you must eat , " she say authoritatively . " I can not stay with you now , lest they find out about the bird . " 

 he grasp her arm and bring his mouth close to her ear . 
 " there be no God ! " he almost hiss ; " no God , not anywhere ! " 
 she start . 
 " not anywhere ! " 
 he grind it out between his tooth , and she feel his hot breath on her cheek . 
 " Waldo , you be mad , " she say , draw herself from he . 
 he loosen his grasp and turn away from she also . 
 in truth , it be life 's way . we fight our little battle alone ; you your , I mine . we be not to help or find help . when your life be most real , you seem to I mad ; when your agony be great I look at you and wonder . friendship be good , but it be a delusion . 

 Lyndall stand by he in the dark , pityingly , wonderingly . as he walk to the door she run after he . 
 " eat your supper ; it will do you good , " she say . 
 she press his hand and then run away . 
 in the front room the little woolly Kaffir girl be wash Tant ' Sannie 's foot in a small tub , and Bonaparte , who sit on the wooden sofa , be pull off his shoe and stocking that his own foot might be wash also . there be three candle burn in the room , and he and Tant ' Sannie sit close together , with the lean Hottentot not far off ; for when ghost be about there be great strength in number . Bonaparte have completely recover from the effect of his fright in the afternoon , and the numerous dos of brandy that it have be necessary to administer to he to effect his restoration have put he into a singularly pleasant and amiable mood . 

 " that boy Waldo , " say Bonaparte , rub 

 his toe , " take himself off coolly this morning as soon as the waggon come , and have not do a stiver of work all day . 
 I will 
 not have that kind of thing now I be master of this farm . " 

 the Hottentot maid translate . 
 " ah , I expect he be sorry that his father 's dead , " say Tant ' Sannie . " it be nature , you know . I cry the whole morning when my father die . one can always get another husband , but one can not   get another father , " say Tant ' Sannie , cast a sidelong glance at Bonaparte . 
 Bonaparte express a wish to give Waldo his order for the next day 's work , and the little woolly - head Kaffir be send to call he . after some time he appear , and stand in the doorway . 

 if they have dress he in one of the swallow - tail coat , and oil his hair till the drop fall from it , and it lie as smooth as an elder be on sacrament Sunday , there would still have be something unanointed in the aspect of the 

 fellow . as it be , stand there in his strange old costume , his head present much the appearance of have be deeply roll in sand , his eyelid swell , the hair hang over his forehead , and a dogged sullenness on his feature , he present most the appearance of an ill - condition young buffalo . 

 " Beloved Lord , " cry Tant ' Sannie , " how he look ! come in , boy . could not   you come and say good - day to I ? do not   you want some supper ? " 
 he say he want nothing , and turn his heavy eye away from she . 
 " there be a ghost be see in your father 's room , " say Tant ' Sannie . " if you be afraid you can sleep in the kitchen . " 
 " I will sleep in our room , " say the boy slowly . 
 " well , you can go now , " she say ; " but be up early to take the sheep . the herd " 

 " yes , be up early , my boy , " interrupt 

 Bonaparte , smile . " I be to be master of this farm now ; and we shall be good friend , I trust , very good friend , if you try to do your duty , my dear boy . " 

 Waldo turn to go , and Bonaparte , look benignly at the candle , stretch out one unstockinged foot , over which Waldo , look at nothing in particular , fall with a heavy thud upon the floor . 
 " dear I ! I hope you be not hurt , my boy , " say Bonaparte . " you will have many a hard thing than that though , before you have   get all you will get , " he add consolingly , as Waldo pick himself up . 
 the lean Hottentot laugh till the room ring again ; and Tant ' Sannie titter till her side ache . 
 when he have go the little maid begin to wash Bonaparte 's foot . 

 " oh , Lord , beloved Lord , how he do fall ! I can not   think of it , " cry Tant ' Sannie , and she 

 laugh again . " I always do know he be not right ; but this evening any one could see it , " she add , wipe the tear of mirth from her face . " his eye be as wild as if the devil be in they . he never 
 be 
 like other child . the dear Lord know , if he do not   walk alone for hour talk to himself . if you sit in the room with he you can see his lip move the whole time ; and if you talk to he twenty time he do not   hear you . daft - eye ; he be as mad as mad can be . " 

 this repetition of the word mad convey meaning to Bonaparte 's mind . he leave off paddle his toe in the water . 

 " mad , mad ? 
 I 
 know that kind of mad , " say Bonaparte , " and I know the thing to give for it . the front end of a little horse - whip , the tip ! nice thing ; take it out , " say Bonaparte . 

 the Hottentot laugh , and translate . 

 " no more walk about and talk to themselves on this farm now , " say Bonaparte ; " no 

 more minding of sheep and reading of book at the same time . the point of a horsewhip be a little thing , but I think he will have a taste of it before long . " Bonaparte , rub his hand and look pleasantly across his nose ; and then the three laugh together grimly . 

 and Waldo in his cabin crouch in the dark in a corner , with his knee draw up to his chin . 



 CHAPTER X. 
 he show his tooth . 

 doss 
 sit among the karroo - bush , one yellow ear draw over his wicked little eye , ready to flap away any adventurous fly that might settle on his nose . around he in the morning sunlight feed the sheep ; behind he lie his master polish his machine . he find much comfort in handle it that morning . a dozen philosophical essay , or angelically attuned song for the consolation of the bereaved , could never have be to he what that little sheep - shear machine be that day . 


 after struggle to see the unseeable , grow drunk with the endeavour to span the infinite , and writhe before the inscrutable mystery , it 

 be a renovate relief to turn to some simple , feelable , weighable substance ; to something which have a smell and a colour , which may be handle and turn over this way and that . whether there be or be not a hereafter , whether there be any use in call aloud to the unseen power , whether there be an unseen power to call to , whatever be the true nature of the 
 I 
 who call and of the object around I , whatever be our meaning , our internal 
 essence 
 , our 
 cause 
  and in a certain order of mind death and the agony of loss inevitably awaken the wild desire , at other time smother , to look into these thing , whatever be the nature of that which lie beyond the unbroken wall which the limit of the human intellect build up on every hand , this thing be certain a knife will cut wood , and one cog wheel will turn another . this be sure . 


 Waldo find an immeasurable satisfaction in the handling of his machine ; but Doss wink and blink , and think it all frightfully 

 monotonous out there on the flat , and presently drop asleep , sit bolt upright . suddenly his eye open wide ; something be come from the direction of the homestead . wink his eye and look intently , he perceive it be the grey mare . now Doss have wonder much of late what have become of her master . see she carry some one on she back , he now come to his own conclusion , and begin to move his tail violently up and down . presently he prick up one ear and let the other hang ; his tail become motionless , and the expression of his mouth one of decide disapproval border on scorn . he wrinkle his lip up on each side into little line . 


 the sand be soft , and the grey mare come on so noiselessly that the boy hear nothing till Bonaparte dismount . then Doss get up and move back a step . he do not approve of Bonaparte 's appearance . his costume , in truth , be of a unique kind . it be a combination of 

 the town and country . the tail of his black cloth coat be pin up behind to keep they from rub ; he have on a pair of moleskin trouser and leathern gaiter , and in his hand he carry a little whip of rhinoceros hide . 

 Waldo start and look up . have there be a moment 's time he would have dig a hole in the sand with his hand and bury his treasure . it be only a poor toy of wood , but he love it , as one of necessity love what have be bear of he . 
 " what have you here , my lad ? " say Bonaparte , stand by he , and point with the end of his whip to the medley of wheel and hinge . 
 the boy mutter something inaudible , and half - spread over the thing . 
 " but this seem to be a very ingenious little machine , " say Bonaparte , seat himself on the ant - heap , and bend down over it with deep interest . " what be it for , my lad ? " 

 " shearing sheep . " 
 " it be a very nice little machine , " say Bonaparte . " how do it work , now ? I have never see anything so ingenious ! " 
 there be never a parent who hear deception in the voice that praise his child his first - bear . here be one who like the thing that have be create in he . he forget everything . he show how the shear would work with a little guidance , how the sheep would be hold , and the wool fall into the trough . a flush burst over his face as he speak . 

 " I tell you what , my lad , " say Bonaparte emphatically , when the explanation be finish , " we must get you a patent . your fortune be make . in three year ' time there will not be a farm in this colony where it be not   work . you be a genius , that be what 
 you 
 be ! " say Bonaparte , rise . 


 " if it be make large , " say the boy quickly , " it would work more smoothly . do you think 

 there would be any one in this colony would be able to make it ? " 

 " I be sure they could , " say Bonaparte ; " and if not , why I will do my good for you . I will send it to England . it must be do somehow . how long have you work at it ? " 
 " nine month , " say the boy . 

 " oh , it be such a nice little machine , " say Bonaparte , " one can not   help feel an interest in it . there be only 
 one 
 little improvement , one very little improvement I should like to make . " 

 Bonaparte put his foot on the machine and crush it into the sand . the boy look up into his face . 
 " look well now , " say Bonaparte , " do not   it ? if we can not   have it make in England we will send it to America . good - bye ; ta - ta , " he add . " you be a great genius , a bear genius , my dear boy , there be no doubt about it . " 

 he mount the grey mare and ride off . 

 the dog watch his retreat with cynical satisfaction ; but his master lie on the ground with his head on his arm in the sand , and the little wheel and chip of wood lie on the ground around he . the dog jump on to his back and snap at the black curl , till , find that no notice be take , he walk off to play with a black beetle . the beetle be hard at work try to roll home a great ball of dung it have be collect all the morning : but Doss break the ball , and eat the beetle 's hind leg , and then bit off its head . and it be all play , and no one could tell what it have live and work for . a strive , and a strive , and an ending in nothing . 




 CHAPTER XI . 
 he SNAPS . 

 " 
 I have 
 find something in the loft , " say Em to Waldo , who be listlessly pile cake of fuel on the kraal wall , a week after his father 's death . " it be a box of book that belong to my father . we think Tant ' Sannie have burn they . " 

 the boy put down the cake he be raise and look at she . 
 " I do not   think they be very nice , not story , " she add , " but you can go and take any you choose . " 
 so say , she take up the plate in which she have bring his breakfast , and walk off to the house . 

 after that the boy work quickly . the pile 

 of fuel Bonaparte have order he to pack be on the wall in half an hour . he then go to throw salt on the skin lay out to dry . find the pot empty , he go to the loft to refill it . 


 Bonaparte Blenkins , whose door open at the foot of the ladder , see the boy go up , and stand in the doorway wait for his return . he want his boot black . Doss , find he could not follow his master up the round bar , sit patiently at the foot of the ladder . presently he look up longingly , but no one appear . then Bonaparte look up also , and begin to call ; but there be no answer . what could the boy be do ? the loft be an unknown land to Bonaparte . he have often wonder what be up there ; he like to know what be in all lock - up place and out - of - the - way corner , but the ladder he could not scale . so Bonaparte look up , and in the name of all that be tantalize , question what the boy do up there . the loft be use only as a lumber- 

 room . what could the fellow find up there to keep he so long . 


 could the boer - woman have behold Waldo at that instant , any lingering doubt which might have remain in her mind as to the boy 's insanity would instantly have vanish . for , have fill the salt - pot , he proceed to look for the box of book among the rubbish that fill the loft . under a pile of sack he find it a rough packing - case , nail up , but with one loose plank . he lift that , and see the even back of a row of book . he kneel down before the box , and run his hand along its rough edge , as if to assure himself of its existence . he stick his hand in among the book , and pull out two . he feel they , thrust his finger in among the leaf , and crumple they a little , as a lover feel the hair of his mistress . the fellow gloat over his treasure . he have have a dozen book in the course of his life ; now here be a mine of they open at his foot . 

 after a while he begin to read the title , and now and again open a book and read a sentence ; but he be too excited to catch the meaning distinctly . at last he come to a dull , brown volume . he read the name , open it in the centre , and where he open begin to read . ' twas a chapter on property that he fall upon Communism , Fourierism , St. Simonism , in a work on Political Economy . he read down one page and turn over to the next ; he read down that without change his posture by an inch ; he read the next , and the next , kneel up all the while with the book in his hand , and his lip part . 

 all he read he do not fully understand ; the thought be new to he ; but this be the fellow 's startled joy in the book the thought be his , they belong to he . he have never think they before , but they be his . 
 he laugh silently and internally , with the still intensity of triumphant joy . 

 so , then , all thinking creature do not send up the one cry " as thou , dear Lord , have create thing in the beginning , so be they now , so ought they to be , so will they be , world without end ; and it do not   concern we what they be . amen . " there be man to whom not only kopjes and stone be call out imperatively , " what be we , and how come we here ? understand we , and know we ; " but to whom even the old , old relation between man and man , and the custom of the age call , and could not be make still and forget . 

 the boy 's heavy body quiver with excitement . so he be not alone , not alone . he could not quite have tell any one why he be so glad , and this warmth have come to he . his cheek be burn . no wonder that Bonaparte call in vain , and Doss put his paw on the ladder , and whine till three quarter of an hour have pass . at last the boy put the book in his breast and button it tightly to he . 

 he take up the salt - pot , and go to the top of the ladder . Bonaparte , with his hand fold under his coat - tail , look up when he appear , and accost he . 

 " you have   be rather a long time up there , my lad , " he say , as the boy descend with a tremulous haste , most unlike his ordinary slow movement . " you do not   hear I call , I suppose ? " 

 Bonaparte whisk the tail of his coat up and down as he look at he . he , Bonaparte Blenkins , have eye which be very far - seeing . he look at the pot . it be rather a small pot to have take three - quarter of an hour in the filling . he look at the face . it be flushed . and yet , Tant ' Sannie keep no wine he have not be drink ; his eye be wide open and bright he have not be sleep ; there be no girl up there he have not be make love . Bonaparte look at he sagaciously . what would account for the marvellous change in the 

 boy come down the ladder from the boy go up the ladder ? 
 one 
 thing there be . do not Tant ' Sannie keep in the loft " bultong , " and nice smoke sausage ? there must be something nice to 
 eat 
 up there ! aha ! that be it ! 

 Bonaparte be so interested in carry out this chain of inductive reasoning that he quite forget to have his boot black . 
 he watch the boy shuffle off with the salt - pot under his arm ; then he stand in his doorway and raise his eye to the quiet blue sky , and audibly propound this riddle to himself : 
 " what be the connection between the naked back of a certain boy with a great coat on and a salt - pot under his arm , and the tip of a horsewhip ? answer : no connection at present , but there will be soon . " 
 Bonaparte be so pleased with this sally of his wit that he chuckle a little , and go to lie down on his bed . 

 there be bread - baking that afternoon , and 

 there be a fire light in the brick oven behind the house , and Tant ' Sannie have leave the great wooden - elbowed chair in which she pass her life , and waddle out to look at it . not far off be Waldo , who , have throw a pail of food into the pig - sty , now lean over the sod - wall look at the pig . half of the sty be dry , but the low half be a pool of mud , on the edge of which the mother sow lie with closed eye , her ten little one suck ; the father pig , knee - deep in the mud , stand run his snout into a rotten pumpkin and wriggle his curled tail . 


 Waldo wonder dreamily as he star why they be pleasant to look at . take singly they be not beautiful ; take together they be . be it not because there be a certain harmony about they ? the old sow be suit to the little pig , and the little pig to their mother , the old boar to the rotten pumpkin , and all to the mud . they suggest the thought of 

 nothing that should be add , of nothing that should be take away . and , he wonder on vaguely , be not 
 that 
 the secret of all beauty , that you who look on . so he stand dream , and lean far and far over the sod - wall , and look at the pig . 

 all this time Bonaparte Blenkins be slop down from the house in an aimless sort of way ; but he keep one eye fix on the pig - sty , and each gyration bring he near to it . Waldo stand like a thing asleep when Bonaparte come close up to he . 

 in old day , when a small boy , play in an irish street - gutter , he , Bonaparte , have be familiarly know among his comrade under the title of Tripping - Ben ; this from the rare ease and dexterity with which , by merely project his foot , he could precipitate any unfortunate companion on to the crown of his head . year have elapse , and Tripping - Ben have become Bonaparte ; but the old gift be in he still . he 

 come close to the pig - sty . all the defunct memory of his boyhood return on he in a flood , as , with an adroit movement , he insert his leg between Waldo and the wall , and send he over into the pig - sty . 

 the little pig be startle at the strange intruder , and run behind their mother , who sniff at he . Tant ' Sannie smite her hand together and laugh ; but Bonaparte be far from join she . lose in reverie , he gaze at the distant horizon . 
 the sudden reversal of head and foot have throw out the volume that Waldo carry in his breast . Bonaparte pick it up , and begin to inspect it , as the boy climb slowly over the wall . he would have walk off sullenly , but he want his book , and he wait until it should be give he . 

 " ha ! " say Bonaparte , raise his eye from the leaf of the book which he be examine . " I hope your coat have not be injure ; it be of 

 an elegant cut . an heirloom , I presume , from your paternal grandfather ? it look nice now . " 

 " oh , Lord ! oh ! Lord ! " cry Tant ' Sannie , laugh and hold her side ; " how the child look as though he think the mud would never wash off . oh , Lord , I shall die ! you , Bonaparte , be the funniest man I ever see . " 

 Bonaparte Blenkins be now carefully inspect the volume he have pick up . among the subject on which the darkness of his understanding have be enlighten during his youth , Political Economy have not be one . he be not , therefore , very clear as to what the nature of the book might be ; and as the name of the writer , J.S. Mill , might , for anything he know to the contrary , have belong to a venerable member of the british and Foreign Bible Society , it by no mean throw light upon the question . he be not in any way sure that political 

 economy have nothing to do with the cheap way of procure clothing for the army and navy , which would be certainly both a political and economical subject . 

 but Bonaparte soon come to a conclusion as to the nature of the book and its content , by the application of a simple rule now largely act upon , but which , become universal , would save much thought and valuable time . it be of marvellous simplicity , of infinite utility , of universal applicability . it may easily be commit to memory and run thus : 

 whenever you come into contact with any book , person , or opinion of which you absolutely comprehend nothing , declare that book , person or opinion to be immoral . Bespatter it , vituperate against it , strongly insist that any man or woman harbour it be a fool or a knave , or both . carefully abstain from study it . do all that in you lie to annihilate that book , person , or opinion . 


 act on this rule , so wide in its 

 comprehen- 
 comprehensiveness 


 siveness , so beautifully simple in its working , Bonaparte approach Tant ' Sannie with the book in his hand . Waldo come a step nearer , eye it like a dog whose young have fall into evil hand . 

 " this book , " say Bonaparte , " be not a fit and proper study for a young and immature mind . " 
 Tant ' Sannie do not understand a word , and say , 
 " what ? " 

 " this book , " say Bonaparte , bring down his finger with energy on the cover , " this book be 
 sleg , sleg , Davel , Davel 
 ! " 


 Tant ' Sannie perceive from the gravity of his countenance that it be no laugh matter . from the word 
 sleg 
 and 
 Davel 
 she understand that the book be evil , and have some connection with the prince who pull the wire of evil over the whole earth . 


 " where do you get this book ? " she ask , 

 turn her twinkle little eye on Waldo . " I wish that my leg may be as thin as an Englishman 's if it be not   one of your father 's . he have more sin than all the Kaffirs in Kaffirland , for all that he pretend to be so good all those year , and to live without a wife because he be think of the one that be dead ! as though ten dead wife could make up for one fat one with arm and leg ! " cry Tant ' Sannie , snort . 

 " it be not my father 's book , " say the boy savagely . " I get it from your loft . " 
 " my loft ! my book ! how dare you ? " cry Tant ' Sannie . 
 " it be Em 's father 's . she give it I , " he mutter more sullenly . 
 " give it here . what be the name of it ? what be it about ? " she ask , put her finger upon the title . 
 Bonaparte understand . 
 " Political Economy , " he say slowly . 


 " Dear Lord ! " say Tant ' Sannie , " can not one hear from the very sound what an ungodly book it be ! one can hardly say the name . have not   we get curse enough on this farm ? " cry Tant ' Sannie , eloquently ; " my well import Merino ram dying of nobody know what , and the short - horn cow cast her two calf , and the sheep eat up with the scab and the drought ? and be 
 this 
 a time to bring ungodly thing about the place , to call down the vengeance of Almighty God to punish we more ? do not   the minister tell I when I be confirm not to read any book except my Bible and hymn - book , that the Devil be in all the rest ? and I never have read any other book , " say Tant ' Sannie with virtuous energy , " and I never will ! " 

 Waldo see that the fate of his book be seal , and turn sullenly on his heel . 

 " so you will not stay to hear what I say ! " cry Tant ' Sannie . " there , take your polity - gollity - gominy , your devil 's book ! " she cry , 

 fling the book at his head with much energy . 

 it merely touch his forehead on one side and fall to the ground . 
 " go on , " she cry ; " I know you be go to talk to yourself . People who talk to themselves always talk to the Devil . go and tell he all about it . go , go ! run ! " cry Tant ' Sannie . 
 but the boy neither quicken nor slacken his pace , and pass sullenly round the back of the waggon - house . 

 book have be throw at other head before and since that summer afternoon , by hand more white and delicate than those of the boer - woman ; but whether the result of the process have be in any case wholly satisfactory , may be question . we love that with a peculiar tenderness , we treasure it with a peculiar care , it have for we quite a fictitious value , for which we have suffer . if we may not carry it anywhere 

 else we will carry it in our heart , and always to the end . 

 Bonaparte Blenkins go to pick up the volume , now loosen from its cover , while Tant ' Sannie push the stump of wood far into the oven . Bonaparte come close to she , tap the book knowingly , nod , and look at the fire . Tant ' Sannie comprehend , and , take the volume from his hand , throw it into the back of the oven . it lie upon the heap of coal , smoke , flare , and blaze , and the " Political Economyí be no more go out of existence , like many another poor heretic of flesh and blood . 

 Bonaparte grin , and to watch the process bring his face so near the oven door that the white hair on his eyebrow get sing . he then inquire if there be any more in the loft . learn that there be , he make sign indicative of take up armful and fling they into the fire . but Tant ' Sannie be dubious . the 

 deceased Englishman have leave all his personal effect specially to his child . it be all very well for Bonaparte to talk of burn the book . he have have his hair spiritually pull , and she have no wish to repeat his experience . 

 she shake her head . Bonaparte be displeased . but then a happy thought occur to he . he suggest that the key of the loft should henceforth be put into his own safe care and keep no one gain possession of it without his permission . to this Tant ' Sannie readily assent , and the two walk lovingly to the house to look for it . 



 CHAPTER XII . 
 he bite . 

 BONAPARTE blenkin 
 be rid home on the grey mare . he have ride out that afternoon , partly for the benefit of his health , partly to maintain his character as overseer of the farm . as he ride on slowly , he thoughtfully touch the ear of the grey mare with his whip . 


 " no , Bon , my boy , " he address himself , " do not   propose ! you can not   marry for four year , then why propose ? wheedle she , tweedle she , teedle she , but 
 do not 
 let she make sure of you . when a woman , " say Bonaparte , sagely rest his finger against the side of his nose , " when a woman be sure of you she do what she like with you ; but when she be not , you do what you like with she . and I " say Bonaparte . 


 here he draw the horse up suddenly and look . he be now close to the house , and lean over the pigsty wall , in company with Em , who be show she the pig , be a strange female figure . it be the first visitor that have appear on the farm since his arrival , and he look at she with interest . she be a tall , pudgy girl of fifteen , weigh a hundred and fifty pound , with baggy pendulous cheek and up - turn nose . she strikingly resemble Tant ' Sannie in form and feature , but her sleepy good eye lack that twinkle that dwelt in the boer - woman 's small orb . she be attire in a bright green print , wear brass ring in her ear and glass bead round her neck , and be suck the tip of her large finger as she look at the pig . 
 " who be it that have come ? " ask Bonaparte , when he stand drink his coffee in the front room . 

 " why , my niece , to be sure , " say Tant ' 

 Sannie , the Hottentot maid translating . " she be the only daughter of my only brother Paul , and she be come to visit I . she will be a nice mouthful to the man that can get she , " add Tant ' Sannie . " her father 's get two thousand pound in the green waggon box under his bed , and a farm , and five thousand sheep , and God Almighty know how many goat and horse . they milk ten cow in mid winter , and the young man be after she like fly about a bowl of milk . she say she mean to get marry in about four month , but she do not   yet know to whom . it be so with I when I be young , " say Tant ' Sannie . " I have   sit up with the young man four and five night a week . and they will come rid again as soon as ever they know that the time be up that the Englishman make I agree not to marry in . " 

 the boer - woman smirk complacently . 
 " where be you go to ? " ask Tant ' Sannie presently , see that Bonaparte rise . 

 " ha ! I be just go to the kraal ; I will be in to supper , " say Bonaparte . 
 nevertheless , when he reach his own door he stop and turn in there . soon after he stand before the little glass , array in his good white shirt with the little tuck , and shave himself . he have on his very good trouser , and have heavily oil the little fringe at the back of his head , which , however , refuse to become darker . but what distress he most be his nose it be very red . he rub his finger and thumb on the wall , and put a little whitewash on it ; but , find it rather make matter bad , he rub it off again . then he look carefully into his own eye . they certainly be a little pull down at the outer corner , which give they the appearance of look cross - wise ; but then they be a nice blue . so he put on his good coat , take up his stick , and go out to supper , feel on the whole well satisfied . 

 " Aunt , " say Trana to Tant ' Sannie when 

 that night they lie together in the great wooden bed , " why do the Englishman sigh so when he look at I ? " 

 " ha ! " say Tant ' Sannie , who be half asleep , but suddenly start , wide awake . " it be because he think you look like I . I tell you , Trana , " say Tant ' Sannie , " the man be mad with love of I . I tell he the other night I could not   marry till Em be sixteen , or I would lose all the sheep her father leave I . and he talk about Jacob work seven year and seven year again for his wife . and of course he mean I , " say Tant ' Sannie pompously . " but he will not   get I so easily as he think ; he will have to ask more than once . " 
 " oh ! " say Trana , who be a lumpish girl and not much give to talk ; but presently she add , " Aunt , why do the Englishman always knock against you when he pass you ? " 
 " that be because you be always in the way , " say Tant ' Sannie . 

 " but , aunt , say Trana , presently , " I think he be very ugly . " 
 " Phugh ! " say Tant ' Sannie . it be only because we be not accustomed to such nose in this country . in his country he say all the people have such nose , and the redder your nose be the high you be . he be of the family of the Queen , Victoria , you know , " say Tant ' Sannie , waken up with her subject ; " and he do not   think anything of governor and Church elder , and such people ; they be nothing to he . when his aunt with the dropsy die he will have money enough to buy all the farm in this district ! " 
 " oh ! " say Trana . that certainly make a difference . 
 " yes , " say Tant ' Sannie ; " and he be only forty - one , though you would take he to be sixty . and he tell I last night the real reason of his baldness . " 

 Tant ' Sannie then proceed to relate how , at 

 eighteen year of age , Bonaparte have court a fair young lady . how a deadly rival , jealous of his verdant lock , his golden flow hair , have , with a damnable and insinuate deception , make he a present of a pot of pomatum . how apply it in the evening , on rise in the morning he find his pillow strew with the golden lock , and , look into the glass , beheld the shin and smooth expanse which henceforth he must bear . the few remain hair be turn to a silvery whiteness , and the young lady marry his rival . 

 " and , " say Tant ' Sannie solemnly , " if it have not be for the grace of God , and reading of the psalm , he say he would have kill himself . he say he could kill himself quite easily if he want to marry a woman and she will not . " 
 " all the world ! " say Trana : and then they go to sleep . 

 every one be lose in sleep soon ; but from the window of the cabin the light stream 

 forth . it come from a dung fire , over which Waldo sit brood . hour after hour he sit there , now and again throw a fresh lump of fuel on to the fire , which burn up bravely , and then sink into a great bed of red coal , which reflect themselves in the boy 's eye as he sit there brooding , brooding , brood . at last , when the fire be blaze at its bright , he rise suddenly and walk slowly to a beam from which an ox " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " hung . loosen it , he run a noose in one end and then double it round his arm . 

 " mine , mine ! I have a right , " he mutter ; and then something louder , " if I fall and be kill , so much the well ! " 
 he open the door and go out into the starlight . 

 he walk with his eye bend upon the ground , but over - head it be one of those brilliant southern night when every space so small that your hand might cover it show fifty cold white point , and the milky - way be a belt of sharp 

 frosted silver . he pass the door where Bonaparte lie dreaming of Trana and her wealth , and he mount the ladder step . from those he clamber with some difficulty on to the roof of the house . it be of old rotten thatch with a ridge of white plaster , and it crumble away under his foot at every step . he trod as heavily as he could . so much the well if he fall ! 


 he kneel down when he get to the far gable , and begin to fasten his " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " to the crumble brick . below be the little window of the loft . with one end of the " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " tie round the gable , the other end round his waist , how easy to slide down to it , and to open it , through one of the broken pane , and to go in , and to fill his arm with book , and to clamber up again ! they have burn one book he would have twenty . every man 's hand be against his his should be against every man 's . no one would help he he would help himself . 


 he lift the black damp hair from his knit 

 forehead , and look round to cool his hot face . then he see what a regal night it be . he kneel silently and look up . a thousand eye be look down at he , bright and so cold . there be a laugh irony in they . 

 " so hot , so bitter , so angry ? poor little mortal ! " 
 he be ashamed . he fold his arm , and sit on the ridge of the roof look up at they . 

 " 
 so 
 hot , 
 so 
 bitter , 
 so 
 angry ? " 


 it be as though a cold hand have be lay upon his throbbing forehead , and slowly they begin to fade and grow dim . Tant ' Sannie and the burn book , Bonaparte and the broken machine , the box in the loft , he himself sit there how small they all become ! even the grave over yonder . those star that shine on up above so quietly , they have see a thousand such little existence fight just so fiercely , flare up just so 

 brightly , and go out ; and they , the old , old star , shine on forever . 

 " so hot , so angry , poor little soul ? " they say . 

 the " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " slip from his finger ; he sit with his arm fold , look up . 

 " we , " say the star , " have see the earth when it be young . we have see small thing creep out upon its surface small thing that pray and love and cry very loudly , and then creep under it again . but we , " say the star , " be as old as the Unknown . " 
 he lean his chin against the palm of his hand and look up at they . so long he sit there that bright star set and new one rise , and yet he sit on . 

 then at last he stand up , and begin to loosen the " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " from the gable . 


 what do it matter about the book ? the lust and the desire for they have die out . if they please to keep they from he they might . 

 what matter ? it be a very little thing . why hate , and struggle , and fight ? let it be as it would . 


 he twist the " 

 riem 
 reim 

 " round his arm and walk back along the ridge of the house . 


 by this time Bonaparte Blenkins have finish his dream of Trana , and as he turn himself round for a fresh doze he hear the step descend the ladder . his first impulse be to draw the blanket over his head and his leg under he , and to howl ; but recollect that the door be lock and the window carefully bolt , he allow his head slowly to crop out among the blanket , and listen intently . Whosoever it might be , there be no danger of their get at he ; so he clamber out of bed , and go on tiptoe to the door , apply his eye to the keyhole . there be nothing to be see ; so walk to the window , he bring his face as close to the glass as his nose would allow . there be a figure just discernible . the lad 

 be not try to walk softly , and the heavy shuffling of the well - know " vel - schoen " could be clearly hear through the closed window as they cross the stone in the yard . Bonaparte listen till they have die away round the corner of the waggon - house ; and , feel that his bare leg be get cold , he jump back into bed again . 


 " what do you keep up in your loft ? " inquire Bonaparte of the boer - woman the next evening , point upwards and elucidate his meaning by the addition of such dutch word as he know , for the lean Hottentot be go home . 
 " dry skin , " say the boer - woman , " and empty bottle , and box , and sack , and soap . " 
 " you do not   keep any of your provision there sugar , now ? " say Bonaparte , point to the sugar - basin and then up at the loft . 
 Tant ' Sannie shake her head . 

 " only salt , and dry peach . " 
 " dried peach ! eh ? " say Bonaparte . " shut the door , my dear child , shut it tight , " he call out to Em , who stand in the dining - room . then he lean over the elbow of the sofa and bring his face as close as possible to the boer - woman 's , and make sign of eat . then he say something she do not comprehend ; then say , " Waldo , Waldo , Waldo , " point up to the loft , and make sign of eat again . 
 now an inkling of his meaning dawn on the boer - woman 's mind . to make it clear , he move his leg after the manner of one go up a ladder , appear to be open a door , masticate vigorously , say , " Peaches , peach , peach , " and appear to be come down the ladder . 
 it be now evident to Tant ' Sannie that Waldo have be in her loft and eat her peach . 

 to exemplify his own share in the proceeding , 

 Bonaparte lie down on the sofa , and shut his eye tightly , say , " Night , night , night ! " then he sit up wildly , appear to be intently listen , mimic with his foot the come down a ladder , and look at Tant ' Sannie . this clearly show how , rouse in the night , he have discover the theft . 

 " he must have be a great fool to eat my peach , " say Tant ' Sannie . " they be full of mite as a sheepskin , and as hard as stone . " 
 Bonaparte , fumble in his pocket , do not even hear her remark , and take out from his coat - tail a little horsewhip , nicely roll up . Bonaparte wink at the little rhinoceros horsewhip , at the boer - woman , and then at the door . 
 " shall we call he Waldo , Waldo ? " he say . 

 Tant ' Sannie nod , and giggle . there be something so exceedingly humorous in the idea that he be go to beat the boy , though for her own part she do not see that the peach 

 be worth it . when the Kaffir maid come with the wash - tub she be send to summon Waldo ; and Bonaparte double up the little whip and put it in his pocket . then he draw himself up , and prepare to act his important part with become gravity . soon Waldo stand in the door , and take off his hat . 

 " come in , come in , my lad , " say Bonaparte , " and shut the door behind . " 
 the boy come in and stand before they . 
 " you need not be so afraid , child , " say Tant ' Sannie . " I be a child myself once . it be no great harm if you have take a few . " 
 Bonaparte perceive that her remark be not in keep with the nature of the proceeding , and of the little drama he intend to act . purse out his lip , and wave his hand , he solemnly address the boy . 

 " Waldo , it grieve I beyond expression to have to summon you for so painful a purpose ; but it be at the imperative call of duty , which I 

 dare not evade . I do not state that frank and unreserved confession will obviate the necessity of chastisement , which if requisite shall be fully administer ; but the nature of that chastisement may be mitigate by free and humble confession . Waldo , answer I as you would your own father , in whose place I now stand to you ; have you , or have you not , do you , or do you not , eat of the peach in the loft ? " 

 " say you take they , boy , say you take they , then he will not   beat you so much , " say the dutch - woman , good - naturedly , get a little sorry for he . 
 the boy raise his eye slowly and fix they vacantly upon she , then suddenly his face grow dark with blood . 

 " 
 so 
 , you have not   get anything to say to we , my lad ? " say Bonaparte , momentarily forget his dignity , and bend forward with a little snarl . " but what I mean be just this , my lad when it take a boy three - quarter of an 

 hour to fill a salt - pot , and when at three o'clock in the morning he go knock about the door of a loft , it be natural to suppose there be mischief in it . it be certain there 
 be 
 mischief in it ; and where there be mischief 
 in 
 it must be take 
 out 
 , " say Bonaparte , grin into the boy 's face . then , feel that he have fall from that high gravity which be as spice to the pudding , and the flavour of the whole little tragedy , he draw himself up . " Waldo , " he say , " confess to I instantly , and without reserve , that you eat the peach . " 

 the boy 's face be white now . his eye be on the ground , his hand doggedly clasp before he . 
 " what , do you not intend to answer ? " 
 the boy look up at they once from under his bent eyebrow , and then look down again . 

 " the creature look as if all the devil in hell be in it , " cry Tant ' Sannie . " say you take they , boy . young thing will be young thing , 

 I be old than you when I use to eat " bultongí in my mother 's loft , and get the little nigger whip for it . say you take they . " 

 but the boy say nothing . 
 " I think a little solitary confinement might perhaps be beneficial , " say Bonaparte . " it will enable you , Waldo , to reflect on the enormity of the sin you have commit against our Father in heaven . and you may also think of the submission you owe to those who be old and wise than you be , and whose duty it be to check and correct you . " 
 say this , Bonaparte stand up and take down the key of the fuel - house , which hang on a nail against the wall . 
 " walk on , my boy , " say Bonaparte , point to the door ; and as he follow he out he draw his mouth expressively on one side , and make the lash of the little horsewhip stick out of his pocket and shake up and down . 

 Tant ' Sannie feel half sorry for the lad ; but 

 she could not help laugh , it be always so funny when one be go to have a whipping , and it would do he good . anyhow , he would forget all about it when the place be heal . 

 Bonaparte take up a light candle that have be leave burn on the kitchen table , and tell the boy to walk before he . they go to the fuel - house . it be a little stone erection that jut out from the side of the waggon - house . it be low , and without a window ; and the dry dung be pile in one corner , and the coffee - mill stand in another , fasten on the top of a post . Bonaparte take the padlock off the rough door . 
 " walk in , my lad , " he say . 
 Waldo obey sullenly ; one place to he be much the same as another . he have no objection to be lock up . 

 Bonaparte follow he in , and close the door carefully . he put the light down on the heap of dung in the corner , and quietly 

 intro- 
 introduce 


 duce his hand under his coat - tail , and draw slowly from his pocket the end of a rope , which he conceal behind he . 

 " I be very sorry , exceedingly sorry , Waldo , my lad , that you should have act in this manner . it grieve I , " say Bonaparte . 
 he move round toward the boy 's back . he hardly like the look in the fellow 's eye , though he stand there motionless . if he should spring on he ! 
 so he draw the rope out very carefully , and shift round to the wooden post . there be a slip - knot in one end of the rope , and a sudden movement draw the boy 's hand to his back and pass it round they . it be an instant 's work to drag it twice round the wooden post : then Bonaparte be safe . 
 for a moment the boy struggle to free himself ; then he know that he be powerless , and stand still . 

 " horse that kick must have their leg tie , " 

 say Bonaparte , as he pass the other end of the rope round the boy 's knee . " and now , my dear Waldo , " take the whip out of his pocket , " I be go to beat you . " 

 he pause for a moment . it be perfectly quiet ; they could hear each other 's breath . 
 " " chasten thy son while there be hope , í " say Bonaparte , " " and let not thy soul spare for his crying.í those be God 's word . I shall act as a father to you , Waldo . I think we have well have your naked back . " 
 he take out his pen - knife , and slit the shirt down from the shoulder to the waist . 
 " now , " say Bonaparte , " I hope the Lord will bless and sanctify to you what I be go to do to you . " 
 the first cut run from the shoulder across the middle of the back ; the second fall exactly in the same place . a shudder pass through the boy 's frame . 

 " Nice , eh ? " say Bonaparte , peep round 

 into his face , speak with a lisp , as though to a very little child . " 
 Nith , eh ? 
 " 

 but the eye be black and lustreless , and seem not to see he . when he have give sixteen Bonaparte pause in his work to wipe a little drop of blood from his whip . 
 " Cold , eh ? what make you shiver so ? perhaps you would like to pull up your shirt ? but I have   not quite do yet . " 
 when he have finish he wipe the whip again , and put it back in his pocket . he cut the rope through with his pen - knife , and then take up the light . 
 " you do not   seem to have find your tongue yet . forget how to cry ? " say Bonaparte , pat he on the cheek . 
 the boy look up at he not sullenly , not angrily . there be only a wild , fitful terror in the eye . Bonaparte make haste to go out and shut the door , and leave he alone in the darkness . he himself be afraid . 


 it be almost morning . Waldo lie with his face upon the ground at the foot of the fuel - heap . there be a round hole near the top of the door , where a knot of wood have fall out , and a stream of grey light come in through it . 

 ah , it be go to end at last . nothing last forever , not even the night . how be it he have never think of that before ? for in all that long dark night he have be very strong , have never be tired , never feel pain , have run on and on , up and down , up and down ; he have not dare to stand still , and he have not know it would end . he have be so strong , that when he strike his head with all his force upon the stone wall it do not stun he nor pain he only make he laugh . that be a dreadful night . when he clasp his hand frantically and pray " o God , my beautiful God , my sweet God , once , only once , let I feel you near I to - night ! " he could not feel he . he 

 pray aloud , very loud , and he get no answer ; when he listen it be all quite quiet like when the priest of Baal cry aloud to their god " oh , Baal , hear we ! oh , Baal , hear we ! " but Baal be go a - hunting . 

 that be a long wild night , and wild thought come and go in it ; but they leave their mark behind they forever : for as year can not pass without leave their trace behind they , neither can night into which be force the thought and suffering of year . and now the dawn be come , and at last he be very tired . he shiver , and try to draw the shirt up over his shoulder . they be get stiff now . he have never know they be cut in the night . he look up at the white light that come in through the hole at the top of the door and shudder . then he turn his face back to the ground , and sleep again . 

 some hour later Bonaparte come toward the fuel - house with a lump of bread in his hand . 

 he open the door and peer in ; then enter , and touch the fellow with his boot . see that he breathe heavily , though he do not rouse , Bonaparte throw the bread down on the ground . he be alive , that be one thing . he bend over he , and carefully scratch open one of the cut with the nail of his forefinger , examine with much interest his last night 's work . he would have to count his sheep himself that day ; the boy be literally cut up . he lock the door and go away again . 

 " oh , Lyndall , " say Em , enter the dining room , and bath in tear , that afternoon , " I have be beg Bonaparte to let he out , and he will not . " 
 " the more you beg the more he will not , " say Lyndall . 
 she be cut out apron on the table . 

 " oh , but it be late , and I think they want to kill he , " say Em , weep bitterly ; and find that no more consolation be to be 

 gain from her cousin , she go off blubber " I wonder you can cut out apron when Waldo be shut up like that . " 

 for ten minute after she be go Lyndall work on quietly ; then she fold up her stuff , roll it tightly together , and stand before the closed door of the sit room with her hand closely clasp . a flush rise to her face : she open the door quickly , and walk in , go to the nail on which the key of the fuel - room hung . Bonaparte and Tant ' Sannie sit there and see she . 
 " what do you want ? " they ask together . 
 " this key , " she say , hold it up , and look at they . 
 " do you mean she to have it ? " say Tant ' Sannie in Dutch . 
 " why do not   you stop she ? " ask Bonaparte in English . 
 " why do not   you take it from she ? " say Tant ' Sannie . 

 so they look at each other , talk , while Lyndall walk to the fuel - house with the key , her underlip bite in . 
 " Waldo , " she say , as she help he to stand up , and twist his arm about her waist to support he , " we will not be child always ; we shall have the power too some day . " she kiss his naked shoulder with her soft little mouth . it be all the comfort her young soul could give he . 



 CHAPTER XIII . 
 he make love . 

 " 
 HERE 
 , " say Tant ' Sannie to her Hottentot maid , " I have be in this house four year , and never be up in the loft . fatter woman than I go up ladder ; I will go up to - day and see what it be like , and put it to right up there . you bring the little ladder and stand at the bottom . " 

 " there be one would be sorry if you be to fall , " say the Hottentot maid , leer at Bonaparte 's pipe , that lie on the table . 
 " hold your tongue , jade , " say her mistress , try to conceal a pleased smile , " and go fetch the ladder . " 

 there be a never - use trap - door at one end 

 of the sit room : this the Hottentot maid push open , and set the ladder against it , the boer - woman with some danger and difficulty climb into the loft . then the Hottentot maid take the ladder away , as her husband be mend the waggon - house , and need it ; but the trap - door be leave open . 

 for a little while Tant ' Sannie poke about among the empty bottle and skin , and look at the bag of peach that Waldo be suppose to have like so ; then she sit down near the trap - door beside a barrel of salt mutton . she find that the piece of meat be much too large , and take out her clasp - knife to divide they . 
 that be always the way when one leave thing to servant , she grumble to herself : but when once she be married to her husband Bonaparte it would not matter whether a sheep spoil or no when once his rich aunt with the dropsy be dead . she smile as she dive her hand into the pickle water . 

 at that instant her niece enter the room below , closely follow by Bonaparte , with his head on one side , smile mawkishly . have Tant ' Sannie speak at that moment the life of Bonaparte Blenkins would have run a wholly different course ; as it be , she remain silent , and neither notice the open trap - door above their head . 
 " sit there , my love , " say Bonaparte , motion Trana into her aunt 's elbow - chair , and draw another close up in front of it , in which he seat himself . " there , put your foot upon the stove too . your aunt have go out somewhere . long have I wait for this auspicious event ! " 

 Trana , who understand not one word of English , sit down in the chair and wonder if this be one of the strange custom of other land , that an old gentleman may bring his chair up to your , and sit with his knee touch you . she have be five day in Bonaparte 's 

 company , and fear the old man , and dislike his nose . 

 " how long have I desire this moment ! " say Bonaparte . " but that aged relative of thine be always cast her unhallowed shadow upon we . look into my eye , Trana ! " 
 Bonaparte know that she comprehend not a syllable ; but he understand that it be the eye , the tone , the action , and not at all the rational word , that touch the love - chord . he see she change colour . 
 " all night , " say Bonaparte , " I lie awake ; I see nought but thy angelic countenance . I open my arm to receive thee where art thou , where ? thou art not there ! " say Bonaparte , suit the action to the word , and spread out his arm and draw they to his breast . 
 " oh , please , I do not   understand , " say Trana , " I want to go away . " 

 " yes , yes ! " say Bonaparte , lean back in his chair , to her great relief , and press his 

 hand on his heart , " since first thy amethystine countenance be impress 
 here 
  what have I not suffer , what have I not feel ? oh , the pang unspoken , burn as an ardent coal in a fiery and uncontaminated bosom ! " say Bonaparte , bend forward again . 

 " Dear Lord ! " say Trana to herself , " how foolish I have be ! the old man have a pain in his stomach , and now , as my aunt be out , he have come to I to help he . " 
 she smile kindly at Bonaparte , and push past he , go to the bedroom , quickly return with a bottle of red drop in her hand . 
 " they be very good for " benaawdheití ; my mother always drink they , " she say , hold the bottle out . 

 the face in the trap - door be a fiery red . like a tiger - cat ready to spring . Tant ' Sannie crouch , with the shoulder of mutton in her hand . exactly beneath she stand Bonaparte . 

 she rise and clasp with both arm the barrel of salt meat . 

 " what , rise of the desert , nightingale of the colony , that with thine amorous lie whil the lonesome night ! " cry Bonaparte , seize the hand that hold the " vonlicsense . " " Nay , struggle not ! fly as a stricken fawn into the arm that would embrace thee , thou " 
 here a stream of cold pickle - water , heavy with rib and shoulder , descend on his head abruptly terminate his speech . half - blind , Bonaparte look up through the drop that hang from his eyelid , and see the red face that look down at he . with one wild cry he flee . as he pass out at the front door a shoulder of mutton , well - direct , strike the black coat in the small of the back . 
 " bring the ladder ! bring the ladder ! I will go after he ! " cry the boer - woman , as Bonaparte Blenkins wildly flee into the field . 


 late in the evening of the same day Waldo kneel on the floor of his cabin . he bath the foot of his dog which have be pierce by a thorn . the bruise on his own back have have five day to heal in , and , except a little stiffness in his movement , there be nothing remarkable about the boy . 
 the trouble of the young be soon over ; they leave no external mark . if you wound the tree in its youth the bark will quickly cover the gash ; but when the tree be very old , peel the bark off , look carefully , and you will see the scar there still . all that be bury be not dead . 
 Waldo pour the warm milk over the little swollen foot ; Doss lie very quiet , with tear in his eye . then there be a tap at the door . in an instant Doss look wide awake , and wink the tear out from between his little lid . 
 " come in , " say Waldo , intent on his work ; and slowly and cautiously the door open . 

 " good evening , Waldo , my boy , " say 

 Bonaparte Blenkins in a mild voice , not venture more than his nose within the door . " how be you this evening ? " 

 Doss growl and show his little tooth , and try to rise , but his paw hurt he so , he whine . 
 " I be very tired , Waldo , my boy , " say Bonaparte , plaintively . 
 Doss show his little white tooth again . his master go on with his work without look round . there be some people at whose hand it be good not to look . at last he say , 
 " come in . " 
 Bonaparte step cautiously a little way into the room , and leave the door open behind he . he look at the boy 's supper on the table . 
 " Waldo , I have   have nothing to eat all day I be very hungry , " he say . 
 " eat ! " say Waldo after a moment , bend lower over his dog . 

 " you will not   go and tell she that I be here , will 

 you , Waldo ? " say Bonaparte most uneasily . " you have   hear how she use I , Waldo ? I have   be 
 badly 
 treat ; you will know yourself what it be some day when you can not   carry on a little conversation with a lady without have salt meat and pickle - water throw at you . Waldo , look at I : do I look as a gentleman should ? " 

 but the boy neither look up nor answer , and Bonaparte grow more uneasy . 
 " you would not   go and tell she that I be here , would you ? " say Bonaparte , whiningly . " there be no knowing what she would do to I . I have   such trust in you , Waldo ; I have   always think you such a promising lad , though you may not   have know it , Waldo . " 
 " eat , " say the boy . " I shall say nothing . " 

 Bonaparte , who know the truth when another speak it , close the door , carefully put on the button . then he look to see that the curtain of the window be closely pull down , and seat himself at the table . he be soon 

 munch the cold meat and bread . Waldo knelt on the floor , bath the foot with hand which the dog lick lovingly . once only he glance at the table , and turn away quickly . 

 " ah , yes ; I do not   wonder that you can not   look at I , Waldo , " say Bonaparte : " my condition would touch any heart . you see , the water be fatty , and that have make all the sand stick to I ; and my hair , " say Bonaparte , tenderly touch the little fringe at the back of his head , " be all cake over like a little plank ; you would not   think it be hair at all , " say Bonaparte , plaintively . " I have to creep all along the stone wall for fear she would see I , and with nothing on my head but a red handkerchief , tie under my chin , Waldo ; and to hide in a " slootí the whole day , with not a mouthful of food , Waldo . and she give I such a blow , just here , " say Bonaparte . 
 he have clear the plate of the last morsel , when Waldo rise and walk to the door . 

 " oh , Waldo , my dear boy , you be not go to call she ? " say Bonaparte , rise anxiously . 
 " I be go to sleep in the waggon , " say the boy , open the door . 
 " oh , we can both sleep in this bed : there be plenty of room . do stay , my boy , please . " 
 but Waldo step out . 

 " it be such a little whip , Waldo , " say Bonaparte , follow he deprecatingly . " I do not   think it would hurt you so much . it be such a 
 little 
 whip . I be 
 sure 
 you do not   take the peach . you be not   go to call she , Waldo , be you ? " 

 but the boy walk off . 

 Bonaparte wait till his figure have pass round the front of the waggon - house , and then slip out . he hide himself round the corner , but keep peep out to see who be come . he feel sure the boy be go to call Tant ' Sannie . his tooth chatter with inward cold as he look round into the darkness and thought of the snake that might bite he , and the 

 dreadful thing that might attack he , and the dead that might arise out of their graf if he sleep out in the field all night . but more than an hour pass , and no footstep approach . 

 then Bonaparte make his way back to the cabin . he button the door and put the table against it and , give the dog a kick to silence his whining when the foot throb , he climb into bed . he do not put out the light , for fear of the ghost , but , wear out with the sorrow of the day , be soon asleep himself . 
 about four o'clock Waldo , lie between the seat of the horse - waggon , be awaken by a gentle touch on his head . sit up , he espy Bonaparte look through one of the window with a light candle in his hand . 
 " I be about to depart , my dear boy , before my enemy arise ; and I could not leave without come to bid you farewell , " say Bonaparte . 
 Waldo look at he . 

 " I shall always think of you with affection , " 

 say Bonaparte . " and there be that old hat of your , if you could let I have it for a keepsake " 

 " take it , " say Waldo . 
 " I think you would say so , so I bring it with I , " say Bonaparte , put it on . " the Lord bless you , my dear boy . you have not   a few shilling just a trifle you do not   need , have you ? " 
 " take the two shilling that be in the break vase . " 
 " may the blessing of my God rest upon you , my dear child , " say Bonaparte ; " may he guide and bless you . give I your hand . " 
 Waldo fold his arm closely , and lie down . 
 " farewell , adieu ! " say Bonaparte . " may the blessing of my God and my father 's God rest on you , now and evermore . " 
 with these word the head and nose withdraw themselves , and the light vanish from the window . 

 after a few moment the boy , lie in the waggon , hear stealthy footstep as they pass the waggon - house and make their way down the road . he listen as they grow fainter and fainter , and at last die away altogether ; and from that night the footstep of Bonaparte Blenkins be hear no more at the old farm . 
 END of PART I. 




 PART II . 


 " and it be all play , and no one could tell what it have live and work for . a strive , and a strive , and an ending in nothing . " 




 CHAPTER I. 
 Times and Seasons . 

 waldo 
 lie on his stomach on the sand . since he pray and howl to his God in the fuel - house three year have pass . 

 they say that in the world to come time be not measure out by month and year . neither be it here . the soul 's life have season of its own ; period not find in any calendar , time that year and month will not scan , but which be as deftly and sharply cut off from one another as the smoothly - arrange year which the earth 's motion yield we . 

 to stranger eye these division be not evident ; but each , look back at the little 

 track his consciousness illuminate , see it cut into distinct portion , whose boundary be the termination of mental state . 

 as man differ from man , so differ these soul ' year . the most material life be not devoid of they ; the story of the most spiritual be tell in they . and it may chance that some , look back , see the past cut out after this fashion : 

 I. 
 the year of infancy , where from the shadowy background of forgetfulness start out picture of startle clearness , disconnected , but brightly colour , and indelibly print in the mind . much that follow fade , but the colour of those baby - picture be permanent . 
 there rise , perhaps , a warm summer 's evening ; we be seat on the door - step ; we have yet the taste of the bread and milk in our mouth , and the red sunset be reflect in our basin . 

 then there be a dark night , where , wake with a nameless fear , we run from our own bed to another , creep close to some large figure , and be comfort . 
 then there be remembrance of the pride when , on some one 's shoulder , with our arm around their head , we ride to see the little pig . 
 remembrance of delight in the feel and smell of the first orange we ever see ; of sorrow which make we put up our lip , and cry hard , when one morning we run out to try and catch the dew - drop , and they melt and wet our little finger ; of almighty and despairing sorrow when we be lose behind the kraal , and can not see the house anywhere . 
 and then one picture start out more vividly than any . 

 there have be a thunder - storm ; the ground , as far as the eye can reach , be cover with white hail ; the cloud be go , and overhead a deep blue sky be show ; far off a great 

 rainbow rest on the white earth . we , stand in a window to look , feel the cool , unspeakably sweet wind blow in on we , and a feeling of longing come over we unutterable longing , we can not tell for what . we look at the white earth , and the rainbow , and the blue sky ; and oh , we want it , we want we do not know what . we cry as though our heart be break . when one lift our little body from the window we can not tell what ail we . we run away to play . 

 so look the first year . 


 II . 
 now the picture become continuous and connected . material thing still rule , but the spiritual and intellectual take their place . 

 in the dark night when we be afraid we pray and shut our eye . we press our finger very hard upon the lid , and see dark spot 

 move round and round , and we know they be head and wing of angel send to take care of we , see dimly in the dark as they move round our bed . it be very consoling . 


 in the day we learn our letter , and be troubled because we can not see why k - n - o - w should be know , and p - s - a - l - m psalm . they tell we it be so because it 
 be 
 so . we be not satisfied ; we hate to learn ; we like well to build little stone house . we can build they as we please , and know the reason for they . 

 other joy too we have incomparably great . 
 we be run through with a shudder of delight when in the red sand we come on one of those white wax - flower that lie between their two green leaf flat on the sand . we hardly dare pick they , but we feel compel to do so ; and we smell and smell till the delight become almost pain . afterwards we pull the green leaf softly into piece to see the silk thread run across . 

 beyond the " kopje " grow some dull - green , 

 hairy - leave bush . we be so small they meet over our head ; and we sit among they , and talk to they , and kiss they , and they love we back . 


 one day we sit there and look up at the blue sky , and down at our fat little knee ; and suddenly it strike we , who be we ? this 
 I 
 , what be it ? we try to look in upon ourselves , and ourself beat back upon ourself . then we get up in great fear and run home as hard as we can . we can not   tell any one what frighten we . we never quite lose that feeling of 
 self 
 again . 



 III . 
 and then a new time rise . we be seven year old . we can read now read the Bible . good of all we like the story of Elijah in his cave at Horeb , and the still small voice . 

 one day , a notable one , we read on the 

 " kopje , " and discover the fifth chapter of Matthew , and read it all through . then we tuck the Bible under our arm and rush home . they do not   know it be wicked to take your thing again if some one take they , wicked to go to law , wicked to ! we be quite breathless when we get to the house ; we tell they we have discover a chapter they never hear of ; we tell they what it say . the old wise people tell we they know all about it . our discovery be a mare's - nest to they ; but to we it be very real . the ten commandment and the old " thou shalt " we have hear about long enough and do not   care about it ; but this new law set we on fire . we will deny ourself . our little waggon that we have make , we give to the little Kaffirs . we keep quiet when they throw sand at we   feeling , oh , so happy . we conscientiously put the crack tea - cup for ourselves at breakfast , and take the burn roaster - cake . we save our money , and buy threepence of tobacco 

 for the Hottentot maid who call we name . we be exotically virtuous . at night we be profoundly religious ; even the tick watch say , " eternity , eternity ! hell , hell , hell ! " and the silence talk of God . 

 occasionally , also , unpleasantly shrewd question begin to be ask by something , we know not what , in ourselves . we get to know he well afterward . we carry the question to the grow - up people . they give we answer ; we be more or less satisfied for the time . the grow - up people be very wise , and they say it be kind of God to make hell , and very loving of he to send man there ; and besides , he could not   help himself , and they be very wise , we think , so we believe they . 


 IV . 

 then a new time come of which the lead feature be , that the shrewd question be ask 

 louder . we carry they to the grow - up people ; they answer we , and we be 
 not 
 satisfied . 

 and now between we and the dear old world of the sens the spirit - world begin to peep in , and wholly cloud it over . what be the flower to we ? they be fuel wait for the great burning . we look at the wall of the farmhouse and the matter - of - fact sheep " kraal , " with the merry sunshine play over all , and do not see it . but we see a great white throne , and he that sit on it . around he stand a great multitude that no man can number , harper harp with their harp , a thousand time ten thousand , and thousand of thousand . how white be their robe , wash in the blood of the Lamb ! and the music rise higher , and rend the vault of heaven with its unutterable sweetness . and we , as we listen , ever and anon , as it sink on the sweetest , low note , hear a groan of the damned from below . we shudder in the sunlight . 

 " the torment , " say Jeremy Taylor , whose sermon our father read aloud in the evening , " comprise as many torment as the body of man have joint , sinew , artery ,   c. , be cause by that penetrate and real fire , of which this temporal fire be but a paint fire . what comparison will there be between burn for a hundred year ' space and to be burn without intermission as long as God be God ? " 

 we remember the sermon there in the sunlight . one come and ask why we sit there nod so moodily . ah , they do not see what we see . 


 " a moment 's time , a narrow space , 
 divide I from that heavenly place , 
 or shut I up in hell . " 


 so say Wesley 's hymn , which we sing evening by evening . what matter sunshine and wall , man and book ? 


 " the thing which be see be temporal , but 

 the thing which be not see be eternal . " they be real . 

 the Bible we bear always in our breast ; its page be our food ; we learn to repeat it ; we weep much , for in sunshine and in shade , in the early morning or the late evening , in the field or in the house , the Devil walk with we . he come to a real person , copper - colour face , head a little on one side , forehead knit , ask question . believe I , it would be well to be follow by three deadly disease than by he . he be never silence , never satisfied without mercy . though the drop of blood stand out on your heart he will put his question . softly he come up   we be only a wee bit child , mark you ; " be it good of God to make hell ? be it kind of he to let no one be forgive unless Jesus Christ die ? " 
 then he go off , and leave we writhe . presently he come back . 

 " do you love he ? " wait a little . " do 

 you love he ? you will be lose if you do not . " 

 we say we try to . 
 " but do you ? " then he go off . 
 it be nothing to he if we go quite mad with fear at our own wickedness . he ask on , the question Devil ; he care nothing what he say . we long to tell some one , that they may share our pain . we do not yet know that the cup of affliction be make with such a narrow mouth that only one lip can drink at a time , and that each man 's cup be make to match his lip . 

 one day we try to tell some one . then a grave head be shake solemnly at we . we be wicked , very wicked , they say we ought not to have such thought . God be good , very good . we be wicked , very wicked . that be the comfort we get . wicked ! oh , Lord ! do we not know it ? be it not the sense of our own exceeding wickedness that be dry up our 

 young heart , fill it with sand , make all life a dust - bin for we ? 

 wicked ? we know it ! too vile to live , too vile to die , too vile to creep over this , God 's earth , and move among his believe man . Hell be the one place for he who hat his master , and there we do not want to go . 
 and once again we try to seek for comfort . this time great eye look at we wonder , and lovely little lip say , 

 " if it make you so unhappy to think of these thing , why do you not think of 
 something else , and forget ? 
 " 

 forget ? we turn away and shrink into ourself . forget ? and think of other thing ? oh , God ! do they not understand that the material world be but a film , through every pore of which God 's awful spirit world be shin through on we , poor miserable little wretch that we be ? we keep as far from other as we can . 

 one night , we kneel in the window ; every one 

 else sleep , but we kneel reading by the moonlight . it be only a chapter of the prophet , tell how the choose people of God shall be carry on the Gentiles ' shoulder . surely the Devil might leave we alone ; there be not much to handle for he there . but presently we hear he . 

 " be it right there should be a choose people ? if you should be choose out , would it be right , fair ? " 
 how can we answer he ? we be feel so good till he come . we put our head down on the Bible and blister it with tear . then we fold our hand over our head and pray , till our tooth grind together . oh , that from that spirit - world , so real and yet so silent , that surround we , one word would come to guide we ! we be leave alone with this devil ; the angel do not come . suddenly we seize the Bible , turn it round and round , and say hurriedly , 
 " it will be God 's voice speak to we ; his voice as though we hear it . " 

 we yearn , oh , so hugrily , for a token from the inexorably silent one . 
 we turn the book , put our finger down on a page , and bend to read by the moonlight . it be God 's answer . we tremble . 
 " then fourteen year after I go up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas , and take Titus with I also . " 

 for an instant our imagination seize it ; we be twist , twirl , try to make an allegory . the fourteen year be fourteen month ; we be Paul and the devil be Barnabas , Titus be then a sudden loathing come to we : we be liar and hypocrite , we be try to deceive ourselves . what be Paul to we and Jerusalem ? who be Barnabas and Titus ? we know not the man . this be no answer . before we know we seize the book , swing it round our head , and fle it with all our might to the farth end of the room . we put down our head again and weep . youth and ignorance yearn for light : 

 be there anything else that can weep so ? it be as though the tear be drop of blood congeal beneath the eyelid ; nothing else be like those tear . after a long time , when we be weak with crying , and lie silent , by chance we knock against the wood that stop the break pane . it fall . upon our hot stiff face a sweet breath of wind blow . we raise our head , and with our swollen eye look out at the beautiful still world , and the sweet night wind blow in upon we , holy and gentle , like a love breath from the lip of God . over we a deep peace come , a calm , still joy ; the tear now flow readily and softly . oh , the unutterable gladness ! at last , at last we have find it ! " 
 the peace with God . 
 " " 
 the sense of sin forgive . 
 " all doubt vanish , God 's voice in the soul , the Holy Spirit fill we ! we feel he ! we feel he ! oh , Jesus Christ ! through you , through you , this joy ! we press our hand upon our breast and look upward with adore gladness . soft wave of bliss break 

 through we . " 
 the peace with God . 
 " " 
 the sense of sin forgive . 
 " Methodists and Revivalists say the word , and the mocking world shoot out its lip , and walk by smile " Hypocrite ! " 

 there be more fool and few hypocrite than the wise world dream of . hypocrite be rare as iceberg in the tropic ; fool common as buttercup beside a water - furrow : whether you go this way or that you tread on they ; you dare not look at your own reflection in the water but you see one . there be no can not phrase , rotten with age , but it be the dress of a live body ; none but at heart it signify a real bodily or mental condition . 

 after hour and night of frenzied fear of the supernatural , desire to appease the power above , a fierce quivering excitement in every inch of nerve and blood - vessel , there come a time when nature can not 


 endure 

 long , and the spring long bent recoil . we sink down emasculate . up creep the deadly delicious calm . 


 " I have blot out as a cloud thy sin , and as a thick cloud thy trespass , and will remember they no more for ever . " we weep with soft transporting joy . 
 a few experience this ; many imagine they experience it , one here and there lie about it . in the main , " the peace with God ; a sense of sin forgive , " stand for a certain mental and physical reaction . its reality those know who have feel it . 
 and we , on that moonlight night , put down our head on the window , " oh , God ! we be happy , happy ; thy child forever . oh , thank you , God ! " and we drop asleep . 
 next morning the Bible we kiss . we be God 's forever . we go out to work , and it go happily all day , happily all night ; but hardly so happily , not happily at all , the next day ; and the next night the devil ask we , " where be your Holy Spirit ? " 
 we can not tell . 

 so month by month , summer and winter , the old life go on reading , pray , weeping , pray . they tell we we become utterly stupid . we know it . even the multiplication table we learn with so much care we forget . the physical world recede far and far from we . truly we love not the world , neither the thing that be in it . across the bound of sleep our grief follow we . when we wake in the night we be sit up in bed weep bitterly , or find ourself outside in the moonlight , dress , and walk up and down , and wring our hand , and we can not tell how we come there . so pass two year , as man reckon they . 


 V. 
 then a new time . 
 before we there be three course possible to go mad , to die , to sleep . 

 we take the latter course ; nature take it for we . 
 all thing take rest in sleep ; the beast , bird , the very flower close their eye , and the stream be freeze in winter . all thing take rest in sleep ; then why not the human reason also ? so we drop asleep , and in that sleep a beautiful dream rise for we . though you hear all the dream of man , you will hardly find a pretty one than ours . it run so : 
 in the centre of all thing be a Mighty Heart , which , have beget all thing , love they ; and , have bear they into life , beat with great throb of love towards they . no death for his dear insect , no hell for his loved man , no burn up for his dear world his own , own world ! in the end all will be well . do not ask we how we make our dream tally with fact ; the glory of a dream be this that it despise fact , and make its own . our dream save we from go mad ; that be enough . 

 its peculiar point of sweetness lie here . when the Mighty Heart 's yearning of love become too great for other expression , it become the sweet Rose of heaven , the beloved Man God . 
 Jesus ! you Jesus of our dream ! how we love you ; no Bible tell of you as we know you . your sweet hand hold our fast ; your sweet voice say always , " I be here , my loved one , not far off ; put your arm about I . " we find he in everything in those day . when the little weary lamb we drive home drag its foot , we seize on it , and carry it with its head against our face . his little lamb ! we feel we have get he . 
 when the drunken Kaffir lie by the road in the sun we draw his blanket over his head , and put green branch of milk - bush on it . his kaffir ; why should the sun hurt he ? 

 in the evening , when the cloud lift themselves like gate , and the red light shine through they , we cry ; for in such glory he will come , 

 and the hand that ache to touch he will hold he , and we shall see the beautiful hair and eye of our God . 

 " lift up your head , o ye gate ; and be ye lift up , ye everlaste door , and our king of glory shall come in ! " the purple flower , the little purple flower be his eye , look at we . we kiss they , and kneel alone on the flat , rejoice over they . 
 and the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for he , and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as a rose . if ever in our tearful , joyful ecstasy the poor , sleepy , half - dead devil should raise his head , we laugh at he . it be not his hour now . 
 " if there should be a hell , after all ! " he mutter . " if your God should be cruel ! if there should be no God ! if you should find out it be all imagination ! if " 

 we laugh at he . when a man sit in the warm sunshine , do you ask he for proof of it ? 

 he feel that be all . and we feel that be all . we want no proof of our God . we feel , we feel ! 

 do we believe in our God because the Bible tell we of he ? we believe in the Bible because he tell we of it . we feel he , we feel he , we feel that be all ! and the poor , half - swamp devil mutter 
 " but if the day should come when you do not feel ? " 
 and we laugh and cry he down . 
 " it will never come never , never , " and the poor Devil slink to sleep again , with his tail between his leg . fierce assertion many time repeat be hard to stand against . it be most wisely meet by silence . time separate the truth from the lie . so we dream on . 

 one day we go to town and to church . the townspeople rustle in in their silk , and the man in their sleek cloth , and settle themselves in their pew , and the light shin in through the window on the artificial flower in the 

 woman 's bonnet . we have the same miserable feeling that we have in a shop where all the clerk be very smart . we wish our Father have not   bring we to town , and we be out on the karroo . then the man in the pulpit begin to preach . his text be " he that believeth not shall be damn . " 

 the day before an atheist have die in the street , strike by lightning . 
 the man in the pulpit mention no name ; but he talk of " the hand of God make visible among we . " he tell we how , when the white stroke fall , quiver and naked , the soul flee , rob of his earthly filament , and lie at the footstool of God ; how over its head have be pour out the wrath of the Mighty One , whose existence it have deny ; and , quiver and terrify , it have flee to the everlasting night . 

 we , as we listen , half start up ; every drop of blood in our body have rush to our head . he lie ! he lie ! he lie ! that man in the 

 pulpit lie ! will no one stop he ? have none of they hear do none of they know , that when the poor , dark soul shut its eye on earth it open they in the still light of heaven ? that there be no wrath where God be ? that if one could once creep to the footstool of God , there be everlaste peace there ? while the atheist lie wonder and afraid , God bend down and say , " my child , 
 here 
 I be I , whom you have not know ; I , whom you have not believe in ; I be here . I send my messenger , the white sheet - lightning , to call you home . I be here . " 

 then the poor soul turn to the light its weakness and pain be go for ever . 
 have they not know , have they not hear , who it be rule ? 
 " for a little moment have I hide my face from thee ; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee , saith the Lord thy Redeemer . " 

 we mutter on to ourselves , till some one pull 

 we violently by the arm to remind we we be in church . we see nothing but our own idea . 

 presently every one turn to pray . there be six hundred soul lift themselves to the Everlasting Light . 

 behind we sit two pretty lady ; one hand her scent - bottle softly to the other , and a mother pull down her little girl 's frock . one lady drop her handkerchief ; a gentleman pick it up ; she blush . the woman in the choir turn softly the leaf of their tune - book , to be ready when the praying be do . it be as though they think more of the singing than the Everlasting Father . oh , would it not be more worship of he to sit alone in the karoo and kiss one little field flower that he have make ? be it not mockery ? then the thought come , " 
 what doest thou here , Elijah ? 
 " we who judge , what be we well than they ? rather worse . be it any excuse to say we be but a child and must come ? do God allow any soul to step in 

 between the spirit he make and himself ? what do we there in that place , where all the word to we seem lie of the All Father , and the worship a seeming . fill with horror , we turn and flee out of the place . on the pavement we smite our foot , and swear in our child 's soul , never again to enter those place where man come to worship . we be question afterwards . why be it we go out of church ? 


 how can we explain ? we stand silent . then we be press far , and we try to tell . upon that a head be shake solemnly at we . 
 no one 
 can think it wrong to go to the house of the Lord ; it be the idle excuse of a wicked boy . when will we think seriously of our soul , and love go to church ? we be wicked , very wicked . and we we slink away and go alone to cry . will it be always so ? if we hate and doubt , or believe and love , to our dearest , be we to seem always wicked , wicked , wicked ? nothing else ! 


 we do not yet know that in the soul 's search for truth the bitterness lie here ; the strive can not always hide itself among the thought ; soon or later it will clothe itself in outward action ; then it step in and divide between we and our near . all thing on earth have their price ; and for truth we pay the dearest . we barter it for love and sympathy . the road to honour be pave with thorn ; but on the path to truth , at every step you set your foot down on your own heart . 


 VI . 
 then at last a new time the time of wake : short , sharp , and not pleasant . 
 Sleep and dream exist on this condition that no one wake the dreamer . 

 and life take we up between her finger and thumb , shake we furiously , till our poor 

 nodding head be well - nigh roll from our shoulder , and she set we down a little hard on the bare earth , bruised and sore , but preternaturally wide awake . 

 we have say in our day of dream , " injustice and wrong be a seem ; pain be a shadow . our God , he be real , he who make all thing , and he only be Love . " 

 now life take we by the neck and show we a few other thing , new - make graf with the red sand fly about they ; eye that we love with the worm eat they ; evil man walk sleek and fat , and she say , " what do you think of these ? " we dare not say " nothing . " we feel they ! we feel they ! they be very real . but we try to lay our hand about and feel that other thing we feel before . in the dark night in the fuel - room we cry to our beautiful dream - god : " oh , let we come near you , and lie our head against your foot . now in our hour of need be near 

 we . " but he be not there ; he be go away . the old questioning Devil be there ; but he be not there ; he be go away . 

 we must have be awaken soon or later . the imagination can not always triumph over reality , the desire over truth . we must have be awaken . if it be do a little sharply , what matter ? it be do thoroughly . 


 VII . 
 and a new life begin for we a new time : the old look indeed like a long hot delirium , people with phantasy . 

 now we have no God . we have have two : the old God that our father hand down to we , that we hat , and never like : the new one that we make for ourselves , that we love ; but one day he flit away with the feeling that give he birth , and we see what he be make 

 of the shadow of our high ideal , crown and throne . now we have no God ; we sit down without any . 

 " the fool hath say in his heart , " there be no god.í " it may be so . Most thing say or write have be the work of fool . 

 this 
 thing be certain 
 he 
 be a fool who say , " no man hath say in his heart , there be no God . " 

 it have be say many thousand time in heart with profound earnestess and bitter faith . 
 we do not cry and weep ; we sit down with great cold eye and look at the world . we be not miserable . why should we be ? we eat and drink , and sleep all night ; but the dead be not colder . 
 and we say it slowly , but without sigh , " yes , we see it now : there be no God . " 

 and , we add , grow a little cold yet , " there be no justice . the ox die in the yoke , beneath its master 's whip ; it turn its anguish- 

 fill eye on the sunlight , but there be no sign of recompense to be make it . the black man be shoot like a dog , and it go well with the shooter . the innocent be accuse and the accuser triumph . if you will take the trouble to scratch the surface anywhere , you will see under the skin a sentient be writhe in impotent anguish . " 

 and , we say far , and our heart be as the heart of the dead for coldness , " there be no orderer and no order : all thing be drive about by a blind chance . " 

 what a soul drink in with its mother 's milk will not leave it in a day . from our early hour we have be teach that the thought of the heart , the shaping of the rain - cloud , the amount of wool that grow on a sheep 's back , the length of a drought , and the grow of the corn , depend on nothing that move immutable , deep at the heart of all thing ; but on the changeable will of a changeable being , whom our prayer can 

 alter . to we , from the beginning , nature have be but a poor plastic thing , to be toy with this way or that , as man happen to please his deity or not ; to go to church or not ; to say his prayer right or not ; to travel on a Sunday or not . be it possible for we in an instant to see Nature as she be the flow vestment of an unchanging reality ? when the soul break free from the arm of a superstition , bit of the claw and talon break themselves off in he . it be not the work of a day to squeeze they out . 

 and so , for we , the human - like driver and guider be go , all existence , as we look out at it with our chill , wonder eye , be an aimless rise and swell of shift water . in all that welter chaos we can see no spot so large as a man 's hand on which we may plant our foot . 

 whether a man believe in a human - like God or no be a small thing . it be a great and terrible when he look into the mental and physical world and see no relation between cause 

 and effect , no order , but a blind chance sporting . it be almost a mercy to cut his throat , if indeed he do not do it for himself . 

 we , however , do not cut our throat . to do so would imply some desire and feeling , and we have no desire and no feeling ; we be only cold . we do not wish to live , and we do not wish to die . one day a snake curl itself round the waist of a Kaffir woman . we take it in our hand , swing it round and round , and fle it on the ground dead . every one look at we with eye of admiration . we almost laugh . be it bravery to risk that for which we care nothing ? 
 in truth , nothing matter . this dirty little world full of confusion , and the bit of blue stretch overhead for a sky , be worthless . 

 Existence , if it be not a dream , be a great pot , and the Fate who stir it round care nothing what rise to the top and what go down , and laugh when the bubble burst . and we do not care . let it boil about . why should we 

 trouble ourselves ? nevertheless the physical sensation be real . hunger hurt , and thirst ; therefore we eat and drink . inaction pain we ; therefore we work like galley - slave . no one demand it , but we set ourselves to build a great dam in red sand beyond the graf . in the grey dawn before the sheep be let out we be work at it . all day , while the young ostrich we tend feed about we , we work on through the fierce heat . the people wonder what new spirit have seize we now . they do not know we be work for our life . we bear the great stone , and feel a satisfaction when we stagger under they , and be hurt by a pang that shoot through our chest . while we eat our dinner we carry on basket full of earth , as though the devil drive we . the Kaffir servant have a story that at night a witch and two white oxen come to help we . no wall , they say , could grow so quickly under one man 's hand . 


 at night , alone in our cabin , we sit no more brooding over the fire . what should we think 

 of now ? it be all emptiness . so we take the old arithmetic ; and the multiplication table , which with so much pain we learn long ago and forget directly , we learn now in a few hour , and never forget again . we take a strange satisfaction in work arithmetical problem . we pause in our building to cover the stone with figure and calculation . we save money for a Latin Grammar and an Algebra , and carry they about in our pocket , pore over they as over our Bible of old . we have think we be utterly stupid , incapable of remember anything , of learn anything . now we find that all be easy . have a new soul creep into this old body , that even our intellectual faculty be change ? we marvel ; not perceive that what a man expend in prayer and ecstasy he can not have over for acquire knowledge . you never shed a tear , or create a beautiful image , or quiver with emotion , but you pay for it at the other end of your nature . you have just 

 so much force : when the one channel run over the other run dry . 

 and we turn to Nature . all these year we have live beside she , and we have never see she ; and now we open our eye and look at she . 
 the rock have be to we a blur of brown : we bend over they , and the disorganised mass dissolve into a many - colour , many - shape , carefully - arrange form of existence . here mass of rainbow - tint crystal , half- fuse together ; there band of smooth grey and red methodically overlying each other . this rock here be cover with a delicate silver tracery , in some mineral , resemble leaf and branch ; there on the flat stone , on which we so often have sit to weep and pray , we look down , and see it cover with the fossil footprint of great bird , and the beautiful skeleton of a fish . we have often try to picture in our mind what the fossile remain of creature must be like , and all the while we sit on they . 


 the flat plain have be to we a reach of monotonous red . we look at it , and every handful of sand start into life . that wonderful black people , the ant , we learn to know ; see they make war and peace , play and work , and build their huge palace . that small people we make acquaintance with also who live in the flower . the bitto flower have be for we a mere blur of yellow ; we find its heart compose of a hundred perfect flower , the home of the tiny black people with red stripe , who move in and out in that little yellow city . every bluebell have its inhabitant . every day the karroo show we a new wonder sleep in its teem breast . on our way back to work we pause and stand to see the ground spider make its trap , bury itself in the sand , and then wait for the fall in of its enemy . far on walk a horn beetle , and near he start open the door of a spider , who peep out carefully , and quickly pull it down again . on a karroo - bush a green fly be lay her silver egg . we 

 carry they home , and see the shell pierce , the spotted grub come out , turn to a green fly , and go away . we be not satisfied with what nature show we , and we see something for ourselves . under the white hen we put a dozen egg , and break one daily , to see the white spot wax into the chicken . we be not excited or enthusiastic about it ; but a man must think of something if he be to live at all . so we plant seed in row on our dam - wall , and pull one up daily to see how it go with they . Allardeen bury her wonderful stone , and a golden palace spring up at her foot . we do far more . we put a brown seed in the earth , and a live thing start out before our eye start upward why , no more than Allardeen can we say start upward , and do not desist till it be high than our head , sparkle with dew in the early morning , glitter with yellow blossom , shake brown seed with little embryo soul on to the ground . we look at it solemnly , from the time it be two small 

 leaf peep above the ground and a soft white root , till we have to raise our face to look at it ; but we find no reason for that upward start . 

 we look into dead duck and lamb . in the evening we carry they home , spread newspaper on the floor , and lie work with they till midnight . with a start feeling near akin to ecstasy we open the lump of flesh call a heart , and find little door and string inside . we feel they , and put the heart away ; but every now and then return to look , and to feel they again . why we like they so we can hardly tell . 

 a gander drown itself in our dam . we take it out , and open it on the bank , and kneel , look at it . above be the organ divide by delicate tissue ; below be the intestine , artistically curve in a spiral form , and each tier cover by a delicate network of blood - vessel , stand out red against the faint blue background . each branch of the blood - vessel be 

 comprise of a trunk , bifurcate and rebifurcate into the most delicate , hair - like thread , symmetrically arrange . we be strike with its singular beauty . and , moreover and here we drop from our kneeling into a sit posture this also we remark : of that same exact shape and outline be our thorn - tree see against the sky in midwinter : of that shape also be delicate metallic tracery between our rock ; in that exact path do our water flow when without a furrow we lead it from the dam ; so shaped be the antler of the horn beetle . how be these thing relate that such deep union should exist between they all ? be it chance ? can it be ? or , be they not all the fine branch of one trunk , whose sap flow through we all ? that would explain it . we nod over the gander 's inside . 


 this thing we call existence ; be it not a something which have its root far down below in the dark , and its branch stretch far out 

 into the immensity above , which we among the branch can not see ? not a chance jumble ; a live thing , a whole , a 
 one 
 . 

 we nod over the gander ; then start up suddenly , look into the blue sky , throw the dead gander and the refuse into the dam , and go to work again . 
 and so , it come to pass in time , that the earth cease for we to be a weltering chaos . we walk in the great hall of the universe , our soul look up and round reverentially . nothing be despicable all be meaning - full ; nothing be small all be part of a whole , whose beginning and end we know not . the life that throb in we be a pulsation from it . 
 and so , it come to pass at last , that whereas the sky be at first a small blue rag stretch out over we , and so low that our hand might touch it , press down on we , it raise itself into an immeasurable blue arch over our head , and we begin to live again . 




 CHAPTER II . 
 waldo 's stranger . 

 waldo 
 lie on his stomach on the red sand . the small ostrich he herd wander about he , peck at the food he have cut , or at pebble and dry stick . on his right lie the graf ; to his leave the dam ; in his hand be a large wooden post cover with carving , at which he work . Doss lie before he , bask in the winter sunshine , and now and again cast an expectant glance at the corner of the near ostrich camp . the scrubby thorn - tree under which they lie yield no shade , but none be need in that glorious June weather , when in the hot part of the afternoon the sun be but pleasantly warm ; and 

 the boy carve on , not look up , yet conscious of the brown serene earth about he and the intensely blue sky above . 

 presently , at the corner of the camp , Em appear , bear a cover saucer in one hand and in the other a jug , with a cup in the top . she be grow into a premature little old woman , ridiculously fat , and wear long dress . the jug and saucer she put down on the ground before the dog and his master and drop down beside they herself , pant and out of breath . 
 " oh , Waldo ! as I come up the camp I meet some one on horseback ; and I do believe it must be the new man . " 
 the new man be an Englishman to whom the boer - woman have hire half the farm . 
 " Hum ! " say Waldo . 

 " he be quite young , " say em , " and he have brown hair , and beard curl close to his face , and such dark blue eye . and , Waldo , 

 I be so ashamed ! I be just look back to see , you know , and he happen just to be look back too , and we look right into each other 's face ; and he get red , and I get so red . " 

 " yes , " say Waldo . 
 " I must go now . perhaps he have bring we letter from the post from Lyndall . and you know he will have to stay with we till his house be build . I must get his room ready . good - bye ! " 
 she trip off again , and Waldo carve on at his post . Doss lie with his nose close to the cover saucer , and smell that some one have make nice little fat cake that afternoon . both be so intent on their occupation , that not till a horse 's hoof beat beside they in the sand do they look up to see a rider draw in his steed . 

 he be certainly not the stranger whom Em have describe . a dark , somewhat french - look little man of eight - and - twenty , rather stout , 

 with heavy , cloudy eye and point moustache . his horse be a fiery creature , well caparison ; a highly - finish saddle - bag hang from the saddle ; the man 's hand be glove , and he present the appearance an appearance rare on that farm of a well - dress gentleman . 


 in an uncommonly melodious voice he inquire whether he might be allow to remain there for an hour . Waldo direct he to the farm - house , but the stranger decline . he would merely rest under the tree , and give his horse water . he remove the saddle , and Waldo lead the animal away to the dam . when he return , the stranger have settle himself under the tree , with his back against the saddle . the boy offer he of the cake . he decline , but take a draught from the jug ; and Waldo lie down not far off , and fall to work again . it matter nothing if cold eye see it . it be not his sheep - shearing machine . with material love , as with human , we go mad once , love out , and 

 have do . we never get up the true enthusiasm a second time . this be but a thing he have make , labour over , love and like nothing more . 


 the stranger force himself low down in the saddle and yawn . it be a drowsy afternoon , and he object to travel in these out - of - the - world part . he like well civilized life , where at every hour of the day a man may look for his glass of wine , and his easy - chair , and paper ; where at night he may lock himself into his room with his book and a bottle of brandy , and taste joy mental and physical . the world say of he the all - knowing , omnipotent world , whom no lock can bar , who have the cat - like propensity of see well in the dark the world say that well than the book he love the brandy , and well than book or brandy , that which it have be well have he love less . but for the world he care nothing ; he smile blandly in its tooth . all life be an aimless dream ; if wine 

 and philosophy and woman keep the dream from become a nightmare , so much the well . it be all they be fit for , all they can be use for . there be another side to his life and thought , but of that the world know nothing and say nothing , as the way of the wise world be . 

 the stranger look from beneath his sleepy eyelid at the brown earth that stretch away , beautiful in spite of itself in that June sunshine ; look at the graf , the gable of the farm - house showing over the stone wall of the camp , at the clownish fellow at his foot , and yawn . but he have drunk of the hind 's tea , and must say something . 
 " your father 's place , I presume ? " he inquire sleepily . 
 " no ; I be only a servant . " 
 " dutch people ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " and you like the life ? " 
 the boy hesitate . 

 " on day like these . " 
 " and why on these ? " 
 the boy wait . 
 " they be very beautiful . " 
 the stranger look at he . it seem that as the fellow 's dark eye look across the brown earth they kindle with an intense satisfaction ; then they look back at the carving . 

 what have that creature , so coarse - clothe and clownish , to do with the subtle joy of the weather ? himself , white - handed and delicate , 
 he 
 might hear the music with shimmering sunshine and solitude play on the finely - string chord of nature ; but that fellow ! be not the ear in that great body too gross for such delicate muttering ? 

 presently he say , 
 " may I see what you work at ? " 

 the fellow hand his wooden post . it be by no mean lovely . the man and bird be almost grotesque in their laboured resemblance 

 to nature , and bore sign of patient thought . the stranger turn the thing over on his knee . 

 " where do you learn this work ? " 
 " I teach myself . " 
 " and these zigzag line represent " 
 " a mountain . " 
 the stranger look . 
 " it have some meaning , have it not ? " 
 the boy mutter confusedly , 
 " only thing . " 
 the questioner look down at he the huge , unwieldy figure , in size a man 's , in right of his child - like feature and curl hair a child 's ; and it hurt he it attract he and it hurt he . it be something between pity and sympathy . 
 " how long have you work at this ? " 
 " nine month . " 

 from his pocket the stranger draw his pocket - book , and take something from it . he could 

 fasten the post to his horse in some way , and throw it away in the sand at safe distance . 

 " will you take this for your carving ? " 
 the boy glance at the five - pound note and shake his head . 
 " no ; I can not . " 
 " you think it be worth more ? " ask the stranger with a little sneer . 
 he point with his thumb to a grave . 
 " no ; it be for he . " 
 " and who be there ? " ask the stranger . 
 " my father . " 
 the man silently return the note to his pocket - book , and give the carving to the boy ; and , draw his hat over his eye , compose himself to sleep . not be able to do so , after a while he glance over the fellow 's shoulder to watch he work . the boy carve letter into the back . 

 " if , " say the stranger , with his melodious voice , rich with a sweetness that never shew 

 itself in the clouded eye , " if for such a purpose , why write that upon it ? " 

 the boy glance round at he , but make no answer . he have almost forget his presence . 
 " you surely believe , " say the stranger , " that some day , soon or later , these graf will open , and those boer - uncle with their wife walk about here in the red sand , with the very fleshly leg with which they go to sleep ? you believe it , do you not ? then why say , " he sleep forever?í you believe he will stand up again ? " 
 " do you ? " ask the boy , lift for an instant his heavy eye to the stranger 's face . 
 half take aback , the stranger laugh . it be as though a curious little tadpole which he hold under his glass should suddenly lift its tail and begin to ask question . 

 " I ? no . " he laugh his short thick laugh . " I be a man who believe nothing , hop 

 nothing , fear nothing , feel nothing , trust nothing . I be beyond the pale of humanity ; no criterion of what you should be who live here among your bird and bush . " 

 the next moment the stranger be surprise by a sudden movement on the part of the fellow , which bring he close to the stranger 's foot . soon after he raise his carving and lay it across the man 's knee . 
 " yes , I will tell you , " he mutter ; " I will tell you all about it . " 

 he put his finger on the grotesque little mannikin at the bottom   ah ! that man who believe nothing , hop nothing , feel nothing ; 
 how he love he ! 
  , and , with eager finger the fellow move upward , explain over fantastic figure and mountain , to the crown bird from whose wing drop a feather . at the end he speak with broken breath short word , like one who utter thing of mighty import . 


 the stranger watch more the face than the 

 carving ; and there be now and then a show of white tooth beneath the moustache as he listen . 


 " I think , " he say blandly , when the boy have do , " that I partly understand you . it be something after this fashion , be it not ? "   he smile .   " in certain valley there be a hunter . "   he touch the grotesque little figure at the bottom .   " day by day he go to hunt for wild - fowl in the wood ; and it chance that once he stand on the shore of a large lake . while he stand wait in the rush for the coming of the bird , a great shadow fall on he , and in the water he see a reflection . he look up to the sky ; but the thing be go . then a burn desire come over he to see once again that reflection in the water , and all day he watch and wait ; but night come and it have not return . then he go home with his empty bag , moody and silent . his comrade come question about 

 he to know the reason , but he answer they nothing ; he sit alone and brood . then his friend come to he , and to he he speak . 

 " " I have see to - day , í he say , " that which I never see before a vast white bird , with silver wing outstretche , sail in the everlasting blue . and now it be as though a great fire burn within my breast . it be but a sheen , a shimmer , a reflection in the water ; but now I desire nothing more on earth than to hold her.í 
 his friend laugh . 
 " it be but a beam playing on the water , or the shadow of your own head . to - morrow you will forget she , í he say . 
 but to - morrow , and to - morrow , and to - morrow the hunter walk alone . he seek in the forest and in the wood , by the lake and among the rush , but he could not find she . he shoot no more wild fowl ; what be they to he ? 
 " what ail him?í say his comrade . 
 " he be mad , í say one . 

 " no ; but he be bad , í say another ; " he would see that which none of we have see , and make himself a wonder.í 
 " come , let we forswear his company , í say all . 
 so the hunter walk alone . 
 one night , as he wander in the shade , very heart - sore and weeping , an old man stand before he , grander and tall than the son of man . 
 " who be you?í ask the hunter . 
 " I be Wisdom , í answer the old man ; " but some man call I Knowledge . all my life I have grow in these valley ; but no man see I till he have sorrow much . the eye must be wash with tear that be to behold I ; and , accord as a man have suffer , I speak.í 
 and the hunter cry 
 " oh , you who have live here so long , tell I , what be that great wild bird I have see sail in the blue ? they would have I believe she be a dream ; the shadow of my own head.í 

 the old man smile . 
 " her name be Truth . he who have once see she never rest again . till death he desire her.í 
 and the hunter cry 
 " oh , tell I where I may find her.í 
 but the old man say , 
 " you have not suffer enough , í and go . 
 then the hunter take from his breast the shuttle of Imagination , and wound on it the thread of his Wishes ; and all night he sit and wove a net . 

 in the morning he spread the golden net upon the ground , and into it he throw a few grain of credulity , which his father have leave he , and which he keep in his breast pocket . they be like white puff - ball , and when you trod on they a brown dust fly out . then he sit by to see what would happen . the first that come into the net be a snow - white bird , with dove 's 

 eye , and he sing a beautiful song " a human - God ! a human - God ! a human - God!í it sing . the second that come be black and mystical , with dark , lovely eye , that look into the depth of your soul , and he sing only this " Immortality!í 

 and the hunter take they both in his arm , for he say 
 " they be surely of the beautiful family of truth.í 
 then come another , green and gold , who sing in a shrill voice , like one cry in the marketplace , " reward after death ! reward after Death!í 
 and he say 
 " you be not so fair ; but you be fair too , í and he take it . 
 and other come , brightly colour , sing pleasant song , till all the grain be finish . and the hunter gather all his bird together , and build a strong iron cage call a new creed , and put all his bird in it . 

 then the people come about dancing and singing . 
 " oh , happy hunter!í they cry . " oh , wonderful man ! oh , delightful bird ! oh , lovely songs!í 
 no one ask where the bird have come from , nor how they have be catch ; but they dance and sing before they . and the hunter too be glad , for he say 
 " surely truth be among they . in time she will moult her feather , and I shall see her snow - white form.í 
 but the time pass , and the people sing and dance ; but the hunter 's heart grow heavy . he creep alone , as of old , to weep ; the terrible desire have awaken again in his breast . one day , as he sit alone weeping , it chance that Wisdom meet he . he tell the old man what he have do . 
 and Wisdom smile sadly . 

 " many man , í he say , " have spread that net 

 for Truth ; but they have never find she . on the grain of credulity she will not feed ; in the net of wish her foot can not be hold ; in the air of these valley she will not breathe . the bird you have catch be of the brood of Lies . lovely and beautiful , but still lie ; Truth know they not.í 

 and the hunter cry out in bitterness 
 " and must I then sit still , to be devour of this great burning?í 
 and the old man say , 

 " listen , and in that you have suffer much and weep much , I will tell you what I know . he who set out to search for Truth must leave these valley of superstition for ever , take with he not one shred that have belong to they . alone he must wander down into the Land of Absolute Negation and Denial ; he must abide there ; he must resist temptation ; when the light break he must arise and follow it into the country of dry sunshine . the mountain of 

 stern reality will rise before he ; he must climb they : 
 beyond 
 they lie truth.í 

 " and he will hold she fast ! he will hold she in his hands!í the hunter cry . 
 Wisdom shake his head . 
 " he will never see she , never hold she . the time be not yet.í 
 " then there be no hope?í cry the hunter . 

 " there be this , í say wisdom : " some man have climb on those mountain ; circle above circle of bare rock they have scale ; and , wander there , in those high region , some have chance to pick up on the ground , one white , silver feather , drop from the wing of Truth . and it shall come to pass , í say the old man , raise himself prophetically and point with his finger to the sky , " it shall come to pass , that when enough of those silver feather shall have be gather by the hand of man , and shall have be weave into a cord , and the cord into a net , that in 
 that 

 net Truth may be capture . 
 nothing but truth can hold Truth . 
 í 

 the hunter arise . " I will go , í he say . 
 but Wisdom detain he . 

 " Mark you well who leave these valley 
 never 
 return to they . though he should weep tear of blood seven day and night upon the confine , he can never put his foot across they . left they be leave forever . upon the road which you would travel there be no reward offer . who go , go freely for the great love that be in he . the work be his reward.í 

 " I go , í say the hunter ; " but upon the mountain , tell I , which path shall I take?í 
 " I be the child of The - accumulate - Knowledge - of - Ages , í say the man ; " I can walk only where many man have tread . on these mountain few foot have pass ; each man strike out a path for himself . he go at his own peril : my voice he hear no more . I may follow after he , but can not go before him.í 

 then Knowledge vanish . 
 and the hunter turn . he go to his cage , and with his hand break down the bar , and the jagged iron tear his flesh . it be sometimes easy to build than to break . 
 one by one he take his plume bird and let they fly . but when he come to his dark - plume bird he hold it , and look into its beautiful eye , and the bird utter its low , deep cry " Immortality!í 
 and he say quickly , " I can not part with it . it be not heavy ; it eat no food . I will hide it in my breast ; I will take it with me.í and he bury it there and cover it over with his cloak . 
 but the thing he have hide grow heavy , heavy , heavy till it lie on his breast like lead . he could not move with it . then again he take it out and look at it . 
 " oh , my beautiful ! my heart 's own!í he cry , " may I not keep you?í 

 he open his hand sadly . 

 " go!í he say . " it may happen that in Truth 's song one note be like your ; but 
 I 
 shall never hear it.í 

 sadly he open his hand , and the bird fly from he forever . 
 then from the shuttle of imagination he take the thread of his wish , and throw it on the ground ; and the empty shuttle he put into his breast , for the thread be make in those valley , but the shuttle come from an unknown country . he turn to go , but now the people come about he , howl . 
 " Fool , hound , demente lunatic!í they cry . " how dare you break your cage and let the bird fly?í 
 the hunter speak ; but they would not hear he . 

 " Truth ! who be she ? can you eat she ? can you drink she ? who have ever see she ? your bird be real : all could hear they sing ! 

 oh , fool ! vile reptile ! atheist!í they cry , " you pollute the air.í 

 " Come , let we take up stone and stone he , í cry some . 
 " what affair be it of ours?í say other . " let the idiot go , í and go away . but the rest gather up stone and mud and throw at he . at last , when he be bruise and cut , the hunter creep away into the wood . and it be evening about he . " 
 at every word the stranger speak the fellow 's eye flash back on he yes , and yes , and yes ! the stranger smile . it be almost worth the trouble of exert oneself , even on a lazy afternoon , to win those passionate flash , more thirsty and desiring than the love - glance of a woman . 

 " he wander on and on , " say the stranger , " and the shade grow deep . he be on the border now of the land where it be always night . then he step into it , and there be no light there . with his hand he grope ; 

 but each branch as he touch it break off , and the earth be cover with cinder . at every step his foot sink in , and a fine cloud of impalpable ash fly up into his face ; and it be dark . so he sit down upon a stone and bury his face in his hand , to wait in the Land of Negation and Denial till the light come . 

 and it be night in his heart also . 

 then from the marsh to his right and leave cold mist arise and close about he . a fine , imperceptible rain fall in the dark , and great drop gather on his hair and clothe . his heart beat slowly , and a numbness creep through all his limb . then , look up , two merry wisp light come dance . he lift his head to look at they . Nearer , nearer they come . so warm , so bright , they dance like star of fire . they stand before he at last . from the centre of the radiating flame in one look out a woman 's face , laugh , dimple , with streaming yellow hair . in the centre of the other be merry 

 laugh ripple , like the bubble on a glass of wine . they dance before he . 

 " who be you , í ask the hunter , " who alone come to I in my solitude and darkness?í 
 " we be the twin Sensuality , í they cry . " our father 's name be Human - Nature , and our mother 's name be Excess . we be as old as the hill and river , as old as the first man ; but we never die , í they laugh . 
 " oh , let I wrap my arm about you!í cry the first ; " they be soft and warm . your heart be freeze now , but I will make it beat . oh , come to me!í 
 " I will pour my hot life into you , í say the second ; " your brain be numb , and your limb be dead now ; but they shall live with a fierce free life . oh , let I pour it in!í 

 " oh , follow we , í they cry , " and live with we . Nobler heart than yours have sit here in this darkness to wait , and they have come to we and we to they ; and they have never leave 

 we , never . all else be a delusion , but 
 we 
 be real , we be real . truth be a shadow ; the valley of superstition be a farce : the earth be of ash , the tree all rotten ; but we feel we we live ! you can not doubt we . feel we how warm we be ! oh , come to we ! oh , live with us!í 

 Nearer and near round his head they hover , and the cold drop melt on his forehead . the bright light shoot into his eye , dazzle he , and the frozen blood begin to run . and he say 
 " yes , why should I die here in this awful darkness ? they be warm , they be warm!í and he stretch out his hand to take they . 
 then in a moment there arise before he the image of the thing he have love , and his hand drop to his side . 
 " oh , come to us!í they cry . 
 but he bury his face . 

 " you dazzle my eye , í he cry , " you make my heart warm ; but you can not give I what 

 I desire . I will wait here wait till I die ; but I will not follow you . go!í 

 he cover his face with his hand and would not listen ; and when he look up again they be two twinkle star , that vanish in the distance . 
 and the long , long night roll on . 
 all who leave the valley of superstition pass through that dark land ; but some go through it in a few day , some linger there for month , some for year , and some die there . 
 at last for the hunter a faint light play along the horizon , and he rise to follow it.í 
 the boy have creep close ; his hot breath almost touch the stranger 's hand ; a mystic wonder fill his eye . 

 " he reach that light at last , and step into the broad sunshine , í say the stranger . " then before he rise the almighty mountain of Dry - fact and reality . the clear sunshine play on they , and the top be lose in 

 the cloud . at the foot many path run up . an exultant cry burst from the hunter . he choose the straight and begin to climb ; and the rock and ridge resound with his song . they have exaggerate ; after all , it be not so high , nor be the road so steep ! a few day , a few week , a few month at most , and then the top ! not one feather only would he pick up ; he would gather all that other man have find weave the net capture truth hold she fast touch she with his hand clasp she ! 


 he laugh in the merry sunshine , and sing loud . victory be very near . nevertheless , after a while the path grow steep . he need all his breath for climbing , and the singing die away . on the right and leave rise huge rock , devoid of lichen or moss , and in the lava - like earth chasm yawn . here and there he see a sheen of white bone . now too the path begin to grow less and 

 less marked ; then it become a mere trace , with a footmark here and there ; then it cease altogether . he sing no more , but strike forth a path for himself , until it reach a mighty wall of rock , smooth and without break , stretch as far as the eye could see . " I will rear a stair against it ; and , once this wall climb , I shall be almost there , í he say bravely ; and set to work . with his shuttle of imagination he dig out stone ; but half of they would not fit , and sometimes half a month 's work would roll down because those below be ill choose . but the hunter work on , say always to himself , " once this wall climb , I shall be almost there . this great work ended!í 


 at last he come out upon the top , and he look about he . far below roll the white mist over the valley of superstition , and above tower the mountain . they have seem low before ; they be of an immeasurable height now , from crown to foundation surround by 

 wall of rock , that rise tier above tier in mighty circle . upon they play the eternal sunshine . he utter a wild cry . when he rise from the earth on which he have fall , his face be white . in absolute silence he walk on . he be very silent now . in those high region the rarefied air be hard to breathe by those bear in the valley ; every breath he draw hurt he , and the blood ooze out from the tip of his finger . before the next wall of rock he begin to work . the height of this seem infinite , and he say nothing . the sound of his tool rang night and day upon the iron rock into which he cut step . time and time , and again time , pass over he , yet he work on ; but the wall tower up above he to heaven . sometimes he pray that a little moss or lichen might spring up on those bare wall to be a companion to he ; but it never come . 


 and the year roll on ; he count they 

 by the step he have cut a few for a year only a few . he sing no more ; he say no more , " I will do this , or thatí he only work . and at night , when the twilight settle down , there look out at he from the hole and crevice in the rock strange wild face . 

 " stop your work , you lonely man , and speak to we , í they cry . 
 " my salvation be in work . if I should stop but for one moment you would creep down upon I , í he reply . and they put out their long neck far . 

 " look down into the crevice at your foot , í they say . " see what lie there white bone ! as brave and strong a man as you climb to these rocks.í and he look up . he see there be no use ; he would never hold Truth , never see she , never find she . so he lie down here , for he be very tired . he go to sleep for ever . he put himself to sleep . sleep be very tranquil . you be not lonely when you 

 be asleep , neither do your hand ache , nor your heart . and the hunter laugh between his teeth.í and the hunter laugh between his tooth . 

 " have I tear from my heart all that be dear ; have I wander alone in the land of night ; have I resist temptation ; have I dwelt where the voice of my kind be never hear , and labour alone , to lie down and be food for you , ye harpies?í 
 he laugh fiercely ; and the Echoes of Despair slunk away , for the laugh of a brave , strong heart be as a death blow to they . 
 nevertheless they creep out again and look at he . 
 " do you know that your hair be white?í they say , " that your hand begin to tremble like a child 's ? do you see that the point of your shuttle be go ? it be crack already . if you should ever climb this stair , í they say , " it will be your last . you will never climb another.í 


 and he answer , " 
 I know it ! 
 í and work on . 

 the old , thin hand cut the stone ill and jaggedly , for the finger be stiff and bent . the beauty and the strength of the man be go . 
 at last , an old , wizene , shrunken face look out above the rock . it see the eternal mountain rise with wall to the white cloud ; but its work be do . 
 the old hunter fold his tired hand and lie down by the precipice where he have work away his life . it be the sleep time at last . below he over the valley roll the thick white mist . once it break ; and through the gap the die eye look down on the tree and field of their childhood . from afar seem borne to he the cry of his own wild bird , and he hear the noise of people sing as they dance . and he think he hear among they the voice of his old comrade ; and he see far off the sunlight shine on his early home . and great tear gather in the hunter 's eye . 

 " ah ! they who die there do not die alone , í he cry . 
 then the mist roll together again ; and he turn his eye away . 

 " I have seek , í he say , " for long year I have labour ; but I have not find she . I have not rest , I have not repine , and I have not see she ; now my strength be go . where I lie down wear out other man will stand , young and fresh . by the step that I have cut they will climb ; by the stair that I have build they will mount . they will never know the name of the man who make they . at the clumsy work they will laugh ; when the stone roll they will curse I . but they will mount , and on 
 my 
 work ; they will climb , and by 
 my 
 stair ! they will find she , and through I ! and no man liveth to himself , and no man dieth to himself.í 


 the tear roll from beneath the shrivelled eyelid . if Truth have appear above he 

 in the cloud now he could not have see she . 

 " my soul hear their glad step come , í he say ; " and they shall mount ! they shall mount!í he raise his shrivelled hand to his eye . 
 then slowly from the white sky above , through the still air , come something fall , fall , fall . softly it flutter down , and drop on to the breast of the die man . he feel it with his hand . it be a feather . he die hold it . " 
 the boy have shade his eye with his hand . on the wood of the carving great drop fall . the stranger must have laugh outright , or remain silent and somewhat solemn . 
 " how do you know it ? " the boy whisper at last . " it be not write there not on that wood . how do you know it ? " 

 " certainly , " say the stranger , " the whole of the story be not write here , but it be suggest . and the attribute of all true art , the high and 

 the low , be this that it say more than it say , and take you away from itself . it be a little door that open into an infinite hall where you may find what you please . man , think to detract , say , " People read more in this or that work of genius than be ever write in it , í not perceive that they pay the high compliment . if we pick up the finger and nail of a real man , we can decipher a whole story could almost reconstruct the creature again , from head to foot . but half the body of a Mumboo - jumbow idol leave we utterly in the dark as to what the rest be like . we see what we see , but nothing more . there be nothing so universally intelligible as truth . it have a thousand meaning , and suggest a thousand more , all true . though a man should carve it into matter with the least possible manipulative skill , it will yet find interpreter . it be the soul that look out with burn eye through the most gross fleshly filament . it be that which be universal . Whosoever should 

 portray truly the life and death of a little flower , its birth , suck in of nourishment , waxing , reproduction of its kind , wither and vanishing , would have shape a symbol of all existence . all true fact of nature or the mind be relate . your little carving represent a mental fact as it really be , therefore fifty different true story might be read from it . what your work want be not truth , but beauty of external form , the other half of art . skill may come in time , but you will have to work hard . the love of beauty and the desire for it must be bear in a man ; the skill to reproduce it he must make . " 

 have deliver himself of these paradox , for the purpose of observe their effect upon his listener , the stranger break off the end of a cigar and light it . 
 " all my life I have long to see you , " the boy say . 

 he lift the heavy wood from the stranger 's knee and draw yet near he . in the dog - like 

 manner of his drawing near there be something superbly ridiculous , unless one chance to view it in another light . presently the stranger say , whiffing , " do something for I . " 

 the boy start up . 
 " no ; stay where you be . I do not   want you to go anywhere ; I want you to talk to I . tell I what you have be do all your life . " 
 the boy slink down again . would that the man have ask he to root up bush with his hand for his horse to feed on ; or to run to the far end of the plain for the fossil that lie there ; or to gather the flower that grow on the far low hill ; he would have run and be back quickly but now ! 
 " I have never do anything , " he say . 
 " then tell I of that nothing . I like to know what other folk have be do whose word I can believe . it be interesting . what be the first thing you ever want very much ? " 

 the boy wait to remember , then begin 

 hesitatingly , but soon the word flow . in the small past we find an inexhaustible mine when once we begin to dig at it . we stare ourselves at the thing we draw forth when for another we disturb the day of old . 

 a confused , disorder story it be the little make large and the large small , and nothing show its inward meaning . it be not till the past have recede many step that before the clear eye it fall into co - ordinate picture . it be not till the I we tell of have cease to exist , that it take its place among other objective reality , and find its true niche in the picture . the present and the near past be a confusion , whose mean flash on we as it slink away into the distance . 
 the stranger light one cigar from the end of another , and puff and listen , with half - close eye . 
 " I will remember more to tell you if you like , " say the boy . 

 he speak with that extreme gravity common to all very young thing who feel deeply . it be not till twenty that we learn to be in deadly earnest and to laugh . the stranger nod , while the fellow seek for something more to relate . he would tell all to this man of his all that he know , all that he have feel , his inmost sore thought . suddenly the stranger turn upon he . 
 " boy , " he say , " you be happy to be here . " 
 Waldo look at he . be his delightful one ridicule he ? here , with this brown earth and these low hill ! while the rare wonderful world lie all beyond they ! fortunate to be here ! 
 the stranger read his glance . 

 " yes , " he say ; " here with the karroo - bush and red sand . you wonder what I mean ? to all who have be bear in the old faith there come a time of danger , when the old slip from we , and we have not yet plant our foot on the new ; when the voice from Sinai 

 thunder no more , and the still small voice of reason be not yet hear . we have prove the religion our mother feed we on to be a delusion ; in our bewilderment we see no rule by which to guide our step day by day ; and yet every day we must step somewhere . we have never once be teach by word or act to distinguish between religion and the moral law on which it have artfully fasten itself , and from which it have suck its vitality . when we have drag down the weed and creeper that cover the solid wall and have find they to be rotten wood , we imagine the wall itself to be rotten wood too . we find it be solid and stand only when we fall headlong against it . we have be teach that all right and wrong originate in the will of an irresponsible being . it be some time before we see how the inexorable " thou shalt and shalt not , í be carve into the nature of thing . this be the time of danger . 


 " in the end experience will inevitably teach 

 we that the law for a wise and noble life have a foundation infinitely deep than the fiat of any being , God or man , even in the groundwork of human nature . she will teach we that whoso sheddeth man 's blood , though by man his blood be not shed , though no man avenge and no hell await ; yet every drop shall blister on his soul and eat in the name of the dead . she will teach that whoso take a love not lawfully his own , gather a flower with a poison on its petal ; that whoso revenge , strike with a sword that have two edge one for his adversary , one for himself ; that who live to himself be dead , though the ground be not yet on he ; that who wrong another cloud his own sun ; and that who sin in secret stand accurse and condemn before the one Judge who deal eternal justice his own all - know self . 


 " experience 
 will 
 teach we this , and reason will show we why it 
 must 
 be so ; but at first the world swing before our eye , and no voice cry 

 out , " this be the way , walk ye in it!í boy , you be happy to be here ! when the suspense fill you with pain you build stone wall and dig earth for relief . other have stand where you stand to - day , and have feel as you feel ; and another relief have be offer they , and they have take it . 

 " when the day have come when they have see the path in which they might walk , they have not the strength to follow it . habit have fasten on they from which nothing but death can free they ; which cling close than his sacerdotal sanctimony to a priest ; which feed on the intellect like a worm sap energy , hope , creative power , resolution , all that make a man high than a beast leave only the power to yearn , to regret , and to sink lower in the abyss . 

 " boy , " he say , and the listener be not more unsmiling now than the speaker , " you be happy to be here ! stay where you be . if you ever pray , let it be only the one old prayer 

 " lead we not into temptation.í live on here quietly . the time may yet come when you will be that which other man have hop to be and never will be now . " 

 the stranger rise , shake the dust from his sleeve , and half - ashamed of his earnestness , look across the bush for his horse . 
 " we should have be on our way already , " he say . " we shall have a long ride in the dark to - night . " 
 Waldo hasten to fetch the animal ; but he return lead it slowly . the soon it come the soon would its rider be go . 
 the stranger be open his saddle - bag , in which be a bright french novel and an old brown volume . he take the last and hold it out to the boy . 

 " it may be of some help to you . it be a gospel to I when I first fall on it . you must not expect too much , " he say ; " but it may give you a centre round which to organize 

 your confused idea . we of this generation be not destine to eat and be satisfied as our father be ; but to search , and be hungry . " 

 he smile his automaton smile , and rebuttone the bag . Waldo thrust the book into his breast , and while he saddle the horse the stranger make inquiry as to the nature of the road and the distance to the next farm . 
 when the bag be fix Waldo take up his wooden post and begin to fasten it on to the saddle , tie it with the little blue cotton handkerchief from his neck . the stranger look on in silence . when it be do the boy hold the stirrup for he to mount . 
 " what be your name ? " he inquire , unglove his right hand when he be in the saddle . 
 the boy reply . 
 " well , I trust we shall meet again some day , soon or later . " 

 he shake hand with the ungloved hand ; then draw on the glove , touch his horse , and 

 ride slowly away . the boy stand to watch he . 

 once when the stranger have go half across the plain he look back . 
 " poor devil , " he say , smile and stroke his moustache . then he look to see if the little blue handkerchief be still safely knot . " poor devil ! " 
 he smile , and then he sigh wearily , very wearily . 
 and Waldo wait till the move speck have disappear on the horizon ; then he stoop and kiss passionately a hoof - mark in the sand . then he call his young bird together , and put his book under his arm , and walk home along the stone wall . there be a rare beauty to he in the sunshine that evening . 


 END of VOL . I. 




 CHAPTER III . 
 GREGORY ROSE find his AFFINITY . 

 the 
 new man , Gregory Rose , sit at the door of his dwelling , his arm fold , his leg cross , and a profound melancholy seem to rest over his soul . his house be a little square daub - and - wattle building , far out in the " karroo , " two mile from the homestead . it be cover outside with a sombre coating of brown mud , two little pane be let into the wall for window . behind it be the " sheep - kraal , " and to the right a large dam , now principally 

 contain baked mud . far off the little " kopje " conceal the homestead , and be not itself an object conspicuous enough to relieve the dreary monotony of the landscape . 

 before the door sit Gregory Rose in his shirt - sleeve , on a camp - stool , and ever and anon he sigh deeply . there be that in his countenance for which even his depressing circumstance fail to account . again and again he look at the little " kopje , " at the milk - pail at his side , and at the brown pony , who a short way off crop the dry bush and sigh . 

 presently he rise and go into his house . it be one tiny room , the whitewash wall profusely cover with print cut from the " Illustrated London Newsí , and in which there be a noticeable preponderance of female face and figure . a stretcher fill one end of the hut , and a rack for a gun and a little hang look - glass diversify the gable opposite , while 

 in the centre stand a chair and table . all be scrupulously neat and clean , for Gregory keep a little duster fold in the corner of his table - drawer , just as he have see his mother do , and every morning before he go out he say his prayer , and make his bed , and dust the table and the leg of the chair , and even the picture on the wall and the gun - rack . 

 on this hot afternoon he take from beneath his pillow a watch - bag , make by his sister Jemima , and take out the watch . only half - past four ! with a suppress groan he drop it back and sit down beside the table . half - past four ! presently he rouse himself . he would write to his sister Jemima . he always write to she when he be miserable . she be his safety - valve . he forget she when he be happy ; but he use she when he be wretche . 

 he take out ink and paper ; there be a family crest and motto on the latter , for the 

 Roses since come to the colony have discover that they be of distinguished lineage . Old Rose himself , an honest english farmer , know nothing of his noble descent ; but his wife and daughter know especially his daughter . there be Roses in England who keep a park and date from the Conquest . so the colonial " Rose Farm " become " Rose Manor " in remembrance of the ancestral domain , and the claim of the Roses to noble blood be establish in their own mind at least . 

 Gregory take up one of the white , crested sheet ; but on deep reflection he determine to take a pink one , as more suitable to the state of his feeling . he begin 
 " Kopje Alone , 
 " Monday afternoon . 
 " MY DEAR jemina " 

 then he look up into the little glass opposite . it be a youthful face reflect there , 

 with curl brown beard and hair ; but in the dark blue eye there be a look of languid longing that touch he . he re - dip his pen and write , 

 " when I look up into the little glass that hang opposite I , I wonder if that change and sad face " 
 here he sit still and reflect . it sound almost as if he might be conceited or unmanly to be look at his own face in the glass . no , that would not do . so he look for another pink sheet and begin again . 






 " Kopje Alone , 
 " Monday afternoon . 


 " DEAR SISTER , 

 " 
 it 
 be hardly six month since I leave you to come to this spot , yet could you now see I I know what you would say , I know what mother would say " can that be our Greg that thing with the strange look in his eyes?í 


 " yes , Jemima , it be your Greg , and the 

 change have be come over I ever since I come here ; but it be great since yesterday . you know what sorrow I have pass through , Jemima ; how unjustly I be always treat at school , the master keep I back and call I a blockhead , though , as they themselves allow , I have the good memory of any boy in the school , and could repeat whole book from begin to end . you know how cruelly father always use I , call I a noodle and a milksop , just because he could not   understand my fine nature . you know how he have make a farmer of I instead of a minister , as I ought to have be ; you know it all , Jemima ; and how I have bear it all , not as a woman , who whine for every touch , but as a man should in silence . 


 " but there be thing , there be 
 a 
 thing , which the soul long to pour forth into a kindre ear . 

 " dear sister , have you ever know what it be to keep want and want and want to kiss some one 's mouth , and you may not ; to touch some one 's hand , and you can not ? I be in love , Jemima ! 

 " the old Dutch - woman from whom I hire this 

 place have a little step - daughter , and her name begin with 
 e 
 . 


 " she be English . I do not know how her father come to marry a boer - woman . it make I feel so strange to put down that letter , that I can hardly go on write 
 e 
 . I have   love she ever since I come here . for week I have not be able to eat or drink ; my very tobacco when I smoke have no taste ; and I can remain for no more than five minute in one place , and sometimes feel as though I be really go mad . 


 " every evening I go there to fetch my milk . yesterday she give I some coffee . the spoon fall on the ground . she pick it up ; when she give it I her finger touch mine . jemima , I do not know if I fancy it I shiver hot , and she shiver too ! I think , " it be all right ; she will be mine ; she love me!í just then , Jemima , in come a fellow , a great , coarse fellow , a german a ridiculous fellow , with curl right down to his shoulder ; it make one sick to look at he . he be only a servant of the boer - woman 's , and a low , vulgar , uneducated 

 thing , that be never be to boarding - school in his life . he have be to the next farm seek sheep . when he come in she say , " good evening , Waldo . have some coffee!í 
 and she kiss he 
 . 

 " all last night I hear nothing else but " have some coffee ; have some coffee.í if I go to sleep for a moment I dream that her finger be press mine ; but when I wake with a start I hear she say , " good evening , Waldo . have some coffee!í 
 " be this madness ? 
 " I have not eat a mouthful to - day . this evening I go and propose to she . if she refuse I I shall go and kill myself to - morrow . there be a dam of water close by . the sheep have drink most of it up , but there be still enough if I tie a stone to my neck . 

 " it be a choice between death and madness . I can endure no more . if this should be the last letter you ever get from I , think of I tenderly , and forgive I . without her life would be a howl wilderness , a long tribulation . she be my affinity ; the one love of 

 my life , of my youth , of my manhood ; my sunshine ; my God - give blossom . 



 " " they never love who dream that they love once , 
 and who saith , " I love once " ? 
 not angel , whose deep eye look down through realm of light!í 


 " your disconsolate brother , on what be , in all probability , the last and distracted night of his life . 

 " Gregory Nazianzen Rose . 

 " P.S. tell mother to take care of my pearl stud . I leave they in the wash - hand - stand drawer . do not   let the child get hold of they . 
 " P.P.S. I shall take this letter with I to the farm . if I turn down one corner you may know I have be accept ; if not , you may know it be all up with your heart - break brother . 

 " G.N.R. " 






 Gregory , have finish this letter , read it over with much approval , put it in an envelope , 

 address it , and sit contemplate the ink - pot , somewhat relieve in mind . 

 the evening turn out chilly and very windy after the day 's heat . from afar off , as Gregory near the homestead on the brown pony , he could distinguish a little figure in a little red cloak at the door of the cow - kraal . Em lean over the pole that bar the gate , and watch the froth milk run through the black finger of the herdsman , while the unwilling cow stand with tethered head by the milk pole . she have throw the red cloak over her own head , and hold it under her chin with a little hand , to keep from her ear the wind , that playfully shake it , and toss the little fringe of yellow hair into her eye . 
 " be it not too cold for you to be stand here ? " say Gregory , come softly close to she . 

 " oh , no ; it be so nice . I always come to watch the milking . that red cow with the 

 short horn be bring up the calf of the white cow that die . she love it so just as if it be her own . it be so nice to see her lick its little ear . just look ! " 

 " the cloud be black . I think it be go to rain to - night , " say Gregory . 
 " yes , " answer Em , look up as well as she could for the little yellow fringe . 
 " but I be sure you must be cold , " say Gregory , and put his hand under the cloak , and find there a small fist double up , soft , and very warm . he hold it fast in his hand . 

 " oh , Em , I love you well than all the world besides ! tell I , 
 do 
 you love I a little ? " 

 " yes , I do , " say Em , hesitating , and try softly to free her hand . 
 " well than everything ; well than all the world , darling ? " he ask , bend down so low that the yellow hair be blow into his eye . 

 " I do not   know , " say Em , gravely . " I do love you very much ; but I love my cousin who be at school , and Waldo , very much . you see I have know they so long ! " 
 " oh , Em , do not talk to I so coldly ! " Gregory cry , seize the little arm that rest on the gate , and press it till she be half afraid . the herdsman have move away to the other end of the " kraal " now , and the cow , busy with their calf , take no notice of the little human farce . " em , if you talk so to I I will go mad ! you must love I , love I well than all ! you must give yourself to I . I have love you since that first moment when I see you walk by the stone wall with the jug in your hand . you be make for I , create for I ! I will love you till I die ! oh , Em , do not be so cold , so cruel to I ! " 

 he hold her arm so tightly that her finger relax their hold , and the cloak flutter down 

 on to the ground , and the wind play more roughly than ever with the little yellow head . 

 " I do love you very much , " she say ; " but I do not know if I want to marry you . I love you well than Waldo , but I can not   tell if I love you well than Lyndall . if you would let I wait for a week , I think perhaps I could tell you . " 
 Gregory pick up the cloak and wrap it round she . 

 " if you could but love I as I love you , " he say ; " but no woman 
 can 
 love as a man can . I will wait till Saturday . I will not once come near you till then . good - bye ! oh , Em , " he say , turn again , and twin his arm about she , and kiss she surprised little mouth , " if you be not my wife I can not live . I have never love another woman , and I never shall ! never , never ! " 

 " you make I afraid , " say em . " come , let we go , and I will fill your pail . " 

 " I want no milk . good - bye ! you will not see I again till Saturday . " 
 late that night , when every one else have go to bed , the yellow - haired little woman stand alone in the kitchen . she have come to fill the kettle for the next morning 's coffee , and now stand before the fire . the warm reflection light the grave old - womanish little face , that be so unusually thoughtful this evening . 

 " well than all the world ; well than everything ; he love I well than everything ! " she say the word aloud , as if they be more easy to believe if she speak they so . she have give out so much love in her little life , and have get none of it back with interest . now one say , " I love you well than all the world . " one love she well than she love he . how suddenly rich she be . she keep clasp and unclasp her hand . so a beggar feel who fall asleep on the pavement wet and hungry , 

 and who wake in a palace - hall with servant and light , and a feast before he . of course the beggar 's be only a dream , and he wake from it ; and this be real . 

 Gregory have say to she , " I will love you as long as I live . " she say the word over and over to herself like a song . 
 " I will send for he to - morrow , and I will tell he how I love he back , " she say . 
 but Em need not to send for he . Gregory discover on reach home that Jemima 's letter be still in his pocket . and , therefore , much as he dislike the appearance of vacillation and weakness , he be oblige to be at the farm - house before sunrise to post it . 
 " if I see she , " Gregory say , " I shall only bow to she . she shall see that I be a man , one who keep his word . " 

 as to Jemima 's letter , he have turn down one corner of the page , and then turn it back , 

 leav- 
 leave 


 ing a deep crease . that would show that he be neither accept nor reject , but that matter be in an intermediate condition . it be a more poetical way then put it in plain word . 

 Gregory be barely in time with his letter , for Waldo be start when he reach the homestead , and Em be on the door - step to see he off . when he have give the letter , and Waldo have go , Gregory bow stiffly and prepare to remount his own pony , but somewhat slowly . it be still early ; none of the servant be about . Em come up close to he and put she little hand softly on his arm as he stand by his horse . 
 " I do love you well of all , " she say . she be not frighten now , however much he kiss she . " I wish I be beautiful and nice , " she add , look up into his eye as he hold she against his breast . 

 " my darling , to I you be more beautiful 

 than all the woman in the world ; dearer to I than everything it hold . if you be in hell I would go after you to find you there ! if you be dead , though my body move , my soul would be under the ground with you . all life as I pass with you in my arm will be perfect to I . it will pass , pass like a ray of sunshine . " 

 em think how beautiful and grand his face be as she look up into it . she raise her hand gently and put it on his forehead . 
 " you be so silent , so cold , my Em , " he cry . " have you nothing to say to I ? " 
 a little shade of wonder fill her eye . 
 " I will do everything you tell I , " she say . 
 what else could she say ? her idea of love be only service . 

 " then , my own precious one , promise never to kiss that fellow again . I can not bear that you should love any one but I . you must not ! I will not have it ! if every relation I 

 have in the world be to die to - morrow , I would be quite happy if I still only have you ! my darling , my love , why be you so cold ? promise I not to love he any more . if you ask 
 I 
 to do anything for 
 you 
 , I would do it , though it cost my life . " 

 em put her hand very gravely round his neck . 
 " I will never kiss he , " she say , " and I will try not to love any one else . but I do not know if I will be able . " 

 " oh , my darling , I think of 
 you 
 all night , all day . I think of nothing else , love , nothing else , " he say , fold his arm about she . 

 Em be a little conscience - stricken ; even that morning she have find time to remember that in six month her cousin would come back from school , and she have think to remind Waldo of the lozenge for his cough , even when she see Gregory come . 


 " I do not know how it be , " she say humbly , nestle to he , " but I can not love you so much as you love I . perhaps it be because I be only a woman ; but I 
 do 
 love you as much as I can . " 

 now the Kaffir maid be come from the hut . he kiss she again , eye and mouth and hand , and leave she . 
 Tant ' Sannie be well satisfied when tell of the betrothment . she herself contemplate marriage within the year with one or other of her numerous " vrijer , " and she suggest that the wedding might take place together . 
 em set to work busily to prepare her own household linen and wedding garment . Gregory be with her daily , almost hourly , and the six month which elapse before Lyndall 's return pass , as he felicitously phrase it , " like a summer night , when you be dream of some one you love . " 

 late one evening , Gregory sit by his little love , turn the handle of her machine as she draw her work through it , and they talk of the change they would make when the boer - woman be go , and the farm belong to they alone . there should be a new room here , and a kraal there . so they chat on . suddenly Gregory drop the handle , and impress a fervent kiss on the fat hand that guide the linen . 
 " you be so beautiful , em , " say the lover . " it come over I in a flood suddenly how I love you . " 
 em smile . 

 " Tant ' Sannie say when I be her age no one will look at I ; and it be true . my hand be as short and broad as a duck 's foot , and my forehead be so low , and I have not   any nose . I 
 can not 
 be pretty . " 

 she laugh softly . it be so nice to think he should be so blind . 

 " when my cousin come to - morrow you will see a beautiful woman , Gregory , " she add presently . " she be like a little queen : her shoulder be so upright , and her head look as though it ought to have a little crown upon it . you must come to see she to - morrow as soon as she come . I be sure you will love she . " 

 " of course I shall come to see she , since she be your cousin ; but do you think I could 
 ever 
 think any woman as lovely as I think you ? " 

 he fix his seethe eye upon she . 
 " you could not help see that she be pretty , " say Em , slip she right hand into his ; " but you will never be able to like any one so much as you like I . " 

 afterward , when she wish her lover good night , she stand upon the doorstep to call a greeting after he ; and she wait , as she always 

 do , till the brown pony 's hoof become inaudible behind the " kopje . " 

 then she pass through the room where Tant ' Sannie lie snoring , and through the little room that be all drape in white , wait for her cousin 's return , on to her own room . 

 she go to the chest of drawer to put away the work she have finish , and sit down on the floor before the low drawer . in it be the thing she be prepare for her marriage . pile of white linen , and some apron and quilt ; and in a little box in the corner a spray of orange - blossom which she have buy from a smouse . there too be a ring Gregory have give she , and a veil his sister have send , and there be a little roll of fine embroider work which Trana have give she . it be too fine and good even for Gregory 's wife just right for something very small and soft . she would keep it . and she touch it gently with her forefinger , smile ; 

 and then she blush and hide it far behind the other thing . she know so well all that be in that drawer , and yet she turn they all over as though she see they for the first time , pack they all out , and pack they all in , without one fold or crumple ; and then sit down and look at they . 

 to - morrow evening when Lyndall come she would bring she here , and show it she all . Lyndall would so like to see it the little wreath , and the ring , and the white veil ! it would be so nice ! then Em fall to see picture . Lyndall should live with they till she herself get marry some day . 
 every day when Gregory come home , tired from his work , and he would look about and say , " where be my wife ? have no one see my wife ? Wife , some coffee ! " and she would give he some . 

 Em 's little face grow very grave at last , and 

 she kneel up and extend her hand over the drawer of linen . 

 " oh , God ! " she say , " I be so glad ! I do not know what I have do that I should be so glad . thank you ! " 



 CHAPTER IV . 
 LYNDALL . 

 she 
 be more like a princess , yes , far more like a princess , than the lady who still hang on the wall in Tant ' Sannie 's bed - room . so Em think . she lean back in the little armchair ; she wear a grey dressing - gown , and her long hair be comb out and hang to the ground . em , sit before she , look up with mingled respect and admiration . 


 Lyndall be tired after her long journey , and have come to her room early . her eye run over the familiar object . strange to go away for four year , and come back , and find that the candle stand on the dressing - table still cast the 

 shadow of an old crone 's head in the corner beyond the clothe - horse . strange that even a shadow should last long than a man ! she look about among the old familiar object ; all be there , but the old self be go . 

 " what be you notice ? " ask Em . 
 " nothing and everything . I think the window be high . if I be you , when I get this place I should raise the wall . there be not room to breathe here ; one suffocate . " 
 " Gregory be go to make many alteration , " say Em ; and draw nearer to the grey dressing - gown respectfully . " do you like he , Lyndall ? be he not handsome ? " 
 " he must have be a fine baby , " say Lyndall , look at the white dimity curtain that hang above the window . 
 Em be puzzle . 

 " there be some man , " say Lyndall , " whom you never can believe be baby at all ; and 

 other you never see without think how very nice they must have look when they wear sock and pink sash . " 

 em remain silent ; then she say with a little dignity , 

 " when you know he you will love he as I do . when I compare other people with he , they seem so weak and little . 
 our 
 heart be so cold , our love be mix up with so many other thing . but he no one be worthy of his love . I be not . it be so great and pure . " 


 " you need not make yourself unhappy upon that point your poor return for his love , my dear , " say Lyndall . " a man 's love be a fire of olive - wood . it leap high every moment ; it roar , it blaze , it shoot out red flame ; it threaten to wrap you round and devour you you who stand by like an icicle in the glow of its fierce warmth . you be self - reproach at your own chilliness and want of reciprocity . 

 the next day , when you go to warm your hand a little , you find a few ash ! ' tis a long love and cool against a short love and hot ; man , at all event , have nothing to complain of . " 

 " you speak so because you do not know man , " say Em , instantly assume the dignity of superior knowledge so universally affect by affiance and married woman in discuss man 's nature with their uncontracted sister . 
 " you will know they too some day , and then you will think differently , " say em , with the condescend magnanimity which superior knowledge can always afford to show to ignorance . 
 Lyndall 's little lip quiver in a manner indicative of intense amusement . she twirl a massive ring upon her forefinger a ring more suitable for the hand of a man , and noticeable in design a diamond cross let into gold , with the initial " R.R. " below it . 

 " ah , Lyndall , " em cry , " perhaps you be engage yourself that be why you smile . yes ; I be sure you be . look at this ring ! " 
 Lyndall draw the hand quickly from she . 
 " I be not in so great a hurry to put my neck beneath any man 's foot ; and I do not so greatly admire the crying of baby , " she say , as she close her eye half wearily and lean back in the chair . " there be other woman glad of such work . " 

 em feel rebuke and ashamed . how could she take Lyndall and show she the white linen and the wreath , and the embroidery ? she be quiet for a little while , and then begin to talk about Trana , and the old farm - servant , till she see her companion be weary ; then she rise and leave she for the night . but after Em be go Lyndall sit on , watch the old crone 's face in the corner , and with a weary look , as 

 though the whole world 's weight rest on these frail young shoulder . 

 the next morning , Waldo , start off before breakfast with a bag of mealie sling over his shoulder to feed the ostrich , hear a light step behind he . 
 " wait for I ; I be come with you , " say Lyndall , add as she come up to he , " if I have not go to look for you yesterday you would not have come to greet I till now . do you not like I any long , Waldo ? " 
 " yes but you be change . " 
 it be the old clumsy , hesitate mode of speech . 

 " you like the pinafore well ? " she say quickly . she wear a dress of a simple cotton fabric , but very fashionably make , and on her head be a broad white hat . to Waldo she seem superbly attire . she see it . " my dress have change a little , " she say , " and I also ; 

 but not to you . hang the bag over your other shoulder , that I may see your face . you say so little that if one do not look at you you be an uncomprehended cipher . " Waldo change the bag , and they walk on side by side . " you have improve , " she say . " do you know that I have sometimes wish to see you while I be away ; not often , but still sometimes . " 

 they be at the gate of the first camp now . Waldo throw over a mug of mealie , and they walk on over the dewy ground . 
 " have you learn much ? " he ask she simply , remember how she have once say , " when I come back again I shall know everything that a human being can . " 
 she laugh . 

 " be you think of my old boast ? yes ; I have learn something , though hardly what I expect , and not 
 quite 
 so much . in the first place , I have learn that one of my ancestor 

 must have be a very great fool ; for they say nothing come out in a man but one of his forefather possess it before he . in the second place , I have discover that of all cursed place under the sun , where the hungry soul can hardly pick up a few grain of knowledge , a girl ' boarding - school be the bad . they be call finish school , and the name tell accurately what they be . they finish everything but imbecility and weakness , and that they cultivate . they be nicely adapt machine for experiment on the question , " into how little space a human soul can be crushed?í I have see some soul so compress that they would have fit into a small thimble , and find room to move there , wide room . a woman who have be for many year in one of those place carry the mark of the beast on she till she die , though she may expand a little afterward , when she breathe in the free world . " 


 " be you miserable ? " he ask , look at she with quick anxiety . 

 " I ? no . I be never miserable and never happy . I wish I be . but I should have run away from the place on the fourth day , and hire myself to the first boer - woman whose farm I come to , to make fire under her soap - pot , if I have to live as the rest of the drove do . can you form an idea , Waldo , of what it must be to be shut up with cackle old woman , who be without knowledge of life , without love of the beautiful , without strength , to have your soul culture by they ? it be suffocation only to breathe the air they breathe ; but I make they give I room . I tell they I should leave , and they know I come there on my own account ; so they give I a bed - room without the companionship of one of those thing that be have their brain slowly dilute and squeeze out of they . I do not learn music , because I have no 

 talent ; and when the drove make cushion , and hideous flower that the rose laugh at , and a footstool in six week that a machine would have make well in five minute , I go to my room . with the money save from such work I buy book and newspaper , and at night I sit up . I read , and epitomize what I read ; and I find time to write some play , and find out how hard it be to make your thought look anything but imbecile fool when you paint they with ink and paper . in the holiday I learn a great deal more . I make acquaintance , see a few place and many people , and some different way of living , which be more than any book can show one . on the whole , I be not dissatisfied with my four year . I have not learn what I expect ; but I have learn something else . what have you be do ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 " that be not possible . I shall find out by and by . " 
 they still step on side by side over the dewy bush . then suddenly she turn on he . 
 " do not   you wish you be a woman , Waldo ? " 
 " no , " he answer readily . 
 she laugh . 

 " I think not . even you be too worldly wise for that . I never meet a man who do . this be a pretty ring , " she say , hold out her little hand , that the morning sun might make the diamond sparkle . " worth fifty pound at least . I will give it to the first man who tell I he would like to be a woman . there might be one on Robbin Island 
 
 who would win it perhaps , but I doubt it even there . it be delightful to be a woman ; but every man thank the Lord devoutly that he be not   one . " 

 lunatic at the Cape be send to Robbin Island . 

 she draw her hat to one side to keep the sun out of her eye as she walk . Waldo look at she so intently that he stumble over the bush . yes , this be his little Lyndall who have wear the check pinafore ; he see it now , and he walk close beside she . they reach the next camp . 
 " let we wait at this camp and watch the bird , " she say , as an ostrich hen come bound toward they with velvety wing outstretche , while far away over the bush the head of the cock be visible as he sit brood on the egg . 
 Lyndall fold her arm on the gate - bar , and Waldo throw his empty bag on the wall and lean beside she . 
 " I like these bird , " she say ; " they share each other 's work , and be companion . do you take an interest in the position of woman , Waldo ? " 
 " no . " 


 " I think not . no one do , unless they be in need of a subject upon which to show their wit . and as for you , from of old you can see nothing that be not separate from you by a few million of mile , and strew over with mystery . if woman be the inhabitant of Jupiter , of whom you have happen to hear something , you would pore over we and our condition night and day ; but because we be before your eye you never look at we . you care nothing that 
 this 
 be ragged and ugly , " she say , put she little finger on his sleeve ; " but you strive mightily to make an imaginary leaf on an old stick beautiful . I be sorry you do not   care for the position of woman ; I should have like we to be friend ; and it be the only thing about which I think much or feel much if , indeed , I have any feeling about anything , " she add , flippantly , readjust her dainty little arm . " when I be a baby , I fancy my parent leave I out in the 

 frost one night , and I get nip internally it feel so ! " 

 " show I what you feel , " he say . " I have only a few old thought , and I think they over and over again ; always begin where I leave off . I never get any far . I be weary of they . I be like an old hen that sit on egg month after month and they never come out . " 
 " and I , " she say quickly , " be so pressed in upon by new thing that , lest they should trip one another up , I have to keep force they back . my head swing sometimes . but this one thought stand , never go if I might but be one of these bear in the future ; then perhaps to be bear a woman will not be to be bear branded . " 
 Waldo look at she . it be hard to say whether she be in earnest or mocking . 
 " I know it be foolish . wisdom never kick at the iron wall it can not   bring down , " she say . 

 " but we be curse . Waldo , bear curse from the time our mother bring we into the world till the shroud be put on we . do not look at I as though I be talk nonsense . everything have two side the outside that be ridiculous , and the inside that be solemn . " 
 " I be not laugh , " say the boy solemnly enough ; " but what curse you ? " 
 he think she would not reply to he , she wait so long . 

 " it be not what be do to we , but what be make of we , " she say at last , " that wrong we . no man can be really injure but by what modify himself . we all enter the world little plastic being , with so much natural force perhaps , but for the rest blank ; and the world tell we what we be to be , and shape we by the end it set before we . to you it say " 
 work 
 ; " and to we it say " 
 seem ! 
 " to you it say as you approximate to man 's high ideal of God , as your arm 

 be strong and your knowledge great , and the power to labour be with you , so you shall gain all that human heart desire . to we it say Strength shall not help you , nor knowledge , nor labour . you shall gain what man gain , but by other mean . and so the world make man and woman . 


 " look at this little chin of mine , Waldo , with the dimple in it . it be but a small part of my person ; but though I have a knowledge of all thing under the sun , and the wisdom to use it , and the deep love heart of an angel , it would not stead I through life like this little chin . I can win money with it , I can win love ; I can win power with it , I can win fame . what would knowledge help I ? the less a woman have in her head the light she be for climb . I once hear an old man say , that he never see intellect help a woman so much as a pretty ankle ; and it be the truth . they begin to 

 shape we to our cursed end , " she say , with her lip draw in to look as though they smile , " when we be tiny thing in shoe and sock . we sit with our little foot draw up under we in the window , and look out at the boy in their happy play . we want to go . then a love hand be lay on we : " little one , you can not go , í they say ; " your little face will burn , and your nice white dress be spoiled.í we feel it must be for our good , it be so lovingly say : but we can not understand ; and we kneel still with one little cheek wistfully press against the pane . afterwards we go and thread blue bead , and make a string for our neck ; and we go and stand before the glass . we see the complexion we be not to spoil , and the white frock , and we look into our own great eye . then the curse begin to act on we . it finish its work when we be grow woman , who no more look out wistfully at a more healthy life ; we be 

 content . we fit our sphere as a chinese - woman 's foot fit her shoe exactly , as though God have make both and yet he know nothing of either . in some of we the shaping of our end have be quite complete . the part we be not to use have be quite atrophied , and have even drop off ; but in other , and we be not less to be pity , they have be weaken and leave . we wear the bandage , but our limb have not grow to they ; we know that we be compress , and chafe against they . 

 " but what do it help ? a little bitterness , a little longing when we be young , a little futile search for work , a little passionate strive for room for the exercise of our power , and then we go with the drove . a woman must march with her regiment . in the end she must be trodden down or go with it ; and if she be wise she go . 

 " I see in your great eye what you be 

 think , " she say , glance at he ; " I always know what the person I be talk to be think of . how be this woman who make such a fuss bad off than I ? I will show you by a very little example . we stand here at this gate this morning , both poor , both young , both friendless ; there be not much to choose between we . let we turn away just as we be , to make our way in life . this evening you will come to a farmer 's house . the farmer , albeit you come alone on foot , will give you a pipe of tobacco and a cup of coffee and a bed . if he have no dam to build and no child to teach , to - morrow you can go on your way with a friendly greeting of the hand . I , if I come to the same place to - night , will have strange question ask I , strange glance cast on I . the boer - wife will shake her head and give I food to eat with the Kaffirs , and a right to sleep with the dog . that would be the first step in our 

 progress a very little one , but every step to the end would repeat it . we be equal once when we lay new - bear babe on our nurse ' knee . we will be equal again when they tie up our jaw for the last sleep . " 

 Waldo look in wonder at the little quivering face ; it be a glimpse into a world of passion and feel wholly new to he . 

 " Mark you , " she say , " we have always this advantage over you we can at any time step into ease and competence , where you must labour patiently for it . a little weeping , a little wheedling , a little self - degradation , a little careful use of our advantage , and then some man will say " come , be my wife!í with good look and youth marriage be easy to attain . there be man enough ; but a woman who have sell herself , even for a ring and a new name , need hold her skirt aside for no creature in the street . they both earn their bread in one way . 

 marriage for love be the beautiful external symbol of the union of soul ; marriage without it be the uncleanli traffic that defile the world . " she run her little finger savagely along the topmost bar , shake off the dozen little dewdrop that still hang there . " and they tell we we have man 's chivalrous attention ! " she cry . " when we ask to be doctor , lawyer , law - maker , anything but ill - pay drudge , they say , No ; but you have man 's chivalrous attention ; now think of that and be satisfied ! what would you do without it ? " 

 the bitter little silvery laugh , so seldom hear , ring out across the bush . she bite her little tooth together . 

 " I be come up in Cobb and Co. 's the other day . at a little wayside hotel we have to change the large coach for a small one . we be ten passenger , eight man and two woman . as I sit in the house the gentleman come and 

 whisper to I , " there be not room for all in the new coach , take your seat quickly.í we hurry out , and they give I the good seat , and cover I with rug , because it be drizzle . then the last passenger come run up to the coach an old woman with a wonderful bonnet , and a black shawl pin with a yellow pin . 

 " " there be no room , í they say ; " you must wait till next week 's coach take you up;í but she climb on to the step , and hold on at the window with both hand . 
 " " my son - in - law be ill , and I must go and see he , í she say . 
 " " my good woman , í say one , " I be really exceedingly sorry that your son - in - law be ill ; but there be absolutely no room for you here.í 
 " " you have well get down , í say another , " or the wheel will catch you.í 
 " I get up to give she my place . 
 " " oh , no , no!í they cry , " we will not allow that.í 

 " " I will rather kneel , í say one , and he crouch down at my foot ; so the woman come in . 
 " there be nine of we in that coach , and only one show chivalrous attention and that be a woman to a woman . 
 " I shall be old and ugly , too , one day , and I shall look for man 's chivalrous help , but I shall not find it . 
 " the bee be very attentive to the flower till their honey be do , and then they fly over they . I do not   know if the flower feel grateful to the bee ; they be great fool if they do . " 
 " but some woman , " say Waldo , speak as though the word force themselves from he at that moment , " some woman have power . " 
 she lift her beautiful eye to his face . 

 " Power ! do you ever hear of man be ask whether other soul should have power or not ? it be bear in they . you may dam up 

 the fountain of water , and make it a stagnant marsh , or you may let it run free and do its work ; but 
 you 
 can not say whether it shall be there ; 
 it be there 
 . and it will act , if not openly for good , then covertly for evil ; but it will act . if Goethe have be steal away a child , and rear in a robber horde in the depth of a german forest , do you think the world would have have " Faustí and " iphegenie?í but he would have be Goethe still strong , wise than his fellow . at night , round their watch - fire , he would have chant wild song of rapine and murder , till the dark face about he be move and tremble . his song would have echo on from father to son , and nerve the heart and arm for evil . do you think if Napoleon have be bear a woman that he would have be content to give small tea - party and talk small scandal ? he would have rise ; but the world would not have hear of he as 

 it hear of he now a man great and kingly , with all his sin ; he would have leave one of those name that stain the leaf of every history the name of woman , who , have power , but be deny the right to exercise it openly , rule in the dark , covertly , and by stealth , through the man whose passion they feed on and by whom they climb . 


 " Power ! " she say , suddenly , smite her little hand upon the rail . " yes , we have power ; and since we be not to expend it in tunnelling mountain , nor heal disease , nor make law , nor money , nor on any extraneous object , we expend it on 
 you 
 . you be our good , our merchandise , our material for operate on ; we buy you , we sell you , we make fool of you , we act the wily old Jew with you , we keep six of you crawl to our little foot , and pray only for a touch of our little hand ; and they say truly , there be never an ache or pain or 

 broken heart but a woman be at the bottom of it . we be not to study law , nor science , nor art , so we study you . there be never a nerve or fibre in a man 's nature but we know it . we keep six of you dance in the palm of one little hand , " she say , balance her outstretched arm gracefully , as though tiny being disport themselves in its palm . " there we throw you away , and you sink to the devil , " she say , fold her arm composedly . " there be never a man who say one word for woman but he say two for man , and three for the whole human race . " 

 she watch the bird peck up the last yellow grain ; but Waldo look only at she . 
 when she speak again it be very measuredly . 

 " they bring weighty argument against we when we ask for the perfect freedom of woman , " she say ; " but , when you come up to the objection , they be like pumpkin - devil , with 

 candle inside , hollow , and can not   bite . they say that woman do not wish for the sphere and freedom we ask for they , and would not use it ! 


 " if the bird 
 do 
 like its cage , and 
 do 
 like its sugar and will not leave it , why keep the door so very carefully shut ? why not open it , only a little ? do they know , there be many a bird will not break its wing against the bar , but would fly if the door be open . 


 " then they say again , " if woman have the liberty you ask for , they will be find in position for which they have not talent!í if two man climb one ladder , do you ever see the weak anywhere but at the foot ? the sure sign of fitness be success . the weak never win but where there be handicapping . nature , leave to herself , will as beautifully apportion a man 's work to his capacity as long age ago she graduate the colour on the bird 's breast . if we be not fit you give we to no purpose the 

 right to labour ; the work will fall out of our hand into those that be abler . " 

 she talk more quickly and eagerly as she go on , as one talk of that over which they have brood long , and which lie near their heart . 
 Waldo watch she intently . 

 " they say woman have one great and noble work leave they , and they do it ill . that be true ; they do it execrably . it be the work that demand the broad culture , and they have not even the narrow . the lawyer may see no deep than his law book , and the chemist see no far than the window of his laboratory , and they may do their work well . but the woman who do woman 's work need a many - side , multiform culture ; the height and depth of human life must strike an answer chord in she ; she must have knowledge of man and thing in many state , a wide catholicity 

 of sympathy , the strength that spring from knowledge , and the magnanimity which spring from strength . 
 we 
 bear the world , and 
 we 
 make it . the soul of little child be marvellously delicate and tender thing , and keep for ever the shadow that first fall on they , and that be the mother 's or at good a woman 's . there be never a great man who have not a great mother it be hardly an exaggeration . the first six year of our life make we ; all that be add later be veneer ; and yet some say , if a woman can cook a dinner or dress herself she have culture enough . 


 " the mighty and noblest of human work be give to we , and we do it ill . send an untutored navvie to work into an artist 's studio , and see what you will find there ! and yet , thank God , we have this work , " she add quickly : " it be the one window through which we see into the great world of earnest labour . the mean girl who 

 dance and dress become something high when her child look up into her face and ask her question . it be the only education we have and which they can not take from we . " 

 " and they say , " she go on , " that we complain of woman 's be compel to look upon marriage as a profession ; but that she be free to enter upon it or leave it , as she please . 

 " yes and a cat set afloat in a pond be free to sit in the tub till it die , it be under no obligation to wet its foot ; and a drown man may catch at a straw or not , just as he like it be a glorious liberty ! let any man think for five minute of what old maidenhood mean to a woman and then let he be silent . be it easy to bear through life a name that in itself signify defeat ? to dwell , as nine out of ten unmarried woman must , under the finger of another woman ? be it easy to look forward to an old age without honour , without the reward 

 of useful labour , without love ? I wonder how many man there be who would give up everything that be dear in life for the sake of maintain a high purity . " 


 she laugh , a little laugh that be clear without be pleasant . " and then , when they have no other argument against we , they say " go on ; but when you have make woman what you wish , and her child inherit her culture , you will defeat yourself . Man will gradually become extinct from excess of intellect , the passion which replenish the race will die.í Fools ! " she say , curl her pretty lip ; " a Hottentot sit at the road - side , and feed on a rotten bone he have find there , and take out his bottle of cape - smoke and swill at it , and grunt with satisfaction ; and the cultured child of the nineteenth century sit in his arm - chair , and sip choice wine with the lip of a connoisseur , and taste delicate dish with a 

 delicate palate , and with a satisfaction of which the Hottentot know nothing . heavy jaw and slop forehead all have go with increase intellect ; but the animal appetite be there still refine , discriminative , but immeasurably intensify . fool ! before man forgave or worship , while they be weak on their hind leg , do they not eat and drink and fight for wife ? when all the latter addition to humanity have vanish , will not the foundation on which they be build remain ? " 

 she be silent then for a while , and say somewhat dreamily , more as though speak to herself than to he , 
 " they ask , what will you gain , even if man do not become extinct ? you will have bring justice and equality on to the earth , and send love from it . when man and woman be equal they will love no more . your highly - cultured woman will not be lovable , will not love . 

 " do they see nothing , understand nothing ? it be Tant ' Sannie who bury husband one after another , and fold her hand resignedly , " the Lord give , and the Lord hath take away , and bless be the name of the Lord , í and she look for another . it be the hard - headed , deep thinker who , when the wife who have think and work with he go , can find no rest , and linger near she till he find sleep beside she . 

 " a great soul draw and be draw with a more fierce intensity than any small one . by every inch we grow in intellectual height our love strike down its root deeply , and spread out its arm wide . it be for love 's sake yet more than for any other that we look for that new time . " she have lean her head against the stone , and watch with her sad , soft eye the retreating bird . " then when that time come , " she say lowly , " when love be no more buy or sell , when it be not a means of make bread , 

 when each woman 's life be fill with earnest , independent labour , then love will come to she , a strange , sudden sweetness break in upon her earnest work ; not seek for , but find . then , but not now " 

 Waldo wait for she to finish the sentence , but she seem to have forget he . 
 " Lyndall , " he say , put his hand upon she she start " if you think that that new time will be so great , so good , you who speak so easily " 
 she interrupt he . 
 " speak ! speak ! " she say , " the difficulty be not to speak ; the difficulty be to keep silence . " 
 " but why do you not try to bring that time ? " he say with pitiful simplicity . " when you speak I believe all you say ; other people would listen to you also . " 
 " I be not so sure of that , " she say with a smile . 

 then over the small face come the weary look it have wear last night as it watch the shadow in the corner , ah , so weary ! 
 " I , Waldo , I ? " she say . " I will do nothing good for myself , nothing for the world , till some one wake I . I be asleep , swathe , shut up in self ; till I have be deliver I will deliver no one . " 
 he look at her wondering , but she be not look at he . 

 " to see the good and the beautiful , " she say , " and to have no strength to live it , be only to be Moses on the mountain of Nebo , with the land at your foot and no power to enter . it would be well not to see it . come , " she say , look up into his face , and see its uncomprehending expression , " let we go , it be get late . doss be anxious for his breakfast also , " she add , wheel round and call to the dog , who be endeavour to unearth a mole , an 

 occupation to which he have be zealously addict from the third month , but in which he have never on any single occasion prove successful . 

 Waldo shoulder his bag , and Lyndall walk on before in silence , with the dog close to her side . perhaps she think of the narrowness of the limit within which a human soul may speak and be understand by its near of mental kin , of how soon it reach that solitary land of the individual experience , in which no fellow footfall be ever hear . whatever her thought may have be , she be soon interrupt . Waldo come close to she , and stand still , produce with awkwardness from his breast - pocket a small carve box . 
 " I make it for you , " he say , hold it out . 
 " I like it , " she say , examine it carefully . 

 the workmanship be well than that of the grave - post . the flower that cover it be delicate , and here and there small conical 

 pro- 
 protuberance 


 tuberance be let in among they . she turn it round critically . waldo bend over it lovingly . 

 " there be one strange thing about it , " he say earnestly , put a finger on one little pyramid . " I make it without these , and I feel something be wrong ; I try many change , and at last I let these in , and then it be right . but why be it ? they be not beautiful in themselves . " 
 " they relieve the monotony of the smooth leaf , I suppose . " 
 he shake his head as over a weighty matter . 
 " the sky be monotonous , " he say , " when it be blue , and yet it be beautiful . I have think of that often ; but it be not monotony and it be not variety make beauty . what be it ? the sky , and your face , and this box the same thing be in they all , only more in the sky and in your face . but what be it ? " 
 she smile . 

 " so you be at your old work still . why , 

 why , why ? what be the reason ? it be enough for I , " she say , " if I find out what be beautiful and what be ugly , what be real and what be not . why it be there , and over the final cause of thing in general , I do not   trouble myself ; there must be one , but what be it to I ? if I howl to all eternity I shall never get hold of it ; and if I do I might be no well off . but you Germans be bear with an aptitude for burrowing ; you can not   help yourself . you must sniff after reason , just as that dog must after mole . he know perfectly well he will never catch it , but he be under the imperative necessity of dig for it . " 


 " but he 
 might 
 find it . " 


 " 
 Might ! 
  but he never have and never will . life be too short to run after might ; we must have certainty . " 


 she tuck the box under her arm and be about to walk on , when Gregory Rose , with 

 shin spur , an ostrich feather in his hat , and a silver - head whip , career past . he bow gallantly as he go by . they wait till the dust of the horse 's hoof have lay itself . 

 " there , " say Lyndall , " go a true woman one bear for the sphere that some woman have to fill without be bear for it . how happy he would be sew frill into his little girl 's frock , and how pretty he would look sit in a parlour , with a rough man make love to he ! do not   you think so ? " 
 " I shall not stay here when he be master , " Waldo answer , not able to connect any kind of beauty with Gregory Rose . 
 " I should imagine not . the rule of a woman be tyranny ; but the rule of a man - woman grind fine . where be you go ? " 
 " anywhere . " 
 " what to do ? " 
 " see see everything . " 

 " you will be disappoint . " 
 " and be you ? " 

 " yes ; and you will be more so . I want some thing that man and the world give , you do not . if you have a few yard of earth to stand on , and a bit of blue over you , and something that you can not see to dream about , you have all that you need , all that you know how to use . but I like to see real man . let they be as disagreeable as they please , they be more interesting to I than flower , or tree , or star , or any other thing under the sun . sometimes , " she add , walk on , and shake the dust daintily from her skirt , " when I be not too busy try to find a new way of do my hair that will show my little neck to well advantage , or over other work of that kind , sometimes it amuse I intensely to trace out the resemblance between one man and another : to see how Tant ' Sannie and I , you and Bonaparte , St. Simon on his 

 pillow , and the Emperor dining off lark ' tongue , be one and the same compound , merely mix in different proportion . what be microscopic in one be largely develop in another ; what be a rudimentary fold in I be a great active organ in you ; but all thing be in all man , and one soul be the model of all . we shall find nothing new in human nature after we have once carefully dissect and analyze the one be we ever shall truly know ourself . the Kaffir girl throw some coffee on my arm in bed this morning ; I feel displeased , but say nothing . Tant ' Sannie would have throw the saucer at she and swear for an hour ; but the feeling would be the same irritated displeasure . if a huge animate stomach like Bonaparte be put under a glass by a skilful mental microscopist , even he would be find to have an embryonic double somewhere indicative of a heart , and rudimentary budding that might have become conscience 

 and sincerity : let I take your arm Waldo . how full you be of mealie dust . no , never mind . it will brush off . and sometimes what be more amusing still than trace the likeness between man and man , be to trace the analogy there always be between the progress and development of one individual and of a whole nation ; or , again , between a single nation and the entire human race . it be pleasant when it dawn on you that the one be just the other write out in large letter ; and very odd to find all the little folly and virtue , and development and retrogression , write out in the big world 's book that you find in your little internal self . it be the most amusing thing I know of ; but of course , be a woman , I have not often time for such amusement . professional duty always first , you know . it take a great deal of time and think always to look perfectly exquisite even for a pretty 

 woman . be the old buggy still in existence , Waldo ? " 

 " yes ; but the harness be break . " 
 " well , I wish you would mend it . you must teach I to drive . I must learn something while I be here . I get the Hottentot girl to show I how to make " sar - sar - tiesí this morning ; and Tant ' Sannie be go to teach I to make " kapjes.í I will come and sit with you this afternoon while you mend the harness . " 
 " thank you . " 

 " no , do not   thank I ; I come for my own pleasure . I never find any one I can talk to . woman bear I , and man , I talk so to " go to the ball this evening ? nice little dog that of your . pretty little ear . so fond of pointer pups!í and they think I fascinating , charming ! man be like the earth , and we be the moon ; we turn always one side to they , and 

 they think there be no other , because they do not   see it but there be . " 

 they have reach the house now . 
 " tell I when you set to work , " she say , and walk toward the door . 
 Waldo stand to look after she , and Doss stand at his side , a look of painful uncertainty depict on his small countenance , and one little foot poise in the air . should he stay with his master or go ? he look at the figure with the wide straw hat move toward the house , and he look up at his master ; then he put down the little paw and go . Waldo watch they both in at the door and then walk away alone . he be satisfied that at least his dog be with she . 



 CHAPTER V. 
 TANT ' SANNIE hold an upsitting , and GREGORY write a letter . 

 it 
 be just after sunset , and Lyndall have not yet return from her first driving - lesson , when the lean coloured woman stand at the corner of the house to enjoy the evening breeze , see come along the road a strange horseman . very narrowly she survey he , as slowly he approach . he be attire in the deep mourning , the black crape round his tall hat totally conceal the black felt , and nothing but a dazzle shirt - front relieve the funereal tone of his attire . he ride much forward in his saddle , with his chin rest on the uppermost 

 of his shirt - stud , and there be an air of meek subjection to the will of Heaven , and to what might be in store for he , that bespoke itself even in the way in which he gently urge his steed . he be evidently in no hurry to reach his destination , for the nearer he approach to it the slacker do his bridle hang . the coloured woman have duly inspect he , dash into the dwelling . 

 " here be another one ! " she cry " a widower ; I see it by his hat . " 
 " Good Lord ! " say Tant ' Sannie ; " it be the seventh I have   have this month ; but the man know where sheep and good look and money in the bank be to be find , " she add , wink knowingly . " how do he look ? " 
 " Nineteen , weak eye , white hair , little round nose , " say the maid . 

 " then it be he ! then it be he ! " say Tant ' Sannie triumphantly ; " little Piet Vander Walt , whose 

 wife die last month two farm , twelve thousand sheep . I have   not see he , but my sister - in - law tell I about he , and I dream about he last night . " 

 here Piet 's black hat appear in the doorway , and the boer - woman draw herself up in dignified silence , extend the tip of her finger , and motion solemnly to a chair . the young man seat himself , stick his foot as far under it as they would go , and say mildly 
 " I be Little Piet Vander Walt , and my father be Big Piet Vander Walt . " 
 Tant ' Sannie say solemnly , " yes . " 
 " Aunt , " say the young man , start up spasmodically ; " can I off - saddle ? " 
 " yes . " 
 he seize his hat , and disappear with a rush through the door . 

 " I tell you so ! I know it ! " say Tant ' Sannie . " the dear Lord do not   send dream for nothing . 

 do not   I tell you this morning that I dream of a great beast like a sheep , with red eye , and I kill it ? be not   the white wool his hair , and the red eye his weak eye , and my kill he mean marriage ? get supper ready quickly ; the sheep 's inside and roaster - cake . we shall sit up to - night . " 


 to young Piet Vander Walt that supper be a period of intense torture . there be something overawe in that assembly of english people , with their incomprehensible speech ; and moreover , it be his first courtship ; his first wife have court he , and ten month of severe domestic rule have not raise his spirit nor courage . he eat little , and when he raise a morsel to his lip glance guiltily round to see if he be not observe . he have put three ring on his little finger , with the intention of stick it out stiffly when he raise a coffee - cup ; now the little finger be curl miserably among its fellow . it 

 be small relief when the meal be over , and Tant ' Sannie and he repair to the front - room . once seat there , he set his knee close together , stand his black hat upon they , and wretchedly turn the brim up and down . but supper have cheer Tant ' Sannie , who find it impossible long to maintain that decorous silence , and whose heart yearn over the youth . 

 " I be relate to your aunt Selena who die , " say Tant ' Sannie . " my mother 's step - brother 's child be married to her father 's brother 's step - nephew 's niece . " 
 " yes , aunt , " say the young man , " I know we be relate . " 
 " it be her cousin , " say Tant ' Sannie , now fairly on the flow , " who have the cancer cut out of her breast by the other doctor , who be not the right doctor they send for , but who do it quite as well . " 
 " yes , aunt , " say the young man . 

 " I have   hear about it often , " say Tant ' Sannie . " and he be the son of the old doctor that they say die on Christmas day ; but I do not   know if that be true . People do tell such awful lie . why should he die on Christmas day more than any other day ? " 
 " yes , aunt , why ? " say the young man meekly . 
 " do you ever have the toothache ? " ask Tant ' Sannie . 
 " no , aunt . " 

 " well , they say that doctor , not the son of the old doctor that die on Christmas day , the other that do not   come when he be send for , he give such good stuff for the toothache , that if you open the bottle in the room where any one be bad they get well directly . you could see it be good stuff , " say Tant ' Sannie ; " it taste horrid . 
 that 
 be a real doctor ! he use to give a bottle so high , " say the boer - woman , raise 

 her hand a foot from the table , " you could drink at it for a month and it would not   get do , and the same medicine be good for all sort of sickness croup , measle , jaundice , dropsy . 
 now 
 you have to buy a new kind for each sickness . the doctor be not   so good as they use to be . " 

 " no , aunt , " say the young man , who be try to gain courage to stick out his leg and clink his spur together . he do so at last . 
 Tant ' Sannie have notice the spur before ; but she think it show a nice manly spirit , and her heart warm yet more to the youth . 
 " do you ever have convulsion when you be a baby ? " ask Tant ' Sannie . 
 " yes , " say the young man . 
 " strange ! " say Tant ' Sannie ; " I have convulsion too . wonderful that we should be so much alike ! " 
 " Aunt , " say the young man explosively , " can we sit - up to - night ? " 

 Tant ' Sannie hang her head and half close her eye ; but find that her little wile be throw away , the young man star fixedly at his hat , she simper , " yes , " and go away to fetch candle . 
 in the dining room em work at her machine , and Gregory sit close beside she , his great blue eye turn to the window where Lyndall lean out talk to Waldo . 
 Tant ' Sannie take two candle out of the cupboard and hold they up triumphantly , wink all round the room . 
 " he be ask for they , " she say . 
 " do he want they for his horse 's sore back ? " ask Gregory , new to up - country life . 
 " no , " say Tant ' Sannie , indignantly ; " we be go to sit - up ! " and she walk off in triumph with the candle . 

 nevertheless , when all the rest of the house have 

 retire , when the long candle be light , when the coffee - kettle be fill , when she sit in her elbow - chair , with her lover on a chair close beside she , and when the vigil of the night be fairly begin , she begin to find it wearisome . the young man look chilly , and say nothing . 

 " will not   you put your foot on my stove ? " say Tant ' Sannie . 
 " no thank you , aunt , " say the young man , and both lapse into silence . 
 at last Tant ' Sannie , afraid of go to sleep , tap a strong cup of coffee for herself and hand another to her lover . this visibly revive both . 
 " how long be you married , cousin ? " 
 " ten month , aunt . " 
 " how old be your baby ? " 
 " three day when it die . " 
 " it be very hard when we must give our husband and wife to the Lord , " say Tant ' Sannie . 

 " very , " say the young man ; " but it be the Lord 's will . " 
 " yes , " say Tant ' Sannie , and sigh . 
 " she be such a good wife , aunt : I have   know she break a churn - stick over a maid 's head for only let dust come on a milk cloth . " 
 Tant ' Sannie feel a twinge of jealousy . she have never break a churn - stick on a maid 's head . 
 " I hope your wife make a good end , " she say . 
 " oh , beautiful , aunt : she say up a psalm and two hymn and a half before she die . " 
 " do she leave any message ? " ask Tant ' Sannie . 
 " no , " say the young man ; " but the night before she die I be lie at the foot of her bed ; I feel her foot kick I . 
 " " Piet , í she say . 
 " " Annie , my heart , í say I. 
 " " my little baby that die yesterday have be here , and it stand over the waggon - box , í she say . 

 " " what do it say?í I ask . 
 " " it say that if I die you must marry a fat woman.í 
 " " I will , í I say , and I go to sleep again . presently she wake I . 
 " " the little baby have be here again , and it say you must marry a woman over thirty , and who be have two husbands.í 
 " I do not   go to sleep after that for a long time , aunt ; but when I do she wake I . 
 " " the baby have be here again , í she say , " and it say you must not   marry a woman with a mole.í I tell she I would not ; and the next day she die . " 
 " that be a vision from the Redeemer , " say Tant ' Sannie . 

 the young man nod his head mournfully . he think of a young sister of his wife 's who be not fat , and who 
 have 
 a mole , and of whom his wife have always be jealous , and 

 he wish the little baby have like well stay in heaven to come and stand over the waggon - chest . 

 " I suppose that be why you come to I , " say Tant ' Sannie . 
 " yes , aunt . and pa say I ought to get marry before shearing time . it be bad if there be no one to see after thing then ; and the maid waste such a lot of fat . " 
 " when do you want to get marry ? " 
 " next month , aunt , " say the young man in a tone of hopeless resignation . " may I kiss you , aunt ? " 
 " Fie ! fie ! " say Tant ' Sannie , and then give he a resounding kiss . " come , draw your chair a little close , " she say , and their elbow now touch , they sit on through the night . 

 the next morning at dawn , as Em pass through Tant ' Sannie 's bed - room , she find 

 the boer - woman pull off her boot preparatory to climb into bed . 

 " where be Piet Vander Walt ? " 
 " just go , " say Tant ' Sannie ; " and I be go to marry he this day four week . I be dead sleepy , " she add ; " the stupid thing do not   know how to talk love - talk at all , " and she climb into the four - poster , clothe and all , and draw the quilt up to her chin . 

 on the day precede Tant ' Sannie 's wedding , Gregory Rose sit in the blaze sun on the stone wall behind his daub - and - wattle house . it be warm , but he be intently watch a small buggy that be be recklessly drive over the bush in the direction of the farmhouse . Gregory never stir till it have vanish ; then , find the stone hot , he slip down and walk into the house . he kick the little pail that lie in the doorway , and send it into 

 one corner ; that do he good . then he sit down on the box , and begin cut letter out of a piece of newspaper . find that the snipping litter the floor , he pick they up and begin scribble on his blot - paper . he try the effect of different initial before the name Rose : G. Rose , E. Rose , L. Rose , L. Rose , L.L.L.L. Rose . when he have cover the sheet , he look at it discontentedly a little while , then suddenly begin to write a letter . 






 " Beloved Sister , 


 " 
 it 
 be a long while since I last write to you , but I have have no time . this be the first morning I have be at home since I do not   know when . em always expect I to go down to the farm - house in the morning ; but I do not   feel as though I could stand the ride to - day . 

 " I have much news for you . 

 " Tant ' Sannie , Em 's boer step - mother , be to be married to - morrow . she be go to town to - day , and the wedding feast be to be at her 

 brother 's farm . em and I be go to ride over on horseback , but her cousin be go to ride in the buggy with that German . I do not   think I have   write to you since she come back from school . I do not   think you would like she at all , Jemima ; there be something so proud about she . she think just because she be handsome there be nobody good enough to talk to she , and just as if there have nobody else but she be to boarding - school before . 


 " they be go to have a grand affair to - morrow : all the Boers about be come , and they be go to dance all night ; but I do not   think I shall dance at all ; for , as Em 's cousin say , these boer dance be low thing . I be sure I only dance at the last to please em . I do not   know why she be so fond of dancing . em talk of our be marry on the same day as Tant ' Sannie ; but I say it would be nice for she if she wait till the shearing be over , and I take she down to see you . I suppose she will have to live with we   Em 's cousin , I mean , as she have not anything in the world but a poor fifty pound . I do not   like she 
 at all 
 , Jemima , 

 and I do not   think you would . she be get such queer way ; she be always drive about in a gig with that low German ; and I do not   think it be at all the thing for a woman to be go about with a man she be not engage to . do you ? if it be I now , of course , who be a kind of connection , it would be different . the way she treat I , consider that I be so soon to be her cousin , be not at all nice . I take down my album the other day with your likeness in it , and I tell she she could look at it , and put it down close to she ; but she just say thank you , and never even touch it , as much as to say what be your relation to I ? 


 " she get the wild horse in that buggy , and a horrid snappish little cur belong to the german sit in front , and then she drive out alone . I do not   think it be at all proper for a woman to drive out alone ; I would not   allow it if she be 
 my 
 sister . the other morning , I do not   know how it happen , I be go in the way from which she be come , and that little beast they call he Doss begin to bark when he see I he always do , the little wretch and the 

 horse begin to spring , and kick the splashboard all to piece . it be a sight to see Jemima ! she have get the little hand I ever see I could hold they both in one of mine , and not know that I would got anything except that they be so soft ; but she hold those horse in as though they be make of iron . when I want to help she she say , " no , thank you ; I can manage they myself . I have   get a pair of bit that would break their jaw if I use they well , í and she laugh and drive away . it be so unwomanly . 


 " tell father my hire of the ground will not be out for six month , and before that em and I will be marry . my pair of bird be breed now , but I have not   be down to see they for three day . I do not   seem to care about anything any more . I do not   know what it be ; I be not well . if I go into town on Saturday I will let the doctor examine I ; but perhaps she will go in herself . it be a very strange thing , Jemima , but she never will send her letter to post by I . if I ask she she have none , and the very next day she go in and post they herself . you must not   say anything about it , Jemima , 

 but 
 twice 
 I have   bring her letter from the post in a gentleman 's hand , and I be sure they be both from the same person , because I notice every little mark , even the dotting of the 
 I 
 ' s. of course it be nothing to 
 I 
 ; but for Em 's sake I can not   help feel an interest in she , however much I may dislike she myself ; and I hope she be up to nothing . I pity the man who marry 
 she 
 ; I would not   be he for 
 anything 
 . if I have a wife with pride I would make she give it up , sharp . I do not   believe in a man who can not   make a woman obey he . now em , I be very fond of she , as you know , but if I tell she to put on a certain dress , that dress she put on ; and if I tell she to sit on a certain seat , on that seat she sit ; and if I tell she not to speak to a certain individual , she do not speak to they . if a man let a woman do what he do not   like 
 he be a muff 
 . 

 " give my love to mother and the child . the " veldí here be look pretty good , and the sheep be well since we wash they . tell father the dip he recommend be very good . 

 " em send her love to you . she be make 

 I some woollen shirt ; but they do not   fit I so nicely as those mother make I . 

 " write soon to 

 your love brother , 
 Gregory . 

 " P.S. she drive past just now ; I be sit on the kraal wall right before her eye , and she never even bow . 

 " G.N.R. " 








 CHAPTER VI . 
 a boer - wedding . 

 " 
 I DIDN'T 
 know before you be so fond of rid hard , " say Gregory to his little betroth . 

 they be canter slowly on the road to Oom Muller 's on the morning of the wedding . 
 " do you call this riding hard ? " ask Em in some astonishment . 

 " of course I do ! it be enough to break the horse ' neck , and knock one up for the whole day besides , " he add testily ; then twist his head to look at the buggy that come on behind . " I think Waldo be such a mad driver ; they be take it easily enough to - day , " say 

 Gregory . " one would think the black stallion be lame . " 

 " I suppose they want to keep out of our dust , " say em . " see , they stand still as soon as we do . " 
 perceive this to be the case , Gregory ride on . 
 " it be all that horse of your : she kick up such a confounded dust , I can not   stand it myself , " he say . 
 meanwhile the cart come on slowly enough . 
 " take the rein , " say Lyndall , " and make they walk . I want to rest and watch their hoof to - day not to be exhilarate ; I be so tired . " 

 she lean back in her corner , and Waldo drive on slowly in the grey dawn light along the level road . they pass the very milk - bush behind which so many year before the old German have find the Kaffir woman . but 

 their thought be not with he that morning : they be the thought of the young , that run out to meet the future , and labour in the present . at last he touch her arm . 

 " what be it ? " 
 " I fear you have go to sleep and might be jolt out , " he say ; " you sit so quietly . " 
 " no ; do not talk to I ; I be not asleep ; " but after a time she say suddenly : " I hope I shall never bring a human being into the world . " 
 Waldo look round ; she sit draw into the corner , her blue cloud wind tightly about she , and she still watch the horse ' foot . have no comment to offer on her somewhat unexpected remark , he merely touch up his horse . 

 " I have no conscience , none , " she add ; " but I would not like to bring a soul into this world . when it sin and when it suffer something like a dead hand would fall on I " you do it , you , for your own pleasure you 

 create this thing ! see your work!í if it live to be eighty it would always hang like a mill - stone round my neck , have the right to demand good from I , and curse I for its sorrow . a parent be only like to God if his work turn out bad , so much the bad for he ; he 
 dare 
 not wash his hand of it . time and year can never bring the day when you can say to your child : " Soul , what have I to do with you?í " 

 Waldo say dreamingly , 
 " it be a marvellous thing that one soul should have power to cause another . " 
 she hear the word as she hear the beating of the horse ' hoof ; her thought run on in their own line . 

 " they say , " God send the little babies.í of all the dastardly revolting lie man tell to suit themselves , I hate that most . I suppose my father say so when he know he be die of 

 consumption , and my mother when she know she have nothing to support I on , and they create I to feed like a dog from stranger hand . man do not say God send the book , or the newspaper article , or the machine they make ; and then sigh , and shrug their shoulder and say they can not   help it . why do they say so about other thing ? liar ! " God send the little babies!í " she strike her foot fretfully against the splashboard . " the small child say so earnestly . 
 they 
 touch the little stranger reverently who have just come from God 's far country , and they peep about the room to see if not one white feather have drop from the wing of the angel that bring he . on their lip the phrase mean much ; on all other it be a 
 deliberate 
 lie . noticeable , too , " she say , drop in an instant from the passionate into a low , mock tone , " when people be marry , though they should have sixty child , they throw the 

 whole 
 onus 
 on God . when they be not , we hear nothing about God 's have send they . when there have be no legal contract between the parent , who send the little child then ? the Devil perhaps ! " she laugh her little silvery , mock laugh . " Odd that some man should come from hell and some from heaven , and yet all look so much alike when they get here . " 

 Waldo wonder at she . he have not the key to her thought , and do not see the string on which they be string . she draw her cloud tight about she . 

 " it must be very nice to believe in the Devil , " she say ; " I wish I do . if it would be of any use I would pray three hour night and morning on my bare knee , " God , let I believe in Satan.í he be so useful to those people who do . they may be as selfish and as sensual as they please , and , between God 's will and the Devil 's action , 

 always have some one to throw their sin on . but we , wretched unbeliever , we bear our own burden : we must say , " I myself do it , 
 I 
 . not God , not Satan ; I myself!í that be the sting that strike deep . Waldo , " she say gently , with a sudden and complete change of manner , " I like you so much , I love you . " she rest her cheek softly against his shoulder . " when I be with you I never know that I be a woman and you be a man ; I only know that we be both thing that think . other man when I be with they , whether I love they or not , they be mere body to I ; but you be a spirit ; I like you . look , " she say quickly , sink back into her corner , " what a pretty pinkness there be on all the hill - top ! the sun will rise in a moment . " 


 Waldo lift his eye to look round over the circle of golden hill ; and the horse , as the first sunbeam touch they , shake their head 

 and champ their bright bit , till the brass setting in their harness glitter again . 

 it be eight o'clock when they near the farm - house : a red - brick building , with kraal to the right and a small orchard to the left . already there be sign of unusual life and bustle : one cart , a waggon , and a couple of saddle against the wall betoken the arrival of a few early guest , whose number would soon be largely increase . to a dutch country wedding , guest start up in number astonishing to one who have merely ride through the plain of sparsely - inhabit karroo . 

 as the morning advance , rider on many shade of steed appear from all direction , and add their saddle to the long row against the wall , shake hand , drink coffee , and stand about outside in group to watch the arrive cart and ox - waggon , as they be unburdened of their heavy freight of massive Tantes and 

 comely daughter , follow by swarm of child of all size , dress in all manner of print and mole - skin , who be take care of by Hottentot , Kaffir , and half - caste nurse , whose many - shade complexion , range from light yellow up to ebony black , add variety to the animate scene . everywhere be excitement and bustle , which gradually increase as the time for the return of the wedding - party approach . preparation for the feast be actively advance in the kitchen ; coffee be liberally hand round , and amid a profound sensation , and the firing of gun , the horse - waggon draw up , and the wedding - party alight . bride and bridegroom with their attendant march solemnly to the marriage - chamber , where bed and box be deck out in white , with end of ribbon and artificial flower , and where on a row of chair the party solemnly seat themselves . after a time bridesmaid and good man rise , and conduct in with ceremony each individual guest , 

 to wish success , and to kiss bride and bridegroom . then the feast be set on the table , and it be almost sunset before the dish be clear away , and the pleasure of the day begin . everything be remove from the great front room , and the mud floor , well rub with bullock 's blood , glisten like polished mahogany . the female portion of the assembly flock into the side - room to attire themselves for the evening ; and re - issue clothe in white muslin , and gay with bright ribbon and brass jewelry . the dancing begin as the first tallow candle be stick up about the wall , the music come from a couple of fiddler in a corner of the room . bride and bridegroom open the ball , and the floor be soon cover with whirling couple , and every one 's spirit rise . bride and bridegroom mingle freely in the throng , and here and there a musical man sing vigorously as he drag his partner through the Blue Water or John Speriwig ; boy shout and 

 applaud , and the enjoyment and confusion be intense , till eleven o'clock come . by this time the child who swarm in the side - room be not to be keep quiet long , even by hunch of bread and cake ; there be a general howl and wail , that rise yet high than the scraping of fiddle , and mother rush from their partner to knock small head together , and cuff little nursemaid , and force the wailer down into unoccupied corner of bed , under table and behind box . in half an hour every variety of childish snore be hear on all side , and it have become perilous to raise or set down a foot in any of the side - room lest a small head or hand should be crush . now too the busy foot have break the solid coating of the floor , and a cloud of fine dust arise , that make a yellow halo round the candle , and set asthmatic people cough , and grow denser , till to recognise any one on the opposite side of the room become impossible , 

 and a partner 's face be see through a yellow mist . 

 at twelve o'clock the bride be lead to the marriage - chamber and undressed ; the light be blow out , and the bridegroom be bring to the door by the good man , who give he the key ; then the door be shut and lock , and the revel rise high than ever . there be no thought of sleep till morning , and no unoccupied spot where sleep may be find . 
 it be at this stage of the proceeding on the night of Tant ' Sannie 's wedding that Lyndall sit near the doorway in one of the side - room , to watch the dancer as they appear and disappear in the yellow cloud of dust . Gregory sit moodily in a corner of the large dancing - room . his little betrothed touch his arm . 
 " I wish you would go and ask Lyndall to dance with you , " she say ; " she must be so tired ; she have sit still the whole evening . " 


 " I have ask she three time , " reply her lover shortly . " I be not go to be 
 her 
 dog , and creep to 
 her 
 foot , just to give she the pleasure of kick I not for you , Em , nor for anybody else . " 

 " oh , I do not   know you have ask she , Greg , " say his little betrothed , humbly ; and she go away to pour out coffee . 
 nevertheless , some time after Gregory find he have shift so far round the room as to be close to the door where Lyndall sit . after stand for some time he inquire whether he might not bring she a cup of coffee . she decline ; but still he stand on   why should he not stand there as well as anywhere else ? , and then he step into the bed - room . 
 " may I not bring you a stove , Miss Lyndall , to put your foot on ? " 
 " thank you . " 
 he seek for one , and put it under her foot . 

 " there be a draught from that break window : shall I stuff something in the pane ? " 
 " no , we want air . " 
 Gregory look round , but nothing else suggest itself , he sit down on a box on the opposite side of the door . Lyndall sit before he , her chin rest in her hand ; her eye , steel - grey by day but black by night , look through the doorway into the next room . after a time he think she have entirely forget his proximity , and he dare to inspect the little hand and neck as he never dare when he be in momentary dread of the eye be turn upon he . 

 she be dress in black , which seem to take she yet far from the white - clothe , gew - gawe woman about she ; and the little hand be white , and the diamond ring glitter . where have she get that ring ? he bend forward a little and try to decipher the letter , but the candle - light be too faint . when he look up her 

 eye be fix on he . she be look at he not , Gregory feel , as she have ever look at he before ; not as though he be a stump or a stone that chance have throw in her way . to - night , whether it be critically , or kindly , or unkindly , he could not tell , but she look at he , at the man , Gregory Rose , with attention . a vague elation fill he . he clinch his fist tight to think of some good idea he might express to she ; but of all those profound thing he have picture himself as say to she , when he sit alone in the daub - and - wattle house , not one come . he say , at last , 

 " these boer dance be very low thing ; " and then , as soon as it have go from he , he think it be not a clever remark , and wish it back . 
 before Lyndall reply Em look in at the door . 
 " oh , come , " she say ; " they be go to have the cushion - dance . I do not want to kiss any of these fellow . take I quickly . " 

 she slip her hand into Gregory 's arm . 
 " it be so dusty , Em ; do you care to dance any more ? " he ask , without rise . 
 " oh , I do not mind the dust , and the dancing rest I . " 
 but he do not move . 
 " I feel tired ; I do not think I shall dance again , " he say . 
 em withdraw her hand , and a young farmer come to the door and bear she off . 
 " I have often imagine , " remark Gregory but Lyndall have rise . 
 " I be tired , " she say . " I wonder where Waldo be ; he must take I home . these people will not leave off till morning , I suppose ; it be three already . " 

 she make her way past the fiddler , and a bench full of tired dancer , and pass out at the front door . on the " stoep " a group of man and boy be smoke , peep in at the 

 window , and crack coarse joke . Waldo be certainly not among they , and she make her way to the cart and waggon draw up at some distance from the homestead . 

 " Waldo , " she say , peer into a large cart , " be that you ? I be so daze with the tallow candle , I see nothing . " 
 he have make himself a place between the two seat . she climb up and sit on the sloping floor in front . 
 " I think I should find you here , " she say , draw her skirt up about her shoulder . " you must take I home presently , but not now . " 
 she lean her head on the seat near to his , and they listen in silence to the fitful twanging of the fiddle as the night wind bear it from the farm - house , and to the ceaseless thud of the dancer , and the peal of gross laughter . she stretch out her little hand to feel for his . 


 " it be so nice to lie here and hear that noise , " she say . " I like to feel that strange life beat up against I . I like to realise form of life utterly unlike mine . when my own life feel small , and I be oppress with it , I like to crush together , and see it in a picture , in an instant , a multitude of disconnected unlike phase of human life a medi?val monk with his string of bead pace the quiet orchard , and look up from the grass at his foot to the heavy fruit - tree ; little malay boy play naked on a shin sea - beach ; a Hindoo philosopher alone under his banyan tree , thinking , thinking , think , so that in the thought of God he may lose himself ; a troop of Bacchanalians dress in white , with crown of vine - leaf , dance as they sing along the roman street ; a martyr on the night of his death look through the narrow window to the sky , and feel that already he have the wing that shall bear he up ; 

 an epicurean discourse at a roman bath to a knot of his disciple on the nature of happiness ; a Kaffir witch - doctor seek for herb by moonlight , while from the hut on the hill - side come the sound of dog barking , and the voice of woman and child ; a Nihilist start up in her sleep , and vow , with clench fist , the vow she have swear waking , to sacrifice life and blood in the cause of freedom ; a mother give bread and milk to her child in little wooden basin and sing the evening - song . I like to see it all ; I feel it run through I that universal life belong to I , of which I be part ; it make my little life large , it break down the narrow wall that shut I in . " 

 she sigh , and draw a long breath . 
 " have you make any plan ? " she ask he presently . 

 " yes , " he say , the word come in jet , with pause between ; " I will take the grey mare , 

 I will travel first I will see the world then I will find work . " 

 " what work ? " 
 " I do not know . " 
 she make a little impatient movement . 

 " that be no plan . if you go into the world aimless , without a definite object , dream , dream , you will be definitely defeat , bamboozle , knock this way and that ; in the end you will stand with your beautiful life all spend , and nothing to show . they talk of genius it be nothing but this , that a man know what he can do good , and do it , and nothing else . Waldo , " she say , knit her little finger close among his , " I wish I could help you ; I wish I could rouse you up , and make you see tht now to - day you must decide what you will be and do . it do not matter what you choose , be a farmer , business - man , artist , politician , what you will , but know your aim , and 

 live for that one thing . the secret of success be concentration ; wherever there have be a great life , or a great work , that have go before . taste everything a little , look at everything ; but live for one thing . anything be possible to a man who know his end and move straight for it , and for it alone . I will show you what I mean , " she say , concisely ; " word be gas till you condense they into picture . " 


 " suppose a woman , young , friendless as I be , the weak thing on God 's earth . but she must make her way through life . what she would be she can not be because she be a woman ; so she look carefully at herself and the world about she , to see where her path must lie . there be no one to help she ; she must help herself . she look . these thing she have a sweet voice , rich in subtile intonation ; a fair , very fair face , with a power of concentrate in itself , and give expression to , feeling that otherwise 

 must have be dissipate in word ; a rare power of enter into other life unlike her own , and intuitively read they aright . these quality she have . how shall she use they ? a poet , a writer , need only the mental ; what use have he for a beautiful body that register clearly mental emotion ? and the painter want an eye for form and colour , and the musician an ear for time and tune , and the mere drudge have no need for mental gift . but there be one art in which all she have would be use , for which they be all necessary the delicate expressive body , the rich voice , the power of mental transposition . the actor , who absorb and then reflect from himself other human life , need they all , but need not much more . this be her end ; but how to reach it ? before she be endless difficulty : sea must be cross , poverty must be endure , loneliness , want . she must be content to wait long before 

 she can even get her foot upon the path . if she have make blunder in the past , if she have weight herself with a burden which she must bear to the end , she must but bear the burden bravely , and labour on . there be no use in wail and repentance here : the next world be the place for that ; this life be too short . by our error we see deep into life . they help we . 


 " if she do all this if she wait patiently , if she be never cast down , never despair , never forget her end , move straight toward it , bend man and thing most unlikely to her purpose , she must succeed at last . man and thing be plastic ; they part to the right and leave when one come among they move in a straight line to one end . I know it by my own little experience , " she say . " long year ago I resolve to be send to school . it seem a thing utterly out of my power ; but I wait , I watch , I collect clothe , I take my place at the school ; 

 when all be ready I bear with my full force on the boer - woman , and she send I at last . it be a small thing ; but life be make up of small thing , as a body be build up of cell . what have be do in small thing can be do in large . shall be , " she say softly . 

 Waldo listen . to he the word be no confession , no glimpse into the strong , proud , restless heart of the woman . they be general word with a general application . he look up into the sparkle sky with dull eye . 
 " yes , " he say ; " but when we lie and think , and think , we see that there be nothing worth do . the universe be so large , and man be so small " 
 she shake her head quickly . 

 " but we must not think so far ; it be madness , it be a disease . we know that no man 's work be great , and stand for ever . Moses be dead , and the prophet , and the book that our 

 grandmother feed on the mould be eat . your poet and painter and actor , before the shout that applaud they have die their name grow strange , they be mile - stone that the world have pass . man have set their mark on mankind forever , as they think ; but time have wash it out as it have wash out mountain and continent . and what if we 
 could 
 help mankind , and leave the trace of our work upon it to the end ? mankind be only an ephemeral blossom on the tree of time ; there be other before it open ; there will be other after it have fall . where be man in the time of the dicynodont , and when hoary monster wallow in the mud ? will he be find in the ? on that be to come ? we be spark , we be shadow , we be pollen , which the next wind will carry away . we be die already ; it be all a dream . 


 " I know that thought . when the fever of living be on we , when the desire to become , to 

 know , to do , be drive we mad , we can use it as an anodyne , to still the fever and cool our beat pulse . but it be a poison , not a food . if we live on it it will turn our blood to ice ; we might as well be dead . we must not , Waldo ; I want your life to be beautiful , to end in something . you be noble and strong than I , " she say ; " and as much well as one of God 's great angel be well than a sin man . your life must not go for nothing . " 

 " no , we will work , " he say . 
 she move close to he and lie still , his black curl touch her smooth little head . 
 Doss , who have lie at his master 's side , climb over the bench , and curl himself up in her lap . she draw her skirt up over he , and the three sit motionless for a long time . 
 " Waldo , " she say , suddenly , " they be laugh at we . " 
 " who ? " he ask , start up . 

 " they the star ! " she say , softly . " do you not see ? there be a little white , mock finger point down at we from each one of they ! we be talk of to - morrow , and to - morrow , and our heart be so strong ; we be not think of something that can touch we softly in the dark and make we still forever . they be laugh at we , Waldo . " 
 both sit look upward . 
 " do you ever pray ? " he ask she in a low voice . 
 " no . " 
 " I never do ; but I might when I look up there . I will tell you , " he add , in a still low voice , " where I could pray . if there be a wall of rock on the edge of a world , and one rock stretch out far into space , and I stand alone upon it , alone with star above I , and star below . I would not say anything ; but the feeling would be prayer . " 

 there be an end to their conversation after that , and Doss fall asleep on her knee . at last the night wind grow very chilly . 
 " ah , " she say , shiver , and draw the skirt about her shoulder , " I be cold . span in the horse , and call I when you be ready . " 
 she slip down and walk toward the house , Doss stiffly follow she , not pleased at be rouse . at the door she meet Gregory . 
 " I have be look for you everywhere ; may I not drive you home ? " he say . 
 " waldo drive I , " she reply , pass on ; and it appear to Gregory that she look at he in the old way , without see he . but before she have reach the door an idea have occur to she , for she turn . 
 " if you wish to drive I you may . " 
 Gregory go to look for Em , whom he find pour out coffee in the back room . he put his hand quickly on her shoulder . 

 " you must ride with Waldo ; I be go to drive your cousin home . " 
 " but I can not   come just now , Greg ; I promise Tante Annie to look after the thing while she go to rest a little . " 
 " well , you can come presently , can not   you ? I do not   say you be to come now . I be sick of this thing , " say Gregory , turn sharply on his heel . " why must I sit up the whole night because your step - mother choose to get marry ? " 
 " oh , it be all right , Greg , I only mean " 
 but he do not hear she , and a man have come up to have his cup fill . 
 an hour after Waldo come in to look for she , and find she still busy at the table . 
 " the horse be ready , " he say ; " but if you would like to have one dance more I will wait . " 
 she shake her head wearily . 
 " no ; I be quite ready . I want to go . " 

 and soon they be on the sandy road the buggy have travel an hour before . their horse , with head close together , nod sleepily as they walk in the starlight , you might have count the rise and fall of their foot in the sand ; and Waldo in his saddle nod drowsily also . only Em be awake , and watch the starlit road with wide - open eye . at last she speak . 
 " I wonder if all people feel so old , so very old , when they get to be seventeen . " 
 " not old than before , " say Waldo sleepily , pull at his bridle . 
 presently she say again , 
 " I wish I could have be a little child always . you be good then . you be never selfish ; you like every one to have everything ; but when you be grow - up there be some thing you like to have all to yourself , you do not   like any one else to have any of they . " 

 " yes , " say Waldo sleepily , and she do not speak again . 
 when they reach the farm - house all be dark , for Lyndall have retire as soon as they get home . 
 Waldo lift Em from her saddle , and for a moment she lean her head on his shoulder and clung to he . 
 " you be very tired , " he say , as he walk with she to the door ; " let I go in and light a candle for you . " 
 " no , thank you ; it be all right , " she say . " good night , Waldo , dear . " 
 but when she go in she sit long alone in the dark . 



 CHAPTER VII . 
 waldo go out to TASTE life , and EM stay AT HOME and taste it . 

 AT 
 nine o'clock in the evening , pack his bundle for the next morning 's start , Waldo look up , and be surprised to see Em 's yellow head peep in at his door . it be many a month since she have be there . she say she have make he sandwich for his journey , and she stay a while to help he put his good into the saddle - bag . 

 " you can leave the old thing lie about , " she say ; " I will lock the room , and keep it wait for you to come back some day . " 

 to come back some day ! would the bird ever 

 return to its cage ? but he thank she . when she go away he stand on the doorstep hold the candle till she have almost reach the house . but Em be that evening in no hurry to enter , and instead of go in at the back door , walk with lag footstep round the low brick wall that run before the house . opposite the open window of the parlour she stop . the little room , keep carefully close in Tant ' Sannie 's time , be well light by a paraffin lamp ; book and work lie strew about it , and it wear a bright , habitable aspect . beside the lamp at the table in the corner sit Lyndall , the open letter and paper of the day 's post lie scatter before she , while she peruse the column of a newspaper . at the centre table , with his arm fold on an open paper , which there be not light enough to read , sit Gregory . he be look at she . the light from the open window fall on Em 's little face under its white kapje 

 as she look in , but no one glance that way . 

 " go and fetch I a glass of water , " Lyndall say at last . 
 Gregory go out to find it ; when he put it down at her side she merely move her head in recognition , and he go back to his seat and his old occupation . then Em move slowly away from the window , and through it come in spot , hard - wing insect , to play round the lamp , till one by one , they stick to its glass , and fall to the foot dead . 
 ten o'clock strike . then Lyndall rise , gather up her paper and letter , and wish Gregory good night . some time after Em enter ; she have be sit all the while on the loft ladder , and have draw her " kapje " down very much over her face . 
 Gregory be piece together the bit of an envelope when she come in . 

 " I think you be never come , " he say , turn round quickly , and throw the fragment onto the floor . " you know I have be shear all day , and it be ten o'clock already . " 
 " I be sorry . I do not think you would be go so soon , " she say in a low voice . 
 " I can not   hear what you say . what make you mumble so ? well , good night , Em . " 
 he stoop down hastily to kiss she . 
 " I want to talk to you , Gregory . " 
 " well , make haste , " he say pettishly . " I be awfully tired . I have   be sit here all the evening . why could not   you come and talk before ? " 
 " I will not keep you long , " she answer very steadily now . " I think , Gregory , it would be well if you and I be never to be marry . " 

 " good heaven ! em , what do you mean ? I think you be so fond of I ? you always 
 profess 
 to be . what on earth have you take into your head now ? " 


 " I think it would be well , " she say , fold her hand over each other , very much as though she be pray . 

 " well , em ! what do you mean ? even a woman can not   take a freak all about nothing ! you must have 
 some 
 reason for it , and I be sure I have   do nothing to offend you . I write only to - day to my sister to tell she to come up next month to our wedding , and I have   be as affectionate and happy as possible . come what be the matter ? " 

 he put his arm half round her shoulder , very loosely . 
 " I think it would be well , " she answer , slowly . 
 " oh , well , " he say , draw himself up , " if you will not   enter into explanation you will not ; and I be not the man to beg and pray not to any woman , and you know that ! if you do not   want to marry I I can not   oblige you to , of course . " 

 she stand quite still before he . 

 " you woman never 
 do 
 know your own mind for two day together ; and of course you know the state of your own feeling well ; but it be very strange . have you really make up your mind , Em ? " 

 " yes . " 
 " well , I be very sorry . I be sure I have   not be in anything to blame . a man can not   always be bill and coo ; but , as you say , if your feeling for I have change , it be much well you should not   marry I . there be nothing so foolish as to marry some one you do not   love ; and I only wish for your happiness , I be sure . I daresay you will find some one can make you much happy than I could ; the first person we love be seldom the right one . you be very young ; it be quite natural you should change . " 
 she say nothing . 

 " thing often seem hard at the time , but 

 Providence make they turn out for the good in the end , " say Gregory . " you will let I kiss you , Em , just for old friendship 's sake . " he stoop down . " you must look upon I as a dear brother , as a cousin at least ; as long as I be on the farm I shall always be glad to help you , Em . " 

 soon after the brown pony be canter along the footpath to the daub - and - wattle house , and his master as he ride whistle John Speriwig and the Thorn Kloof schottische . 

 the sun have not yet touch the outstretche arm of the prickly pear upon the kopje , and the early cock and hen still strut about stiffly after the night 's roost , when Waldo stand before the waggon - house saddle the grey mare . every now and then he glance up at the old familiar object : they have a new aspect that morning . even the cock , see in the light of 

 parting , have a peculiar interest , and he listen with conscious attention while one crow clear and loud as it stand on the pigsty wall . he wish good morning softly to the kaffir - woman who be come up from the hut to light the fire . he be leave they all to that old life , and from his height he look down on they pityingly . so they would keep on crowing , and come to light fire , when for he that old colourless existence be but a dream . 

 he go into the house to say good - bye to Em , and then he walk to the door of Lyndall 's room to wake she ; but she be up , and stand in the doorway . 
 " so you be ready , " she say . 
 Waldo look at she with sudden heaviness ; the exhilaration die out of his heart . her grey dressing - gown hang close about she , and below its edge the little bare foot be rest on the threshold . 

 " I wonder when we shall meet again , Waldo . what you will be , and what I ? " 
 " will you write to I ? " he ask of she . 
 " yes ; and if I should not , you can still remember , wherever you be , that you be not alone . " 
 " I have leave Doss for you , " he say . 
 " will you not miss he ? " 
 " no ; I want you to have he . he love you well than he love I . " 
 " thank you . " they stand quiet . 
 " good - bye ! " she say , put she little hand in his , and he turn away ; but when he reach the door she call to he : " come back , I want to kiss you . " she draw his face down to her , and hold it with both hand , and kiss it on the forehead and mouth . " good - bye , dear ! " 
 when he look back the little figure with its beautiful eye be stand in the doorway still . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 
 the KOPJE . 

 " 
 good 
 morning ! " 

 Em , who be in the storeroom measure the Kaffir 's ration , look up and see her former lover standing betwixt she and the sunshine . for some day after that evening on which he have ride home whistle he have shun she . she might wish to enter into explanation , and he , Gregory Rose , be not the man for that kind of thing . if a woman have once throw he overboard she must take the consequence , and stand by they . when , however , she show no inclination to revert to the past , and shun he more than he shun she , Gregory soften . 

 " you must let I call you em still , and be like a brother to you till I go , " he say ; and em thank he so humbly that he wish she have not . it be not   so easy after that to think himself an injure man . 
 on that morning he stand some time in the doorway switch his whip , and move rather restlessly from one leg to the other . 

 " I think I will just take a walk up to the camp and see how your bird be get on . now Waldo 's go you have   no one to see after thing . nice morning , be not   it ? " then he add suddenly , " I will just go round to the house and get a drink of water first ; " and somewhat awkwardly walk off . he might have find water in the kitchen , but he never glance toward the bucket . in the front room a monkey and two tumbler stand on the centre table ; but he merely look round , peep into the parlour , look round again , and then walk out at the 

 front door , and find himself again at the store - room without have satisfy his thirst . " awfully nice morning this , " he say , try to pose himself in a graceful and indifferent attitude against the door . " it be not   hot and it be not   cold . it be awfully nice . " 

 " yes , " say Em . 
 " your cousin , now , " say Gregory in an aimless sort of way " I suppose she be shut up in her room write letter . " 
 " no , " say em . 
 " gone for a drive , I expect ? nice morning for a drive . " 
 " no . " 
 " go to see the ostrich , I suppose ? " 
 " no . " after a little silence Em add , " I see she go by the kraal to the kopje . " 
 Gregory cross and uncross his leg . 

 " well , I think I will just go and have a look about , " he say , " and see how thing be get 

 on before I go to the camp . good - bye ; so long . " 

 em leave for a while the bag she be fold and go to the window , the same through which , year before , Bonaparte have watch the slouching figure cross the yard . Gregory walk to the pigsty first , and contemplate the pig for a few second ; then turn round , and stand look fixedly at the wall of the fuel - house as though he think it want repair ; then he start off suddenly with the evident intention of go to the ostrich - camp ; then pause , hesitate , and finally walk off in the direction of the " kopje . " 
 then Em go back to the corner , and fold more sack . 

 on the other side of the " kopje " Gregory catch sight of a white tail wave among the stone , and a succession of short , frantic bark tell where Doss be engage in howl 

 implor- 
 imploringly 


 ingly to a lizard who have creep between two stone , and who have not the slight intention of re - sun himself at that particular moment . 

 the dog 's mistress sit higher up , under the shelve rock , her face bent over a volume of play upon her knee . as Gregory mount the stone she start violently and look up ; then resume her book . 
 " I hope I be not trouble you , " say Gregory as he reach her side . " if I be I will go away . I just " 
 " no ; you may stay . " 
 " I fear I startle you . " 
 " yes ; your step be firm than it generally be . I think it be that of some one else . " 
 " who could it be but I ? " ask Gregory , seat himself on a stone at her foot . 
 " do you suppose you be the only man who would find anything to attract he to this " kopjeí ? " 

 " oh , no , " say Gregory . 
 he be not go to argue that point with she , nor any other ; but no old boer be likely to take the trouble of climb the " kopje , " and who else be there ? 
 she continue the study of her book . 
 " Miss Lyndall , " he say at last , " I do not   know why it be you never talk to I . " 
 " we have a long conversation yesterday , " she say , without look up . 
 " yes ; but you ask I question about sheep and oxen . I do not   call that talk . you use to talk to Waldo , now , " he say , in an aggrieved tone of voice . " I have   hear you when I come in , and then you have   just leave off . you treat I like that from the first day ; and you could not   tell from just look at I that I could not   talk about the thing you like . I be sure I know as much about such thing as Waldo do , " say Gregory , in exceed bitterness of spirit . 

 " I do not know which thing you refer to . if you will enlighten I I be quite prepared to speak of they , " she say , read as she speak . 
 " oh , you never use to ask Waldo like that , " say Gregory , in a more sorely aggrieve tone than ever . " you use just to begin . " 

 " well , let I see , " she say , close her book and fold her hand on it . " there go a kaffir ; he have nothing on but a blanket ; he be a splendid fellow six foot high , with a magnificent pair of leg . in his leather bag he be go to get his ration , and I suppose to kick his wife with his beautiful leg when he get home . he have a right to ; he buy she for two oxen . there be a lean dog go after he , to whom I suppose he never give more than a bone from which he have suck the marrow ; but his dog love he , as his wife do . there be something of the master about he in 

 spite of his blackness and wool . see how he brandish his stick and hold up his head ! " 

 " oh , but be not   you make fun ? " say Gregory , look doubtfully from she to the Kaffir herd , who round the " kopje . " 
 " no ; I be very serious . he be the most interesting and intelligent thing I can see just now , except , perhaps , Doss . he be profoundly suggestive . will his race melt away in the heat of a collision with a high ? be the man of the future to see his bone only in museum a vestige of one link that span between the dog and the white man ? he wake thought that run far out into the future and back into the past . " 
 Gregory be not quite sure how to take these remark . be about a kaffir , they appear to be of the nature of a joke ; but be seriously speak , they appear earnest ; so he half laugh and half not , to be on the safe side . 

 " I have   often think so myself . it be funny we should both think the same ; I know we should if once we talk . but there be other thing love , now , " he add . " I wonder if we would think alike about that . I write an essay on love once ; the master say it be the good I ever write , and I can remember the first sentence still " love be something that you feel in your heart.í " 
 " that be a trenchant remark . can not   you remember any more ? " 
 " no , " say Gregory , regretfully ; " I have   forget the rest . but tell I what do you think about love ? " 
 a look , half of abstraction , half amusement , play on her lip . 

 " I do not   know much about love , " she say , " and I do not like to talk of thing I do not understand ; but I have hear two opinion . some say the devil carry the seed from hell 

 and plant it on the earth to plague man and make they sin ; and some say , that when all the plant in the garden of Eden be pull up by the root , one bush that the angel plant be leave grow , and it spread its seed over the whole earth , and its name be love . I do not know which be right perhaps both . there be different specie that go under the same name . there be a love that begin in the head , and go down to the heart , and grow slowly ; but it last till death , and ask less than it give . there be another love , that blot out wisdom , that be sweet with the sweetness of life and bitter with the bitterness of death , last for an hour ; but it be worth have live a whole life for that hour . I can not tell , perhaps the old monk be right when they try to root love out ; perhaps the poet be right when they try to water it . it be a blood - red flower , with the colour of 

 sin ; but there be always the scent of a god about it . " 

 Gregory would have make a remark ; but she say , without notice , 
 " there be as many kind of love as there be flower . everlasting that never wither ; Speedwells that wait for the wind to fan they out of life ; blood - red mountain - lily that pour their voluptuous sweetness out for one day , and lie in the dust at night . there be no flower have the charm of all the Speedwell 's purity , the Everlasting 's strength , the mountain - lily 's warmth ; but who know whether there be no love that hold all friendship , passion , worship ! 

 " such a love , " she say , in her sweetest voice , " will fall on the surface of strong , cold , selfish life as the sunlight fall on a torpid winter world ; there , where the tree be bare , and the ground frozen , till it ring to the step like iron , and the water be solid , and the air be sharp 

 as a two - edge knife that cut the unwary . but when its sun shin on it , through its whole dead crust a throb yearning wake : the tree feel he , and every knot and bud swell , ache to open to he . the brown seed , who have sleep deep under the ground , feel he , and he give they strength , till they break through the frozen earth , and lift two tiny , tremble green hand in love to he . and he touch the water , till down to its depth it feel he and melt , and it flow , and the thing , strange sweet thing that be lock up in it , it sing as it run , for love of he . each plant try to bear at least one fragrant little flower for he ; and the world that be dead life , and the heart that be dead and self - centre throb , with an upward , outward yearning , and it have become that which it seem impossible ever to become . there , do that satisfy you ? " she ask , look down 

 at Gregory . " be that how you like I to talk ? " 

 " oh , yes , " say Gregory , " that be what I have already think . we have the same thought about everything . how strange ! " 
 " very , " say Lyndall , work with her little toe at a stone in the ground before she . 
 Gregory feel he must sustain the conversation . the only thing he could think of be to recite a piece of poetry . he know he have learn many about love ; but the only thing that would come into his mind now , be the " Battle of Hohenlinden , í and " not a drum be hear , í neither of which seem to bear directly on the subject on hand . 

 but unexpected relief come to he from Doss , who , too deeply lose in contemplation of his crevice , be surprise by the sudden descent of the stone Lyndall 's foot have loosen , which , roll against his little front paw , carry away 

 a piece of white skin . Doss stand on three leg , hold up the paw with an expression of extreme self - commiseration ; he then proceed to hop slowly upward in search of sympathy . 

 " you have hurt that dog , " say Gregory . 
 " have I ? " she reply indifferently , and re - open the book , as though to resume her study of the play . 
 " he be a nasty , snappish little cur ! " say Gregory , calculate from her manner that the remark would be endorse . " he snap at my horse 's tail yesterday , and nearly make it throw I . I wonder his master do not   take he , instead of leave he here to be a nuisance to all of we ! " 
 Lyndall seem absorb in her play ; but he venture another remark . 

 " do you think now , Miss Lyndall , that he will ever have anything in the world that German . I mean money enough to support a wife on , and 

 all that sort of thing ? 
 I 
 do not . he be what 
 I 
 call soft . " 

 she be spread her skirt out softly with her left hand for the dog to lie down on it . 

 " I think I 
 should 
 be rather astonished if he ever become a respectable member of society , " she say . I do not   expect to see he the possessor of bank - share , the chairman of a divisional council , and the father of a large family ; wear a black hat , and go to church twice on a Sunday . he would rather astonish I if he come to such an end . " 


 " yes ; I do not   expect 
 anything 
 of he either , " say Gregory , zealously . 


 " well , I do not   know , " say Lyndall ; " there be some small thing I rather look to he for . if he be to invent wing , or 

 carry 
 carve 

 a statue that one might look at for half an hour without want to look at something else , I should not be surprised . he may do some little thing of 

 that kind perhaps , when he have do ferment and the sediment have all go to the bottom . " 

 Gregory feel that what she say be not wholly intend as blame . 
 " well , I do not   know , " he say sulkily ; " to I he look like a fool . to walk about always in that dead - and - alive sort of way , mutter to himself like an old Kaffir witch - doctor ! he work hard enough , but it be always as though he do not   know what he be do . you do not   know how he look to a person who see he for the first time . " 
 Lyndall be softly touch the little sore foot as she read , and Doss , to show he like it , lick her hand . 
 " but , Miss Lyndall , " persist Gregory , " what do you really think of he ? " 

 " I think , " say Lyndall , " that he be like a thorn - tree , which grow up very quietly , without 

 any one 's care for it , and one day suddenly break out into yellow blossom . " 

 " and what do you think I be like ? " ask Gregory , hopefully . 
 Lyndall look up from her book . 
 " like a little tin duck float on a dish of water , that come after a piece of bread stick on a needle , and the more the needle prick it the more it come on . " 

 " oh , you 
 be 
 make fun of I now , you really be ! " say Gregory feel wretched . " you 
 be 
 make fun , be not   you , now ? " 

 " partly . it be always divert to make comparison . " 
 " yes ; but you do not   compare I to anything nice , and you do other people . what be Em like , now ? " 

 " the accompaniment of a song . she fill up the gap in other people 's life , and be always number two ; but I think she be like many 

 accompaniment a great deal well than the song she be to accompany . " 

 " she be not half so good as you be ! " say Gregory , with a burst of uncontrollable ardour . 
 " she be so much well than I , that her little finger have more goodness in it than my whole body . I hope you may not live to find out the truth of that fact . " 
 " you be like an angel , " he say , the blood rush to his head and face . 
 " yes , probably ; angel be of many order . " 
 " you be the one be that I love ! " say Gregory quivering ; " I think I love before , but I know now ! do not be angry with I . I know you could never like I ; but , if I might but always be near you to serve you , I would be utterly , utterly happy . I would ask nothing in return ! if you could only take everything I have and use it ; I want nothing but to see you . " 

 " how do you know , " she say slowly , " that I would not be willing to marry you if you ask I ? " 
 he start , and turn his burn face to she . 
 " you be very cruel ; you be ridicule I , " he say . 
 " no , I be not , Gregory . what I be say be plain , matter - of - fact business . if you be willing to marry I within three week ' time , I be willing to marry you , if not , not . that be a clear proposal , be it not ? " 
 he look up . be it contempt , loathing , pity , that move in the eye above ? he could not tell ; but he stoop over the little foot and kiss it . 
 she smile . 
 " do you really mean it ? " he whisper . 

 " yes . you wish to be near I , and to serve I , and to have nothing in return ? you shall have what you wish . I believe you love I ; I 

 too could love so , that to lie under the foot of the thing I love would be more heaven than to lie in the breast of another . come ! let we go . carry the dog , " she add ; " he will not bite you if I put he in your arm . so do not let his foot hang down . " 

 they descend the " kopje . " at the bottom , he whisper , 
 " would you not take my arm ? the path be very rough . " 
 she rest her finger lightly on it . 
 " I would try to make everything beautiful for you , " he say ; " but now there be not time . " 

 " it do not matter . I may yet change my mind about marry you before the time come . mark you ! " she say , turn round on he ; " I remember your word : 
 you will give everything , and expect nothing . 
 the knowledge that you be serve I be to be your reward ; and you will have that . you will serve I , and greatly . 

 the reason I have for marry you I need not inform you of now ; you will probably discover some of they before long . " 

 " I only want to be of some use to you , " he say . 
 it seem to Gregory that there be pulse in the sol of his foot , and the ground shimmer as on a summer 's day . they walk round the foot of the kopje , and past the Kaffir hut . an old Kaffir maid knelt at the door of one grind mealie . that she should see he walk so make his heart beat so fast that the hand on his arm feel its pulsation . it seem that she must envy he . 
 just then Em look out again at the back window and see they come . she cry bitterly all the while she sort the skin . 
 but that night when Lyndall have blow her candle out , and half turn round to sleep , the door of Em 's bed - room open . 

 " I want to say good night to you , Lyndall , " 

 she say , come to the bedside and kneel down . 

 " I think you be asleep , " Lyndall reply . 
 " yes , I have be asleep ; but I have such a vivid dream , " she say , hold the other 's hand , " and that wake I . I never have so vivid a dream before . 
 " it seem I be a little girl again , and I come somewhere into a large room . on a bed in the corner there be something lie dress in white , and its little eye be shut , and its little face be like wax . I think it be a doll , and I run forward to take it ; but some one hold up her finger and say , " Hush ! it be a little dead baby.í and I say , " oh , I must go and call Lyndall , that she may look at it also.í 
 " and they put their face close down to my ear and whisper , " it be Lyndall 's baby.í 

 " and I say , " she can not be grow up yet ; 

 she be only a little girl ! where be she?í and I go to look for you , but I could not find you . 

 " and when I come to some people who be dress in black , I ask they where you be , and they look down at their black clothe , and shake their head , and say nothing ; and I could not find you anywhere . and then I wake . 
 " Lyndall , " she say , put she face down upon the hand she hold , " it make I think about that time when we be little girl and use to play together , when I love you well than anything else in the world . it be not   any one 's fault that they love you ; they can not   help it . and it be not   your fault ; you do not   make they love you . I know it . " 
 " thank you , dear , " Lyndall say . " it be nice to be love , but it would be well to be good . " 

 then they wish good night , and Em go back to her room . long after Lyndall lie in the dark thinking , thinking , thinking ; and as she turn round wearily to sleep she mutter , 
 " there be some wise in their sleeping than in their waking . " 



 CHAPTER IX . 
 LYNDALL 's stranger . 

 a FIRE 
 be burn in the unused hearth of the cabin . the fuel blaze up , and light the black rafter , and warm the fade red lion on the quilt , and fill the little room with a glow of warmth and light make bright by contrast , for outside the night be chill and misty . 


 before the open fire - place sit a stranger , his keen blue eye study the fire from beneath delicately - pencil , droop eyelid . one white hand play thoughtfully with a heavy flaxen moustache ; yet once he start , and for an instant the languid lid raise themselves : there be a keen , intent look upon the face as he listen 

 for something . then he lean back in his chair , fill his glass from the silver flask in his bag , and resume his old posture . 

 presently the door open noiselessly . it be Lyndall , follow by Doss . quietly as she enter , he hear she , and turn . 
 " I think you be not come . " 
 " I wait till all have go to bed . I could not come before . " 
 she remove the shawl that envelop she , and the stranger rise to offer she his chair ; but she take her seat on a low pile of sack before the window . 
 " I hardly see why I should be outlaw after this fashion , " he say , re - seat himself and draw his chair a little near to she ; " these be hardly the quarter one expect to find after travel a hundred mile in answer to an invitation . " 
 " I say , " come if you wish.í " 

 " and I do wish . you give I a cold reception . " 
 " I could not take you to the house . question would be ask which I could not answer without prevarication . " 
 " your conscience be grow to have a certain virgin tenderness , " he say , in a low , melodious voice . 
 " I have no conscience . I speak one deliberate lie this evening . I say the man who have come look rough , we have well not have he in the house ; therefore I bring he here . it be a deliberate lie , and I hate lie . I tell they if I must , but they hurt I . " 
 " well , you do not tell lie to yourself , at all event . you be candid , so far . " 
 she interrupt he . 
 " you get my short letter ? " 

 " yes ; that be why I come . you send a very 

 foolish reply ; you must take it back . who be this fellow you talk of marry ? " 

 " a young farmer . " 
 " live here ? " 
 " yes ; he have go to town to get thing for our wedding . " 
 " what kind of a fellow be he ? " 
 " a fool . " 
 " and you would rather marry he than I ? " 
 " yes ; because you be not one . " 
 " that be a novel reason for refuse to marry a man , " he say , lean his elbow on the table and watch she keenly . 

 " it be a wise one , " she say shortly . " if I marry he I shall shake he off my hand when it suit I . it be three week since I first talk of marry he , and he have not once dare to kiss my hand . as far as I wish he should come , he come , and no far . would 

 you ask I what you might and what you might not do ? " 

 her companion raise the moustache with a caress movement from his lip and smile . it be not a question that stand in need of any answer . 
 " what have you do with the ring I give you ? " he say . 
 " sometimes I wear it ; then I take it off and wish to throw it into the fire ; the next day I put it on again , and sometimes I kiss it . " 
 " so you do love I a little ? " 
 " if you be not something more to I than any other man in the world , do you think " she pause . " I love you when I see you ; but when you be away from I I hate you . " 
 " then I fear I must be singularly invisible at the present moment , " he say . " possibly if you be to look less fixedly into the fire you might perceive I . " 

 he move his chair slightly , so as to come between she and the firelight . she raise her eye to his face . 
 " if you do love I , " he ask she , " why will you not marry I ? " 
 " because , if I have be married to you for a year I should have come to my sens and see that your hand and your voice be like the hand and the voice of any other man . I can not quite see that now . but it be all madness . you call into activity one part of my nature ; there be a high part that you know nothing of , that you never touch . if I marry you , afterwards it would arise and assert itself , and I should hate you always , as I do now sometimes . " 

 " I like you when you grow metaphysical and analytical , " he say , lean his face upon his hand . " go a little far in your analysis , say , " I love you with the right ventricle of my heart , but not the left , and with the left auricle 

 of my heart , but not the right ; and this be the case , my affection for you be not of a duly elevated , intellectual and spiritual nature.í I like you when you get philosophical . " 

 she look quietly at he ; he be try to turn her own weapon against she . 

 " you be act foolishly , Lyndall , " he say , suddenly change his manner , and speak almost earnestly , " most foolishly . you be act like a little child ; I be surprised at you . it be all very well to have ideal and theory ; but you know as well as any one can that they must not be carry into the practical world . I love you . I do not pretend that it be in any high , superhuman sense ; I do not say that I should like you as well if you be ugly and deform , or that I should continue to prize you whatever your treatment of I might be , or to love you though you be a spirit without any body at all . that be sentimentality for beardless boy . 

 every one not a mere child   and you be not a child , except in year   know what love between a man and a woman mean . I love you with that love . I should not have believe it possible that I could have bring myself twice to ask of any woman to be my wife , more especially one without wealth , without position , and whom " 

 " yes go on . do not grow sorry for I . say what you be go to " who have put herself into my power , and who have lose the right of meet I on equal terms.í say what you think . at least we two may speak the truth to one another . " 
 then she add after a pause , 

 " I believe you do love I , as much as you possibly could love anything ; and I believe that when you ask I to marry you , you be perform the most generous act you ever have perform in the course of your life , or ever will ; but , at the same time , if I have require your 

 generosity , it would not have be show I . if , when I get your letter a month ago , hint at your willingness to marry I , I have at once write , implore you to come , you would have read the letter . " poor little devil!í you would have say , and tear it up . the next week you would have sail for Europe , and have send I a check for a hundred and fifty pound   which I would have throw in the fire , and I would have hear no more of you . " the stranger smile . " but because I decline your proposal , and write that in three week I should be married to another , then what you call love wake up . your man 's love be a child 's love for butterfly . you follow till you have the thing , and break it . if you have break one wing , and the thing fly still , then you love it more than ever , and follow till you break both ; then you be satisfied when it lie still on the ground . " 


 " you be profoundly wise in the way of the world ; you have see far into life , " he say . 
 he might as well have sneer at the firelight . 
 " I have see enough to tell I that you love I because you can not bear to be resist , and want to master I . you like I at first because I treat you and all man with indifference . you resolve to have I because I seem unattainable . this be all your love mean . " 
 he feel a strong inclination to stoop down and kiss the little lip that defy he ; but he restrain himself . he say quietly , 
 " well , since you will not marry I , may I inquire what your intention be , the plan you write of . you ask I to come and hear it , and I have come . " 
 " I say , " come if you wish.í if you agree to it , well ; if not , I marry on Monday . " 
 " well ? " 
 she be still look beyond he at the fire . 

 " I can not marry you , " she say slowly , " because I can not be tie ; but if you wish , you may take I away with you , and take care of I ; then when we do not love any more we can say good - bye . I will not go down - country , " she add ; " I will not go to Europe . you must take I to the Transvaal . that be out of the world . People we meet there we need not see again in our future life . " 
 " oh , my darling , " he say , bend tenderly , and hold his hand out to she , " why will you not give yourself entirely to I ? one day you will desert I and go to another . " 
 she shake her head without look at he . 
 " no , life be too long . but I will go with you . " 
 " when ? " 

 " to - morrow . I have tell they that before daylight I go to the next farm . I will write from the town and tell they the fact . I do not 

 want they to trouble I ; I want to shake myself free of these old surrounding ; I want they to lose sight of I . you can understand that be necessary for I . " 

 he seem lose in consideration ; then he say , 

 " it be well to have you on those condition than not at all . if you 
 will 
 have it , let it be so . " 


 he sit look at she . on her face be the weary look that rest there so often now when she sit alone . two month have not pass since they part ; but the time have set its mark on she . he look at she carefully , from the brown , smooth head to the little crossed foot on the floor . a worn look have grow over the little face , and it make its charm for he strong . for pain and time , which trace deep line and write a story on a human face , have a strangely different effect on one face and another . 

 the face that be only fair , even very fair , they mar and flaw ; but to the face whose beauty be the harmony between that which speak from within and the form through which it speak , power be add by all that cause the outer man to bear more deeply the impress of the inner . the pretty woman fade with the rose on her cheek , and the girlhood that last an hour ; the beautiful woman find her fulness of bloom only when a past have write itself on she , and her power be then most irresistible when it seem go . 

 from under their half - close lid the keen eye look down at she . her shoulder be bent ; for a moment the little figure have forget its queenly bearing , and droop wearily ; the wide , dark eye watch the fire very softly . 
 it certainly be not in her power to resist he , nor any strength in she that make his own at that moment grow soft as he look at she . 

 he touch one little hand that rest on her knee . 
 " poor little thing ! " he say ; " you be only a child . " 
 she do not draw her hand away from his , and look up at he . 
 " you be very tired ? " 
 " yes . " 
 she look into his eye as a little child might whom a long day 's play have sadden . 
 he lift she gently up , and sit she on his knee . 
 " poor little thing ! " he say . 
 she turn her face to his shoulder , and bury it against his neck ; he wind his strong arm about she , and hold she close to he . when she have sit for a long while , he draw with his hand the face down , and hold it against his arm . he kiss it , and then put it back in its old resting - place . 

 " do not   you want to talk to I ? " 
 " no . " 
 " have you forget the night in the avenue ? " 
 he could feel that she shake her head . 
 " do you want to be quiet now ? " 
 " yes . " 
 they sit quite still , except that only sometimes he raise her finger softly to his mouth . 
 Doss , who have be asleep in the corner , wake suddenly , plant himself before they , his wiry leg move nervously , his yellow eye fill with anxiety . he be not at all sure that she be not be retain in her present position against her will , and be not a little relieved when she sit up and hold out her hand for the shawl . 
 " I must go , " she say . 
 the stranger wrap the shawl very carefully about she . 

 " keep it close around your face , Lyndall ; it be very damp outside . shall I walk with you to the house ? " 
 " no . lie down and rest ; I will come and wake you at three o'clock . " 
 she lift her face that he might kiss it , and , when he have kiss it once , she still hold it that he might kiss it again . then he let she out . he have seat himself at the fire - place , when she re - open the door . 
 " have you forget anything ? " 
 " no . " 
 she give one long , linger look at the old room . when she be go , and the door shut , the stranger fill his glass , and sit at the table sip it thoughtfully . 

 the night outside be misty and damp ; the faint moonlight , try to force its way through the thick air , make darkly visible the outline of the building . the stone and wall be moist , 

 and now and then a drop , slowly collect , fall from the eave to the ground . Doss , not like the change from the cabin 's warmth , run quickly to the kitchen door - step ; but his mistress walk slowly past he , and take her way up the wind foot - path that run beside the stone wall of the camp . when she come to the end of the last camp , she thread her way among the stone and bush till she reach the German 's grave . why she have come there she hardly know ; she stand look down . suddenly she bent and put one hand on the face of a wet stone . 

 " I shall never come to you again , " she say . 
 then she kneel on the ground , and lean her face upon the stone . 

 " dear old man , good old man , I be so tired ! " she say   for we will come to the dead to tell secret we would never have tell to the living . " I be so tired . there be light , there 

 be warmth , " she wail ; " why be I alone , so hard , so cold ? I be so weary of myself ! it be eat my soul to its core , self , self , self ! I can not bear this life ! I can not breathe , I can not live ! will nothing free I from myself ? " she press her cheek against the wooden post . " I want to love ! I want something great and pure to lift I to itself ! dear old man , I can not bear it any more ! I be so cold , so hard , so hard ; will no one help I ? " 

 the water gather slowly on her shawl , and fall on to the wet stone ; but she lie there cry bitterly . for so the live soul will cry to the dead , and the creature to its God ; and of all this cry there come nothing . the lifting up of the hand bring no salvation ; redemption be from within , and neither from God nor man ; it be work out by the soul itself , with suffering and through time . 

 Doss , on the kitchen door - step , shiver , and 

 wonder where his mistress stay so long ; and once , sit sadly there in the damp , he have drop asleep , and dream that old Otto give he a piece of bread , and pat he on the head , and when he wake his tooth chatter , and he move to another stone to see if it be dry . at last he hear his mistress 's step , and they go into the house together . she light a candle , and walk to the boer - woman 's bed - room . on a nail under the lady in pink hang the key of the wardrobe . she take it down and open the great press . from a little drawer she take fifty pound   all she have in the world , relocke the door , and turn to hang up the key . the mark of tear be still on her face , but she smile . 

 " fifty pound for a lover ! a noble reward ! " she say , and open the wardrobe and return the note to the drawer . 

 once in her own room , she arrange the 

 few article she intend to take to - morrow , burn her old letter , and then go back to the front - room to look at the time . there be two hour yet before she must call he . she sit down at the dressing - table to wait , and lean her elbow on it , and bury her face in her hand . the glass reflect the little brown head with its even parting , and the tiny hand on which it rest . presently she look up . the large , dark eye from the glass look back at she . she look deep into they . 


 " we be all alone , you and I , " she whisper ; " no one help we , no one understand we ; but we will help ourselves . " the eye look back at she . there be a world of assurance in their still depth . so they have look at she ever since she could remember , when it be but a small child 's face above a blue pinafore they have look from . " we shall never be quite alone , 

 you and I , " she say ; " we shall always be together , as we be when we be little . " 

 the beautiful eye look into the depth of her soul . 
 " we be not afraid ; we will help ourselves ! " she say . she stretch out her hand and press it over they on the glass . " dear eye ! we will never be quite alone till they part we ; till then ! " 



 CHAPTER X. 
 GREGORY ROSE have an IDEA . 

 GREGORY ROSE 
 be in the loft put it neat . outside the rain pour ; a six month ' drought have break , and the thirsty plain be drench with water . what it could not swallow run off in mad rivulet to the great " sloot , " that now foam like an angry river across the flat . even the little furrow between the farmhouse and the kraal be now a stream , knee - deep , which almost bear away the kaffir - woman who cross it . it have rain for twenty - four hour , and still the rain pour on . the fowl have collect a melancholy crowd in and about the waggon - house , and the 

 solitary gander , who alone have survive the six month ' want of water , walk hither and thither , print his web foot - mark on the mud , to have they wash out the next instant by the pelt rain , which at eleven o'clock still beat on the wall and roof with unabated ardour . 


 Gregory , as he work in the loft , take no notice of it beyond stuff a sack into the broken pane to keep it out ; and , in spite of the pelt and patter , Em 's clear voice might be hear through the open trap - door from the dining room , where she sit at work , sing the " Blue Waterí 


 " and take I away , 
 and take I away , 
 and take I away , 
 to the Blue Water " 


 that quaint , childish song of the people , that have a world of sweetness , and sad , vague yearning when sing over and over dreamily by a woman 's voice as she sit alone at her work . 

 but Gregory hear neither that nor yet the loud laughter of the Kaffir maid , that every now and again break through from the kitchen , where they joke and work . of late Gregory have grow strangely impervious to the sound and sight about he . his lease have run out , but Em have say , " do not renew it ; I need one to help I ; just stay on . " and , she have add , " you must not remain in your own little house ; live with I ; you can look after my ostrich well so . " 


 and Gregory do not thank she . what difference do it make to he , pay rent or not , live there or not ; it be all one . but yet he come . Em wish that he would still sometimes talk of the strength of the master - right of man ; but Gregory be as one smite on the cheek - bone . she might do what she please , he would find no fault , have no word to say . he have forget that it be man 's right to rule . on that 

 rainy morning he have light his pipe at the kitchen fire , and when breakfast be over stand in the front door watch the water rush down the road till the pipe die out in his mouth . em see she must do something for he , and find he a large calico duster . he have sometimes talk of put the loft neat , and to - day she could find nothing else for he to do . so she have the ladder put to the trap - door that he need not go out in the wet , and Gregory with the broom and duster mount to the loft . once at work he work hard . he dust down the very rafter , and clean the broken candle mould and bent fork that have stick in the thatch for twenty year . he place the black bottle neatly in row on an old box in the corner , and pile the skin on one another , and sort the rubbish in all the box ; and at eleven o'clock his work be almost do . he seat himself on the packing - case which have 

 once hold Waldo 's book , and proceed to examine the content of another which he have not yet look at . it be carelessly nail down . he loosen one plank , and begin to lift out various article of female attire old - fashioned cap , apron , dress with long point body such as he remember to have see his mother wear when he be a little child . he shake they out carefully to see there be no moth , and then sit down to fold they up again one by one . they have belong to Em 's mother , and the box , as pack at her death , have stand untouched and forget these long year . she must have be a tall woman , that mother of Em 's , for when he stand up to shake out a dress the neck be on a level with his , and the skirt touch the ground . Gregory lay a night - cap out on his knee , and begin roll up the string ; but presently his finger move slow and slow , then his chin rest on his breast , and 

 finally the implore blue eye be fix on the frill abstractedly . when Em 's voice call to he from the foot of the ladder he start , and throw the nightcap behind he . 


 she be only come to tell he that his cup of soup be ready ; and , when he could hear that she be go , he pick up the night - cap again , and a great brown sun-"kapje " just such a " kapje " and such a dress as one of those he remember to have see a sister - of - mercy wear . Gregory 's mind be very full of thought . he take down a fragment of an old looking - glass from behind a beam , and put the " kapje " on . his beard look somewhat grotesque under it ; he put up his hand to hide it that be well . the blue eye look out with the mild gentleness that become eye look out from under a " kapje . " next he take the brown dress , and , look round furtively , slip it over his head . he have just get his arm in the sleeve , and be 

 try to hook up the back , when an increase in the patter of the rain at the window make he drag it off hastily . when he perceive there be no one come he tumble the thing back into the box , and , cover it carefully , go down the ladder . 

 Em be still at her work , try to adjust a new needle in the machine . Gregory drink his soup , and then sit before she , an awful and mysterious look in his eye . 
 " I be go to town to - morrow , " he say . 
 " I be almost afraid you will not   be able to go , " say Em , who be intent on her needle ; " I do not   think it be go to leave off to - day . " 
 " I be go , " say Gregory . 
 em look up . 
 " but the " slootsí be as full as river ; you can not go . we can wait for the post , " she say . 
 " I be not go for the post , " say Gregory , impressively . 

 em look for explanation ; none come . 
 " when will you be back ? " 
 " I be not come back . " 
 " be you go to your friend ? " 
 Gregory wait , then catch she by the wrist . 
 " look here , em , " he say between his tooth , " I can not   stand it any more . I be go to she . " 
 since that day , when he have come home and find Lyndall go , he have never talk of she ; but Em know who it be who need to be speak of by no name . 
 she say , when he have release her hand , 
 " but you do not know where she be ? " 
 " yes , I do . she be in Bloemfontein when I hear last . I will go there , and I will find out where she go then , and then , and then ! I will have she . " 

 em turn the wheel quickly , and the ill - adjusted needle spring into twenty fragment . 
 " Gregory , " she say , " she do not want we ; she tell we so clearly in the letter she write . " a flush rise on her face as she speak . " it will only be pain to you , Gregory . will she like to have you near she ? " 
 there be an answer he might have make , but it be his secret , and he do not choose to share it . he say only , 
 " I be go . " 
 " will you be go long , Gregory ? " 
 " I do not know ; perhaps I shall never come back . do what you please with my thing . I can not stay here ! " 
 he rise from his seat . 

 " People say , forget , forget ! " he cry , pace the room . " they be mad ! they be fool ! do they say so to man who be die of thirst forget , forget ? why be it only to we they say 

 so ? it be a lie to say that time make it easy ; it be afterward , afterward that it eat in at your heart ! 

 " all these month , " he cry bitterly , " I have live here quietly , day after day , as if I care for what I eat , and what I drank , and what I do ! I care for nothing ! I can not bear it ! I will not ! forget ! forget ! " ejaculate Gregory . " you can forget all the world , but you can not forget yourself . when one thing be more to you than yourself , how be you to forget it ? 
 " I read , " he say " yes ; and then I come to a word she use , and it be all back with I again ! I go to count my sheep , and I see her face before I , and I stand and let the sheep run by . I look at you , and in your smile , a something at the corner of your lip , I see she . how can I forget she when , whenever I turn , she be there , and not there ? I can not , I will not , live where I do not see she . 

 " I know what you think , " he say , turn upon she . " you think I be mad ; you think I be go to see whether she will not like I ! I be not so foolish . I should have know at first she never could suffer I . who be I , what be I , that she should look at I ? it be right that she leave I ; right that she should not look at I . if any one say it be not , it be a lie ! I be not go to speak to she , " he add " only to see she ; only to stand sometimes in a place where she have stand before . " 



 CHAPTER XI . 
 an UNFINISHED letter . 

 GREGORY ROSE 
 have be go seven month . em sit alone on a white sheepskin before the fire . 


 the August night - wind , weird and shrill , howl round the chimney and through the cranny , and in wall and door , and utter a long low cry as it force its way among the cleft of the stone on the " kopje . " it be a wild night . the prickly pear tree , stiff and upright as it hold its arm , feel the wind 's might , and knock its flat leaf heavily together , till great branch break off . the Kaffirs , as they sleep in their straw hut , 

 whisper one to another that before morning there would not be an armful of thatch leave on the roof ; and the beam of the waggon - house creak and groan as if it be heavy work to resist the importunity of the wind . 

 Em have not go to bed . who could sleep on a night like this ? so in the dining room she have light a fire , and sit on the ground before it , turn the roaster - cake that lie on the coal to bake . it would save work in the morning ; and she blow out the light because the wind through the window - chink make it flicker and run ; and she sit sing to herself as she watch the cake . they lie at one end of the wide hearth on a bed of coal , and at the other end a fire burn up steadily , cast its amber glow over Em 's light hair and black dress , with the ruffle of crape about the neck , and over the white curl of the sheepskin on which she sit . 

 louder and more fiercely yet howl the 

 storm ; but Em sing on , and hear nothing but the word of her song , and hear they only faintly , as something restful . it be an old , childish song she have often hear her mother sing long ago 


 " where the reed dance by the river , 
 where the willow 's song be say , 
 on the face of the morning water , 
 be reflect a white flower 's head . " 




 she fold her hand and sing the next verse dreamily 


 " where the reed shake by the river , 
 where the moonlight 's sheen be shed , 
 on the face of the sleep water , 
 two leaf of a white flower float dead . 
 dead , dead , dead ! " 




 she echo the refrain softly till it die away , and then repeat it . it be as if , unknown to herself , it harmonize with the picture and thought that sit with she there alone in the firelight . she turn the cake over , while the 

 wind hurl down a row of brick from the gable , and make the wall tremble . 

 presently she pause and listen ; there be a sound as of something knock at the back - doorway . but the wind have raise its level higher , and she go on with her work . at last the sound be repeat . then she rise , light the candle and the fire , and go to see . only to satisfy herself , she say , that nothing could be out on such a night . 
 she open the door a little way , and hold the light behind she to defend it from the wind . the figure of a tall man stand there , and before she could speak he have push his way in , and be force the door to close behind he . 
 " Waldo ! " she cry in astonishment . 
 he have be go more than a year and a half . 

 " you do not expect to see I , " he answer , as he turn toward she ; " I should have sleep in the out - house , and not trouble you to - night ; 

 but through the shutter I see glimmering of a light . " 

 " come in to the fire , " she say ; " it be a terrific night for any creature to be out . shall we not go and fetch your thing in first ? " she add . 
 " I have nothing but this , " he say , motion to the little bundle in his hand . 
 " your horse ? " 
 " be dead . " 
 he sit down on the bench before the fire . 
 " the cake be almost ready , " she say ; " I will get you something to eat . where have you be wander all this while ? " 
 " up and down , up and down , " he answer wearily ; " and now the whim have seize I to come back here . em , " he say , put his hand on her arm as she pass he , " have you hear from Lyndall lately ? " 
 " yes , " say Em , turn quickly from he . 

 " where be she ? I have one letter from she , but that be almost eighteen month ago now just when she leave . where be she ? " 
 " in the Transvaal . I will go and get you some supper ; we can talk afterward . " 
 " can you give I her exact address ? I want to write to she . " 
 but Em have go into the next room . 
 when food be on the table she kneel down before the fire , turn the cake , babble restlessly , eagerly , now of this , now of that . she be glad to see he Tant ' Sannie be come soon to show she her new baby he must stay on the farm now , and help she . and Waldo himself be well content to eat his meal in silence , ask no more question . 
 " Gregory be come back next week , " she say ; " he will have be go just a hundred and three day to - morrow . I have a letter from he yesterday . " 

 " where have he be ? " 
 but his companion stoop to lift a cake from the fire . 
 " how the wind blow ! one can hardly hear one 's own voice , " she say . " take this warm cake ; no one 's cake be like mine . why , you have eat nothing ! " 
 " I be a little weary , " he say ; " the wind be mad to - night . " 
 he fold his arm , and rest his head against the fire - place , whilst she remove the dish from the table . on the mantel - piece stand an ink - pot and some sheet of paper . presently he take they down and turn up the corner of the table - cloth . 
 " I will write a few line , " he say ; " till you be ready to sit down and talk . " 

 Em , as she shake out the table - cloth , watch he bend intently over his paper . he have change much . his face have grow 

 thin ; his cheek be almost hollow , though they be cover by a dark growth of beard . 


 she sit down on the skin beside he , and feel the little bundle on the bench ; it be painfully small and soft . perhaps it hold a shirt and a book , but nothing more . the old black hat have a piece of unhemmed muslin twisted round it , and on his elbow be a large patch so fix on with yellow thread that her woman 's heart ache . only his hair be not change , and hang in silky beautiful wave almost to his shoulder . to - morrow she would take the ragged edge off his collar , and put a new band round his hat . she do not interrupt he , but she wonder how it be that he sit to write so intently after his long weary walk . he be not tired now ; his pen hurry quickly and restlessly over the paper , and his eye be bright . presently Em raise her hand to her breast , where lie the letter yesterday have bring 

 she . soon she have forget he , as entirely as he have forget she ; each be in his own world with his own . he be write to Lyndall . he would tell she all he have see , all he have do , though it be nothing worth relate . he seem to have come back to she , and to be talk to she now he sit there in the old house . 

 " and then I get to the next town , and my horse be tired , so I could go no far , and look for work . a shop - keeper agree to hire I as salesman . he make I sign a promise to remain six month , and he give I a little empty room at the back of the store to sleep in . I have still three pound of my own , and when you just come from the country three pound seem a great deal . 

 " when I have be in the shop three day I want to go away again . a clerk in a shop have the low work to do of all the people . it be 

 much well to break stone ; you have the blue sky above you , and only the stone to bend to . I ask my master to let I go , and I offer to give he my two pound , and the bag of mealie I have buy with the other pound ; but he would not . 

 " I find out afterward he be only give I half as much as he give to the other that be why . I have fear when I look at the other clerk that I would at last become like they . all day they be bow and smirk to the woman who come in ; smile , when all they want be to get their money from they . they use to run and fetch the dress and ribbon to show they , and they seem to I like worm with oil on . there be one respectable thing in that store it be the Kaffir storeman . his work be to load and unload , and he never need to smile except when he like , and he never tell lie . 

 " the other clerk give I the name of Old Salvation ; but there be one person I like very much . he be clerk in another store . he often go past the door . he seem to I not like other his face be bright and fresh like a little child 's . when he come to the shop I feel I like he . one day I see a book in his pocket , and that , make I feel near he . I ask he if he be fond of reading , and he say , yes , when there be nothing else to do . the next day he come to I , and ask I if I do not feel lonely ; he never see I go out with the other fellow ; he would come and see I that evening , he say . 
 " I be glad , and buy some meat and flour , because the grey mare and I always eat mealie ; it be the cheap thing ; and if you boil it hard you can not   eat much of it . I make some cake , and I fold my great coat on the box to make it soft for he ; and at last he come . 

 " " you have   get a rummy place here , í he say . 
 " you see there be nothing in it but packing - case for furniture , and it be rather empty . while I be put the food on the box he look at my book ; he read their name out aloud . " Elementary Physiology , í " First principles.í 
 " " golly!í he say ; " I have   get a lot of dry stuff like that at home I get for Sunday School prize ; but I only keep they to light my pipe with now ; they come in handy for that.í then he ask I if I have ever read a book call the " black - eyed creole.í " that be the style for I , í he say ; " there where the fellow take the nigger - girl by the arm , and the other fellow cut it off ! that be what I like.í 
 " but what he say after that I do not   remember , only it make I feel as if I be have a bad dream , and I want to be far away . 

 " when he have finish eat he do not 

 stay long ; he have to go and see some girl home from a prayer - meeting ; and he ask how it be he never see I walk out with any on Sunday afternoon . he say he have lot of sweetheart , and he be go to see one the next Wednesday on a farm , and he ask I to lend my mare . I tell he she be very old . but he say it do not   matter ; he would come the next day to fetch she . 

 " after he be go my little room get back to its old look . I love it so ; I be so glad to get into it at night , and it seem to be reproach I for bring he there . the next day he take the grey mare . on Thursday he do not bring she back , and on Friday I find the saddle and bridle stand at my door . 
 " in the afternoon he look into the shop , and call out , 

 " " Hope you get your saddle , Farber . your bag - of - bone kick out six mile from here . I will send you a couple of shilling to - morrow , 

 though the old hide be not   worth it . good morning.í 

 " but I spring over the counter , and get he by his throat . my father be so gentle with she ; he never would ride her up - hill , and now this fellow have murder she ! I ask he where he have kill she , and I shake he till he slip out of my hand . he stand in the door grin . 

 " " it do not   take much to kill 
 that 
 bag - of - bone , whose master sleep in a packing - case , and wait till his company 's finish to eat on the plate . should not   wonder if you feed she on sugar - bag , í he say ; " and if you think I have   jump she , you would well go and look yourself . you will find she along the road by the " aas - vogel " that be eat her.í 


 " I catch he by his collar , and I lift he from the ground , and I throw he out into the street , half - way across it . I hear the book - keeper say to the clerk that there be always 

 the devil in those mum fellow ; but they never call I Salvation after that . 

 " I be write to you of very small thing , but there be nothing else to tell ; it have be all small and you will like it . whenever anything have happen I have always think I would tell it to you . the back thought in my mind be always you . after that only one old man come to visit I . I have see he in the street often ; he always wear very dirty black clothe , and a hat with crape round it , and he have one eye , so I notice he . one day he come to my room with a subscription - list for a minister 's salary . when I say I have nothing to give he look at I with his one eye . 

 " " young man , í he say , " how be it I never see you in the house of the lord?í I think he be try to do good , so I feel sorry for he , and I tell he I never go to chapel . " young man , í he say , " it grieve I to hear such 

 godless word from the lip of one so young so far go in the path of destruction . young man , if you forget God , God will forget you . there be a seat on the right hand side as you go at the bottom door that you may get . if you be give over to the enjoyment and frivolity of this world , what will become of your never - die soul?í 

 " he would not go till I give he half - a - crown for the minister 's salary . afterward I hear he be the man who collect the pew - rent , and get a per centage . I do not   get to know any one else . 
 " when my time in that shop be do I hire myself to drive one of a transport - rider 's waggon . 

 " that first morning , when I sit in the front and call to my oxen , and see nothing about I but the hill with the blue come down to they , and the karroo bush , I be drunk ; I laugh ; my heart be throb till it hurt 

 I . I shut my eye tight , that when I open they I might see there be no shelf about I . there must be a beauty in buy and selling , if there be beauty in everything : but it be very ugly to I . my life as transport - rider would have be the good life in the world if I have have only one waggon to drive . my master tell I he would drive one , I the other , and he would hire another person to drive the third . but the first day I drive two to help he , and after that he let I drive all three . whenever we come to an hotel he stop behind to get a drink , and when he ride up to the waggon he could never stand ; the Hottentot and I use to lift he up . we always travel all night , and use to " out - spaní for five or six hour in the heat of the day to rest . I plan that I would lie under a waggon and read for an hour or two every day before I go to sleep , and I do for the first 

 two or three ; but after that I only want to sleep , like the rest , and I pack my book away . when you have three waggon to look after all night , you be sometimes so tired you can hardly stand . at first when I walk along drive my waggon in the night it be glorious ; the star have never look so beautiful to I ; and on the dark night when we ride through the bush there be will - o'-the - wisps dancing on each side of the road . I find out that even the damp and dark be beautiful . but I soon change , and see nothing but the road and my oxen . I only wish for a smooth piece of road , so that I might sit at the front and doze . at the place where we " out - spannedí there be sometimes rare plant and flower , the festoon hang from the bush - tree , nut and insect , such as we never see here ; but after a little while I never look at they I be too tired . I eat as much as I could , and then lie down on my 

 face under the waggon till the boy come to wake I to " in - span , í and then we drive on again all night ; so it go , so it go . I think sometimes when I walk by my oxen I call to they in my sleep , for I know I think of nothing ; I be like an animal . my body be strong and well to work , but my brain be dead . if you have not feel it , Lyndall , you can not understand it . you may work , and work , and work , till you be only a body , not a soul . now , when I see one of those evil - look man that come from Europe navvy , with the beast - like , sunken face , different from any Kaffir 's I know what bring that look into their eye ; and if I have only one inch of tobacco I give they half . it be work , grind , mechanical work , that they or their ancestor have do , that have make they into beast . you may work a man 's body so that his soul die . work be good . I have work at the old farm from the 

 sun 's rise till its setting , but I have have time to think , and time to feel . you may work a man so that all but the animal in he be go ; and that grow strong with physical labour . you may work a man till he be a brute . I know it , because I have feel it . you will never understand the change that come over I . no one but I will ever know how great it be . but I be never miserable ; when I could keep my oxen from stick fast , and when I could find a place to lie down in , I have all I want . after I have drive eight month a rainy season come . for eighteen hour out of the twenty - four we work in the wet . the mud go up to the axle sometimes , and we have to dig the wheel out , and we never go far in a day . my master swear at I more than ever , but when he have do he always offer I his brandy - flask . when I first come he have offer it I , and I have always refuse ; but now I 

 drink as my oxen do when I give they water without think . at last I buy brandy for myself whenever we pass an hotel . 


 " one Sunday we " out - spannedí on the bank of a swollen river to wait for its go down . it be drizzle still , so I lie under the waggon on the mud . there be no dry place anywhere ; and all the dung be wet , so there be no fire to cook food . my little flask be fill with brandy , and I drink some and go to sleep . when I wake it be drizzle still , so I drink some more . I be stiff and cold ; and my master , who lie by I , offer I his flask , because mine be empty . I drink some , and then I think I would go and see if the river be go down . I remember that I walk to the road , and it seem to be go away from I . when I wake up I be lie by a little bush on the bank of the river . it be afternoon ; all the cloud have go , and the 

 sky be deep blue . the Bushman - boy be grill rib at the fire . he look at I and grin from ear to ear . " Master be a little nice , í he say , " and lie down in the road . something might ride over master , so I carry he there.í he grin at I again . it be as though he say , " you and I be comrade . I have lie in a road , too . I know all about it.í when I turn my head from he I see the earth , so pure after the rain , so green , so fresh , so blue ; and I be a drunken carrier , whom his leader have pick up in the mud , and lay at the roadside to sleep out his drunken booze . I remember my old life , and I remember you . I see how , one day , you would read in the paper " a german Carrier , name Waldo Farber , be kill through fall from his waggon , be instantly crush under the wheel . Deceased be suppose to have be drunk at the time of the accident.í there 

 be those notice in the paper every month . I sit up , and I take the brandy - flask out of my pocket , and I fling it as far as I could into the dark water . the Hottentot boy run down to see if he could catch it ; it have sink to the bottom . I never drink again . but , Lyndall , sin look much more terrible to those who look at it than to those who do it . a convict , or a man who drink , seem something so far off and horrible when we see he ; but to himself he seem quite near to we , and like we . we wonder what kind of a creature he be ; but he be just we , ourselves . we be only the wood , the knife that carve on we be the circumstance . 


 " I do not know why I keep on work so hard for that master . I think it be as the oxen come every day and stand by the yoke ; they do not know why . perhaps I would have be with he still ; but one day we start with 

 load for the Diamond Fields . the oxen be very thin now , and they have be stand about in the yoke all day without food , while the waggon be be load . not far from the town be a hill . when we come to the foot the first waggon stick fast . I try for a little while to urge the oxen , but I soon see the one " spaní could never pull it up . I go to the other waggon to loosen that " spaní to join they on in front , but the transport - rider , who be lie at the back of the waggon , jump out . 

 " " they shall bring it up the hill ; and if half of they die for it they shall do it alone , í he say . 

 " he be not drunk , but in bad temper , for he have be drunk the night before . he swear at I , and tell I to take the whip and help he . we try for a little time , then I tell he it be no use , they could never do it . he swear louder and call to the leader to come on with their whip , and 

 together they lash . there be one ox , a black ox , so thin that the ridge of his backbone almost cut through his flesh . 

 " " it be you , devil , be it , that will not pull?í the transport - rider say . " I will show you something.í he glower like a devil . 
 " he tell the boy to leave off flog , and he hold the ox by the horn , and take up a round stone and knock its nose with it till the blood come . when he have do they call to the oxen and take up their whip again , and the oxen strain with their back bent , but the waggon do not move an inch . 
 " " so you will not , will not   you?í he say . " I will help you.í 

 " he take out his clasp - knife , and run it into the leg of the trembling ox three time , up to the hilt . then he put the knife in his pocket , and they take their whip . the oxen 's flank quiver , and they foam at the mouth . 

 strain , they move the waggon a few foot forward , then stand with bent back to keep it from slide back . from the black ox 's nostril foam and blood be stream on to the ground . it turn its head in its anguish and look at I with its great start eye . it be pray for help in its agony and weakness , and they take their whip again . the creature bellow aloud . if there be a God , it be call to its Maker for help . then a stream of clear blood burst from both nostril ; it fall on to the ground , and the waggon slip back . the man walk up to it . 

 " " you be go to lie down , devil , be you ? we will see you do not   take it too easy.í 

 " the thing be just die . he open his clasp - knife and stoop down over it . I do not know what I do then . but afterward I know I have he on the stone , and I be kneel on he . the boy drag I off . I wish they 

 have not . I leave he stand in the sand in the road , shake himself , and I walk back to the town . I take nothing from that accursed waggon , so I have only two shilling . but it do not matter . the next day I get work at a wholesale store . my work be to pack and unpack good , and to carry box , and I have to work from six in the morning to six in the evening ; so I have plenty of time . I hire a little room , and subscribe to a library , so I have everything I need ; and in the week of Christmas holiday I go to see the sea . I walk all night to escape the heat , and a little after sunrise I get to the top of a high hill . before I be a long , low , blue , monotonous mountain . I walk look at it , but I be think of the sea I want to see . at last I wonder what that curious blue thing might be ; then it strike I , it be the sea ! I would have turn back again , only I be too tired . I 

 wonder if all the thing we long to see the church , the picture , the man in Europe will disappoint we so ! you see I have dream of it so long . when I be a little boy , mind sheep behind the " kopje;í I use to see the wave stretch out as far as the eye could reach in the sunlight . my sea ! be the idea always more beautiful than the real ? 

 " I get to the beach that afternoon , and I see the water run up and down on the sand , and I see the white foam breaker ; they be pretty , but I think I would go back the next day . it be not my sea . 

 " but I begin to like it when I sit by it that night in the moonlight ; and the next day I like it well ; and before I leave I love it . it be not like the sky and star , that talk of what have no beginning and no end ; but it be so human . of all the thing I have ever see , only the sea be like a human 

 be ; the sky be not , nor the earth . but the sea be always move , always something deep in itself be stir it . it never rest . it be always want , wanting , want . it hurry on ; and then it creep back slowly without have reach , moan . it be always ask a question , and it never get the answer . I can hear it in the day and in the night ; the white foam breaker be say that which I think . I walk alone with they when there be no one to see I , and I sing with they . I lie down on the sand and watch they with my eye half shut . the sky be well , but it be so high above our head . I love the sea . sometimes we must look down too . after five day I go back to the town . 


 " I have glorious book , and in the night I could sit in my little room and read they ; but I be lonely . book be not the same thing when you be live among people . I can not tell 

 why , but they be dead . on the farm they would have be live being to I ; but here , where there be so many people about I , I want some one to belong to I . I be lonely . I want something that be flesh and blood . once on this farm there come a stranger ; I do not ask his name , but he sit among the karroo and talk with I . now , wherever I have travel I have look for he in hotel , in street , in passenger waggon as they rush in , through the open window of house I have look for he , but I have not find he never hear a voice like his . one day I go to the Botanic Gardens . it be a half - holiday , and the band be to play . I stand in the long raise avenue and look down . there be many flower , and lady and child be walk about beautifully dress . at last the music begin . I have not hear such music before . at first it be slow and even , like the everyday life , when 

 we walk through it without thought or feeling ; then it grow fast , then it pause , hesitate , then it be quite still for an instant , and then it burst out . Lyndall , they make heaven right when they make it all music . it take you up and carry you away , away , till you have the thing you long for ; you be in their own world . the wall about you break , and you spread out , you be shut in on no side . I could not see anything while it be play ; I stand with my head against my tree ; but , when it be do , I see that there be lady sit close to I on a wooden bench , and the stranger who have talk to I that day in the karroo be sit between they . the lady be very pretty , and their dress beautiful . I do not think they have be listen to the music , for they be talk and laugh very softly . I hear all they say , and could even smell the rose on the breast of one . I be afraid he would 

 see I ; so I go to the other side of the tree , and soon they get up and begin to pace up and down in the avenue . all the time the music play they chat , and he carry on his arm the scarf of the prettiest lady . I do not hear the music ; I try to catch the sound of his voice each time he go by . when I be listen to the music I do not know I be badly dress ; now I feel so ashamed of myself . I never know before what a low , horrible thing I , dress in tancord , be . that day on the farm , when we sit on the ground under the thorn - tree , I think he quite belong to I ; now , I see he be not mine . 


 " at last they turn to go to the gate , and I walk after they . when they get out he help the lady into a phaeton , and stand for a moment with his foot on the step talk to they . he have a little cane in his hand , and an italian greyhound run after he . just when 

 they drive away one of the lady drop her whip . 

 " " pick it up , fellow , í she say ; and when I bring it she she throw sixpence on the ground . I might have go back to the garden then ; but I do not want music ; I want clothe , and to be fashionable and fine . I feel that my hand be coarse , and that I be vulgar . I never try to see he again . 

 " I stay in my situation four month after that , but I be not happy . I have no rest . the people about I press on I , and make I dissatisfied . I could not forget they . even when I do not see they they press on I , and make I miserable . I do not love book ; I want people . when I walk home under the shady tree in the street I could not be happy , for when I pass the house I hear music , and see face between the curtain . I do not want any of they , but I want 

 some one for mine , for I . I could not help it . 

 " only one day something make I happy . a nurse come to the store with a little girl belong to one of our clerk . while the maid go into the office to give a message to its father , the little child stand look at I . presently she come close to I and peep up into my face . 
 " " nice curl , pretty curl , í she say ; " I like curls.í 
 " she feel my hair all over , with her little hand . when I put out my arm she let I take she and sit she on my knee . she kiss I with her soft mouth . we be happy till the nurse - girl come and shake the little one , and ask she if she be not ashamed to sit on the knee of that strange man . but I do not think my little one minded . she laugh at I as she go out . 

 " if the world be all child I could like it ; but man and woman draw I so strangely , and then press I away , till I be in agony . I be not mean to live among people . perhaps some day , when I be grow old , I will be able to go and live among they and look at they as I look at the rock and bush , without let they disturb I , and take myself from I ; but not now . so I grow miserable ; a kind of fever seem to eat I ; I could not rest , or read , or think ; so I come here . I know you be not here , but it seem as though I should be near you ; and it be you I want you that the other people suggest to I , but can not give . " 

 he have fill all the sheet he have take , and now lift down the last from the mantelpiece . em have drop asleep , and lie slumber peacefully on the skin before the fire . out of door the storm still rag ; but in a fitful manner , as though grow half weary of itself . 

 he bend over his paper again , with eager flushed cheek , and write on . 


 " it have be a delightful journey , this journey home . I have walk on foot . the evening before last , when it be just sunset , I be a little footsore and thirsty , and go out of the road to look for water . I go down into a deep little " kloof.í some tree run along the bottom , and I think I should find water there . the sun have quite set when I get to the bottom of it . it be very still not a leaf be stir anywhere . in the bed of the mountain torrent I think I might find water . I come to the bank , and leap down into the dry bed . the floor on which I stand be of fine white sand , and the bank rise on every side like the wall of a room . above there be a precipice of rock , and a tiny stream of water ooze from they and fall slowly on to the flat stone below . each drop you 

 could hear fall like a little silver bell . there be one among the tree on the bank that stand cut out against the white sky . all the other tree be silent ; but this one shake and tremble against the sky . everything else be still ; but those leaf be quiver , quivering . I stand on the sand ; I could not go away . when it be quite dark , and the star have come , I creep out . do it seem strange to you that it should have make I so happy ? it be because I can not tell you how near I feel to thing that we can not see but we always feel . to - night have be a wild , stormy night . I have be walk across the plain for hour in the dark . I have like the wind , because I have seem force my way through to you . I know you be not here , but I would hear of you . when I use to sit on the transport waggon half - sleep , I use to start awake because your hand be on I . in 

 my lodging , night after night I have blow the light out , and sit in the dark , that I might see your face start out more distinctly . sometimes it be the little girl 's face who use to come to I behind the " kopjeí when I mind the sheep , and sit by I in her blue pinafore ; sometimes it be old . I love both . I be very helpless ; I shall never do anything ; but you will work , and I will take your work for mine . sometimes such a sudden gladness seize I when I remember that somewhere in the world you be live and work . you be my very own ; nothing else be my own so . when I have finish I be go to look at your room door " 

 he write ; and the wind , which have spend its fury , moan round and round the house , most like a tired child weary with cry . 

 em wake up , and sit before the fire , rub her eye , and listen , as it sob about the 

 gable , and wander away over the long stone wall . 

 " how quiet it have grow now , " she say , and sigh herself , partly from weariness and partly from sympathy with the tired wind . he do not answer she ; he be lose in his letter . 
 she rise slowly after a time , and rest her hand on his shoulder . 
 " you have many letter to write , " she say . 
 " no , " he answer ; " it be only one to Lyndall . " 
 she turn away , and stand long before the fire look into it . if you have a deadly fruit to give it will not grow sweet by keep . 
 " Waldo , dear , " she say , put her hand on his , " leave off writing . " 
 he throw back the dark hair from his forehead and look at she . 

 " it be no use write any more , " she say . 
 " why not ? " he ask . 
 she put her hand over the paper he have write . 
 " Waldo , " she say , " Lyndall be dead . " 



 CHAPTER XII . 
 GREGORY 's WOMANHOOD . 

 SLOWLY 
 over the flat come a cart . on the back seat sit Gregory , his arm fold , his hat draw over his eye . a Kaffir boy sit on the front seat driving , and at his foot sit Doss , who , every now and again , lift his nose and eye above the level of the splash - board , to look at the surround country ; and then , with an exceedingly knowing wink of his left eye , turn to his companion , thereby intimate that he clearly perceive his whereabouts . no one notice the cart come . Waldo , who be at work at his carpenter 's table in the waggon - house , see nothing , till chance to 

 look down he perceive Doss stand before he , the leg tremble , the little nose wrinkle , and a series of short , suffocate bark give utterance to his joy at reunion . 


 Em , whose eye have ache with look out across the plain , be now at work in a back - room , and know nothing till , look up , she see Gregory , with his straw hat and blue eye , stand in the door - way . he greet she quietly , hang his hat up in its old place behind the door , and for any change in his manner or appearance he might have be go only the day before to fetch letter from the town . only his beard be go , and his face be grow thin . he take off his leather gaiter , say the afternoon be hot and the road dusty , and ask for some tea . they talk of wool , cattle , and sheep , and Em give he the pile of letter that have come for he during that seven month ' absence , but of the 

 thing that lie at their heart neither say anything . then he go out to look at the kraal , and at supper Em give he hot cake and coffee . they talk about the servant , and then eat their meal in quiet . when it be end Gregory go into the front - room , and lie in the dark on the sofa . 

 " do you not want a light ? " em ask , venture to look in . 
 " no , " he answer ; then presently call to she , " come and sit here ; I want to talk to you . " 
 she come and sit on a footstool near he . 
 " do you wish to hear anything ? " he ask . 
 she whisper , " yes , if it do not hurt you . " 
 " what difference do it make to I ? " he say . " if I talk or be silent , be there any change ? " 

 yet he lie quiet for a long time . the light through the open door show he to she , 

 where he lay , with his arm throw across his eye . at last he speak . perhaps it be a relief to he to speak . 

 to Bloemfontein in the Free State , to which through an agent he have trace they , Gregory have go . at the hotel where Lyndall and her stranger have stay he put up ; he be show the very room in which they have sleep . the coloured boy who have drive they to the next town tell he in which house they have board , and Gregory go on . in that town he find they have leave the cart , and buy a spider and four grey , and Gregory 's heart rejoice . now indeed it would be easy to trace their course . and he turn his step northward . 

 at the farm - house where he stop the " oom " and " tante " remember clearly the spider with its four grey horse . at one place the boer - wife tell how the Englishman have buy milk , and ask the way to the next 

 farm . at the next farm the Englishman have buy a bunch of flower , and give half - a - crown for they to the little girl . it be quite true ; the boer - mother make she get it out of the box and show it . at the next place they have sleep . here they tell he that the great bull - dog , who hat all stranger , have walk in in the evening and lay its head in the lady 's lap . so at every place he hear something , and trace they step by step . 


 at one desolate farm the Boer have a good deal to tell . the lady have say she like a waggon that stand before the door . without ask the price the Englishman have offer a hundred and fifty pound for the old thing , and buy oxen worth ten pound for sixteen . the Dutchman chuckle , for he have the " salt - reim 's " money in the box under his bed . Gregory laugh too , in silence ; he could not lose sight of they now , so slowly they would have to move with that 

 cumbrous ox - waggon . yet , when that evening come , and he reach a little wayside inn , no one could tell he anything of the traveller . 


 the master , a surly creature , half stupid with boer - brandy , sit on the bench before the door smoke . Gregory sit beside he , question , but he smoke on . he remember nothing of such stranger . how should he know who have be there month and month before ? he smoke on . Gregory , very weary , try to wake his memory , say that the lady he be seek for be very beautiful , have a little mouth , and tiny , very tiny , foot . the man only smoke on as sullenly as at first . what be little , very little mouth and foot to he . but his daughter lean out in the window above . she be dirty and lazy , and like to loll there when traveller come , to hear the man talk , but she have a soft heart . presently a hand come out of the window , and a pair of velvet slipper touch his shoulder , tiny slipper 

 with black flower . he pull they out of her hand . only one woman 's foot have wear they , he know that . 

 " leave here last summer by a lady , " say the girl ; " might be the one you be look for . never see any foot so small . " 
 Gregory rise and question she . 
 they might have come in a waggon and spider , she could not tell . but the gentleman be very handsome , tall , lovely figure , blue eye , wear glove always when he go out . an english officer , perhaps ; no Africander , certainly . 
 Gregory stop she . 

 the lady ? well , she be pretty , rather , the girl say ; very cold , dull hair , silent . they stay for , it might be , five day ; sleep in the wing over against the " stoep " ; quarrelled sometimes , she think the lady . she have see everything when she go in to wait . one day the gentleman touch her hair ; she draw back 

 from he as though his finger poison she . go to the other end of the room if he come to sit near she . walk out alone . cold wife for such a handsome husband , the girl think ; she evidently pity he . they go away early one morning , how , or in which way , the girl could not tell . 

 Gregory inquire of the servant , but nothing more be to be learn ; so the next morning he saddle his horse and go on . at the farm he come to the good old " oom " and " tante " ask he to have coffee , and the little shoeless child peep out at the stranger from behind oven and gable ; but no one have see what he ask for . this way and that he ride to pick up the thread he have drop , but the spider and the waggon , the little lady and the handsome gentleman , no one have see . in the town he fare yet bad . 

 once indeed hope come to he . on the 

 " stoep " of an hotel at which he stay the night in a certain little village , there walk a gentleman , grave and kindly - looking . it be not hard to open conversation with he about the weather , and then ; have he ever see such and such people , a gentleman and a lady , a spider and waggon , arrive at that place . the kindly gentleman shake his head . what be the lady like , he inquire ? 

 Gregory paint . hair like silken floss , small mouth , underlip very full and pink , upper lip pink but very thin and curl ; there be four white spot on the nail of the forefinger , the eyebrow very straight . 
 " yes ; and a rose - bud tinge in the cheek ; hand like lily , and perfectly seraphic smile . " 
 " that be she ! that be she ! " cry Gregory . 

 who else could it be ? he ask where she 

 have go to . the gentleman most thoughtfully stroke his beard . he would try to remember . be not her ear . here such a violent fit of cough seize he that he run away into the house . an ill - fed clerk and a dirty barman stand in the door - way laugh aloud . Gregory wonder if they could be laugh at the gentleman 's cough , and then he hear some one laugh in the room into which the gentleman have go . he must follow he and try to learn more ; but he soon find that there be nothing more to be learn there . poor Gregory ! 


 Backward and forwards , backward and forwards , from the dirty little hotel where he have drop the thread , to this farm and to that , ride Gregory , till his heart be sick and tired . that from that spot the waggon might have go its own way and the spider another be an idea that do not occur to he . at last he see 

 it be no use linger in that neighbourhood , and press on . 

 one day , come to a little town , his horse knock up , and he resolve to rest they there . the little hotel of the town be a bright and sunny place , like the jovial face of the clean little woman who keep it , and who trot about talk always talk to the customer in the tap - room , and to the maid in the kitchen , and to the passer - by when she could hail they from the window ; talk , as good - natured woman with large mouth and small nose always do , in season and out . 

 there be a little front parlour in the hotel , keep for stranger who want to be alone . Gregory sit there to eat his breakfast , and the landlady dust the room and talk of the great find at the Diamond Fields , and the badness of maid - servant , and the shameful conduct of the dutch parson in that town to the English 

 in- 
 inhabitant 


 habitant . Gregory eat his breakfast and listen to nothing . he have ask his one question , and have have his answer ; now she might talk on . 

 presently a door in the corner open and a woman come out a mozambiquer , with a red handkerchief twisted round her head . she carry in her hand a tray , with a slice of toast crumble fine , and a half - fill cup of coffee , and an egg break open , but not eat . her ebony face grin complacently as she shut the door softly and say , " good morning . " 
 the landlady begin to talk to she . 
 " you be not go to leave she really , Ayah , be you ? " she say . " the maid say so ; but I be sure you would not   do such a thing . " 
 the Mozambiquer grin . 
 " Husband say I must go home . " 
 " but she have not   get any one else , and will not   have any one else . come , now , " say the landlady . 

 the Mozambiquer only show her white tooth good - naturedly for answer , and go out , and the landlady follow she . 
 Gregory , glad to be alone , watch the sunshine as it come over the fuchsia in the window , and run up and down on the panel door in the corner . the Mozambiquer have close it loosely behind she , and presently something touch it inside . it move a little , then it be still , then move again ; then through the gap a small nose appear , and a yellow ear overlap one eye ; then the whole head obtrude , place itself critically on one side , wrinkle its nose disapprovingly at Gregory , and withdraw . through the half - open door come a faint scent of toilet vinegar , and the room be dark and still . 
 presently the landlady come back . 

 " leave the door open , " she say , bustle to shut it ; " but a darkey will be a darkey , and never carry a head on its shoulder like 

 other folk . not ill , I hope sir , " she say , look at Gregory when she have shut the bed - room door . 

 " no , " say Gregory , " no . " 
 the landlady begin put the thing together . 
 " who , " ask Gregory , " be in that room ? " 

 Glad to have a little innocent piece of gossip to relate , and some one willing to hear it , the landlady make the most of a little story as she clear the table . six month before a lady have come alone to the hotel in a waggon , with only a coloured leader and driver . eight day after a little baby have be bear . if Gregory stand up and look out at the window he would see a blue gum - tree in the grave - yard ; close by it be a little grave . the baby be bury there . a tiny thing , only live two hour , and the mother herself almost go with it . after a while she be well ; but one day she get 

 up out of bed , dress herself without say a word to any one , and go out . it be a drizzly day ; a little time after some one see she sit on the wet ground under the blue gum - tree , with the rain dripping from her hat and shawl . they go to fetch she , but she would not come until she choose . when she do she have go to bed and have not rise again from it ; never would , the doctor say . 

 she be very patient , poor thing . when you go in to ask she how she be she say always " well , " or " nearly well ! " and lie still in the darken room , and never trouble any one . the Mozambiquer take care of she , and she would not allow any one else to touch she ; would not so much as allow any one else to see her foot uncover . she be strange in many way , but she pay well , poor thing ; and now the Mozambiquer be go , and she would have to take up with some one else . 

 the landlady prattle on pleasantly , and now carry away the tray with the breakfast - thing . when she be go Gregory lean his head on his hand , but he do not think long . 

 before dinner he have ride out of the town to where on a rise a number of transport - waggon be out - span . the Dutchman driver of one wonder at the stranger 's eagerness to free himself of his horse . steal perhaps ; but it be worth his while to buy they at so low a price . so the horse change master , and Gregory walk off with his saddle - bag sling across his arm . once out of sight of the waggon he strike out of the road and walk across the " veld , " the dry , flower grass wave everywhere about he ; half way across the plain he come to a deep gully which the rain torrent have wash out , but which be now dry . Gregory spring down into its red bed . it be a safe place , and quiet . when he have look about he he sit 

 down under the shade of an overhang bank and fan himself with his hat , for the afternoon be hot , and he have walk fast . at his foot the dusty ant run about , and the high red bank before he be cover by a network of root and fibre wash bare by the rain . above his head rise the clear blue african sky ; at his side be the saddle - bag full of woman 's clothing . Gregory look up half plaintively into the blue sky . 

 " be I , be I Gregory Nazianzen Rose ? " he say . 

 it be also strange , he sit there in that " sloot " in that up - country plain ! strange as the fantastic , change shape in a summer cloud . at last , tired out , he fall asleep , with his head against the bank . when he wake the shadow have stretch across the " sloot , " and the sun be on the edge of the plain . now he must be up and do . he draw from his breast pocket a little sixpenny look - glass , and 

 hang it on one of the root that stick out from the bank . then he dress himself in one of the old - fashioned gown and a great pinked out collar . then he take out a razor . Tuft by tuft the soft brown beard fall down into the sand , and the little ant take it to line their nest with . then the glass show a face surround by a frille cap , white as a woman 's , with a little mouth , a very short upper lip , and a recede chin . 


 presently a rather tall woman 's figure be make its way across the " veld . " as it pass a hollow - out ant - heap it kneel down , and stuff in the saddle - bag with the man 's clothing , close up the ant - hill with bit of ground to look as natural as possible . like a sinner hide his deed of sin , Gregory start once and look round , but yet there be no one near save a " meerkat , " who have lift herself out of her hole and sit on her hind leg 

 watch . he do not like that even she should see , and when he rise she dive away into her hole . then he walk on leisurely , that the dusk might have reach the village street before he walk there . the first house be the smith 's , and before the open door two idle urchin loll . as he hurry up the street in the gathering gloom he hear they laugh long and loudly behind he . he glance round fearingly , and would almost have flee , but that the strange skirt clung about his leg . and after all it be only a spark that have alight on the head of one , and not the strange figure they laugh at . 


 the door of the hotel stand wide open , and the light fall out into the street . he knock , and the landlady come . she peer out to look for the cart that have bring the traveller ; but Gregory 's heart be brave now he be so near the quiet room . he tell she he have come 

 with the transport waggon that stand outside the town . 

 he have walk in , and want lodging for the night . 
 it be a deliberate lie , glibly tell ; he would have tell fifty , though the recording angel have stand in the next room with his pen dip in the ink . what be it to he ? he remember that she lie there say always , " I be well . " 

 the landlady put his supper in the little parlour where he have sit in the morning . when it be on the table she sit down in the rock - chair , as her fashion be , to knit and talk , that she might gather news for her customer in the tap - room . in the white face under the queer , deep - fringed cap she see nothing of the morning 's traveller . the newcomer be communicative . she be a nurse by profession , she say ; have come to the Transvaal hear that good nurse be need there . she have 

 not yet find work . the landlady do not perhaps know whether there would be any for she in that town ? 

 the landlady put down her knitting and smote her fat hand together . 
 if it be not   the very finger of God 's Providence , as though you see it hang out of the sky , she say . here be a lady sick and need a new nurse that very day , and not able to get one to her mind , and now well , if it be not   enough to convert all the atheist and free - thinker in the Transvaal , she do not   know ! 
 then the landlady proceed to detail fact . 
 " I be sure you will suit she , " she add ; " you be just the kind . she have heap of money to pay you with ; have everything that money can buy . she be asleep now , but I will take you in to look at she . " 

 the landlady open the door of the next room , and Gregory follow she . a table stand 

 near the bed , and a lamp burn low stand on it ; the bed be a great four - poster with white curtain , and the quilt be of rich crimson satin . but Gregory stand just inside the door with his head bent low , and see no far . 

 " come nearer ! I will turn the lamp up a bit , that you can have a look at she . a pretty thing , be not   it ? " say the landlady . 
 near the foot of the bed be a dent in the crimson quilt , and out of it Doss 's small head and bright eye look knowingly . 
 then Gregory look up at what lie on the cushion . a little white , white face , transparent as an angel 's with a cloth bind round the forehead , and with soft hair toss about on the pillow . 

 " we have to cut it off , " say the woman , 

 touch it with her fore - finger . " Soft as silk , like a wax doll 's . " 

 but Gregory 's heart be bleed . 
 " never get up again , the doctor say , " say the landlady . 
 Gregory utter one word . in an instant the beautiful eye open widely , look round the room and into the dark corner . 
 " who be here ? whom do I hear speak ? " 
 Gregory have sink back behind the curtain ; the landlady draw it aside , and pull he forward . 
 " only this lady , ma'am a nurse by profession . she be willing to stay and take care of you , if you can come to term with she . " 
 Lyndall raise herself on her elbow , and cast one keen scrutinize glance over he . 
 " have I never see you before ? " she ask . 
 " no . " 
 she fall back wearily . 

 " perhaps you would like to arrange the term between yourself , " say the landlady . " here be a chair . I will be back presently . " 
 Gregory sit down , with bent head and quick breath . she do not speak , and lie with half - close eye , seem to have forget he . 
 " will you turn the lamp down a little ? " she say at last ; " I can not bear the light . " 
 then his heart grow braver in the shadow , and he speak . nursing be to he , he say , a pleasure . he want no money : if she stop he . 
 " I take no service for which I do not pay , " she say . " what I give to my last nurse I will give to you ; if you do not like it you may go . " 
 and Gregory mutter humbly , he would take it . 

 afterward she try to turn herself . he lift she . ah ! such a shrunken little body , he 

 could feel its weakness as he touch it . his hand be to he glorify for that service . 

 " thank you ! that be so nice . other people hurt I when they touch I , " she say . " thank you ! " then after a little while she repeat humbly , " thank you ; they hurt I so . " 

 Gregory sit down tremble . his little ewe - lamb , could 
 he 
 hurt she ? 

 the doctor say of Gregory four day after , " she be the most experienced nurse I ever come in contact with . " 
 Gregory , stand in the passage , hear it and laugh in his heart . what need have he of experience ? experience teach we in a millennium what passion teach we in an hour . a Kaffir study all his life the discerning of distant sound ; but he will never hear my step , when my love hear it , come to her window in the dark over the short grass . 

 at first Gregory 's heart be sore when 

 day by day the body grow light , and the mouth he feed take less ; but afterward he grow accustomed to it , and be happy . for passion have 
 one 
 cry , one only " oh , to touch thee , Beloved ! " 

 in that quiet room Lyndall lie on the bed with the dog at her foot , and Gregory sit in his dark corner watch . 
 she seldom sleep , and through those long , long day she would lie watch the round streak of sunlight that come through the knot in the shutter , or the massive lion 's paw on which the wardrobe rest . what thought be in those eye ? Gregory wonder ; he dare not ask . 

 sometimes Doss where he lie on her foot would dream that they two be in the cart , tear over the " veld , " with the black horse snort , and the wind in their face ; and he would start up in his sleep and bark aloud . then 

 awake , he would lick his mistress 's hand almost remorsefully , and slink quietly down into his place . 

 Gregory think she have no pain , she never groan ; only sometimes , when the light be near she , he think he could see contraction about her lip and eyebrow . 
 he sleep on the sofa outside her door . 
 one night he think he hear a sound , and , open it softly , he look in . she be cry out aloud , as if she and her pain be alone in the world . the light fall on the red quilt , and the little hand that be clasp over the head . the wide - open eye be look up , and the heavy drop fall slowly from they . 
 " I can not bear any more , not any more , " she say in a deep voice . " oh , God , God ! have I not bear in silence ? have I not endure these long , long month ? but now , now , oh , God , I can not ! " 

 Gregory kneel in the door - way listening . 
 " I do not ask for wisdom , not human love , not work , not knowledge , not for all thing I have long for , " she cry ; " only a little freedom from pain ! only one little hour without pain ! " 
 she sit up , and bite the little hand Gregory love . 
 he creep away to the front door , and stand look out at the quiet starlight . when he come back she be lie in her usual posture , the quiet eye look at the lion 's claw . he come close to the bed . 
 " you have much pain to - night ? " he ask she . 
 " no , not much . " 
 " can I do anything for you ? " 
 " no , nothing . " 

 she still draw her lip quiver together , and motion with her finger toward the dog who 

 lie sleep at her foot . Gregory lift he and lay he at her side . she make Gregory turn open the bosom of her night - dress , that the dog might put his black muzzle between her breast . she cross her arm over he . Gregory leave they lie there together . 

 next day , when they ask she how she be , she answer " well . " 
 " some one ought to tell she , " say the landlady ; " we can not   let her soul go out into eternity not know , especially when I do not   think it be all right about the child . you ought to go and tell she , Doctor . " 
 so , the little doctor , egg on and on , go in at last . when he come out of the room he shake his fist in the landlady 's face . 
 " the next time you have any devil 's work to do , do it yourself , " he say , and he shake his fist in her face again , and go away swearing . 

 when Gregory go into the bed - room he 

 only find she move , her body curl up , and draw close to the wall . he dare not disturb she . at last , after a long time , she turn . 

 " bring I food , " she say , " I want to eat . two egg , and toast , and meat two large slice of toast , please . " 
 wonder , Gregory bring a tray with all that she have ask for . 
 " sit I up , and put it close to I , " she say ; " I be go to eat it all . " she try to draw the thing near she with her finger , and re - arrange the plate . she cut the toast into long strip , break open both egg , put a tiny morsel of bread into her own mouth , and feed the dog . 

 " be it twelve o'clock yet ? " she say , finger the meat ; " I think I do not generally eat so early . put it away , please , 
 carefully 
 , no , do not take it away , on the side table . when the clock strike twelve I will eat it . " 


 she lie down trembling . after a little while she say , 
 " give I my clothe . " 
 he look at she . 
 " yes ; I be go to dress to - morrow . I should get up now , but it be rather late . put they on that chair . my collar be in the little box , my boot behind the door . " 
 her eye follow he intently as he collect the article one by one , and place they on the chair as she direct . 
 " put it near , " she say , " I can not see it ; " and she lie watch the clothe , with her hand under her cheek . 
 " now open the shutter wide , " she say ; " I be go to read . " 
 the old , old tone be again in the sweet voice . 
 he open the shutter , and raise she up among the pillow . 

 " now bring my book to I , " she say , 

 motion eagerly with her finger ; " the large book , and the review and the play ; I want they all . " 

 he pile they round she on the bed ; she draw they greedily close , her eye very bright , though her face be white . 
 " now the big one off the drawer . no , you need not help I to hold my book , " she say ; " I can hold it for myself . " 
 Gregory go back to his corner , and for a little time the restless turning of many leaf be to be hear . 
 " will you open the window , " she say , almost querulously , " and throw this book out ? it be so utterly foolish . I think it be a nice book ; but the word be merely string together , they make no sense . yes so ! " she say with approval , see he fle it out into the street . " I must have be very foolish when I think that book nice . " 

 then she turn to read , and lean she little elbow resolutely on the great volume , and knit her brow . this be Shakespeare it must mean something . 
 " I wish you would take a handkerchief and tie it tight round my head , it ache so . " 
 he have not be long in his seat when he see drop fall from beneath the hand that shade the eye , on to the page . 
 " I be not accustomed to so much light , it make my head swim a little , " she say . " go out and close the shutter . " 
 when he come back , she lie shrivel up among the pillow . he hear no sound of weeping , but the shoulder shake . 

 when Gregory go to his sofa that night , she tell he to wake she early , for she must be up before breakfast . nevertheless , when morning come , she say it be a little cold , and lie all day watch her clothe upon the chair . still 

 she send for her oxen in the country ; they would start on Monday . 

 in the afternoon she tell he to open the window wide , and draw the bed near it . 
 it be a leaden afternoon , the dull rain - cloud rest close to the roof of the house , and the little street be silent and deserted . now and then a gust of wind eddying round catch up the dry leaf , whirl they hither and thither under the tree , and drop they again into the gutter ; then all be quiet . she lie look out . presently the bell of the church begin to toll , and up the village street come a long procession . they be carry an old man to his last resting - place . she follow they with her eye till they turn in among the tree at the gate . 
 " who be that ? " she ask . 
 " an old man , " he answer , " a very old man ; they say he be ninety - four ; but his name I do not know . " 

 she muse a while , look out with fixed eye . 
 " that be why the bell ring so cheerfully , " she say . " when the old die it be well ; they have have their time . it be when the young die that the bell weep drop of blood . " 
 " but the old love life ? " he say ; for it be sweet to hear her speak . 
 she raise herself on her elbow . 

 " they love life , they do not want to die , " she answer , " but what of that ? they have have their time . they know that a man 's life be three - score year and ten ; they should have make their plan accordingly ! but the young , " she say , " the young , cut down , cruelly , when they have not see , when they have not know , when they have not find it be for they that the bell weep blood . I hear in the ringing it be an old man . when the old die listen to the bell ! it be laugh " it be right , it be right ; he 

 have have his time.í they can not ring so for the young . " 

 she fall back exhaust ; the hot light die from her eye , and she lie look out into the street . by - and - bye straggler from the funeral begin to come back and disappear here and there among the house ; then all be quiet , and the night begin to settle down upon the village street . when the room be quite dark , so that they could not see each other 's face , she say , 
 " it will rain to - night ; " and move restlessly on the pillow . " how terrible when the rain fall down on you drop by drop ! " 
 he wonder what she mean . she move again . 
 " will you presently take my cloak the new grey cloak from behind the door and go with it . you will find a little grave at the foot of the tall blue gum - tree ; the water drip off the long , pointed leaf ; you must cover it up with that . " 

 Gregory assent , and there be silence again . it be the first time she have ever speak of her child . 
 " it be so small , " she say ; " it live such a little while only three hour . they lay it close by I , but I never see it ; I could feel it by I . " she wait ; " its foot be so cold ; I take they in my hand to make they warm , and my hand close right over they they be so little . " there be a tremor in the voice . " it creep close to I ; it want to drink , it want to be warm . " she move her hand : " I do not love it ; its father be not my prince ; I do not care for it ; but it be so little . " uneasily she move upon her pillow . " they might have kiss it , one of they , before they put it in . it never do any one any harm in all its little life . they might have kiss it . " 
 Gregory think he feel rather than hear some one sob in the room . 

 late on in the evening , when the shutter be close and the lamp light , and the rain - drop beat on the roof , he take the cloak from behind the door and go away with it . on his way back he call at the village post - office and bring back a letter . in the hall he stand read the address . how could he fail to know whose hand have write it ? have he not long ago study those character on the torn fragment of paper in the old parlour ? a burn pain be at Gregory 's heart . if now , now at the last , one should come , should step in between ! he carry the letter into the bed - room and give it to she . when she have read it , " give I my desk , " she say ; " open it before I . " 

 then Gregory sit down in the lamp - light on the other side of the curtain , and hear the pencil move on the paper . when he look round the curtain she be lie on the pillow with a flushed face , the hand write quickly . 

 the open letter lie at her side ; she glance at it with soft eye . the man with the languid eyelid must have be strangely move before his hand set down those word : " let I come back to you ! my darling , let I put my hand round you , and guard you from all the world . as my wife they shall never touch you . I have learn to love you more wisely , more tenderly , than of old ; you shall have perfect freedom . Lyndall , grand little woman , for your own sake be my wife ! 

 " why do you send that money back to I ? you be cruel to I ; it be not rightly do . " 
 she roll the little red pencil softly between her finger , and her face grow very soft . yet 

 " it can not be , " she write ; " I thank you much for the love you have show I ; but I can not listen . you will call I mad , foolish the world would do so ; but I know what I need and the kind of path I must 

 walk in . I can not marry you . I will always love you for the sake of what lie by I those three hour ; we may be friend , but there it end . I must know , see , suffer , taste of life ; I can not be bind to one whom I love as I love you . I be not afraid of the world I will fight the world . one day perhaps it may be far off I shall find what I have want all my life ; something nobler , strong than I , before which I can kneel down . you lose nothing by not have I now ; I be a weak , selfish , err woman . one day I shall find something to worship , and then I shall be a noble woman " 


 " Nurse , " she say ; " take my desk away ; I be suddenly so sleepy ; I will write more to - morrow . " she turn her face to the pillow ; it be the sudden drowsiness of great weakness . she have drop asleep in a moment , and Gregory move the desk softly , and then sit in the chair watch . hour after hour pass , but 

 he have no wish for rest , and sit on , hear the rain cease , and the still night settle down everywhere . at a quarter - past twelve he rise , and take a last look at the bed where she lie sleep so peacefully ; then he turn to go to his couch . before he have reach the door she have start up and be call he back . 

 " you be sure you have put it up ? " she say , with a look of blank terror at the window . " it will not fall open in the night , the shutter you be sure ? " 
 he comfort she . yes , it be tightly fasten . 
 " even if it be shut , " she say , in a whisper , " you can not keep it out ! you feel it come in at four o'clock , creep , creep , up , up ; deadly cold ! " she shudder . 
 he think she be wander , and lay she little trembling body down among the blanket . 
 " I dream just now that it be not put up , " she say , look into his eye ; " and it creep right in and I be alone with it . " 

 " what do you fear ? " he ask tenderly . 
 " the Gray Dawn , " she say , glance round at the window . " I be never afraid of anything , never when I be a little child , but I have always be afraid of that . you will not let it come in to I ? " 
 " no , no ; I will stay with you , " he continue . 
 but she be grow calm . " no ; you must go to bed . I only awake with a start ; you must be tired . I be childish , that be all ; " but she shiver again . 
 he sit down beside she , after some time she say : " will you not rub my foot ? " 
 he kneel down at the foot of the bed and take the tiny foot in his hand ; it be swollen and unsightly now , but as he touch it he bend down and cover it with kiss . 

 " it make it well when you kiss it ; thank you . what make you all love I so ? " then dreamily she mutter to herself : " not utterly 

 bad , not quite bad what make they all love I so ? " 

 Rubbing , rub softly , with his cheek press against the little foot , Gregory drop to sleep at last . how long he kneel there he could not tell , but when he start up awake she be not look at he . 
 the eye be fix on the far corner , gaze wide and intent , with an unearthly light . 

 he look round fearfully . what do she see there ? God 's angel come to call she ? something fearful ? 
 he 
 see only the purple curtain with the shadow that fall from it . softly he whisper , ask what she see there . 


 and she say : " I see the vision of a poor weak life , strive after good . it be not cut short , and in the end it learn , through tear and much pain , that holiness be an infinite compassion for other ; that greatness be to take the common thing of life and walk grandly 

 among they ; that happiness be a great love and much serving . it be not cut short ; and it love what it have learn it love ! " 

 be that all she see in the corner ? 
 Gregory tell the landlady the next morning that she have be wander all night . nevertheless , when he come in to give she her breakfast , she be sit up against the pillow , look as he have not see she look before . 
 " put it close to I , " she say , " and when I have have breakfast I be go to dress . " 
 she finish all he have bring she eagerly . 
 " I be sit up quite by myself , " she say . " give I his meat ; " and she feed the dog herself , cut his food small for he . she move to the side of the bed . 

 " now bring the chair near and dress I . it be be in this room so long , and look at that miserable little bit of sunshine that come in through the shutter that be make I so ill . 

 always that lion 's paw ! " she say , with a look of disgust at it . " come , dress I . " Gregory kneel on the floor before she , and try to draw on one stocking , but the little swollen foot refuse to be cover . 

 " it be very funny that I should have grow so fat since I have be so ill , " she say , peer down curiously . " perhaps it be want of exercise ? " she look troubled and say again , " perhaps it be want of exercise ? " she want Gregory to say so too . but he only find a large pair ; and then try to force the shoe , oh , so tenderly ! on to her little foot . 
 " there , " she say , look down at they when they be on , with the delight of a small child over its first shoe , " I could walk far now . how nice it look ! " 

 " no , " she say , see the soft gown he have prepare for she , " I will not put that on . get one of my white dress the one with the pink 

 bow . I do not even want to think I have be ill . it be think and think of thing that make they real , " she say . " when you draw your mind together , and resolve that a thing shall not be , it give way before you ; it be not . everything be possible if one be resolve , " she say . she draw in her little lip together , and Gregory obey she ; she be so small and slight now it be like dress a small doll . he would have lift she down from the bed when he have finish , but she push he from she , laugh very softly . it be the first time she have laugh in those long , dreary month . 

 " no , no ; I can get down myself , " she say , slip cautiously on to the floor . " you see ! " she cast a defiant glance of triumph when she stand there . " hold the curtain up high , I want to look at myself . " 

 he raise it , and stand hold it . she look into the glass on the opposite wall . such a 

 queenly little figure in its pink and white . such a transparent little face , refine by suffer into an almost angel - like beauty . the face look at she , she look back , laugh softly . Doss , quiver with excitement , run round she , bark . she take one step toward the door , balance herself with outstretche hand . 

 " I be nearly there , " she say . 
 then she grope blindly . 
 " oh , I can not see ! I can not see ! where be I ? " she cry . 
 when Gregory reach she she have fall with her face against the sharp foot of the wardrobe and cut her forehead . very tenderly he raise the little crush heap of clothe and flesh , and lay it on the bed . Doss climb up , and sit look down at it . very softly Gregory 's hand disrobe she . 

 " you will be strong to - morrow , and then we 

 shall try again , " he say , but she neither look at he nor stir . 

 when he have undress she , and lay she in bed , Doss stretch himself across her foot and lie , whine softly . 
 so she lie all that morning , and all that afternoon . 
 again and again Gregory creep close to the bedside and look at she ; but she do not speak to he . be it stupor or be it sleep that shine under those half - close eyelid . Gregory could not tell . 
 at last in the evening he bend over she . 
 " the oxen have come , " he say ; " we can start to - morrow if you like . shall I get the waggon ready ? " 
 twice he repeat his question . then she look up at he , and Gregory see that all hope have die out of the beautiful eye . it be not stupor that shine there , it be despair . 
 " let we go , " she say . 

 " it make no difference , " say the doctor ; " stay or go ; it be close now . " 
 so the next day Gregory carry she out in his arm to the waggon which stand " inspan " before the door . as he lay she down on the " kartel " she look far out across the plain . for the first time she have speak that day . 
 " that blue mountain , " she say , " far away ; let we stop when we get to it , not before . " she close her eye again . he draw the sail down before and behind , and the waggon roll away slowly . 

 very silently the great waggon roll along the grass - cover plain . the driver on the front box do not clap his whip or call to his oxen , and Gregory sit beside he with fold arm . behind they , in the close waggon , she lie with the dog at her foot , very quiet with fold hand . he , Gregory , dare not be in there . like Hagar , when she lay her treasure down in the wilderness , 

 he sit afar off ; " for Hagar say , let I not see the death of the child . " 

 Evening come , and yet the blue mountain be not reach , and all the next day they ride on slowly , but still it be far off . only at evening they reach it ; not blue now , but low and brown , cover with long wave grass and rough stone . they draw the waggon up close to its foot for the night . it be a sheltered , warm spot . 

 when the dark night have come , when the tired oxen be tie to the wheel , and the driver and leader have roll themselves in their blanket before the fire , and go to sleep , then Gregory fasten down the sail of the waggon securely ; fix a long candle near the head of the bed , and lie down himself on the floor of the waggon near the back . he lean his head against the " kartel , " and listen to the chewing of the tired oxen , and to the crackling of the fire , 

 till , overpower by weariness he fall into a heavy sleep . then all be very still in the waggon . the dog sleep on his mistress 's foot , and only two mosquito , creep in through a gap in the front sail , buzz drearily round . 

 the night be grow very old when from a long , peaceful sleep Lyndall awake . the candle burn at her head , the dog lie on her foot ; but he shiver ; it seem as though his resting - place be grow cold . she lie with fold hand , look upwards ; and she hear the oxen chewing , and she see the two mosquito buzz drearily round and round , and her thought , her thought run far back into the past . 

 on her mind through those month of anguish a mist have rest ; it be roll together now , and the old clear intellect awake from its long torpor . it look back into the past ; it see the present ; there be no future now . the old strong soul gather itself 

 together for the last time ; it know where it stand . 


 slowly raise herself on her elbow , she take from the sail a glass that hang pin there . her finger be stiff and cold . she put the pillow on her breast , and stand the glass against it . then the white face on the pillow look into the white face in the glass . they have look at each other often so before . it have be a child 's face once , look out above its blue pinafore ; it have be a woman 's face , with a dim shadow in the eye , and a deep assurance . " we be not afraid , you and I ; we will fight the world and conquer . " now to - night it have come to this . the die eye on the pillow look into the die eye in the glass ; they know that their hour have come . she raise one hand and press the stiff finger against the glass . they be grow very stiff . she try to speak to it , but she would never speak again . only , 

 the wonderful yearn light be in the eye still . the body be dead now , but the soul , clear and unclouded , look forth . 

 then slowly , without a sound , the beautiful eye close . the dead face that the glass reflect be a thing of marvellous beauty and tranquillity . the Grey Dawn creep in over it and see it lie there . 
 have she find what she seek for something to worship ? have she cease from be ? who shall tell we ? there be a veil of terrible mist over the face of the Hereafter . 



 CHAPTER XIII . 
 dreams . 

 " 
 tell 
 I what a soul desire , and I will tell you what it be . " so run the phrase . 

 " tell I what a man dream , and I will tell you what he love . " that also have its truth . 
 for , ever from the early childhood to the late age , day by day , and step by step , the busy wake life be follow and reflect by the life of dream wake dream , sleep dream . weird , misty , and distort as the invert image of a mirage , or a figure see through the mountain mist , they be still the reflection of a reality . 

 on the night when Gregory tell his story , 

 Waldo sit alone before the fire , his untasted supper before he . he be weary after his day 's work too weary to eat . he put the plate down on the floor for Doss , who lick it clean , and then go back to his corner . after a time the master throw himself across the foot of the bed without undressing , and fall asleep there . he sleep so long that the candle burn itself out , and the room be in darkness . but he dream a lovely dream as he lie there . 


 in his dream , to his right rise high mountain , their top crown with snow , their side clothe with bush and bath in the sunshine . at their foot be the sea , blue and breezy , bluer than any earthly sea , like the sea he have dream of in his boyhood . in the narrow forest that run between the mountain and the sea the air be rich that the scent of the honey - creeper that hang from dark green bush , and through the velvety grass little stream run purl down into the 

 sea . he sit on a high square rock among the bush , and Lyndall sit by he and sing to he . she be only a small child , with a blue pinafore , and a grave , grave , little face . he be look up at the mountain , then suddenly when he look round she be go . he slip down from his rock , and go to look for she , but he find only her little footmark ; he find they on the bright green grass , and in the moist sand , and there where the little stream run purl down into the sea . in and out , in and out , and among the bush where the honey - creeper hung , he go look for she . at last , far off , in the sunshine , he see her gathering shell upon the sand . she be not a child now , but a woman , and the sun shine on her soft brown hair , and in her white dress she put the shell she gather . she be stoop , but when she hear his step she stand up , hold her skirt close about she , and wait for his coming . one hand she put 

 in his , and together they walk on over the glitter sand and pink sea - shell : and they hear the leaf talk , and they hear the water babble on their way to the sea , and they hear the sea singing to itself , singing , singing . 

 at last they come to a place where be a long reach of pure white sand ; there she stand still , and drop on to the sand one by one the shell that she have gather . then she look up into his face with her beautiful eye . she say nothing ; but she lift one hand and lay it softly on his forehead ; the other she lay on his heart . 
 with a cry of suppress agony Waldo spring from the bed , fling open the upper half of the door , and lean out , breathe heavily . 
 great God ! it might be only a dream , but the pain be very real , as though a knife run through his heart , as though some treacherous murderer creep on he in the dark ! the strong man draw his breath like a frightened woman . 

 " only a dream , but the pain be very real , " he mutter , as he press his right hand upon his breast . then he fold his arm on the door , and stand look out into the starlight . 

 the dream be with he still ; the woman who be his friend be not separate from he by year only that very night he have see she . he look up into the night sky that all his life long have mingle itself with his existence . there be a thousand face that he love look down at he , a thousand star in their glory , in crown , and circle , and solitary grandeur . to the man they be not less dear than to the boy they have be not less mysterious ; yet he look up at they and shudder ; at last turn away from they with horror . such countless multitude stretch out far into space , and yet not in one of they all be she ! though he search through they all , to the farth , 

 faint point of light , nowhere should he ever say , " she be here ! " to - morrow 's sun would rise and gild the world 's mountain , and shine into its thousand valley ; it would set and the star creep out again . year after year , century after century , the old change of nature would go on , day and night , summer and winter , seed - time and harvest ; but in none of they all would she have part ! 


 he shut the door to keep out their hideous shining , and because the dark be intolerable light a 

 csndle 
 candle 

 , and pace the little room , fast and fast yet . he see before he the long age of eternity that would roll on , on , on , and never bring she . she would exist no more . a dark mist fill the little room . 


 " oh , little hand ! oh , little voice ! oh , little form ! " he cry ; " oh , little soul that walk with mine ! oh , little soul , that look so fearlessly down into the depth , do you exist no more for 

 ever for all time ? " he cry more bitterly : " it be for this hour this that man blind reason , and crush out thought ! for this hour this , this they barter truth and knowledge , take any lie , any creed , so it do not whisper to they of the dead that they be dead ! ah , God ! God ! God ! for a here - after ! " 

 Pain make his soul weak ; it cry for the old faith . they be the tear that fall into the new - make grave that cement the power of the priest . for the cry of the soul that love and lose be this , only this : " bridge over Death ; blend the here with the here - after ; cause the mortal to robe himself in immortality ; let I not say of my Dead that it be dead ! I will believe all else , bear all else , endure all else ! " 
 mutter to himself , Waldo walk with bent head , the mist in his eye . 

 to the soul 's wild cry for its own there be many answer . he begin to think of they . 

 be not there one of they all from which he might suck one drop of comfort ? 


 " you shall see she again , " say the Christian , the true Bible Christian . yes ; you shall see she again . 
 " and I see the dead , great and small , stand before God . and the book be open , and the dead be judge from those thing which be write in the book . and whosoever be not find write in the book of life be cast into the lake of fire , which be the second death . 
 í yes ; you shall see she again . she die so with her knee unbent , with her hand unraised , with a prayer unuttere , in the pride of her intellect and the strength of her youth . she love and she be love ; but she say no prayer to God ; she cry for no mercy ; she repent of no sin . yes ; you 
 shall 
 see she again . " 

 in his bitterness Waldo laugh low : 
 " ha , I have long cease to hearken to your hellish voice . " 

 but yet another speak . 
 " you shall see she again , " say the nineteenth century Christian , deep into whose soul modern unbelief and thought have creep , though he know it not . he it be who use his Bible as the pearl - fisher use their shell , sort out gem from refuse ; he set his pearl after his own fashion , and he set they well . " do not fear , " he say , " hell and judgment be not . God be love . I know that beyond this blue sky above we be a love as widespreade over all . the All - Father will show she to you again ; not spirit only the little hand , the little foot you love , you shall lie down and kiss they if you will . Christ arise , and do eat and drink , so shall she arise . the dead , all the dead , raise incorruptible ! God be love . you shall see she again . " 

 it be a heavenly song , this of the nineteenth century Christian . a man might dry his tear 

 to listen to it , but for this one thing , Waldo mutter to himself confusedly ; 

 " the thing I love be a woman proud and young ; it have a mother once , who , die , kiss she little baby , and pray God that she might see it again . if it have live the loved thing would itself have have a son , who , when he close the weary eye and smooth the wrinkle forehead of his mother , would have pray God to see that old face smile again in the here - after . to the son heaven will be no heaven if the sweet worn face be not in one of the choir ; he will look for it through the phalanx of God 's glorify angel ; and the youth will look for the maid , and the mother for the baby . " and whose then shall she be at the resurrection of the dead?í " 
 " ah , God ! ah , God ! a beautiful dream , " he cry ; " but can any one dream it not sleep ? " 
 Waldo pace on , moan in agony and longing . 
 he hear the Transcendentalist 's high answer . 

 " what have you to do with flesh , the gross and miserable garment in which spirit hide itself ? you shall see she again . but the hand , the foot , the forehead you love , you shall see no more . the love , the fear , the frailty that be bear with the flesh , with the flesh they shall die . let they die ! there be that in man that can not die a seed , a germ an embryo , a spiritual essence . high than she be on earth , as the tree be high than the seed , the man than the embryo , so shall you behold she ; change , glorify ! " 

 high word , ring well ; they be the offering of jewel to the hungry , of gold to the man who die for bread . Bread be corruptible , gold be incorruptible ; bread be light , gold be heavy ; bread be common , gold be rare ; but the hungry man will barter all your mine for one morsel of bread . around God 's throne there may be choir and company of angel , cherubim 

 and seraphim , rise tier above tier , but not for one of they all do the soul cry aloud . only perhaps for a little human woman full of sin , that it once love . 

 " Change be death , change be death , " he cry . " I want no angel , only she ; no holier and no well , with all her sin upon she , so give she I or give I nothing ! " 

 and , truly , do not the heart love its own with the 
 strong 
 passion for their very frailty ? Heaven might keep its angel if man be but leave to man . 

 " Change be death , " he cry , " change be death ! who dare to say the body never die , because it turn again to grass and flower ? and yet they dare to say the spirit never die , because in space some strange unearthly be may have spring up upon its ruin . leave I ! leave I ! " he cry in frantic bitterness . " give I back what I have lose , or give I nothing ! " 

 for the soul 's fierce cry for immortality be this this only : return to I after death the thing as it be before . leave I in the here - after the being that I be to - day . rob I of the thought , the feeling , the desire that be my life , and you have leave nothing to take . your immortality be annihilation , your here - after be a lie . 
 Waldo fling open the door , and walk out into the starlight , his pain - stricken thought ever drive he on as he pace there . 

 " there must be a here - after because man long for it ? " he whisper . " be not all life from the cradle to the grave one long yearn for that which we never touch ? there must be a here - after because we can not think of any end to life . can we think of a beginning ? be it easy to say " I be notí than to say " I shall not beí ? and yet , where be we ninety year ago ? dream , dream ! 

 ah , all dream and lie ! no ground anywhere . " 

 he go back into the cabin and walk there . hour after hour pass , and he be think dream . 

 for , mark you , man 
 will 
 dream ; the most that can be ask of they be but that the dream be not in too glaring discord with the thing they know . he walk with bent head . 

 " all die , all die ! " he mutter ; " the rose be red with the matter that once redden the cheek of the child ; the flower bloom the fairest on the last year 's battle - ground ; the work of death 's finger cunningly wreathe over be at the heart of all thing , even of the living . death 's finger be everywhere . the rock be build up of a life that be . body , thought , and love die : from where spring that whisper to the tiny soul of man , " you shall not dieí ? ah , be there no truth of which this dream be shadow ? " 

 he fall into perfect silence . and , at last , as he walk there with his bent head , his soul pass down the step of contemplation into that vast land where there be always peace ; that land where the soul , gaze long , lose all consciousness of its little self , and almost feel its hand on the old mystery of Universal Unity that surround it . 
 " no death , no death , " he mutter ; " there be that which never die which abide . it be but the individual that perishe , the whole remain . it be the organism that vanish , the atom be there . it be but the man that die , the Universal Whole of which he be part rework he into its inmost self . ah , what matter that man 's day be short ! that the sunrise see he , and the sunset see his grave ; that of which he be but the breath have breathe he forth and draw he back again . that abide we abide . " 

 for the little soul that cry aloud for 

 con- 
 continue 


 tinued personal existence for itself and its beloved , there be no help . for the soul which know itself no more as a unit , but as a part of the Universal Unity of which the Beloved also be a part ; which feel within itself the throb of the Universal Life ; for that soul there be no death . 

 " let we die , beloved , you and I , that we may pass on forever through the Universal Life ! " in that deep world of contemplation all fierce desire die out , and peace come down . he , Waldo , as he walk there , see no more the world that be about he ; cry out no more for the thing that he have lose . his soul rest . be it only John , think you , who see the heaven open ? the dreamer see it every day . 

 long year before the father have walk there , and see quire of angel , and a prince of peace like unto man , but clothe in immortality . the son 's knowledge be not as the father 's , 

 therefore the dream be new - tinted , but the sweetness be all there , the infinite peace , that man find not in the little canker kingdom of the tangible . the bar of the real be set close about we ; we can not open our wing but they be strike against they , and drop bleeding . but , when we glide between the bar into the great unknown beyond , we may sail forever in the glorious blue , see nothing but our own shadow . 

 so age succeed age , and dream succeed dream , and of the joy of the dreamer no man knoweth but he who dreameth . 
 our father have their dream ; we have our ; the generation that follow will have its own . without dream and phantom man can not exist . 



 CHAPTER XIV . 
 waldo go out to SIT in the SUNSHINE . 

 it 
 have be a princely day . the long morning have melt slowly into a rich afternoon . rain have cover the karroo with a heavy coat of green that hide the red earth everywhere . in the very chink of the stone wall dark green leaf hang out , and beauty and growth have creep even into the bed of the sandy furrow , and line they with weed . on the broken sod wall of the old pigsty chick - weed flourish , and ice - plant lift their transparent leaf . Waldo be at work in the waggon - house again . he be make a kitchen - table for Em . as the long curl gather in heap before his plane , he 

 pause for an instant now and again to throw one down to a small naked nigger , who have creep from its mother who stand churn in the sunshine , and have crawl into the waggon - house . from time to time the little animal lift its fat hand as it expect a fresh shower of curl ; till Doss , jealous of his master 's notice any other small creature but himself , would catch the curl in his mouth and roll the little Kaffir over in the saw - dust , much to that small animal 's contentment . it be too lazy an afternoon to be really ill - natured , so Doss satisfy himself with snap at the little nigger 's finger , and sit on he till he laugh . Waldo , as he work , glance down at they now and then , and smile ; but he never look out across the plain . he be conscious without look of that broad green earth ; it make his work pleasant to he . near the shadow at the gable the mother of the little nigger stand churn . slowly she raise 

 and let fall the stick in her hand , murmur to herself a sleepy chant such as her people love ; it sound like the humming of far - off bee . 

 a different life show itself in the front of the house , where Tant ' Sannie 's cart stand ready inspan , and the boer - woman herself sit in the front room drink coffee . she have come to visit her step - daughter , probably for the last time , as she now weigh two hundred and sixty pound , and be not easily able to move . on a chair sit her mild young husband nurse the baby a pudding - face , weak - eyed child . 
 " you take it and get into the cart with it , " say Tant ' Sannie . " what do you want here , listen to our woman 's talk ? " 
 the young man arise , and meekly go out with the baby . 

 " I be very glad you be go to be marry , my child , " say Tant ' Sannie , as she drain the last drop from her coffee cup . " I would not   say 

 so while that boy be here , it would make he too conceited ; but marriage be the fine thing in the world . I have   be at it three time , and if it please God to take this husband from I I should have another . there be nothing like it , my child ; nothing . " 

 " perhaps it might not suit all people , at all time , as well as it suit you , Tant ' Sannie , " say Em . there be a little shade of weariness in the voice . 

 " not suit every one ! " say Tant ' Sannie . " if the beloved Redeemer do not   mean man to have wife what do he make woman for ? that be what I say . if a woman 's old enough to marry and do not   she be sin against the Lord it be a wanting to know well than he . what , do she think the Lord take all that trouble in make she for nothing ? it be evident he want baby , otherwise why do he send they ? not that I have   do much in that way myself , " say 

 Tant ' Sannie , sorrowfully ; " but I have   do my good . " 

 she rise with some difficulty from her chair , and begin move slowly toward the door . 

 " it be a strange thing , " she say , " but you can not   love a man till you have   have a baby by he . now there be that boy there , when we be first married if he only sneeze in the night I box his ear ; now if he let his pipe - ash come on my milk - cloth I do not   think of lay a finger on he . there be nothing like be marry , " say Tant ' Sannie , as she puff toward the door . " if a woman 's get a baby and a husband she be get the good thing the Lord can give she ; if only the baby do not   have convulsion . as for a husband , it be very much the same who one have . some man be fat , and some man be thin ; some man drink brandy , and some man drink gin ; but it all come to the 

 same thing in the end ; it be all one . a man 's a man , you know . " 

 here they come upon Gregory , who be sit in the shade before the house . Tant ' Sannie shake hand with he . 
 " I be glad you be go to get marry , " she say . " I hope you will have as many child in five year as a cow have calf , and more too . I think I will just go and have a look at your soap - pot before I start , " she say , turn to Em . " not that I believe in this new plan of put soda in the pot . if the dear Father have mean soda to be put into soap what would he have make milk - bush for , and stick they all over the " veldí as thick as lamb in the lamb season ? " 

 she waddle off after em in the direction of the build - in soap - pot , leave Gregory as they find he , with his dead pipe lie on the bench beside he , and his blue eye gaze out far 

 across the flat , like one who sit on the sea - shore watch that which be fade , fade from he . against his breast be a letter find in the desk address to himself , but never post . it hold only four word : " you must marry Em . " he wear it in a black bag round his neck . it be the only letter she have ever write to he . 


 " you see if the sheep do not   have the scab this year ! " say Tant ' Sannie as she waddle after Em . " it be with all these new invention that the wrath of God 
 must 
 fall on we . what be the child of Israel punish for , if it be not   for make a golden calf ? I may have my sin , but I do remember the tenth commandment . " honour thy father and mother that it may be well with thee , and that thou mayest live long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee!í it be all very well to say we honour they , and then to be find out thing 

 that they never know , and do thing in a way that they never do they ! 
 my 
 mother boil soap with bush , and I will boil soap with bush . if the wrath of God be to fall upon this land , " say Tant ' Sannie , with the serenity of conscious virtue , " it shall not be through I . let they make their steam - waggon and their fire - carriage ; let they go on as though the dear Lord do not   know what he be about when he give horse and oxen leg , the destruction of the Lord will follow they . I do not   know how such people read their bible . when do we hear of Moses or Noah rid in a railway ? the Lord send fire - carriage out of heaven in those day : there be no chance of his send they for we if we go on in this way , " say Tant ' Sannie sorrowfully , think of the splendid chance which this generation have lose . 

 arrive at the soap - pot she look over into it thoughtfully . 

 " depend upon it you will get the itch , or some other disease ; the blessing of the Lord'll never rest upon it , " say the boer - woman . then suddenly she break forth . " and she eighty - two , and goat , and ram , and eight thousand morgan , and the ram real angora , and two thousand sheep , and a shorthorn bull , " say Tant ' Sannie , stand upright and plant a hand on each hip . 
 em look at she in silent wonder . have connubial bliss and the joy of motherhood really turn the old boer - woman 's head ? 

 " yes , " say Tant ' Sannie ; " I have almost forget to tell you . by the Lord if I have he here ! we be walk to church last Sacrament Sunday , Piet and I. Close in front of we with old Tant ' Trana , with dropsy and cancer , and can not   live eight month . walk by she be something with its hand under its coat - tail , flap , flap , flap ; and its chin in the air , 

 and a stick - up collar , and the black hat on the very back of the head . I know he ! " who be that?í I ask . " the rich Englishman that Tant ' Trana marry last week.í " Rich Englishman ! I will rich Englishman he , í I say ; " I will tell Tant ' Trana a thing or two.í my finger be just in his little white curl . if it have not   be the blessed sacrament , he would not   have walk so " sourka , sourka , courka , í any more . but I think , wait till I have   have it , and then . but he , sly fox , son of Satan , seed of the Amalekite , he see I look at he in the church . the blessed Sacrament be not   half over when he take Tant ' Trana by the arm , and out they go . I clap my baby down to its father , and I go after they . but , " say Tant ' Sannie , regretfully , " I could not   get up to they ; I be too fat . when I get to the corner he be pull Tant ' Trana up into the cart . " Tant ' Trana , í I say , " you have   marry a Kaffir 's dog , 

 a Hottentot 's brakje.í I have not   any more breath . he wink at I ; he wink at 
 I 
 , " say Tant ' Sannie , her side shake with indignation , " first with one eye , and then with the other , and then drive away . child of the Amalekite ! " say Tant ' Sannie , " if it have not   be the blessed sacrament . Lord , Lord , Lord ! " 


 here the little Bush - girl come run to say that the horse would stand no long , and still breathe out vengeance against her old adversary she labour toward the cart . shake hand and affectionately kiss Em , she be with some difficulty draw up . then slowly the cart roll away , the good boer - woman put her head out between the sail to smile and nod . em stand watch it for a time , then as the sun dazzle her eye she turn away . there be no use in go to sit with Gregory : he like well sit there alone , star across the the green karroo ; and till the maid have do churning 

 there be nothing to do ; so Em walk away to the waggon - house , and climb on to the end of Waldo 's table , and sit there , swing one little foot slowly to and fro , while the wooden curl from the plane heap themselves up against her black print dress . 

 " Waldo , " she say at last , " Gregory have give I the money he get for the waggon and oxen , and I have fifty pound besides that once belong to some one . I know what they would have like to have do with it . you must take it and go to some place and study for a year or two . " 
 " no , little one , I will not take it , " he say , as he plan slowly away ; " the time be when I would have be very grateful to any one who would have give I a little money , a little help , a little power of gain knowledge . but now , I have go so far alone I may go on to the end . I do not   want it , little one . " 

 she do not seem pain at his refusal , but swing her foot to and fro , the little old wrinkle forehead more wrinkle up than ever . 

 " why be it always so , Waldo , always so ? " she say ; " we long for thing , and long for they , and pray for they ; we would give all we have to come near to they , but we never reach they . then at last , too late , just when we do not   want they any more , when all the sweetness be take out of they , then they come . we do not   want they then , " she say , fold their hand resignedly on her little apron . after a while she add : " I remember once , very long ago , when I be a very little girl , my mother have a work - box full of coloured reel . I always want to play with they , but she would never let I . at last one day she say I might take the box . I be so glad I hardly know what to do . I run round the house , and sit down with it on the back step . 

 but when I open the box all the cotton be take out . " 

 she sit for a while long , till the Kaffir maid have finish churning , and be carry the butter toward the house . then Em prepare to slip off the table , but first she lay she little hand on Waldo 's . he stop his planing and look up . 
 " Gregory be go to the town to - morrow . he be go to give in our ban to the minister ; we be go to be marry in three week . " 
 Waldo lift she very gently from the table . he do not congratulate she ; perhaps he think of the empty box , but he kiss her forehead gravely . 

 she walk away toward the house , but stop when she get half - way . " I will bring you a glass of buttermilk when it be cool , " she call out ; and soon her clear voice come ring out through the back window as she 

 sing the " Blue Waterí to herself , and wash the butter . 


 Waldo do not wait till she return . perhaps he have at last really grow weary of work ; perhaps he feel the waggon - house chilly   for he have shudder two or 

 hree 
 three 

 time , though this be hardly likely in that warm summer weather ; or , perhaps , and most probably , one of his old dreaming fit have come upon he suddenly . he put his tool together , ready for to - morrow , and walk slowly out . at the side of the waggon - house there be a world of bright sunshine , and a hen with her chicken be scratch among the gravel . Waldo seat himself near they with his back against the red - brick wall . the long afternoon be half spend , and the kopje be just begin to cast its shadow over the round - head yellow flower that grow between it and the farm - house . among the flower the white butterfly hover and on the old " kraal " 

 mound three white kid gambol , and at the door of one of the hut an old grey - head Kaffir - woman sit on the ground mend her mat . a balmy , restful peacefulness seem to reign everywhere . even the old hen seem well - satisfied . she scratch among the stone and call to her chicken when she find a treasure ; and all the while tuck to herself with intense inward satisfaction . Waldo , as he sit with his knee draw up to his chin and his arm fold on they , look at it all and smile . an evil world , a deceitful , treacherous , mirage - like world , it might be ; but a lovely world for all that , and to sit there gloating in the sunlight be perfect . it be worth have be a little child , and have cry and pray so one might sit there . he move his hand as though he be wash they in the sunshine . there will always be something worth live for while there be shimmery afternoon . Waldo chuckle with intense 

 inward satisfaction as the old hen have do she , over the insect and the warmth ; he , over the old brick - wall , and the haze , and the little bush . beauty be God 's wine , with which he recompense the soul that love he ; 

 he 
 he 

 make they drunk . 

 the fellow look , and at last stretch out one hand to a little ice - plant that grow on the sod wall of the sty ; not as though he would have pick it , but as it be in a friendly greeting . he love it . one little leaf of the ice - plant stand upright , and the sun shine through it . he could see every little crystal cell like a drop of ice in the transparent green , and it thrill he . 
 there be only rare time when a man 's soul can see Nature . so long as any passion hold its revel there , the eye be holden that they should not see she . 

 go out if you will , and walk alone on the 

 hill - side in the evening , but if your favourite child lie ill at home , or your lover come to - morrow , or at your heart there lie a scheme for the holding of wealth , then you will return as you go out ; you will have see nothing . for nature , ever , like the old Hebrew God , cry out , " thou shalt have no other god before I . " only then , when there come a pause , a blank in your life , when the old idol be break , when the old hope be dead , when the old desire be crush , then the Divine compensation of Nature be make manifest . she show herself to you . so near she draw you , that the blood seem to flow from she to you , through a still uncut cord : you feel the throb of her life . 


 when that day come , that you sit down broken , without one human creature to whom you cling , with your love the dead and the living - dead ; when the very thirst for knowledge through 

 long - continue thwarting have grow dull ; when in the present there be no craving , and in the future no hope , then , oh , with a beneficent tenderness , nature enfold you . 

 then the large white snow - flake as they flutter down , softly , one by one , whisper soothingly , " rest , poor heart , rest ! " it be as though our mother smooth our hair , and we be comfort . 
 and yellow - legged bee as they hum make a dreamy lyric ; and the light on the brown stone wall be a great work of art ; and the light through the leaf make the pulse beat . 

 well to die then ; for , if you live , so surely as the year come , so surely as the spring succeed the winter , so surely will passion arise . they will creep back , one by one , into the bosom that have cast they forth , and fasten there again , and peace will go . Desire , 

 ambi- 
 ambition 


 tion , and the fierce agonizing flood of love for the living they will spring again . then Nature will draw down her veil ; with all your longing you shall not be able to raise one corner ; you can not bring back those peaceful day . well to die then ! 

 sit there with his arm fold on his knee , and his hat slouch down over his face , Waldo look out into the yellow sunshine that tint even the very air with the colour of ripe corn , and be happy . 

 he be an uncouth creature with small learning , and no prospect in the future but that of make endless table and stone - wall , yet it seem to he as he sit there that life be a rare and very rich thing . he rub his hand in the sunshine . ah , to live on so , year after year , how well ! always in the present ; let each day glide , bring its 

 own labour , and its own beauty ; the gradual lighting up of the hill , night and the star , fire - light and the coal ! to live on so , calmly , far from the path of man ; and to look at the life of cloud and insect ; to look deep into the heart of flower , and see how lovingly the pistil and the stamen nestle there together ; and to see in the thorn - pod how the little seed suck their life through the delicate curl - up string , and how the little embryo sleep inside ! well , how well , to sit so on one side take no part in the world 's life ; but when great man blossom into book look into those flower also , to see how the world of man too open beautifully , leaf after leaf . ah ! life be delicious ; well to live long , and see the darkness break , and the day come ! the day when soul shall not thrust back soul that would come to it ; when man shall not be drive to seek solitude because of the crying out of their 

 heart for love and sympathy . well to live long and see the new time break . well to live long ; life be sweet , sweet , sweet ! in his breast pocket , where of old the broken slate use to be , there be now a little dancing - shoe of his friend who be sleep . he could feel it when he fold his arm tight against his breast ; and that be well also . he draw his hat lower over his eye and sit so motionless that the chicken think he be asleep , and gather close around he . one even venture to peck at his boot ; but he run away quickly . tiny , yellow fellow that he be , he know that man be dangerous ; even sleep they might awake . but Waldo do not sleep , and come back from his sunshiny dream , stretch out his hand for the tiny thing to mount . but the chicken eye the hand askance , and then run off to hide under 

 its mother 's wing , and from beneath it it sometimes put out its round head to peep at the great figure sit there . presently its brother run off after a little white moth , and it run out to join they ; and when the moth flutter away over their head they stand look up disappointed , and then run back to their mother . 


 Waldo through his half - close eye look at they . think , fear , craving , those tiny spark of brother life , what be they , so real there in that old yard on that sunshiny afternoon ? a few year where would they be ? strange little brother spirit ! he stretch his hand toward they , for his heart go out to they ; but not one of the little creature come near he , and he watch they gravely for a time ; then he smile , and begin mutter to himself after his old fashion . afterward he fold his arm upon his knee , and rest his 

 forehead on they . and so he sit there in the yellow sunshine , muttering , muttering , muttering , to himself . 

 it be not very long after when Em come out at the back - door with a towel throw across her head , and in her hand a cup of milk . 
 " ah , " she say , come close to he , " he be sleep now . he will find it when he wake , and be glad of it . " 
 she put it down upon the ground beside he . the mother - hen be at work still among the stone , but the chicken have climb about he and be perch on he . one stand upon his shoulder , and rub its little head softly against his black curl : another try to balance itself on the very edge of the old feel hat . one tiny fellow stand upon his hand , and try to crow ; another have nestle itself down comfortably on the old coat - sleeve , and go to sleep there . 

 Em do not drive they away ; but she cover the glass softly at his side . " he will wake soon , " she say , " and be glad of it . " 
 but the chicken be wise . 

 the END . 
