trooper Peter Halket of Mashonaland 
 by 
 Olive Schreiner 
 1897 
 AUTHOR of " DREAMS , " " DREAM LIFE and real life , " " the story of an AFRICAN FARM , " ETC . 
 to a great good MAN , 

 Sir George Grey , 


 once Governor of the Cape Colony , who , during his rule in South Africa , bind to himself the Dutchmen , Englishmen , and native he govern , by an uncorruptible justice and a broad humanity ; and who be remember among we to - day as represent the noble attribute of an Imperial Rule . 

 " our low life be the level 's and the night 's ; 
 he be for the morning . " 


 OLIVE SCHREINER . 

 9 , RUSSELL ROAD , KENSINGTON , W. , 
 February , 1897 . 
 TROOPER PETER HALKET of MASHONALAND . 

 I. 

 IT 
 be a dark night ; a chill breath be come from the east ; not enough to disturb the blaze of Trooper Peter Halket 's fire , yet enough to make it quiver . he sit alone beside it on the top of a koppje 
 
 . 


 all about be an impenetrable 
   Koppje , a little hillock . 

 darkness ; not a star be visible in the black curve over his head . 


 he have be travel with a dozen man who be take provision of mealie and rice to the next camp . he have be send out to act as scout along a low range of hill , and have lose his way . since eight in the morning he have wander among long grass , and ironstone koppjes , and stunt bush , and have come upon no sign of human habitation , but the remain of a burn kraal 
 
 , and a down - trample and now uncultivated mealie field , 
   Kraal , a Kaffir encampment . 

 where a month before the Chartered Company 's force have destroy a native settlement . 

 three time in the day it have appear to he that he have return to the very spot from which he have start ; nor be it his wish to travel very far , for he know his comrade would come back to look for he , to the neighbourhood where he have last be see , when it be find at the evening camping ground that he do not appear . 

 Trooper Peter Halket be very weary . he have eat nothing all day ; and have touch little of 

 the content of a small flask of Cape brandy he carry in his breast pocket , not know when it would again be replenish . 


 as night draw near he determine to make his rest place on the top of one of the koppjes , which stand somewhat alone and apart from the other . he could not easily be approach there , without his know it . he have not much fear of the native ; their kraal have be destroy and their granary burn for thirty mile round , and they themselves have flee : but he fear , somewhat , the lion , which he have 

 never see , but of which he have hear , and which might be cower in the long grass and brushwood at the koppje 's foot : and he fear , vaguely , he hardly know what , when he look forward to his first long night alone in the veld . 
 


 by the time the sun have set he have gather a little pile of stump and branch on the top of the koppje . he intend to keep a fire burn all night ; and as the darkness begin to settle down he light it . it might be his friend would see it from far , and come for he early in 
   Veld , open country . 

 the morning ; and wild beast would hardly approach he while he kneel beside it ; and of the native he feel there be little fear . 

 he build up the fire ; and determine if it be possible to keep awake the whole night beside it . 

 he be a slight man of middle height , with a slop forehead and pale blue eye : but the jaw be hard set , and the thin lip of the large mouth be those of a man who could strongly desire the material good of life , and enjoy it when it come his way . over the low half of the face be scatter a few 

 soft white hair , the growth of early manhood . 


 from time to time he listen intently for possible sound from the distance where his friend might be encamp , and might fire off their gun at see his light ; or he listen yet more intently for sound near at hand : but all be still , except for the occasional cracking of the wood in his own fire , and the slight whistle of the breeze as it creep past the stone on the koppje . he double up his great hat and put it in the pocket of his overcoat , and put on a little two - point cap 

 his mother have make for he , which fit so close that only one lock of white hair hang out over his forehead . he turn up the collar of his coat to shield his neck and ear , and throw it open in front that the blaze of the fire might warm he . he have know many night cold than this when he have sit around the camp fire with his comrade , talk of the nigger they have shoot or the kraal they have destroy , or grumble over their ration ; but to - night the chill seem to creep into his very bone . 


 the darkness of the night above 

 he , and the silence of the veld about he , oppress he . at time he even wish he might hear the cry of a jackal or of some large beast of prey in the distance ; and he wish that the wind would blow a little louder , instead of make that little wheeze sound as it pass the corner of the stone . he look down at his gun , which lie cock ready on the ground at his right side ; and from time to time he raise his hand automatically and finger the cartridge in his belt . then he stretch out his small wiry hand to the fire and 

 warm they . it be only half past ten , and it seem to he he have be sit here ten hour at the least . 

 after a while he throw two more large log on the fire , and take the flask out of his pocket . he examine it carefully by the firelight to see how much it hold : then he take a small draught , and examine it again to see how much it have fall ; and put it back in his breast pocket . 
 then Trooper Peter Halket fall to think . 

 it be not often that he think 
 . 

 on patrol and sit round camp fire with the other man about he there be no time for it ; and Peter Halket have never be give to much thinking . he have be a careless boy at the village school ; and though , when he leave , his mother pay the village apothecary to read learn book with he at night on history and science , he have not retain much of they . as a rule he live in the world immediately about he , and let the thing of the moment impinge on he , and fall off again as they would , without much reflection . but to - night on the 

 koppje he fall to thinking , and his thought shape themselves into connected chain . 


 he wonder first whether his mother would ever get the letter he have post the week before , and whether it would be bring to her cottage or she would go to the post office to fetch it . and then , he fall to thinking of the little english village where he have be bear , and where he have grow up . he see his mother 's fat white duckling creep in and out under the gate , and waddle down to the little pond at the back of the yard ; he see the 

 school house that he have hat so much as a boy , and from which he have so often run away to go a - fishing , or a - bird's - nesting . he see the print on the school house wall on which the afternoon sun use to shine when he be keep in ; Jesus of Judea bless the child , and one picture just over the door where he hang with his arm stretch out and the blood drop from his foot . then Peter Halket think of the tower at the ruin which he have climb so often for bird ' egg ; and he see his mother stand at her cottage gate when he 

 come home in the evening , and he feel her arm round his neck as she kiss he ; but he feel her tear on his cheek , because he have run away from school all day ; and he seem to be make apology to she , and promise he never would do it again if only she would not cry . he have often think of she since he leave she , on board ship , and when he be work with the prospector , and since he have join the troop ; but it have be in a vague way ; he have not distinctly see and feel she . but to - night he wish for she as he use to when he be a small boy 

 and lie in his bed in the next room , and see her shadow through the door as she bend over her wash - tub earn the money which be to feed and clothe he . he remember how he call she and she come and tuck he in and call he " Little Simon , " which be his second name and have be his father 's , and which she only call he when he be in bed at night , or when he be hurt . 


 he sit there star into the blaze . he resolve he would make a great deal of money , and she should live with he . he would 

 build a large house in the West end of London , the big that have ever be see , and another in the country , and they should never work any more . 

 Peter Halket sit as one turn into stone , star into the fire . 
 all man make money when they come to South Africa , Barney Barnato , Rhodes they all make money out of the country , eight million , twelve million , twenty - six million , forty million ; why should not he ! 

 Peter Halket start suddenly and listen . but it be only the 

 wind come up the koppje like a great wheezy beast creep upwards ; and he look back into the fire . 

 he consider his business prospect . when he have serve his time as volunteer he would have a large piece of land give he , and the Mashonas and Matabeles would have all their land take away from they in time , and the Chartered Company would pass a law that they have to work for the white man ; and he , Peter Halket , would make they work for he . he would make money . 

 then he reflect on what he 

 should do with the land if it be no good and he could not make anything out of it . then , he should have to start a syndicate ; call the Peter Halket Gold , or the Peter Halket Iron - mining , or some such name , Syndicate . Peter Halket be not very clear as to how it ought to be start ; but he feel certain that he and some other man would have to take share . they would not have to pay for they . and then they would get some big man in London to take share . he need not pay for they ; they would give they to he ; and then the company 

 would be float . no one would have to pay anything ; it be just the name " the Peter Halket Gold Mining Company , Limited . " it would float in London ; and people there who do not   know the country would buy the share ; 
 they 
 would have to give ready money for they , of course ; perhaps fifteen pound a share when they be up ! Peter Halket 's eye blink as he look into the fire . and then , when the market be up , he , Peter Halket , would sell out all his share . if he give himself only six thousand and sell they each for ten pound , then 

 he , Peter Halket , would have sixty thousand pound ! and then he would start another company , and another . 

 Peter Halket strike his knee softly with his hand . 
 that be the great thing " always sell out at the right time . " that point Peter Halket be very clear on . he have hear it so often discuss . give some share to man with big name , and sell out : they can sell out too at the right time . 
 Peter Halket stroke his knee thoughtfully . 


 and then the other people , that buy the share for cash ! well , they could sell out too ; they could 
 all 
 sell out ! 


 then Peter Halket 's mind get a little hazy . the matter be get too difficult for he , like a rule of three sum at school when he could not see the relation between the two first term and the third . well , if they do not   like to sell out at the right time , it be their own fault . why do not   they ? he , Peter Halket , do not feel responsible for they . everyone know that you have to sell out at the right time . if 

 they do not   choose to sell out at the right time , well , they do not . " 
 it be the share that you sell , not the share you keep , that make the money . 
 " 


 but if they 
 could not 
 sell they ? 


 here Peter Halket hesitate . well , the british Government would have to buy they , if they be so bad no one else would ; and then no one would lose . " the british Government can not   let british share - holder suffer . " he would hear that often enough . the british taxpayer would have to pay for the Chartered Company , for the soldier , and all the other thing , if 
 it 

 could not , and take over the share if it go smash , because there be lord and duke and prince connect with it . and why should not   they pay for 
 his 
 company ? he would have a lord in it too ! 

 Peter Halket look into the fire completely absorb in his calculation . Peter Halket , Esq . , Director of the Peter Halket Gold Mining Company , Limited . then , when he have get thousand , Peter Halket , Esq . , M.P. then , when he have million , Sir Peter Halket , Privy Councillor ! 

 he reflect deeply , look into 

 the blaze . if you have five or six million you could go where you like and do what you like . you could go to Sandringham . you could marry anyone . no one would ask what your mother have be ; it would not   matter . 

 a curious dull sink sensation come over Peter Halket ; and he draw in his broad leathern belt two hole tight . 

 even if you have only two million you could have a cook and a valet , to go with you when you go into the veld or to the war ; and you could have as much champagne and 

 other thing as you like . at that moment that seem to Peter more important than go to Sandringham . 


 he take out his flask of Cape Smoke 
 
 , and draw a tiny draught from it . 

 other man have come to South Africa with nothing , and have make everything ! why should not he ? 

 he stick small branch under the two great log , and a glorious flame burst out . then he listen again intently . the wind be 

 fall- 
 fall 

   Cape Smoke , a very inferior brandy make in Cape Colony . 

 ing and the night be become very still . it be a quarter to twelve now . his back ache , and he would have like to lie down ; but he dare not , for fear he should drop asleep . he lean forward with his hand between his crossed knee , and watch the blaze he have make . 


 then , after a while , Peter Halket 's thought become less clear : they become at last , rather , a chain of disconnected picture , paint themselves in irrelevant order on his brain , than a line of connected idea . now , as he look into the crackling blaze , it seem 

 to be one of the fire they have make to burn the native ' grain by , and they be throw in all they could not carry away : then , he seem to see his mother 's fat duck waddle down the little path with the green grass on each side . then , he seem to see his hut where he live with the prospector , and the native woman who use to live with he ; and he wonder where the woman be . then he see the skull of an old Mashona blow off at the top , the hand still move . he hear the loud cry of the native woman and child as they turn 

 the maxim on to the kraal ; and then he hear the dynamite explode that blow up a cave . then again he be work a maxim gun , but it seem to he it be more like the reap machine he use to work in England , and that what be go down before it be not yellow corn , but black man 's head ; and he think when he look back they lie behind he in row , like the corn in sheaf . 


 the log send up a flame clear and high , and , where they split , show a burn core inside : the cracking and spluttering sound in his brain 

 like the discharge of a battery of artillery . then he think suddenly of a black woman he and another man catch alone in the bush , her baby on her back , but young and pretty . well , they do not   shoot she ! and a black woman be not   white ! his mother do not   understand these thing ; it be all so different in England from South Africa . you could not   be expect to do the same sort of thing here as there . he have an unpleasant feeling that he be justify himself to his mother , and that he do not   know how to . 


 he lean far and far 

 forward : so far at last , that the little white lock of his hair which hang out under his cap be almost sing by the fire . his eye be still open , but the lid droop over they , and his hand hang lower and low between his knee . there be no picture leave on his brain now , but simply an impress of the blaze log before he . 

 then , Trooper Peter Halket start . he sit up and listen . the wind have go ; there be not a sound : but he listen intently . the fire burn up into the still air , two clear red tongue of flame . 

 then , on the other side of the koppje he hear the sound of footstep ascend ; the slow even tread of bare foot come up . 

 the hair on Trooper Peter Halket 's forehead slowly stiffen itself . he have no thought of escape ; he be paralyze with dread . he take up his gun . a deadly coldness creep from his foot to his head . he have work a maxim gun in a fight when some hundred native fall and only one white man have be wound ; and he have never know fear ; but to - night his finger be stiff on the lock of his gun . he kneel low , 

 tend a little to one side of the fire , with his gun ready . a stone half shelter he from anyone come up from the other side of the koppje , and the instant the figure appear over the edge he intend to fire . 

 then , the thought flash on he ; what , and if it be one of his own comrade come in search of he , and no bare - footed enemy ! the anguish of suspense wring his heart ; for an instant he hesitate . then , in a cold agony of terror , he cry out , " who be there ? " 
 and a voice reply in clear , slow English , " a friend . " 

 Peter Halket almost let his gun drop , in the revulsion of feeling . the cold sweat which anguish have restrain burst out in large drop on his forehead ; but he still kneel hold his gun . 
 " what do you want ? " he cry out quiveringly . 
 from the darkness at the edge of the koppje a figure step out into the full blaze of the firelight . 
 Trooper Peter Halket look up at it . 

 it be the tall figure of a man , clothe in one loose linen garment , reach low than his knee , and 

 which clung close about he . his head , arm , and foot be bare . he carry no weapon of any kind ; and on his shoulder hang heavy lock of dark hair . 

 Peter Halket look up at he with astonishment . " be you alone ? " he ask . 
 " yes , I be alone . " 
 Peter Halket lower his gun and kneel up . 
 " lost your way , I suppose ? " he say , still hold his weapon loosely . 
 " no ; I have come to ask whether I may sit beside your fire for a while . " 

 " certainly , certainly ! " say Peter , eye the stranger 's dress carefully , still hold his gun , but with the hand off the lock . " I be confoundedly glad of any company . it be a beastly night for anyone to be out alone . wonder you find your way . sit down ! sit down ! " Peter look intently at the stranger ; then he put his gun down at his side . 

 the stranger sit down on the opposite side of the fire . his complexion be dark ; his arm and foot be bronze ; but his aquiline feature , and the dome forehead , 

 be not of any south african race . 

 " one of the soudanese Rhodes bring with he from the north , I suppose ? " say Peter , still eye he curiously . 
 " no ; Cecil Rhodes have have nothing to do with my come here , " say the stranger . 

 " oh " say Peter . " you do not   perhaps happen to come across a company of man to - day , twelve white man and seven colour , with three cart load of provision ? we be take they to the big camp , and I get part from my troop this 

 morning . I have   not be able to find they , though I have   be seek for they ever since . " 

 the stranger warm his hand slowly at the fire ; then he raise his head : " they be camp at the foot of those hill to - night , " he say , point with his hand into the darkness at the left . " to - morrow early they will be here , before the sun have rise . " 

 " oh , you have   meet they , have you ! " say Peter joyfully ; " that be why you be not   surprise at find I here . take a drop ! " he take the small flask from his pocket and 

 hold it out . " I be sorry there be so little , but a drop will keep the cold out . " 

 the stranger bow his head ; but thank and decline . 
 Peter raise the flask to his lip and take a small draught ; then return it to his pocket . the stranger fold his arm about his knee , and look into the fire . 
 " be you a Jew ? " ask Peter , suddenly ; as the firelight fall full on the stranger 's face . 
 " yes ; I be a Jew . " 

 " ah , " say Peter , " that be why I be not   able to make out at first what 

 nation you could be of ; your dress , you know " then he stop , and say , " trade here , I suppose ? which country do you come from ; be you a spanish Jew ? " 

 " I be a Jew of Palestine . " 
 " ah ! " say Peter ; " I have not   see many from that part yet . I come out with a lot on board ship ; and I have   see Barnato and Beit ; but they be not very much like you . I suppose it be come from Palestine make the difference . " 

 all fear of the stranger have now leave Peter Halket . " come a little nearer the fire , " he say , " you must 

 be cold , you have not   too much wrap . I be chill in this big coat . " Peter Halket push his gun a little far away from he ; and throw another large log on the fire . " I be sorry I have not   anything to eat to offer you ; but I have not   have anything myself since last night . it be beastly sicken , be out like this with nothing to eat . would not   have think a fellow'd feel so bad after only a day of it . have you ever be out without grub ? " say Peter cheerfully , warm his hand at the blaze . 

 " forty day and night , " say the stranger . 

 " forty day ! Ph e ew ! " say Peter . " you must have have have a lot to drink , or you would not   have stand it . I be feel blue enough when you turn up , but I be well now , warm . " 
 Peter Halket re - arrange the log on the fire . 
 " in the employ of the Chartered Company , I suppose ? " say Peter , look into the fire he have make . 
 " no , " say the stranger ; " I have nothing to do with the Chartered Company . " 

 " oh , " say Peter , " I do not   wonder , then , that thing be not 

 look very smart with you ! there be not too much cake and ale up here for those that do belong to it , if they be not big - wig , and none at all for those who do not . I try it when I first come up here . I be with a prospector who be hook on to the company somehow , but I work on my own account for the prospector by the day . I tell you what , it be not the man who work up here who make the money ; it be the big - wig who get the concession ! " 


 Peter feel exhilarate by the presence of the stranger . that one 

 unarmed man have rob he of all fear . 


 see that the stranger do not take up the thread of conversation , he go on after a time : " it be not   such a bad life , though . I only wish I be back there again . I have two hut to myself , and a couple of nigger girl . it be well fun , " say Peter , after a while , " have these black woman than white . the white you have   get to support , but the nigger support you ! and when you have   do with they you can just get rid of they . I be all for the nigger gal . " 

 Peter laugh . but the stranger sit motionless with his arm about his knee . 

 " you get any girl ? " say Peter . " care for nigger ? " 

 " I love 
 all 
 woman , " say the stranger , refolde his arm about his knee . 


 " oh , you do , do you ? " say Peter . " well , I be pretty sick of they . I have bother enough with mine , " he say genially , warm his hand by the fire , and then interlock the finger and turn the palm towards the blaze as one who prepare to enjoy a 

 good talk . " one girl be only fifteen ; I get she cheap from a policeman who be live with she , and she be not   much . but the other , by Gad ! I never see another nigger like she ; well set up , I tell you , and as straight as that " say Peter , hold up his finger in the firelight . " she be thirty if she be a day . fellow do not   generally fancy woman that age ; they like slip of girl . but I set my heart on she the day I see she . she belong to the chap I be with . he get she up north . there be a devil of a row about his 

 get she , too ; she would get a nigger husband and two child ; do not   want to leave they , or some nonsense of that sort : you know what these nigger be ? well , I try to get the other fellow to let I have she , but the devil a bit he would . I would only get the other girl , and I do not   much fancy she ; she be only a child . well , I go down umtali way and get a lot of liquor and stuff , and when I get back to camp I find they clean dry out . they have not   have a drop of liquor in camp for ten day , and the rainy season come on and no knowing 

 when they would get any . well , I have a " vatjeí of Old Dop 
 
 as high as that , " indicate with his hand an object about two foot high , " and the other fellow want to buy it from I . I know two of that . I say I want it for myself . he offer I this , and he offer I that . at last I say , " well , just to oblige you , I give you the " vatje " and you give I the girl!í and so he do . Most people would not   have fancy a nigger girl who have have two nigger child , 
   Vatje of Old Dop , a little cask of Cape brandy . 

 but I do not   mind ; it be all the same to I . and I tell you she work . she make a garden , and she and the other girl work in it ; I tell you I do not   need to buy a sixpence of food for they in six month , and I use to sell green mealie 
 
 and pumpkin to all the fellow about . there be not   many fly on she , I tell you . she pick up English quick than I pick up her lingo , and take to wear a dress and shawl . " 

 the stranger still sit motionless , look into the fire . 
   mealie , maize . 


 Peter Halket reseat himself more comfortably before the fire . " well , I come home to the hut one day , rather suddenly , you know , to fetch something ; and what do I find ? she , talk at the hut door with a nigger man . now it be my strict order they be neither to speak a word to a nigger man at all ; so I ask what it be . and she answer , as cool as can be , that he be a stranger go past on the road , and ask she to give he a drink of water . well , I just order he off . I do not   think anything more about it . but I remember 

 now . I see he hang about the camp the day after . well , she come to I the next day and ask I for a lot of cartridge . she would never ask I for anything before . I ask she what the devil a woman want with cartridge , and she say the old nigger woman who help carry in water to the garden say she could not   stay and help she any more unless she get some cartridge to give her son who be go up north hunt elephant . the woman get over I to give she the cartridge because she be go to have a kid , and she say she could not 

 do the watering without help . so I give they she . I never put two and two together . 


 " well , when I hear that the Company be go to have a row with the Matabele , I think I would volunteer . they say there be lot of loot to be get , and land to be give out , and that sort of thing , and I think I would only be go about three month . so I go . I leave those woman there , and a lot of stuff in the garden and some sugar and rice , and I tell they not to leave till I come back ; and I ask the other man to keep an eye 

 on they . both those woman be Mashonas . they always say the Mashonas do not   love the Matabele ; but , by God , it turn out that they love they well than they love we . they have   get the damned impertinence to say , that the Matabele oppress they sometimes , but the white man oppress they all the time ! 


 " well , I leave those woman there , " say Peter , drop his hand on his knee . " mind you , I would treat those woman really well . I would never give either of they one touch all the time I have they . I be the 

 talk of all the fellow round , the way I treat they . well , I have not   be go a month , when I get a letter from the man I work with , the one who have the woman first he be dead now , poor fellow ; they find he at his hut door with his throat cut and what do you think he say to I ? why , I have not   be go six hour when those two woman skoote ! it be all the big one . what do you think she do ? she take every ounce of ball and cartridge she could find in that hut , and my old Martini - Henry , and even the lid off the tea - box to melt into 

 bullet for the old muzzle - loader they have ; and off she go , and take the young one too . the fellow write I they do not   touch another thing : they leave the shawl and dress I give they kick about the hut , and go off naked with only their blanket and the ammunition on their head . a nigger man meet they twenty mile off , and he say they be skoote up for Lo - Magundi 's country as fast as they could go . 


 " and do you know , " say Peter , strike his knee , and look impressively across the fire at the 

 stranger ; " what I be as sure of as that I be sit here ? it be that that nigger I catch at my hut , that day , be her nigger husband ! he would come to fetch she that time ; and when she see she could not   get away without our catch she , she get the cartridge for 
 he 
 ! " Peter pause impressively between the word . " and now she be go back to he . it be for he she be take that ammunition ! " 

 Peter look across the fire at the stranger , to see what impression his story be make . 

 " I tell you what , " say Peter , " if 

 I have have any idea that day who that bloody nigger be , the day I see he stand at my door , I would have give he one cartridge in the back of his head more than ever he reckon for ! " Peter look triumphantly at the stranger . this be his only story ; and he have tell it a score of time round the camp fire for the benefit of some new - comer . when this point be reach , a low murmur of applause and sympathy always run round the group : to - night there be quiet ; the stranger 's large dark eye watch the fire almost as though he hear nothing . 



 " I should not   have mind so much , " say Peter after a while , " though no man like to have his woman take away from he ; but she be go to have a kid in a month or two and so be the little one for anything I know ; she look like it ! I expect they do away with it before it come ; they have   no heart , these nigger ; they would think nothing of do that with a white man 's child . they have   no heart ; they would rather go back to a black man , however well you have   treat they . it be all right if you get they quite young and keep they away 

 from their own people ; but if once a nigger woman 's have a nigger man and have child by he , you might as well try to hold a she - devil ! they will always go back . if ever I be shoot , it be as likely as not it will be by my own gun , with my own cartridge . and she would stand by and watch it , and cheer they on ; though I never give she a blow all the time she be with I . but I tell you what if ever I come across that bloody nigger , I will take it out of he . he will not   count many day to his year , after I have   spot he ! " Peter Halket pause . it seem to 

 he that the eye under their heavy , curl lash , be look at something beyond he with an infinite sadness , almost as of eye that weep . 

 " you look awfully tired , " say Peter ; " would not   you like to lie down and sleep ? you could put your head down on that stone , and I would keep watch . " 
 " I have no need of sleep , " the stranger say ; " I will watch with you . " 

 " you have   be in the war , too , I see , " say Peter , bend forward a little , and look at the stranger 's foot . " by God ! both of they ! 

 and right through ! you must have have a bad time of it ? " 

 " it be very long ago , " say the stranger . 

 Peter Halket throw two more log on the fire . " do you know , " he say , " I have   be wonder ever since you come , who it be you remind I of . it be my mother ! you be not like she in the face , but when your eye look at I it seem to I as if it be she look at I . curious , be not   it ? I do not   know you from Adam , and you have   hardly speak a word since you come ; and yet I seem as if I have know you all 

 my life . " Peter move a little near he . " I be awfully afraid of you when you first come ; even when I first see you ; you be not   dress as most of we dress , you know . but the minute the fire shine on your face I say , " it be all right.í curious , be not   it ? " say Peter . " I do not   know you from Adam , but if you be to take up my gun and point it at I , I would not   move ! I would lie down here and go to sleep with my head at your foot ; curious , be not   it , when I do not   know you from Adam ? my name 's Peter Halket . what be your ? " 


 but the stranger be arrange the log on the fire . the flame shoot up bright and high , and almost hide he from Peter Halket 's view . 
 " by gad ! how they burn when you arrange they ! " say Peter . 
 they sit quiet in the blaze for a while . 
 then Peter say , " do you see any nigger about yesterday ? I have not   come across any in this part . " 

 " there be , " say the stranger , raise himself , " an old woman in a cave over yonder , and there be one man in the bush , ten mile from 

 this spot . he have live there six week , since you destroy the kraal , live on root or herb . he be wound in the thigh , and leave for dead . he be wait till you have all leave this part of the country that he may set out to follow his own people . his leg be not yet so strong that he may walk fast . " 

 " do you speak to he ? " say Peter . 
 " I take he down to the water where a large pool be . the bank be too high for the man to descend alone . " 

 " it be a lucky thing for you our 

 fellow do not   catch you , " say Peter . " our captain be a regular little martinet . he would shoot you as soon as look at you , if he see you fool round with a wound nigger . it be lucky you keep out of his way . " 

 " the young raven have meat give to they , " say the stranger , lift himself up ; " and the lion go down to the stream to drink . " 
 " ah yes " say Peter ; " but that be because we can not   help it ! " 

 they be silent again for a little while . then Peter , see that the stranger show no inclination to speak , say , " do you hear of the 

 spree they have up Bulawayo way , hang those three nigger for spy ? I be not   there myself , but a fellow who be tell I they make the nigger jump down from the tree and hang themselves ; one fellow would not   bally jump , till they give he a charge of buckshot in the back : and then he catch hold of a branch with his hand and they have to shoot them loose . he do not   like hang . I do not   know if it be true , of course ; I be not   there myself , but a fellow who be tell I . another fellow who be at Bulawayo , but who be not   there when they be 

 hung , say they fire at they just after they jump , to kill them . I " 

 " I be there , " say the stranger . 
 " oh , you be ? " say Peter . " I see a photograph of the nigger hang , and our fellow stand round smoking ; but I do not   see you in it . I suppose you would just go away ? " 
 " I be beside the man when they be hung , " say the stranger . 

 " oh , you be , be you ? " say Peter . " I do not   much care about see that sort of thing myself . some fellow think it be the good fun 

 out to see the nigger kick ; but I can not   stand it : it turn my stomach . it be not liver - heartedness , " say Peter , quickly , anxious to remove any adverse impression as to his courage which the stranger might form ; " if it be shoot or fighting , I be there . I have   pot as many nigger as any man in our troop , I bet . it be flogging and hanging I be off . it be the way one 's bring up , you know . my mother never even would kill our duck ; she let they die of old age , and we have the feather and the egg : and she be always drum into I ; do not 

 hit a fellow small than yourself ; do not   hit a fellow weak than yourself ; do not   hit a fellow unless he can hit you back as good again . when you have   always have that sort of thing drum into you , you can not   get rid of it , somehow . now there be that other nigger they shoot . they say he sit as still as if he be cut out of stone , with his arm round his leg ; and some of the fellow give he blow about the head and face before they take he off to shoot he . now , that be the sort of thing I can not   do . it make I sick here , somehow . " Peter put 

 his hand rather low down over the pit of his stomach . " I will shoot as many as you like if they will run , but they must not   be tie up . " 

 " I be there when that man be shoot , " say the stranger . 
 " why , you seem to have be everywhere , " say Peter . " have you see Cecil Rhodes ? " 
 " yes , I have see he , " say the stranger . 

 " now 
 he be 
 death on nigger , " say Peter Halket , warm his hand by the fire ; " they say when he be Prime Minister down in the Colony he try to pass a law that would 

 give their master and mistress the right to have their servant flog whenever they do anything they do not   like ; but the other englishman would not   let he pass it . but 
 here 
 he can do what he like . that be the reason some fellow do not   want he to be send away . they say , " if we get the british Government here , they will be give the nigger land to live on ; and let they have the vote , and get civilised and educate , and all that sort of thing ; but Cecil Rhodes , he will keep their nose to the grindstone.í 
 I prefer land to nigger 
 , he say . 

 they say he be go to parcel they out , and make they work on our land whether they like it or not just as good as have slave , you know : and you have not   the bother of look after they when they be old . now , there I be with Rhodes ; I think it be an awfully good move . we do not   come out here to work ; it be all very well in England ; but we have   come here to make money , and how be we to make it , unless you get nigger to work for you , or start a syndicate ? he be death on nigger , be Rhodes ! " say Peter , meditating ; " they say if we have the 

 british Government here and you be thrash a nigger and something happen , there would be an investigation , and all that sort of thing . but , with Cecil , it be all right , you can do what you like with the nigger , provide you do not   get 
 he 
 into trouble . " 

 the stranger watch the clear flame as it burn up high in the still night air ; then suddenly he start . 
 " what be it ? " say Peter ; " do you hear anything ? " 

 " I hear far off , " say the stranger , " the sound of weeping , and the 

 sound of blow . and I hear the voice of man and woman call to I . " 

 Peter listen intently . " I do not   hear anything ! " he say . " it must be in your head . I sometimes get a noise in mine . " he listen intently . " no , there be nothing . it be all so deadly still . " 
 they sit silent for a while . 

 " Peter Simon Halket , " say the stranger suddenly Peter start ; he have not tell he his second name " if it should come to pass that you should obtain those land you have desire , and you should 

 obtain black man to labour on they and make to yourself great wealth ; or should you create that company " Peter start " and fool should buy from you , so that you become the rich man in the land ; and if you should take to yourself wide land , and raise to yourself great palace , so that prince and great man of earth creep up to you and lay their hand against your , so that you might slip gold into they what would it profit you ? " 


 " profit ! " Peter Halket star : " why , it would profit everything . what make Beit and Rhodes and 

 Barnato so great ? if you have   get eight million " 

 " Peter Simon Halket , which of those soul you have see on earth be to you great ? " say the stranger , " which soul be to you fairest ? " 

 " ah , " say Peter , " but we be not   talk of soul at all ; we be talk of money . of course if it come to soul , my mother 's the good person I have   ever see . but what do it help she ? she be get to stand washing clothe for those stick - up nincompoop of fine lady ! wait till I have   get 

 money ! it will be somebody else then , who " 

 " Peter Halket , " say the stranger , " who be the great ; he who serve or he who be serve ? " Peter look at the stranger : then it flash on he that he be mad . 
 " oh , " he say , " if it come to that , what be anything ! you might as well say , sit there in your old linen shirt , that you be as great as Rhodes or Beit or Barnato , or a king . of course a man 's just the same whatever he be get on or whatever he have ; but he be not   the same to other people . " 

 " there have king be bear in stable , " say the stranger . 
 then Peter see that he be joke , and laugh . " it must have be a long time ago ; they do not   get bear there now , " he say . " why , if God Almighty come to this country , and have not   half - a - million in share , they would not   think much of he . " 
 Peter build up his fire . suddenly he feel the stranger 's eye be fix on he . 
 " who give you your land ? " the stranger ask . 
 " mine ! why , the Chartered Company , " say Peter . 

 the stranger look back into the fire . " and who give it to they ? " he ask softly . 
 " why , England , of course . she give they the land to far beyond the Zambesi to do what they like with , and make as much money out of as they could , and she would back them . " 
 " who give the land to the man and woman of England ? " ask the stranger softly . 
 " why , the devil ! they say it be theirs , and of course it be , " say Peter . 
 " and the people of the land : do England give you the people also ? " 

 Peter look a little doubtfully at the stranger . " yes , of course , she give we the people ; what use would the land have be to we otherwise ? " 
 " and who give she the people , the live flesh and blood , that she might give they away , into the hand of other ? " ask the stranger , raise himself . 
 Peter look at he and be half afeare . " well , what could she do with a lot of miserable nigger , if she do not   give they to we ? a lot of good - for - nothing rebel they be , too , " say Peter . 

 " what be a rebel ? " ask the stranger . 

 " my Gawd ! " say Peter , " you must have live out of the world if you do not   know what a rebel be ! a rebel be a man who fight against his king and his country . these bloody nigger here be rebel because they be fight against we . they do not   want the Chartered Company to have they . but they will have to . we will teach they a lesson , " say Peter Halket , the pugilistic spirit rise , firmly reseat himself on the south african earth , which two year 

 before he have never hear of , and eighteen month before he have never see , as if it have be his mother earth , and the land in which he first see light . 

 the stranger watch the fire ; then he say musingly , " I have see a land far from here . in that land be man of two kind who live side by side . well nigh a thousand year ago one conquer the other ; they have live together since . to - day the one people seek to drive forth the other who conquer they . be these man rebel , too ? " 

 " well , " say Peter , please at be defer to , " that all depend who they be , you know ! " 
 " they call the one nation Turks , and the other Armenians , " say the stranger . 
 " oh , the Armenians be not   rebel , " say Peter ; " they be on our side ! the paper be all full of it , " say Peter , please to show his knowledge . " those bloody Turks ! what right have they to conquer the Armenians ? who give they their land ? I would like to have a shot at they myself ! " 

 " 
 why 
 be Armenians not 

 rebel ? " ask the stranger , gently . 


 " oh , you do ask such curious question , " say Peter . " if they do not   like the Turks , why should they have them ? if the French come now and conquer we , and we try to drive they out first chance we have ; you would not   call 
 us 
 rebel ! why should not   they try to turn those bloody Turks out ? besides , " say Peter , bend over and talk in the manner of one who impart secret and important information ; " you see , if we do not   help the Armenians the Russians would ; and 

 we , " say Peter , look exceedingly know , " we have   get to prevent that : they would get the land ; and it be on the road to India . and we do not   mean they to . I suppose you do not   know much about politic in Palestine ? " say Peter , look kindly and patronisingly at the stranger . 


 " if these man , " say the stranger , " would rather be free , or be under the British Government , than under the Chartered Company , why , when they resist the Chartered Company , be they more rebel than the Armenians when they resist the Turk ? be the Chartered Company 

 God , that every knee should bow before it , and before it every head be bent ? would you , the white man of England , submit to its rule for one day ? " 

 " ah , " say Peter , " no , of course we should not , but we be white man , and so be the Armenians almost " then he glance at the stranger 's dark face , and add quickly , " at least , it be not the colour that matter , you know . I rather like a dark face , my mother 's eye be brown but the Armenians , you know , they have   get long hair like we . " 

 " oh , it be the hair , then , that matter , " say the stranger softly . 
 " oh , well , " say Peter , " it be not altogether , of course . but it be quite a different thing , the Armenians want to get rid of the Turks , and these bloody nigger want to get rid of the Chartered Company . besides , the Armenians be Christians , like we ! " 

 " be 
 you 
 Christians ? " a strange storm break across the stranger 's feature ; he rise to his foot . 


 " why , of course , we be ! " say Peter . " we be all Christians , we English . perhaps you do not   like 

 Christians , though ? some Jews do not , I know , " say Peter , look up soothingly at he . 

 " I neither love nor hate any man for that which he be call , " say the stranger ; " the name boot nothing . " 
 the stranger sit down again beside the fire , and fold his hand . 
 " be the Chartered Company Christian also ? " he ask . 
 " yes , oh yes , " say Peter . 
 " what be a Christian ? " ask the stranger . 

 " well , now , you really do ask such curious question . a Christian be a man who believe in Heaven 

 and Hell , and God and the Bible , and in Jesus Christ , that he will save he from go to Hell , and if he believe he will be save , he 
 will 
 be save . " 

 " but here , in this world , what be a Christian ? " 
 " why , " say Peter , " I be a Christian we be all Christians . " 

 the stranger look into the fire ; and Peter think he would change the subject . " it be curious how like my mother you be ; I mean , your way . she be always say to I , " do not   be too anxious to make money , Peter . too much wealth be 

 as bad as too much poverty.í you be very like she . " 

 after a while Peter say , bend over a little towards the stranger , " if you do not   want to make money , what do you come to this land for ? no one come here for anything else . be you in with the Portuguese ? " 

 " I be not more with one people than with another , " say the stranger . " the Frenchman be not more to I than the Englishman , the Englishman than the Kaffir , the Kaffir than the Chinaman . I have hear , " say the stranger , " the 

 black infant cry as it creep on its mother 's body and seek for her breast as she lie dead in the roadway . I have hear also the rich man 's child wail in the palace . I hear all cry . " 

 Peter look intently at he . " why , who be you ? " he say ; then , bend near to the stranger and look up , he add , " what be it that you be do here ? " 
 " I belong , " say the stranger , " to the strong company on earth . " 

 " oh , " say Peter , sit up , the look of wonder pass from his 

 face . " so that be it , be it ? be it diamond , or gold , or land ? " 

 " we be the most vast of all company on the earth , " say the stranger ; " and we be always grow . we have among we man of every race and from every land ; the Esquimo , the Chinaman , the Turk , and the Englishman , we have of they all . we have man of every religion , Buddhists , Mahomedans , Confucians , Freethinkers , Atheists , Christians , Jews . it matter to we nothing by what name the man be name , so he be one of we . " 

 and Peter say , " it must be hard 

 for you all to understand one another , if you be of so many different kind ? " 


 the stranger answer , " there be a sign by which we all know one another , and by which all the world may know we . " 
 

 and Peter say , " what be that sign ? " 
 but the stranger be silent . 

 " oh , a kind of freemasonry ! " say Peter , lean on his elbow towards the stranger , and look up at he from under his pointed cap . 
 by this shall all man know that ye be my disciple , if ye have love one to another . 

 " be there any more of you here in this country ? " 


 " there be , " say the stranger . then he point with his hand into the darkness . " there in a cave be two woman . when you blow the cave up they be leave unhurt behind a fall rock . when you take away all the grain , and burn what you could not carry , there be one basketful that you know nothing of . the woman stay there , for one be eighty , and one near the time of her give birth ; and they dare not set out to follow the remnant of their tribe because 

 you be in the plain below . every day the old woman dole grain from the basket ; and at night they cook it in their cave where you could not see their smoke ; and every day the old woman give the young one two handfuls and keep one for herself , say , " because of the child within you.í and when the child be bear and the young woman strong , the old woman take a cloth and fill it with all the grain that be in the basket ; and she put the grain on the young woman 's head and tie the child on her back , and say , " go , keep always along the 

 bank of the river , till you come north to the land where our people be go ; and some day you can send and fetch me.í and the young woman say , " have you corn in the basket to last till they come?í and she say , " I have enough.í and she sit at the broken door of the cave and watch the young woman go down the hill and up the river bank till she be hide by the bush ; and she look down at the plain below , and she see the spot where the kraal have be and where she have plant mealie when she be a young girl " 


 " I meet a woman with corn on her head and a child on her back ! " say Peter under his breath . 
 " and to - night I see she sit again at the door of the cave ; and when the sun have set she grow cold ; and she creep in and lie down by the basket . to - night , at half - past three , she will die . I have know she since she be a little child and play about the hut , while her mother work in the mealie field . she be one of our company . " 
 " oh , " say Peter . 

 " other member we have here , " 

 say the stranger . " there be a prospector " he point north ; " he be a man who drink and swear when it list he ; but he have many servant , and they know where to find he in need . when they be ill , he tend they with his own hand ; when they be in trouble , they come to he for help . when this war begin , and all black man 's heart be bitter , because certain white man have lie to they , and their envoy have be kill when they would have ask England to put her hand out over they ; at that time certain of the 

 man who fight the white man come to the prospector 's hut . and the prospector fire at they from a hole he have cut in his door ; but they fire back at he with an old elephant gun , and the bullet pierce his side and he fall on the floor : because the innocent man suffer oftentime for the guilty , and the merciful man fall while the oppressor flourish . then his black servant who be with he take he quickly in his arm , and carry he out at the back of the hut , and down into the river bed where the water flow and no man could trace 

 his footstep , and hide he in a hole in the river wall . and when the man break into the hut they could find no white man , and no trace of his foot . but at evening , when the black servant return to the hut to get food and medicine for his master , the man who be fight catch he , and they say , " oh , you betrayer of your people , white man 's dog , who be on the side of those who take our land and our wife and our daughter before our eye ; tell we where you have hide him?í and when he would not answer they , they kill he before the 

 door of the hut . and when the night come , the white man creep up on his hand and knee , and come to his hut to look for food . all the other man be go , but his servant lie dead before the door ; and the white man know how it must have happen . he could not creep far , and he lie down before the door , and that night the white man and the black lay there dead together , side by side . both those man be of my friend . " 


 " it be damn plucky of the nigger , " say Peter ; " but I have   hear of their do that sort of thing 

 before . even of a girl who would not   tell where her mistress be , and get kill . but , " he add doubtfully , " all your company seem to be nigger or to get kill ? " 


 " they be of all race , " say the stranger . " in a city in the old Colony be one of we , small of stature and small of voice . it come to pass on a certain Sunday morning , when the man and woman be gather before he , that he mount his pulpit : and he say when the time for the sermon come , " in place that I should speak to you , I will read you a history.í and he open an 

 old book more than two thousand year old : and he read : " now it come to pass that Naboth the Jezreelite have a vineyard , which be in Jezreel , hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria 
 . 

 " " and Ahab spake unto Naboth , say , give I thy vineyard , that I may have it for a garden of herb , because it be near unto my house : and I will give thee for it a well vineyard than it ; or , if it seemeth good to thee , I will give thee the worth of it in money . 

 " " and Naboth say to Ahab , the Lord forbid it I , that I should give 

 the inheritance of my father unto thee . 

 " " and Ahab come into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite have speak unto he ; for he have say , I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers.í 
 " the man read the whole story until it be end . then he close the book , and he say , " my friend , Naboth have a vineyard in this land ; and in it there be much gold ; and Ahab have desire to have it that the wealth may be his.í 

 " and he put the old book aside , 

 and he take up another which be write yesterday . and the man and woman whisper one to another , even in the church , " be not that the Blue Book Report of the Select Committee of the Cape Parliament on the Jameson raid?í 


 " and the man say , " friend , the first story I have read you be one of the old story of the world : the story I be about to read you be one of the new . truth be not more truth because it be three thousand year old , nor be it less truth because it be of yesterday . all book which throw light on truth be 

 God 's book , therefore I shall read to you from the page before I . shall the story of Ahab king of Samaria profit we when we know not the story of the Ahabs of our day ; and the Naboths of our land be stone while we sit at ease?í and he read to they portion of that book . and certain rich man and woman rise up and go out even while he speak , and his wife also go out . 


 " and when the service be end and the man return to his home , his wife come to he weep ; and she say , " do you see how some of 

 the most wealthy and important people get up and go out this morning ? why do you preach such a sermon , when we be just go to have the new wing add to our house , and you think they be go to raise your salary ? you have not a single boer in your congregation ! why need you say the Chartered Company raid on Johannesburg be wrong?í 

 " he say , " my wife , if I believe that certain man whom we have raise on high , and to whom we have give power , have do a cowardly wrong , shall I not say it?í 


 " and she say , " yes , and only a little while ago , when Rhodes be lick the dust off the Boers ' foot that he might keep they from suspect while he get ready this affair , then you attack both Rhodes and the bond 
 
 for try to pass a Bill for flog the nigger , and we lose fifty pound we might have get for the church?í and he say , " my wife , can not God be worship as well under the dome of the heaven he make as in a golden palace ? shall a man keep silence , when he 
 the Afrikander Bond , the organise dutch political party , through whom Mr. Rhodes work , and by whom he be back . 

 see oppression , to earn money for God ? if I have defend the black man when I believe he to be wrong , shall I not also defend the white man , my flesh - brother ? shall we speak when one man be wrong and not when it be another?í 


 " and she say , " yes , but you have your family and yourself to think of ! why be you always in opposition to the people who could do something for we ? you be only love by the poor . if it be necessary for you to attack some one , why do not   you attack the Jews for kill Christ , or Herod , or Pontius Pilate ; 

 why do not   you leave alone the man who be in power to - day , and who with their money can crush you!í 


 " and he say , " oh my wife , those Jews , and Herod , and Pontius Pilate be long dead . if I should preach of they now , would it help they ? would it save one live thing from their clutch ? the past be dead , it live only for we to learn from . the present , the present only , be ours to work in , and the future our to create . be all the gold of Johannesburg or be all the diamond in Kimberley worth , that one christian man should fall 

 by the hand of his fellow aye , or one heathen brother?í 

 " and she answer , " oh , that be all very well . if you be a really eloquent preacher , and could draw hundred of man about you , and in time form a great party with you at its head , I should not   mind what you say . but you , with your little figure and your little voice , who will ever follow you ? you will be leave all alone ; that be all the good that will ever come to you through it.í 

 " and he say , " oh my wife , have I not wait and watch and hop that they who be noble and 

 strong than I , all over this land , would lift up their voice and speak and there be only a deadly silence ? here and there one have dare to speak aloud ; but the rest whisper behind the hand ; one say , " my son have a post , he would lose it if I speak loudí ; and another say , " I have a promise of landí ; and another , " I be socially intimate with these man , and should lose my social standing if I let my voice be heard.í oh my wife , our land , our goodly land , which we have hop would be free and strong among the people of earth , be rotten and 

 honeycomb with the tyranny of gold ! we who have hop to stand first in the anglo - Saxon sisterhood for justice and freedom , be not even fit to stand last . do I not know only too bitterly how weak be my voice ; and that that which I can do be as nothing : but shall I remain silent ? shall the glow - worm refuse to give its light , because it be not a star set up on high ; shall the broken stick refuse to burn and warm one frozen man 's hand , because it be not a beacon - light flame across the earth ? ever a voice be behind my shoulder , that whisper to I 

 " 
 why break your head against a stone wall ? leave this work to the great and large man of your people ; they who will do it well than you can do it ! why break your heart when life could be so fair to you ? 
 í but , oh my wife , the strong man be silent ! and shall I not speak , though I know my power be as nothing?í 

 " he lay his head upon his hand . 

 " and she say , " I can not understand you . when I come home and tell you that this man drink , or that that woman have get into trouble , you always answer I , " Wife , what business be it of ours if 

 so be that we can not help them?í a little innocent gossip offend you ; and you go to visit people and treat they as your friend , into whose house I would not go . yet when the rich and strong man in the land , who could crush you with their money , as a boy crush a fly between his finger and thumb , take a certain course , you stand and oppose them.í 


 " and he say , " my wife , with the sin of the private man , what have I to do , if so be I have not lead he into they ? be I guilty ? I have enough to do look after my own 

 sin . the sin that a man sin against himself be his alone , not mine ; the sin that a man sin against his fellow be his and theirs , not mine : but the sin that a man sin , in that he be take up by the hand of a people and set up on high , and whose hand they have arm with their sword , whose power to strike be their power his sin be theirs ; there be no man so small in the whole nation that he dare say , " I have no responsibility for this man 's action.í we arm he , we raise he , we strengthen he , and the evil he accomplish be 

 more ours than his . if this man 's end in South Africa should be accomplish , and the day should come when , from the Zambesi to the sea , white man should fly at white man 's throat , and every man 's heart burn with bitterness against his fellow , and the land be bath with blood as rain shall I then dare to pray , who have now fear to speak ? do not think I wish for punishment upon these man . let they take the million they have wring out of this land , and go to the land of their birth , and live in wealth , luxury , and joy ; but let 

 they leave this land they have torture and ruin . let they keep the money they have make here ; we may be the poor for it ; but they can not then crush our freedom with it . shall I ask my God Sunday by Sunday to brood across the land , and bind all its child 's heart in a close - knit fellowship ; yet , when I see its people betray , and their jawbone break by a stroke from the hand of gold ; when I see freedom pass from we , and the whole land be grasp by the golden claw , so that the generation after we shall be bear without 

 free- 
 freedom 


 dom , to labour for the man who have grasp all , shall I hold my peace ? the Boer and the Englishman who have be in this land , have not always love mercy , nor have they always seek after justice ; but the little finger of the speculator and monopolist who be devour this land will be thick on the back of the child of this land , black and white , than the loin of the Dutchmen and Englishmen who have been.í 


 " and she say , " I have hear it say that it be our duty to sacrifice ourselves for the man and woman 

 live in the world at the same time as ourselves ; but I never before hear that we have to sacrifice ourselves for people that be not bear . what be they to you ? you will be dust , and lie in your grave , before that time come . if you believe in God , í she say , " why can not you leave it to he to bring good out of all this evil ? do he need 
 you 
 to be make a martyr of ? or will the world be lose without 
 you 
 ? í 


 " he say , " Wife , if my right hand be in a fire , shall I not pull it out ? shall I say , " God may bring good out of this evil , í and let it 

 burn ? that unknown that lie beyond we we know of no otherwise than through its manifestation in our own heart ; it work no otherwise upon the son of man than through man . and shall I feel no bond bind I to the man to come , and desire no good or beauty for they I , who be what I be , and enjoy what I enjoy , because for countless age in the past man have live and labour , who live not for themselves alone , and count no cost ? would the great statue , the great poem , the great reform ever be accomplish , if man 

 count the cost and create for their own life alone ? and no man liveth to himself , and no man dieth to himself . you can not tell I not to love the man who shall be after I ; a soft voice within I , I know not what , cry out ever , " live for they as for your own children.í when in the circle of my own small life all be dark , and I despair , hope spring up in I when I remember that something nobler and fairer may spring up in the spot where I now stand.í 


 " and she say , " you want to put everyone against we ! the other 

 woman will not call on I ; and our church be more and more make up of poor people . money hold by money . if your congregation be Dutchmen , I know you would be always preach to love the Englishmen , and be kind to nigger . if they be Kaffirs you would always be tell they to help white man . you will never be on the side of the people who can do anything for we ! you know the offer we have from í 


 " and he say , " oh my wife , what be the boer , and the Russian , and the Turk to I ; be I 

 re- 
 responsible 


 sponsible for their action ? it be my own nation , mine , which I love as a man love his own soul , whose act touch I . I would that wherever our flag be plant the feeble or oppress people of earth might gather under it , say , " under this banner be freedom and justice which know no race or colour.í I wish that on our banner be blazon in large letter 
 Justice and Mercy 
 , and that in every new land which our foot touch , every son among we might see ever blazon above his head that banner , and below it the great order : " 

 by this 

 sign , Conquer ! 

 " and that the pirate flag which some man now wave in its place , may be tear down and furl for ever ! shall I condone the action of some , simply because they happen to be of my own race , when in Bushman or Hottentot I would condemn it ? shall man belong to one of the mighty race of earth , creep softly on their belly , to attack an unwarned neighbour ; when even the Kaffir have again and again give notice of war , say , " be ready , on such and such a day I come to fight you?í be England 's power so broken , and our 

 race so enfeeble , that we dare no long to proclaim war ; but must creep silently upon our belly in the dark to stab , like a subject people to whom no other course be open ? these man be english ; but not English- 
 man 
 . when the man of our race fight , they go to war with a blazon flag and the loud trumpet before they . it be because I be an Englishman that these thing crush I . well that ten thousand of we should lie dead and defeat on one battlefield , fight for some great cause , and my own son among they , than that those 

 twelve poor boy should have fall at Doornkop , fight to fill up the pocket of those already o'er - heavy with gold.í 


 " and she say , " 
 you 
 , what do it matter what you feel or think ; 
 you 
 will never be able to do anything!í 

 " and he say , " oh my wife , stand by I ; do not crush I . for I in this matter there be no path but one on which light shines.í 

 " and she say , " you be very unkind ; you do not   care what the people say about us!í and she weep bitterly , and go out of the room . 

 but as soon as the door be shut , she dry her tear ; and she say to herself , " now he will never dare to preach such a sermon again . he dare never oppose I when once I have set down my foot.í 

 " and the man speak to no one , and go out alone in the veld . all the afternoon he walk up and down among the sand and low bush ; and I walk there beside he . 

 " and when the evening come , he go back to his chapel . many be absent , but the elder sit in their place , and his wife also be 

 there . and the light shine on the empty bench . and when the time come he open the old book of the Jews ; and he turn the leaf and read : " if thou forbear to deliver they that be draw unto death , and those that be ready to be slay ; if thou sayest , " Behold we know it not!í Doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it ? and he that keepeth thy soul , doth he not know it?í 


 " and he say , " this morning we consider the evil this land be suffer under at the hand of man whose aim be the attainment of 

 wealth and power . to - night we shall look at our own share in the matter . I think we shall realise that with we , and not with the man we have lift up on high , lie the condemnation.í then his wife rise and go out , and other follow she ; and the little man 's voice roll among the empty bench ; but he speak on . 


 " and when the service be over he go out . no elder come to the porch to greet he ; but as he stand there one , he see not whom , slip a leaflet into his hand . he hold it up , and read in the lamplight what 

 be write on it in pencil . he crush it up in his hand , as a man crush that which have run a poisonous sting into he ; then he drop it on the earth as a man drop that he would forget . a fine drizzly rain be fall , and he walk up the street with his arm fold behind he , and his head bend . the people walk up the other side ; and it seem to he he be alone . but I walk behind he . " 

 " and then , " ask Peter , see that the stranger be silent , " what happen to he after that ? " 

 " that be only last Sunday , " say the stranger . 
 there be silence again for some second . 
 then Peter say , " well , anyhow , at least he do not   die ! " 
 the stranger cross his hand upon his knee . " Peter Simon Halket , " he say , " it be easy for a man to die than to stand alone . he who can stand alone can , also , when the need be , die . " 

 Peter look up wistfully into the stranger 's face . " I should not like to die myself , " he say , " not yet . I shall not be twenty - one till next 

 birthday . I should like to see life first . " 

 the stranger make no answer . 
 presently Peter say , " be all the man of your company poor man ? " 
 the stranger wait a while before he answer ; then he say , " there have be rich man who have desire to join we . there be a young man once ; and when he hear the condition , he go away sorrowful , for he have great possession . " 
 there be silence again for a while . 

 " be it long since your company be start ? " ask Peter . 

 " there be no man live who can conceive of its age , " say the stranger . " even here on this earth it begin , when these hill be young , and these lichen have hardly show their stain upon the rock , and man still raise himself upwards with difficulty because the sinew in his thigh be weak . in those day , which man reck not of now , man , when he hunger , feed on the flesh of his fellow man and find it sweet . yet even in those day it come to pass that there be one 

 whose head be high than her fellow and her thought keener , and , as she pick the flesh from a human skull , she ponder . and so it come to pass the next night , when man be gather around the fire ready to eat , that she steal away , and when they go to the tree where the victim be bind , they find he go . and they cry one to another , " she , only she , have do this , who have always say , " I like not the taste of man - flesh ; man be too like I ; I can not eat them.í 
 " 
 she be mad , í they cry ; " let we kill her!í so , in those dim , misty time that 

 man reck not of now , that they hardly believe in , that woman die . but in the head of certain man and woman a new thought have take root ; they say , " we also will not eat of she . there be something evil in the taste of human flesh.í and ever after , when the fleshpot be fill with man - flesh , these stand aside , and half the tribe eat human flesh and half not ; then , as the year pass , none eat . 


 " even in those day , which man reck not of now , when man fall easily upon their hand and knee , they be of we on the earth . and , 

 if you would learn a secret , even before man trod here , in the day when the dicynodont bent yearningly over her young , and the river - horse which you find now nowhere on earth 's surface , save bury in stone , call with love to his mate ; and the bird whose footprint be on the rock fly in the sunshine call joyfully to one another even in those day when man be not , the fore - dawn of this kingdom have break on the earth . and still as the sun rise and set and the planet journey round , we grow and grow . " 


 the stranger rise from the fire , and stand upright : around he , and behind he , the darkness stand out . 

 " all earth be ours . and the day shall come , when the star , look down on this little world , shall see no spot where the soil be moist and dark with the blood of man shed by his fellow man ; the sun shall rise in the East and set in the West and shed his light across this little globe ; and nowhere shall he see man crush by his fellow . and they shall beat their sword into ploughshare and their spear into pruning hook : nation shall not lift 

 up sword against nation , neither shall they learn war any more . and instead of the thorn shall come up the fir - tree ; and instead of the bri shall come up the myrtle tree : and man shall nowhere crush man on all the holy earth . to - morrow 's sun shall rise , " say the stranger , " and it shall flood these dark koppjes with light , and the rock shall glint in it . not more certain be that rise than the coming of that day . and I say to you that even here , in the land where now we stand , where to - day the cry of the wound and the curse of revenge ring in the air ; 

 even here , in this land where man creep on his belly to wound his fellow in the dark , and where an acre of gold be worth a thousand soul , and a reef of shin dirt be worth half a people , and the vulture be heavy with man 's flesh even here that day shall come . I tell you , Peter Simon Halket , that here on the spot where now we stand shall be raise a temple . man shall not gather in it to worship that which divide ; but they shall stand in it shoulder to shoulder , white man with black , and the stranger with the inhabitant of the land ; and 

 the place shall be holy ; for man shall say , " be we not brother and the son of one Father?í " 


 Peter Halket look upward silently . and the stranger say : " certain man sleep upon a plain , and the night be chill and dark . and , as they sleep , at that hour when night be darkest , one stir . far off to the eastward , through his half - close eyelid , he see , as it be , one faint line , thin as a hair 's width , that edge the hill top . and he whisper in the darkness to his fellow : " the dawn be coming.í but they , with fast - close 

 eyelid murmur , " he lie , there be no dawn.í 

 " nevertheless , day break . " 
 the stranger be silent . the fire burn up in red tongue of flame that neither flicker nor flare in the still night air . Peter Halket creep near to the stranger . 
 " when will that time be ? " he whisper ; " in a thousand year ' time ? " 

 and the stranger answer , " a thousand year be but as our yesterday 's journey , or as our watch to - night , which draw already to its close . see , pile , these rock on 

 which we now stand ? the age have be young and they have grow old since they have lain here . half that time shall not pass before that time come ; I have see its dawn already in the heart of man . " 

 Peter move nearer , so that he almost knelt at the stranger 's foot : his gun lie on the ground at the other side of the fire . 
 " I would like to be one of your man , " he say . " I be tired of belong to the Chartered Company . " 

 the stranger look down gently . 

 " Peter Simon Halket , " he say , " can you bear the weight ? " 

 and Peter say , " give I work , that I may try . " 

 there be silence for a time ; then the stranger say , " Peter Simon Halket , take a message to England " Peter Halket start " go to that great people and cry aloud to it : " where be the sword be give into your hand , that with it you might enforce justice and deal out mercy ? how come you to give it up into the hand of man whose search be gold , whose thirst be wealth , to whom man 's soul and 

 body be counter in a game ? how come you to give up the folk that be give into your hand , into the hand of the speculator and the gamester ; as though they be dumb beast who might be buy or sell ? 

 " " take back your sword , Great People but wipe it first , lest some of the gold and blood stick to your hand . 
 " " what be this , I see ! the sword of the Great People , transform to burrow earth for gold , as the snout of swine for earth nut ! have you no other use for it , Great Folk ? 

 " " take back your sword ; and , when you have thoroughly cleanse it and wipe it of the blood and mire , then raise it to set free the oppressed of other clime . 
 " " Great Prince 's daughter , take heed ! you put your sword into the hand of recreant knight ; they will dull its edge and mar its brightness , and , when your hour of need come and you would put it into other hand , you will find its edge chip and its point break . take heed ! take heed!í 

 " cry to the wise man of England : " you , who in peace and calm in 

 shade chamber ponder on all thing in heaven and earth , and take all knowledge for your province , have you no time to think of this ? to whom have England give her power ? how do the man wield it who have filch it from she ? say not , what have we to do with folk across the water ; have we not matter enough for thought in our own land ? where the brain of a nation have no time to go , there should its hand never be send to labour : where the power of a people go , there must its intellect and knowledge go , to guide it . oh , you 

 who sit at ease , study past and future and forget the present you have no right to sit at ease know nothing of the working of the power you have arm and send to work on man afar . where be your nation 's sword you man of thought?í 


 " cry to the woman of England : " you , who repose in sumptuous house , with child on your knee ; think not it be only the rustling of the soft drape curtain , or the whistling of the wind , you hear . listen ! may it not be the far off cry of those your sword govern , 

 creep towards you across wide ocean till it pierce even into your inmost sanctuary ? listen ! 

 " for the womanhood of a dominant people have not accomplish all its labour when it have bear its child and feed they at its breast : there cry to it also from over sea and across continent the voice of the child - people " mother - heart , stand for us!í it would be well for you that your womb should be barren and that your race should die out ; than that you should listen , and give no answer.í " 

 the stranger lift his hand 

 up- 
 upwards 


 ward as he speak , and Peter see there be the mark of old wound in both . 


 " cry aloud to the work man and woman of England : " you , who for age cry out because the heel of your master be heavy on you ; and who have say , " we curse the king that sit at ease , and care not who oppress the folk , so their coffer be full and their belly satisfy , and they be not trouble with the trouble of ruleí ; you , who have take the king 's rule from he and sit enthrone within his seat ; be his sin not yours to - day ? if man 

 should add but one hour to your day 's labour , or make but one fraction dearer the bread you eat , would you not rise up as one man ? yet , what be deal out to man beyond sea whom you rule wound you not . Nay , have you not sometimes say , as king of old : " it matter not who hold out our sword , marauder or speculator , so he call it ours , we must cloak up the evil it have done!í think you , no other curse rise to heaven but your ? where be your sword ? into whose hand have it fall ? take it quickly and cleanse it!í " 


 Peter Halket crouch , look upwards ; then he cry : " Master , I can not give that message , I be a poor unlearn'd man . and if I should go to England and cry aloud , they would say , " who be this , who come preach to a great people ? be not his mother with we , and a washerwoman ; and be not his father a day labourer at two shilling a day?í and they would laugh I to scorn . and , in truth , the message be so long I could not well remember it ; give I other work to do . " 

 and the stranger say , " take a 

 message to the man and woman of this land . go , from the Zambesi to the sea , and cry to its white man and woman , and say : " I see a wide field , and in it be two fair beast . wide be the field about they and rich be the earth with sweet scented herb , and so abundant be the pasturage that hardly might they consume all that grow about they : and the two be like one to another , for they be the son of one mother . and as I look , I see , far off to the northward , a speck within the sky , so small it be , and so high it be , that the eye scarce 

 might mark it . then it come near and hover over the spot where the two beast feed : and its neck be bare , and its beak be hooked , and its talon be long , and its wing strong . and it hover over the field where the two beast be ; and I see it settle down upon a great white stone ; and it wait . and I see more speck to the northward , and more and more come onward to join he who sit upon the stone . and some hover over the beast , and some sharpen their beak on the stone ; and some walk in and out 

 between the beast ' leg . and I see that they be wait for something . 


 " " then he who first come fly from one of the beast to the other , and sit upon their neck , and put his beak within their ear . and he fly from one to the other and flap his wing in their face till the beast be blind , and each believe it be his fellow who attack he . and they fall to , and fight ; they gore one another 's side till the field be red with blood and the ground shake beneath they . the bird sit by and watch ; and when the blood 

 flow they walk round and round . and when the strength of the two beast be exhaust they fall to earth . then the bird settle down upon they , and feast ; till their maw be full , and their long bare neck be wet ; and they stand with their beak deep in the entrail of the two dead beast ; and look out with their keen bright eye from above they . and he who be king of all pluck out the eye , and feed on the heart of the dead beast . and when his maw be full , so that he could eat no more , he sit on his stone hard by and flap his great wings.í 


 " Peter Simon Halket , cry to the white man and woman of South Africa : " you have a goodly land ; you and your child 's child shall scarce fill it ; though you should stretch out your arm to welcome each stranger who come to live and labour with you . you be the twin branch of one tree ; you be the son of one mother . be this goodly land not wide enough for you , that you should rend each other 's flesh at the bidding of those who will wet their beak within both your vital ? look up , see , they circle in the air above you!í " 

 almost Peter Halket start and look upward ; but there be only the black sky of Mashonaland over his head . 
 the stranger stand silent look downward into the fire . Peter Halket half clasp his arm about his knee . 

 " my master , " he cry , " how can I take this message ? the Dutchmen of South Africa will not listen to I , they will say I be an Englishman . and the Englishmen will say : " who be this fellow who come preach peace , peace , peace ? have he not be a year in 

 the country and he have not a share in a single company ? can anything he say be worth hear ? if he be a man of any sense he would have make five thousand pound at least.í and they will not listen to I . give I another labour ! " 

 and the stranger say : " take a message to one man . find he , whether he sleep or wake , whether he eat or drink ; and say to he : " where be the soul of the man that you have bought?í 

 " and if he shall answer you and say : " I buy no man 's soul ! the soul that I buy be the 

 soul of dogs?í then ask he this question , say to he , " where be the í 

 " and if he cry out , " you lie , you lie ! I know what you be go to say . what do I know of envoy ? be I ever afraid of the british Government ? it be all a lie!í then question he no far . but say : " there be a rushlight once . it flicker and flare , and it gutter down , and go out and no man heed it : it be only a rushlight . 

 " " and there be a light once ; man set it on high within a lighthouse , that it might yield light to 

 all soul at sea ; that afar off they might see its steady light and find harbour , and escape the rock . 


 " " and that light flicker and flare , as it list . it go this way and it go that ; it burn blue , and green , and red ; now it disappear altogether , and then it burn up again . and man , far out at sea , keep their eye fix where they know the light should be : say , " we be safe ; the great light will lead we when we near the rocks.í and on dark night man drift near and nearer ; and in the stillness of the midnight they 

 strike on the lighthouse rock and go down at its foot . 

 " " what now shall be do to that light , in that it be not a rushlight ; in that it be set on high by the hand of man , and in that man trust it ? shall it not be put out?í 

 " and if he shall answer , say , " what be man to I ? they be fool , all fool ! let they die!í tell he again this story : " there be a streamlet once : it burst forth from beneath the snow on a mountain 's crown ; and the snow make a cove over it . it run on pure and 

 blue and clear as the sky above it , and the bank of snow make its cradle . then it come to a spot where the snow end ; and two way lie before it by which it might journey ; one , on the mountain ridge , past rock and stone , and down long sunlit slope to the sea ; and the other , down a chasm . and the stream hesitate : it twirl and purl , and go this way and go that . it 
 might 
 have be , that it would have force its way past rock and ridge and along mountain slope , and make a path for itself where no path have be ; the bank 

 would have grow green , and the mountain daisy would have grow beside it ; and all night the star would have look at their face in it ; and down the long sunny slope the sun would have play on it by day ; and the wood dove would have build her nest in the tree beside it ; and singing , singing , always sing , it would have make its way at last to the great sea , whose far - off call all water hear . 


 " " but it hesitate . it might have be , that , have but some hand be there to move but one stone from its path , it would have force 

 its way past rock and ridge , and find its way to the great sea it might have be ! but no hand be there . the streamlet gather itself together , and   it might be , that it be even in its haste to rush onwards to the sea !   it make one leap into the abyss . 


 " " the rock close over it . nine hundred fathom deep , in a still , dark pool it lay . the green lichen hang from the rock . no sunlight come there , and the star could not look down at night . the pool lie still and silent . then , because it be alive and could not rest , it 

 gather its strength together , through fall earth and broken dťbris it ooze its way silently on ; and it creep out in a deep valley ; the mountain close it around . and the streamlet laugh to itself , " ha , ha ! I shall make a great lake here ; a sea!í and it ooze , and it ooze , and it fill half the plain . but no lake come only a great marsh because there be no way outward , and the water rot . the grass die out along its edge ; and the tree drop their leaf and rot in the water ; and the wood dove who have build her nest there fly up 

 to the mountain , because her young one die . and the toad sit on the stone and drop their spittle in the water ; and the reed be yellow that grow along the edge . and at night , a heavy , white fog gather over the water , so that the star could not see through it ; and by day a fine white mist hang over it , and the sunbeam could not play on it . and no man know that once the marsh have leapt forth clear and blue from under a hood of snow on the mountain 's top : aye , and that the turning of one stone might have cause that it have run on and on , 

 and mingle its song with the sea 's song for ever.í " 

 the stranger be silent for a while . 
 then he say , " should he answer you and say , " what do I care ! what be cove and mountain top to I ? gold be real , and the power to crush man within my handí ; tell he no far . 

 " but if by some chance he should listen , then , say this one thing to he , clearly in the ear , that he may not fail to hear it : " the morning may break grey , and the mid - day be dark and stormy ; but the glory of 

 the evening 's sunset may wash out for ever the remembrance of the morning 's dullness , and the darkness of the noon . so that all man shall say , " ah , for the beauty of that day!í for the stream that have once descend there be no path upwards . 
 it be never too late for the soul of a man 
 .í 


 " and if he should laugh , and say : " you fool , a man may remake himself entirely before twenty ; he may re - shape himself before thirty ; but after forty he be fix . shall I , who for forty - three year have seek money and power , seek for 

 anything else now ? you want I to be Jesus Christ , I suppose ! how can I be myself and another man?í then answer he : " deep in the heart of every son of man lie an angel ; but some have their wing fold . wake your ! he be large and strong than another man 's ; mount up with him!í 


 " but if he curse you , and say , " I have eight million of money , and I care neither for God nor man!í then make no answer , but stoop and write before he . " the stranger bend down and write with his finger in the white ash of the 

 fire . Peter Halket bent forward , and he see the two word the stranger have write . 

 the stranger say : " say to he : " though you should seek to make that name immortal in this land ; and should write it in gold dust , and set it with diamond , and cement it with human blood , shed from the Zambesi to the sea , yet . " the stranger pass his foot over the word ; Peter Halket look down , and he see only a bed of smooth white ash where the name have be . 

 the stranger say : " and if he 

 should curse yet far , and say , " there be not one man nor woman in South Africa I can not buy with my money ! when I have the Transvaal , I shall buy God Almighty himself , if I care to!í 


 " then say to he this one thing only , " 
 thy money perish with thee 
 ! í and leave he . " 


 there be a dead silence for a moment . then the stranger stretch forth his hand . " yet in that leave he , remember ; it be not the act , but the will , which mark the soul of the man . he who have crush a nation sin no 

 more than he who rejoice in the death throe of the mean creature . the stagnant pool be not less poisonous drop for drop than the mighty swamp , though its reach be small . he who have desire to be and accomplish what this man have be and accomplish , be as this man ; though he have lack the power to perform . Nay , remember this one thing more : certain son of God be bear on earth , name by man Children of Genius . in early youth each stand at the parting of the way and choose ; he bear his gift for other or for himself . but forget 

 this never , whatever his choice may be ; that there be lay on he a burden that be lay not on other all space be open to he , and his choice be infinite and if he fall beneath it , let man weep rather than curse , for he be bear a Son of God . " 


 there be silence again . then Peter Halket clasp his arm about the stranger 's foot . " my master , " he cry , " I dare not take that message . it be not that man may say , " here be Trooper Peter Halket , whom we all know , a man who keep woman and shot nigger , turn prophet.í but it be , that it be true . 

 have I not wish " and Peter Halket would have pour out all his soul ; but the stranger prevent he . 


 " Peter Simon Halket , " he say , " be it the trumpet which give forth the call to battle , whether it be batter tin or gild silver , which boot ? be it not the call ? what and if I should send my message by a woman or a child : shall truth be less truth because the bearer be despise ? be it the mouth that speak or the word that be speak which be eternal ? nevertheless , if you will have it so , go , and say , " I , 

 Peter Halket , sinner among you all , who have desire woman and gold , who have love myself and hat my fellow , I í " the stranger look down at he , and place his hand gently on his head . " Peter Simon Halket , " he say , " a hard task I give you than any which have be lay upon you . in that small spot where alone on earth your will rule , bring there into be the kingdom to - day . love your enemy ; do good to they that hate you . walk ever forward , look not to the right hand or the left . Heed not what man shall say of you . 

 Succour the oppress ; deliver the captive . if thine enemy hunger , feed he ; if he be athirst give he drink . " 

 a curious warmth and gladness stole over Peter Halket as he knelt ; it be as , when a little child , his mother fold he to she : he see nothing more about he but a soft bright light . yet in it he hear a voice cry , " because thou hast love mercy and hat oppression " 

 when Trooper Peter Halket raise himself , he see the figure of the stranger pass from he . he cry , " my Master , let I go with 

 you . " but the figure do not turn . and , as it pass into the darkness , it seem to Peter Halket that the form grow large and large : and as it descend the further side of the koppje it seem that for one instant he still see the head with a pale , white light upon it : then it vanish . 

 and Trooper Peter Halket sit alone upon the koppje . 



 II . 

 II . 

 it 
 be a hot day . the sun pour down its ray over the scatter tree , and stunt bush , and long grass , and over the dry up river bed . far in the blue , so high the eye could scarcely mark they , vulture be fly southward , where forty mile off kraal have be destroy and two hundred black carcass be lie in the sun . 


 under a group of tall straggle tree among the grass and low scrub , 

 on the bank of an almost dry up river bed , a small camp have be pitch . 


 the party have lose their mule , and pende their recovery have already be there seven day . the three cart load of provision they be convey to the large camp be draw up under the tree and have a sail throw across they to form a shelter for some of the man ; while on the other side of the clear and open space that form the camp , a small sail be throw across two pole form a rough tent ; and away to the left , a little 

 cut off from the rest of the camp by some low bush , be the bell - shape tent of the captain , under a tall tree . before the bell - shape tent stand a short stunt tree ; its thick white stem gnarl and knot ; while two stunt misshapen branch , like arm , stretch out on either side . 

 before this tree , up and down , with his gun upon his arm , his head bent and his eye fix on the ground , while the hot sun blaze on his shoulder , walk a man . 

 three or four fire be burn about the camp in different part , 

 three cook the mealie and rice which form the diet of the man , their stock of tin meat have be exhaust ; while the fourth , which be watch by a native boy , contain the more appetising meal of the Captain . 


 Most of the man be out of camp ; the coloured boy have go to fetch the mule , which have be discover in the hill a few mile off , and be expect to arrive in the evening ; and the white man have go out to see what game they could bring down with their gun to flavour the mealie pot , or to 

 recon- 
 reconnoitre 


 noitre the country ; though all native habitation have be destroy within a radius of thirty mile , and the land be as bare of black man as a child 's hand of hair ; and even the beast seem to have vanish . 


 in the shade of the tent , form of the canvas across two post , lie three white man , whose work it be to watch the pot and guard the camp . they be all three colonial Englishmen , and lie on the ground on their stomach , pass the time by carry on a desultory conversation , or take a few whiff , slowly , 

 and with care , from their pipe , for tobacco be precious in the camp . 


 under some bush a few yard off lie a huge trooper , whose nationality be uncertain , but who be hold to hail from some part of the British Isles , and who have travel round the world . he be currently report to have do three year ' labour for attempt rape in Australia , but nothing certain be know regard his antecedent . he have be up on guard half the night , and be now take his rest lie on his back with his arm throw over his face ; but a slight movement could 

 be note in his jaw as he slowly chew a piece of tobacco ; and occasionally when he turn it round the mouth open , and disclose two row of broken yellow stump set in very red gum . 


 the three Colonial Englishmen take no notice of he . two , who be slowly smoke , be of the large and powerful build , and somewhat loose set about the shoulder , which be common among Colonial Europeans of the third generation , whether Dutch or English , and have the placidity and general good temper of expression which commonly 

 mark the Colonial European who grow up beyond the range of the city . the third be small and more wiry and of an unusually nervous type , with aquiline nose , and sallow hatchet face , with a somewhat discontent expression . he be hold forth , while his companion smoke and listen . 


 " now what I say be this , " he bring his hand down on the red sand ; " here we be with about one half teaspoon of Dop give we at night , while he have ten empty champagne bottle lie behind his tent . and we have to live on 

 the mealie we be convoy for the horse , while he have pati and beef , and live like a lord ! it be all very well for the regular ; they know what they be in for , and they have   get gentleman over they anyhow , and one can stomach anything if you know what kind of a fellow you have   get over you . english officer be gentleman , anyhow ; or if one be under selous now " 


 " oh , Selous 's a 
 man 
 ! " break out the other two , take their pipe from their mouth . 


 " yes , well , that be what I say . but these fellow , who could not   do 

 as farmer , and could not   do as shopkeeper , and God know what else ; and their friend in England do not   want to have they ; they be send out here to boss it over we ! it be a damned shame ! why , I want to know , amn't   I as good as any of these fellow , who come swell it about here ? friend get money , I suppose ! " he cast his sharp glance over towards the bell tent . " if they give we real english officer now " 


 " ah ! " say the big of his companion , who , in spite of his huge form , have something of the 

 simplicity and good nature of a child in his handsome face ; " it be because you be not a big enough swell , you know ! he will be a colonel , or a general , before we have   do with he . I call they all general or colonel up here ; it be safe , you know ; if they be not that to - day they will be to - morrow ! " 

 this be intend as a joke , and in that hot weather , and in that dull world , anything be good enough to laugh at : the third man smile , but the first speaker remain serious . 


 " I only know this , " he say , " I would teach these fellow a lesson , if any one belong to I have be among the people they leave to be murder here , while they go gallivant to the Transvaal . if my mother or sister have be kill here , I would have take a pistol and blow out the brain of the great Panjandrum , and the little one after he . fine administration of a country , this , to invite people to come in and live here , and then take every fighting man out of the country on a gold hunting maraud expedition to the Transvaal , and 

 leave we to face the bitter end . I look upon every man and woman who be kill here as murder by the Chartered Company . " 

 " well , Jameson only do what he be tell . he have to obey order , like the rest of we . he do not   make the plan , and he be get the punishment . " 

 " what business have he to listen ? what be all this fine administration they talk of ? it be six year since I come to this country , and I have   work like a nigger ever since I come , and what have I , or any man who have   work hard at real , honest 

 farming , get for it ? everything in the land be give away for the benefit of a few big folk over the water or swell out here . if England take over the Chartered Company to - morrow , what would she find ? everything of value in the land give over to private concessionaire they will line their pocket if the whole land go to pot ! it will be the jackal eat all the flesh off the horse 's bone , and call the lion in to lick the bone . " 


 " oh , you wait a bit and you will be square , " say the handsome man . " I have   be here five year 

 and have lot of promise , though I have not   get anything else yet ; but I expect it to come some day , so I keep my mouth shut ! if they ask I to sign a paper , that Mr. Over - the - Way " he nod towards the bell tent " never get drunk or do not   know how to swear , I would sign it , if there be a good dose of square to come after it . I could stand a good lot of that sort of thing square if it would only come my way . " 


 the man laugh in a dreary sort of way , and the third man , who have not speak yet , roll round on to his 

 back , and take the pipe from his mouth . 


 " I tell you what , " say the keen man , " those of we up here who have get a bit of land and be try honestly and fairly to work , be get pretty sick of this humbug fighting . if we have have a few man like the Curries and Bowkers of the old day up here from the first , all this would never have happen . and there be no knowing when a reason will not   turn up for keep the bloody thing on or stop it off for a time , to break out just when one be settle down to work . it be a damned 

 convenient thing to have a war like this to turn on and off . " 


 slowly the third man keel round on to his stomach again : " 
 let resignation wait . we fight the Matabele again to - morrow 
 , " he say , sententiously . 

 a low titter run round the group . even the man under the bush , though his eye be still closed and his arm across his face , let his mouth relax a little , and show his yellow tooth . 

 " I be always expect , " say the big handsome man , " to have a paper come round , sign by all the 

 nigger chief , say how much they love the B.S.A. Company , and how glad they be the Panjandrum have get they , and how awfully good he be to they ; and they be go to subscribe to the brazen statue . there be nothing a man can not   be square to do . " 

 the third man lie on his back again , lazily examine his hand , which he hold above his face . " what be that in the Bible , " he say , slowly , " about the statue , whose thigh and belly be of brass , and its foot of mud ? " 

 " I do not   know much about the 

 Bible , " say the keen man , " I be go to see if my pot be not   boil over . will not   yours burn ? " 

 " no , I ask the Captain 's boy to keep an eye on it but I expect he will not . do you put the rice in with the mealie ? " 
 " got to ; I have   get no other pot . and the fellow do not   object . it be a tasty variety , you know ! " 

 the keen - faced man slouch away across the square to where his fire burn ; and presently the other man rise and go , either to look at his own pot or sleep under the cart ; and the large colonial man be leave 

 alone . his fire be burn satisfactorily about fifty foot off , and he fold his arm on the ground and rest his forehead on they , and watch lazily the little black ant that run about in the red sand , just under his nose . 


 a great stillness settle down on the camp . now and again a stick crack in the fire , and the cicade cry aloud in the tree stem ; but except where the solitary pace up and down before the little flat - top tree in front of the captain 's tent , not a creature stir in the whole camp ; and the snore of the 

 trooper under the bush might be hear half across the camp . 

 the intense mid - day heat have settle down . 

 at last there be the sound of someone break through the long grass and bush which have only be remove for a few foot round the camp , and the figure of a man emerge bear in one hand a gun , and in the other a bird which he have shoot . he be evidently an Englishman , and not long from Europe , by the bloom of the skin , which be perceptible in spite of the superficial tan . his face be at the moment 

 flush with heat ; but the clear blue eye and delicate feature lose none of their sensitive refinement . 

 he come up to the Colonial , and drop the bird before he . " that be all I have   get , " he say . 
 he throw himself also down on the ground , and put his gun under the loose flap of the tent . 
 the Colonial raise his head ; and without take his elbow from the ground take up the bird . " I will put it into the pot ; it will give it the flavour of something except weevily mealie " ; he say , and fall to pluck it . 

 the Englishman take his hat off , and lift the fine damp hair from his forehead . 
 " knock up , eh ? " say the Colonial , glance kindly up at he . " I have   a few drop in my flask still . " 

 " oh , no , I can stand it well enough . it be only a little warm . " he give a slight cough , and lay his head down sideways on his arm . his eye watch mechanically the Colonial 's manipulation of the bird . he have leave England to escape phthisis ; and he have go to Mashonaland because it be a place 

 where he could earn an open - air living , and save his parent from the burden of his support . 

 " what be Halket do over there ? " he ask suddenly , raise his head . 
 " be not   you here this morning ? " ask the Colonial . " do not   you know they would have a devil of a row ? " 
 " who ? " ask the Englishman , half raise himself on his elbow . 
 " Halket and the Captain . " the Colonial pause in the plucking . " my God , you never see anything like it ! " 

 the Englishman sit upright now , 

 and look keenly over the bush where Halket 's bent head might be see as he pace to and fro . 

 " what be he do out there in this blaze sun ? " 

 " he be on guard , " say the Colonial . " I think you be here when it happen . it be the good thing I ever see or hear of in my whole life ! " he roll half over on his side and laugh at the remembrance . " you see , some of the man go down into the river , to look for fresh pool of water , and they find a nigger , hide away in a hole in the bank , not five hundred 

 yard from here ! they find the bloody rascal by a little path he tramp down to the water , trodden hard , just like a porcupine 's walk . they get he in the hole like an aard - vark , 
 
 with a bush over the mouth , so you could not   see it . he would evidently be there a long time , the floor be full of bone of fish he have catch in the pool , and there be a bit of root like a stick half gnaw through . he have be pot , and get two bullet wound in the thigh ; but he could walk already . it be evident he be just wait till we be go , 
   " Aard - vark , " the great ant - eater . 

 to clear off after his people . he would get that beastly scurvy look a nigger get when he have not   have anything to eat for a long time . 


 " well , they haul he up before the Captain , of course ; and he blow and swore , and say the nigger be a spy , and be to be hang to - morrow ; he would hang he to - night , only the big troop might catch we up this evening , so he would wait to hear what the Colonel say ; but if they do not   come he would hang he first thing to - morrow morning , or have he shoot , as sure as the sun rise . he make the fellow tie he up to 

 that little tree before his tent , with riem 
 
 round his leg , and riem round his waist , and a riem round his neck . " 

 " what do the native say ? " ask the Englishman . 

 " oh , he do not   say anything . there be not   a soul in the camp could have understand he if he have . the coloured boy do not   know his language . I expect he be one of those bloody fellow we hit the day we clear the bush out yonder ; but how he get down that bank with his 
   a " riem " be a thong of undressed leather universally use in South Africa . 

 leg in the state it must have be , I do not   know . he do not   try to fight when they catch he ; just star in front of he fright , I suppose . he must have be a big strap devil before he be take down . 


 " well , I tell you , we would just get he fix up , and the Captain be just go into his tent to have a drink , and we chap be all stand round , when up step Halket , right before the Captain , and pull his front lock you know the way he have ? oh , my God , my God , if you could have see it ! I will never forget it to my die day ! " the 

 Colonial seem burst with internal laughter . " he begin , " Sir , may I speak to you?í in a formal kind of way , like a fellow introduce a deputation ; and then all of a sudden he start off oh , my God , you never hear such a thing ! it be like a boy in Sunday - school say up a piece of scripture he be learn off by heart , and get all ready beforehand , and he be not go to be stop till he get to the end of it . " 

 " what do he say , " ask the Englishman . 

 " oh , he start , how do we know this nigger be a spy at all ; 

 it would be a terrible thing to kill he if we be not   quite sure ; perhaps he be hide there because he be wound . and then he break out that , after all , these nigger be man fight for their country ; we would fight against the French if they come and take England from we ; and the nigger be brave man , " please sirí   every five minute he would pull his forelock , and say , " please sir!í   " and if we have to fight against they we ought to remember they be fight for freedom ; we should not   shoot wound prisoner when they be black if we 

 would not   shoot they if they be white!í and then he break out pure unmitigated Exeter Hall ! you never hear anything like it ! all man be brother , and God love a black man as well as a white ; Mashonas and Matabeli be poor ignorant folk , and we have to take care of they . and then he start out , that we ought to let this man go ; we ought to give he food for the road , and tell he to go back to his people , and tell they we have not   come to take their land but to teach they and love they . " it be hard to love a nigger , Captain , but we 

 must try it ; we must try it!í and every five minute he would break out with , " and I think this be a man I know , Captain ; I be not sure , but I think he come from up Lo Magundis way!í as if any bear devil care whether a bloody nigger come from Lo Magundis or anywhere else ! I be sure he say it fifteen time . and then he break out , " I do not   mean that I be well than you or anybody else , Captain ; I be as bad a man as any in camp , and I know it.í and off he start , tell we all the sin he would ever commit ; and he keep on , " I be an 

 unlearned , ignorant man , Captain ; but I must stand by this nigger ; he be get no one else!í and then he say " if you let I take he up to Lo Magundis , sir , I be not afraid ; and I will tell the people there that it be not their land and their woman that we want , it be they to be our brother and love we . if you will only let I go , sir , I will go and make peace ; give the man to I , sir!í " the Colonial shake with laughter . 

 " what do the Captain say ? " ask the Englishman . 

 " the Captain ; well , you know the small thing set he off 

 swear all round the world ; but he just stand there with his arm hang down at each side of he , and his eye star , and his face get red and redder : and all he could say be , " my Gawd ! my Gawd!í I think he would burst . and Halket stand there look straight in front of he , as though he do not   see a soul of we all there . " 

 " what do the Captain do ? " 

 " oh , as soon as Halket turn away he start swear , but he get the tail of one oath hook on to the head of another . it be nearly as good as Halket himself . 

 and when he would finish and get sane a bit , he say Halket be to walk up and down there all day and keep watch on the nigger . and he give order that if the big troop do not   come up to - night , that he be to be pot first thing in the morning , and that Halket be to shoot he . " 

 the Englishman start : " what do Halket say ? " 
 " nothing . he be be walk there with his gun all day . " 
 the Englishman watch with his clear eye the spot where Halket 's head appear and disappear . 

 " be the nigger hang there now ? " 

 " yes . the Captain say no one be to go near he , or give he anything to eat or drink all day : but " the Colonial glance round where the trooper lie under the bush ; and then lower his voice add , " this morning , a couple of hour ago , Halket send the Captain 's coloured boy to ask I for a drink of water . I think it be for Halket himself , and the poor devil must be hot walk there in the sun , so I send he the water out of my canvas bag . I go along 

 after- 
 afterwards 


 ward to see what have become of my mug ; the boy have go , and there , straight in front of the Captain 's tent , before the very door , be Halket let that bloody nigger drink out of my mug . the riem be so tight round his neck he could not   drink but slowly , and there be Halket hold it up to he ! if the Captain have look out ! w h e w ! I would not   have be Halket ! " 

 " do you think he will try to make Halket do it ? " ask the Englishman . 

 " of course he will . he be the 

 Devil in ; and Halket have well not make a fuss about it , or it will be the bad for he . " 

 " his time be up to - morrow evening ! " 
 " yes , but not to - morrow morning . and I would not   make a row about it if I be Halket . it do not   do to fall out with the authority here . what be one nigger more or less ? he will get shoot some other way , or die of hunger , if we do not   do it . " 

 " it be hardly sport to shoot a man tie up neck and leg , " say the Englishman ; his finely draw 

 eye- 
 eyebrow 


 brow contract and expand a little . 

 " oh , they do not   feel , these nigger , not as we should , you know . I have   see a man go to be shoot , look full at the gun , and fall like that ! without a sound . they have   no feeling , these nigger ; I do not   suppose they care much whether they live or die , not as we should , you know . " 
 the Englishman 's eye be still fix on the bush , behind which Halket 's head appear and disappear . 

 " they have no right to order 

 Halket to do it and he will 
 not 
 do it ! " say the Englishman slowly . 


 " you be not go to be such a fool as to step in , be you ? " say the Colonial , look curiously at he . " it do not   pay . I have   make up my mind never to speak whatever happen . what be the good ? suppose one be to make a complaint now about this affair with Halket , if he be make to shoot the nigger against his will ; what would come of it ? there would be half - a - dozen fellow here square to say what headquarters want not to speak of a fellow like that " turn his thumb in the 

 direction of the sleep trooper " who be pay to watch . I believe he report on the Captain himself to the big headquarters . all one 's wire be edit before they go down ; only what the Company want to go , go through . there be many downright good fellow in this lot ; but how many of we be there , do you think , who could throw away all chance of ever make anything in Mashonaland , for the sake of stand by Halket ; even if he have a real row with the Company ? I have   a great liking for Halket myself , he be a real good fellow , and he be do I 

 many a good turn take my watch only last night , because I be off colour ; I would do anything for he in reason . but , I say this flatly , I could not   and would not   fly in the face of the authority for he or anyone else . I have   my own girl wait for I down in the Colony , and she be be wait for I these five year . and whether I be able to marry she or not depend on how I stand with the Company : and I say , flatly , I be not go to fall out with it . I come here to make money , and I mean to make it ! if other people like to run their head against stone 

 wall , let they : but they must not   expect I to follow they . this be not   a country where a man can say what he think . " 

 the Englishman rest his elbow on the ground . " and the Union Jack be suppose to be fly over we . " 
 " yes , with a black bar across it for the company , " laugh the Colonial . 
 " do you ever have the nightmare ? " ask the Englishman suddenly . 

 " I ? oh yes , sometimes " ; he look curiously at his companion ; 

 " when I have   eat too much , I get it . " 

 " I always have it since I come up here , " say the Englishman . " it be that a vast world be rest on I a whole globe : and I be a midge beneath it . I try to raise it , and I can not . so I lie still under it and let it crush I ! " 
 " it be curious you should have the nightmare so up here , " say the Colonial ; " one get so little to eat . " 
 there be a silence : he be pick the little fine feather from the bird , and the Englishman be watch the ant . 


 " mind you , " the Colonial say at last , " I do not   say that in this case the Captain be to blame ; Halket make an awful ass of himself . he be never be quite right since that time he get lose and spend the night out on the koppje . when we find he in the morning he be in a kind of dead sleep ; we could not   wake he ; yet it be not   cold enough for he to have be freeze . he be never be the same man since ; queer , you know ; give his ration away to the coloured boy , and let the other fellow have his dot of brandy at night ; and keep 

 himself sort of apart to himself , you know . the other fellow think he be get a touch of fever on , catch wander about in the long grass that day . but I do not   think it be that ; I think it be be alone in the veld that be get hold of he . man , have you ever be out like that , alone in the veld , night and day , and not a soul to speak to ? I have ; and I tell you , if I have be leave there three day long I would have go mad or turn religious . man , it be the night , with the star up above you , and the dead still all around . and you think , and think , and think ! 

 you remember all kind of thing you have   never think of for year and year . I use to talk to myself at last , and make believe it be another man . I be out seven day : and he be only out one night . but I think it be the loneliness that get hold of he . Man , those star be awful ; and that stillness that come toward morning ! " he stand up . " it be a great pity , because he be as good a fellow as ever be . but perhaps he will come all right . " 


 he walk away towards the pot with the bird in his hand . when he have go the Englishman turn 

 round on to his back , and lie with his arm across his forehead . 

 high , high up , between the straggle branch of the tree , in the clear , blue african sky above he , he could see the vulture fly southward . 

 that evening the man sit eat their supper round the fire . the large troop have not come up ; and the mule have be bring in ; and they be to make a start early the next morning . 

 Halket be release from his duty , and have come up , and lain 

 down a little in the background of the group who gather round their fire . 


 the Colonial and the Englishman have give order to all the man of their " mess " that Halket be to be leave in quiet , and no question be to be ask he ; and the man , fear the Colonial 's size and the Englishman 's nerve , leave he in peace . the man laugh and chat round the fire , while the big Colonial ladle out the mealie and rice into tin plate , and pass they round to the man . presently he pass one to Halket , who lie half 

 behind he lean on his elbow . for a while Halket eat nothing , then he take a few mouthful ; and again lie on his elbow . 

 " you be eat nothing , Halket , " say the Englishman , cheerily , look back . 
 " I be not hungry now , " he say . after a while he take out his red handkerchief , and empty carefully into it the content of the plate ; and tie it up into a bundle . he set it beside he on the ground , and again lie on his elbow . 

 " you will not   come near to the 

 fire , Halket ? " ask the Englishman . 

 " no , thank you , the night be warm . " 
 after a while Peter Halket take out from his belt a small hunting knife with a rough wooden handle . a small flat stone lie near he , and he pass the blade slowly up and down on it , now and then take it up , and feel the edge with his finger . after a while he put it back in his belt , and rise slowly , take up his small bundle and walk away to the tent . 

 " he be have a pretty stiff day , " 

 say the Colonial . " I expect he be glad enough to turn in . " 


 then all the man round the fire chat freely over his concern . would the Captain stick to his word to - morrow ? be Halket go to do it ? have the Captain any right to tell one man off for the work , instead of let they fire a volley ? one man say he would do it gladly in Halket 's place , if tell off ; why have he make such a fool of himself ? so they chat till nine o'clock , when the Englishman and Colonial leave to turn in . they find Halket asleep , close to the side of the tent , with his 

 face turn to the canvas . and they lie down quietly that they might not disturb he . 

 at ten o'clock all the camp be asleep , except the two man tell off to keep guard ; who pace from one end of the camp to the other to keep themselves awake ; or stand chat by the large fire , which still burn at one end . 
 in the Captain 's tent a light be keep burn all night , which shine through the thin canvas side , and shed light on the ground about ; but , for the rest , the camp be dead and still . 

 by half - past one the moon have go down , and there be leave only a blaze of star in the great african sky . 

 then Peter Halket rise up ; softly he lift the canvas and creep out . on the side furth from the camp he stand upright . on his arm be tie his red handkerchief with its content . for a moment he glance up at the galaxy of star over he ; then he step into the long grass , and make his way in a direction opposite to that in which the camp lay . but after a short while he turn , and make his way 

 down into the river bed . he walk in it for a while . then after a time he sit down upon the bank and take off his heavy boot and throw they into the grass at the side . then softly , on tip - toe , he follow the little footpath that the man have tread go down to the river for water . it lead straight up to the Captain 's tent , and the little flat - top tree , with its white stem , and its two gnarl branch spread out on either side . when he be within forty pace of it , he pause . far over the other side of the camp the two man who be on guard stand 

 chat by the fire . a dead stillness be over the rest of the camp . the light through the wall of the Captain 's tent make all clear at the stem of the little tree ; but there be no sound of movement within . 


 for a moment Peter Halket stand motionless ; then he walk up to the tree . the black man hang against the white stem , so closely bind to it that they seem one . his hand be tie to his side , and his head droop on his breast . his eye be close ; and his limb , which have once be those of a powerful man , have fall away , make the 

 joint stand out . the wool on his head be wild and thick with neglect , and stand out roughly in long strand ; and his skin be rough with want and exposure . 

 the riem have cut a little into his ankle ; and a small flow of blood have make the ground below his foot dark . 
 Peter Halket look up at he ; the man seem dead . he touch he softly on the arm , then shake it slightly . 

 the man open his eye slowly , without raise his head ; and look at Peter from under his weary 

 eye- 
 eyebrow 


 brow . except that they move they might have be the eye of a dead thing . 

 Peter put up his finger to his own lip " hus h ! hus h ! " he say . 
 the man hang torpid , still look at Peter . 

 quickly Peter Halket kneel down and take the knife from his belt . in an instant the riem that bind the foot be cut through ; in another he have cut the riem from the waist and neck : the riem drop to the ground from the arm , and the man stand free . like a daze dumb 

 creature , he stand , with his head still down , eye Peter . 

 instantly Peter slip the red bundle from his arm into the man 's passive hand . 
 " Ari - tsemaia ! Hamba ! loop ! go ! " whisper Peter Halket ; use a word from each african language he know . but the black man still stand motionless , look at he as one paralyse . 
 " Hamba ! Sucka ! go ! " he whisper , motion his hand . 

 in an instant a gleam of intelligence shot across the face ; then a wild transport . without a word , 

 without a sound , as the tiger leap when the wild dog be on it , with one long , smooth spring , as though unwounde and unhurt , he turn and disappear into the grass . it close behind he ; but as he go the twig and leaf crack under his tread . 

 the Captain throw back the door of his tent . " who be there ? " he cry . 
 Peter Halket stand below the tree with the knife in his hand . 

 the noise rouse the whole camp : the man on guard come run ; gun be fire : and the half- 

 sleep- 
 sleep 


 ing man come rush , grasp their weapon . there be a sound of firing at the little tree ; and the cry go round the camp , " the Mashonas be release the spy ! " 

 when the man get to the Captain 's tent , they see that the nigger be go ; and Peter Halket be lie on his face at the foot of the tree ; with his head turn towards the Captain 's door . 

 there be a wild confusion of voice ! " how many be there ? " " where have they go to now ? " " they have   shoot Peter Halket ! " 

 " the Captain see they do it " " stand ready , they may come back any time ! " 

 when the Englishman come , the other man , who know he have be a medical student , make way for he . he kneel down by Peter Halket . 
 " he be dead , " he say , quietly . 
 when they have turn he over , the Colonial kneel down on the other side , with a little hand - lamp in his hand . 

 " what be you fellow fool about here for ? " cry the Captain . " do you suppose it be any use look for foot mark after all this 

 tramping ! go , guard the camp on all side ! " 

 " I will send four coloured boy , " he say to the Englishman and the Colonial , " to dig the grave . you would well bury he at once ; there be no use wait . we start first thing in the morning . " 
 when they be alone , the Englishman uncover Peter Halket 's breast . there be one small wound just under the left bosom ; and one on the crown of the head ; which must have be make after he have fall down . 

 " strange , be not   it , what he can 

 have be do here ? " say the Colonial ; " a small wound , be not   it ? " 

 " a pistol shot , " say the Englishman , close the bosom . 
 " a pistol " 
 the Englishman look up at he with a keen light in his eye . 
 " I tell you he would not kill that nigger . see here " he take up the knife which have fall from Peter Halket 's grasp , and fit it into a piece of the cut leather that lie on the earth . 

 " but you do not   think " the Colonial star at he with wide 

 open eye ; then he glance round at the Captain 's tent . 

 " yes , I think that go and fetch his great - coat ; we will put he in it . if it be no use talk while a man be alive , it be no use talk when he be dead ! " 
 they bring his great - coat , and they look in the pocket to see if there be anything which might show where he have come from or who his friend be . but there be nothing in the pocket except an empty flask , and a leathern purse with two shilling in , and a little hand - make two - point cap . 

 so they wrap Peter Halket up in his great - coat , and put the little cap on his head . 
 and , one hour after Peter Halket have stand outside the tent look up , he be lie under the little tree , with the red sand trodden down over he , in which a black man and a white man 's blood be mingle . 
 all the rest of the night the man sit up round the fire , discuss what have happen , dread an attack . 

 but the Englishman and the 

 Colonial go to their tent , to lie down . 

 " do you think they will make any inquiry ? " ask the Colonial . 
 " why should they ? his time will be up to - morrow . " 
 " be you go to say anything ? " 
 " what be the use ? " 
 they lie in the dark for an hour , and hear the man chat outside . 
 " do you believe in a God ? " say the Englishman , suddenly . 
 the Colonial start : " of course I do ! " 

 " I use to , " say the 

 English- 
 Englishman 


 man ; " I do not believe in your God ; but I believe in something great than I could understand , which move in this earth , as your soul move in your body . and I think this work in such wise , that the law of cause and effect , which hold in the physical world , hold also in the moral : so , that the thing we call justice , rule . I do not believe it any more . there be no God in Mashonaland . " 

 " oh , do not   say that ! " cry the Colonial , much distressed . " be you go off your head , like poor Halket ? " 

 " no ; but there be no God , " say the Englishman . he turn round on his shoulder , and say no more : and afterwards the Colonial go to sleep . 
 before dawn the next morning the man have pack up the good , and start . 

 by five o'clock the cart have file away ; the man ride or walk before and behind they ; and the space where the camp have be be an empty circle ; save for a few broken bottle and empty tin , and the stone about which the fire have 

 be make , round which warm ash yet lay . 

 only under the little stunted tree , the Colonial and the Englishman be pile up stone . their horse stand saddle close by . 
 presently the large trooper come rid back . he have be send by the Captain to ask what they be fool behind for , and to tell they to come on . 

 the man mount their horse to follow he ; but the Englishman turn in his saddle and look back . the morning sun be light up the straggle branch of the tall tree 

 that have overshadow the camp ; and fall on the little stunted tree , with its white stem and outstretche arm ; and on the stone beneath it . 

 " it be all that night on the koppje ! " say the Colonial , sadly . 
 but the Englishman look back . " I hardly know , " he say , " whether it be not well for he now , than for we . " 
 then they ride on after the troop . 

 the END . 



