treasure ISLAND 

 by Robert Louis Stevenson 

 to S.L.O. , an american gentleman in accordance with whose classic taste the following narrative have be design , it be now , in return for numerous delightful hour , and with the kind wish , dedicate by his affectionate friend , the author . 




  to the HESITATING PURCHASER 

  if sailor tale to sailor tune , 
  storm and adventure , heat and cold , 
  if schooner , island , and maroon , 
  and buccaneer , and bury gold , 
  and all the old romance , retold 
  exactly in the ancient way , 
  can please , as I they please of old , 
  the wise youngster of today : 

  so be it , and fall on ! if not , 
  if studious youth no long crave , 
  his ancient appetite forget , 
  Kingston , or Ballantyne the brave , 
  or Cooper of the wood and wave : 
  so be it , also ! and may I 
  and all my pirate share the grave 
  where these and their creation lie ! 




 TREASURE ISLAND 



 PART one the Old Buccaneer 





 1 

 the Old Sea - dog at the Admiral Benbow 

 SQUIRE TRELAWNEY , Dr. Livesey , and the rest of these gentleman have ask I to write down the whole particular about Treasure Island , from the beginning to the end , keep nothing back but the bearing of the island , and that only because there be still treasure not yet lift , I take up my pen in the year of grace 17 and go back to the time when my father keep the Admiral Benbow inn and the brown old seaman with the sabre cut first take up his lodging under our roof . 
 I remember he as if it be yesterday , as he come plod to the inn door , his sea - chest follow behind he in a hand - barrow a tall , strong , heavy , nut - brown man , his tarry pigtail fall over the shoulder of his soil blue coat , his hand rag and scarred , with black , broken nail , and the sabre cut across one cheek , a dirty , livid white . I remember he look round the cover and whistle to himself as he do so , and then break out in that old sea - song that he sing so often afterwards : 
  " fifteen man on the dead man 's chest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! " 
 in the high , old tottering voice that seem to have be tune and break at the capstan bar . then he rap on the door with a bit of stick like a handspike that he carry , and when my father appear , call roughly for a glass of rum . this , when it be bring to he , he drink slowly , like a connoisseur , linger on the taste and still look about he at the cliff and up at our signboard . 
 " this be a handy cove , " say he at length ; " and a pleasant sittyate grog - shop . much company , mate ? " 
 my father tell he no , very little company , the more be the pity . 
 " well , then , " say he , " this be the berth for I . here you , matey , " he cry to the man who trundle the barrow ; " bring up alongside and help up my chest . I will stay here a bit , " he continue . " I be a plain man ; rum and bacon and egg be what I want , and that head up there for to watch ship off . what you mought call I ? you mought call I captain . oh , I see what you be at there " ; and he throw down three or four gold piece on the threshold . " you can tell I when I have   work through that , " say he , look as fierce as a commander . 
 and indeed bad as his clothe be and coarsely as he speak , he have none of the appearance of a man who sail before the mast , but seem like a mate or skipper accustom to be obey or to strike . the man who come with the barrow tell we the mail have set he down the morning before at the Royal George , that he have inquire what inn there be along the coast , and hear our well speak of , I suppose , and describe as lonely , have choose it from the other for his place of residence . and that be all we could learn of our guest . 
 he be a very silent man by custom . all day he hang round the cove or upon the cliff with a brass telescope ; all evening he sit in a corner of the parlour next the fire and drank rum and water very strong . mostly he would not speak when speak to , only look up sudden and fierce and blow through his nose like a fog - horn ; and we and the people who come about our house soon learn to let he be . every day when he come back from his stroll he would ask if any seafaring man have go by along the road . at first we think it be the want of company of his own kind that make he ask this question , but at last we begin to see he be desirous to avoid they . when a seaman do put up at the Admiral Benbow   as now and then some do , make by the coast road for Bristol   he would look in at he through the curtained door before he enter the parlour ; and he be always sure to be as silent as a mouse when any such be present . for I , at least , there be no secret about the matter , for I be , in a way , a sharer in his alarm . he have take I aside one day and promise I a silver fourpenny on the first of every month if I would only keep my " weather - eye open for a seafaring man with one leg " and let he know the moment he appear . often enough when the first of the month come round and I apply to he for my wage , he would only blow through his nose at I and stare I down , but before the week be out he be sure to think well of it , bring I my four - penny piece , and repeat his order to look out for " the seafare man with one leg . " 
 how that personage haunt my dream , I need scarcely tell you . on stormy night , when the wind shake the four corner of the house and the surf roar along the cove and up the cliff , I would see he in a thousand form , and with a thousand diabolical expression . now the leg would be cut off at the knee , now at the hip ; now he be a monstrous kind of a creature who have never have but the one leg , and that in the middle of his body . to see he leap and run and pursue I over hedge and ditch be the bad of nightmare . and altogether I pay pretty dear for my monthly fourpenny piece , in the shape of these abominable fancy . 
 but though I be so terrified by the idea of the seafare man with one leg , I be far less afraid of the captain himself than anybody else who know he . there be night when he take a deal more rum and water than his head would carry ; and then he would sometimes sit and sing his wicked , old , wild sea - song , mind nobody ; but sometimes he would call for glass round and force all the tremble company to listen to his story or bear a chorus to his singing . often I have hear the house shake with " Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum , " all the neighbour join in for dear life , with the fear of death upon they , and each sing louder than the other to avoid remark . for in these fit he be the most overriding companion ever know ; he would slap his hand on the table for silence all round ; he would fly up in a passion of anger at a question , or sometimes because none be put , and so he judge the company be not follow his story . nor would he allow anyone to leave the inn till he have drink himself sleepy and reel off to bed . 
 his story be what frighten people bad of all . dreadful story they be about hang , and walk the plank , and storm at sea , and the Dry Tortugas , and wild deed and place on the spanish Main . by his own account he must have live his life among some of the wicked man that God ever allow upon the sea , and the language in which he tell these story shock our plain country people almost as much as the crime that he describe . my father be always say the inn would be ruin , for people would soon cease come there to be tyrannize over and put down , and send shivering to their bed ; but I really believe his presence do we good . People be frighten at the time , but on look back they rather like it ; it be a fine excitement in a quiet country life , and there be even a party of the young man who pretend to admire he , call he a " true sea - dog " and a " real old salt " and such like name , and say there be the sort of man that make England terrible at sea . 
 in one way , indeed , he bid fair to ruin we , for he keep on staying week after week , and at last month after month , so that all the money have be long exhaust , and still my father never pluck up the heart to insist on have more . if ever he mention it , the captain blow through his nose so loudly that you might say he roar , and star my poor father out of the room . I have see he wring his hand after such a rebuff , and I be sure the annoyance and the terror he live in must have greatly hasten his early and unhappy death . 
 all the time he live with we the captain make no change whatever in his dress but to buy some stocking from a hawker . one of the cock of his hat have fall down , he let it hang from that day forth , though it be a great annoyance when it blow . I remember the appearance of his coat , which he patch himself upstairs in his room , and which , before the end , be nothing but patch . he never write or receive a letter , and he never speak with any but the neighbour , and with these , for the most part , only when drunk on rum . the great sea - chest none of we have ever see open . 
 he be only once cross , and that be towards the end , when my poor father be far go in a decline that take he off . Dr. Livesey come late one afternoon to see the patient , take a bit of dinner from my mother , and go into the parlour to smoke a pipe until his horse should come down from the hamlet , for we have no stabling at the old Benbow . I follow he in , and I remember observe the contrast the neat , bright doctor , with his powder as white as snow and his bright , black eye and pleasant manner , make with the coltish country folk , and above all , with that filthy , heavy , bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours , sitting , far go in rum , with his arm on the table . suddenly he the captain , that be begin to pipe up his eternal song : 
  " fifteen man on the dead man 's chest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! 
  drink and the devil have do for the rest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! " 
 at first I have suppose " the dead man 's chest " to be that identical big box of his upstairs in the front room , and the thought have be mingle in my nightmare with that of the one - legged seafaring man . but by this time we have all long cease to pay any particular notice to the song ; it be new , that night , to nobody but Dr. Livesey , and on he I observe it do not produce an agreeable effect , for he look up for a moment quite angrily before he go on with his talk to old Taylor , the gardener , on a new cure for the rheumatic . in the meantime , the captain gradually brighten up at his own music , and at last flap his hand upon the table before he in a way we all know to mean silence . the voice stop at once , all but Dr. Livesey 's ; he go on as before speak clear and kind and draw briskly at his pipe between every word or two . the captain glare at he for a while , flap his hand again , glare still hard , and at last break out with a villainous , low oath , " Silence , there , between deck ! " 
 " be you address I , sir ? " say the doctor ; and when the ruffian have tell he , with another oath , that this be so , " I have only one thing to say to you , sir , " reply the doctor , " that if you keep on drink rum , the world will soon be quit of a very dirty scoundrel ! " 
 the old fellow 's fury be awful . he spring to his foot , draw and open a sailor 's clasp - knife , and balance it open on the palm of his hand , threaten to pin the doctor to the wall . 
 the doctor never so much as move . he speak to he as before , over his shoulder and in the same tone of voice , rather high , so that all the room might hear , but perfectly calm and steady : " if you do not put that knife this instant in your pocket , I promise , upon my honour , you shall hang at the next assize . " 
 then follow a battle of look between they , but the captain soon knuckle under , put up his weapon , and resume his seat , grumble like a beat dog . 
 " and now , sir , " continue the doctor , ' since I now know there be such a fellow in my district , you may count I will have an eye upon you day and night . I be not a doctor only ; I be a magistrate ; and if I catch a breath of complaint against you , if it be only for a piece of incivility like tonight 's , I will take effectual mean to have you hunt down and rout out of this . let that suffice . " 
 soon after , Dr. Livesey 's horse come to the door and he ride away , but the captain hold his peace that evening , and for many evening to come . 




 2 

 Black Dog Appears and disappear 

 it be not very long after this that there occur the first of the mysterious event that rid we at last of the captain , though not , as you will see , of his affair . it be a bitter cold winter , with long , hard frost and heavy gale ; and it be plain from the first that my poor father be little likely to see the spring . he sink daily , and my mother and I have all the inn upon our hand , and be keep busy enough without pay much regard to our unpleasant guest . 
 it be one January morning , very early a pinch , frosty morning the cove all grey with hoar - frost , the ripple lap softly on the stone , the sun still low and only touch the hilltop and shin far to seaward . the captain have rise early than usual and set out down the beach , his cutlass swing under the broad skirt of the old blue coat , his brass telescope under his arm , his hat tilt back upon his head . I remember his breath hang like smoke in his wake as he stride off , and the last sound I hear of he as he turn the big rock be a loud snort of indignation , as though his mind be still run upon Dr. Livesey . 
 well , mother be upstairs with father and I be lay the breakfast - table against the captain 's return when the parlour door open and a man step in on whom I have never set my eye before . he be a pale , tallowy creature , want two finger of the left hand , and though he wear a cutlass , he do not look much like a fighter . I have always my eye open for seafare man , with one leg or two , and I remember this one puzzle I . he be not sailorly , and yet he have a smack of the sea about he too . 
 I ask he what be for his service , and he say he would take rum ; but as I be go out of the room to fetch it , he sit down upon a table and motion I to draw near . I pause where I be , with my napkin in my hand . 
 " come here , sonny , " say he . " come nearer here . " 
 I take a step nearer . 
 " be this here table for my mate bill ? " he ask with a kind of leer . 
 I tell he I do not know his mate bill , and this be for a person who stay in our house whom we call the captain . 
 " well , " say he , " my mate Bill would be call the captain , as like as not . he have a cut on one cheek and a mighty pleasant way with he , particularly in drink , have my mate Bill . we will put it , for argument like , that your captain have a cut on one cheek and we will put it , if you like , that that cheek be the right one . ah , well ! I tell you . now , be my mate Bill in this here house ? " 
 I tell he he be out walk . 
 " which way , sonny ? which way be he go ? " 
 and when I have point out the rock and tell he how the captain be likely to return , and how soon , and answer a few other question , " ah , " say he , " this will be as good as drink to my mate bill . " 
 the expression of his face as he say these word be not at all pleasant , and I have my own reason for think that the stranger be mistaken , even suppose he mean what he say . but it be no affair of mine , I think ; and besides , it be difficult to know what to do . the stranger keep hang about just inside the inn door , peer round the corner like a cat wait for a mouse . once I step out myself into the road , but he immediately call I back , and as I do not obey quick enough for his fancy , a most horrible change come over his tallowy face , and he order I in with an oath that make I jump . as soon as I be back again he return to his former manner , half fawn , half sneer , pat I on the shoulder , tell I I be a good boy and he have take quite a fancy to I . " I have a son of my own , " say he , " as like you as two block , and he be all the pride of my ' art . but the great thing for boy be discipline , sonny discipline . now , if you have sail along of Bill , you would not   have stand there to be speak to twice not you . that be never Bill 's way , nor the way of sich as sail with he . and here , sure enough , be my mate Bill , with a spy - glass under his arm , bless his old ' art , to be sure . you and me'll just go back into the parlour , sonny , and get behind the door , and we will give Bill a little surprise bless his ' art , I say again . " 
 so say , the stranger back along with I into the parlour and put I behind he in the corner so that we be both hide by the open door . I be very uneasy and alarm , as you may fancy , and it rather add to my fear to observe that the stranger be certainly frighten himself . he clear the hilt of his cutlass and loosen the blade in the sheath ; and all the time we be wait there he keep swallow as if he feel what we use to call a lump in the throat . 
 at last in strode the captain , slam the door behind he , without look to the right or left , and march straight across the room to where his breakfast await he . 
 " Bill , " say the stranger in a voice that I think he have try to make bold and big . 
 the captain spin round on his heel and front we ; all the brown have go out of his face , and even his nose be blue ; he have the look of a man who see a ghost , or the evil one , or something bad , if anything can be ; and upon my word , I feel sorry to see he all in a moment turn so old and sick . 
 " come , Bill , you know I ; you know an old shipmate , Bill , surely , " say the stranger . 
 the captain make a sort of gasp . 
 " Black Dog ! " say he . 
 " and who else ? " return the other , get more at his ease . " Black Dog as ever be , come for to see his old shipmate Billy , at the Admiral Benbow inn . ah , Bill , Bill , we have see a sight of time , we two , since I lose they two talon , " hold up his mutilate hand . 
 " now , look here , " say the captain ; " you have   run I down ; here I be ; well , then , speak up ; what be it ? " 
 " that be you , Bill , " return Black Dog , " you be in the right of it , Billy . I will have a glass of rum from this dear child here , as I have   take such a liking to ; and we will sit down , if you please , and talk square , like old shipmate . " 
 when I return with the rum , they be already seat on either side of the captain 's breakfast - table Black Dog next to the door and sit sideways so as to have one eye on his old shipmate and one , as I think , on his retreat . 
 he bid I go and leave the door wide open . " none of your keyhole for I , sonny , " he say ; and I leave they together and retire into the bar . 
 for a long time , though I certainly do my good to listen , I could hear nothing but a low gattling ; but at last the voice begin to grow high , and I could pick up a word or two , mostly oath , from the captain . 
 " no , no , no , no ; and an end of it ! " he cry once . and again , " if it come to swing , swing all , say I. " 
 then all of a sudden there be a tremendous explosion of oath and other noise the chair and table go over in a lump , a clash of steel follow , and then a cry of pain , and the next instant I see Black Dog in full flight , and the captain hotly pursue , both with draw cutlass , and the former stream blood from the left shoulder . just at the door the captain aim at the fugitive one last tremendous cut , which would certainly have split he to the chine have it not be intercept by our big signboard of Admiral Benbow . you may see the notch on the low side of the frame to this day . 
 that blow be the last of the battle . once out upon the road , Black Dog , in spite of his wound , show a wonderful clean pair of heel and disappear over the edge of the hill in half a minute . the captain , for his part , stand star at the signboard like a bewildered man . then he pass his hand over his eye several time and at last turn back into the house . 
 " Jim , " say he , " rum " ; and as he speak , he reel a little , and catch himself with one hand against the wall . 
 " be you hurt ? " cry I. 
 " Rum , " he repeat . " I must get away from here . Rum ! Rum ! " 
 I run to fetch it , but I be quite unsteadied by all that have fall out , and I break one glass and foul the tap , and while I be still get in my own way , I hear a loud fall in the parlour , and run in , beheld the captain lie full length upon the floor . at the same instant my mother , alarm by the cry and fighting , come run downstairs to help I . between we we raise his head . he be breathe very loud and hard , but his eye be close and his face a horrible colour . 
 " dear , deary I , " cry my mother , " what a disgrace upon the house ! and your poor father sick ! " 
 in the meantime , we have no idea what to do to help the captain , nor any other thought but that he have get his death - hurt in the scuffle with the stranger . I get the rum , to be sure , and try to put it down his throat , but his tooth be tightly shut and his jaw as strong as iron . it be a happy relief for we when the door open and Doctor Livesey come in , on his visit to my father . 
 " oh , doctor , " we cry , " what shall we do ? where be he wound ? " 
 " wound ? a fiddle - stick 's end ! " say the doctor . " no more wounded than you or I. the man have have a stroke , as I warn he . now , Mrs. Hawkins , just you run upstairs to your husband and tell he , if possible , nothing about it . for my part , I must do my good to save this fellow 's trebly worthless life ; Jim , you get I a basin . " 
 when I get back with the basin , the doctor have already rip up the captain 's sleeve and expose his great sinewy arm . it be tattooed in several place . " here 's luck , " " a fair wind , " and " Billy Bones his fancy , " be very neatly and clearly execute on the forearm ; and up near the shoulder there be a sketch of a gallow and a man hang from it do , as I think , with great spirit . 
 " Prophetic , " say the doctor , touch this picture with his finger . " and now , Master Billy Bones , if that be your name , we will have a look at the colour of your blood . Jim , " he say , " be you afraid of blood ? " 
 " no , sir , " say I. 
 " well , then , " say he , " you hold the basin " ; and with that he take his lancet and open a vein . 
 a great deal of blood be take before the captain open his eye and look mistily about he . first he recognize the doctor with an unmistakable frown ; then his glance fall upon I , and he look relieve . but suddenly his colour change , and he try to raise himself , cry , " where 's Black Dog ? " 
 " there be no Black Dog here , " say the doctor , " except what you have on your own back . you have be drink rum ; you have have a stroke , precisely as I tell you ; and I have just , very much against my own will , drag you headforemost out of the grave . now , Mr. Bones " 
 " that be not my name , " he interrupt . 
 " much I care , " return the doctor . " it be the name of a buccaneer of my acquaintance ; and I call you by it for the sake of shortness , and what I have to say to you be this ; one glass of rum will not   kill you , but if you take one you will take another and another , and I stake my wig if you do not   break off short , you will die do you understand that ? die , and go to your own place , like the man in the Bible . Come , now , make an effort . I will help you to your bed for once . " 
 between we , with much trouble , we manage to hoist he upstairs , and lay he on his bed , where his head fall back on the pillow as if he be almost faint . 
 " now , mind you , " say the doctor , " I clear my conscience the name of rum for you be death . " 
 and with that he go off to see my father , take I with he by the arm . 
 " this be nothing , " he say as soon as he have close the door . " I have draw blood enough to keep he quiet awhile ; he should lie for a week where he be that be the good thing for he and you ; but another stroke would settle he . " 




 3 

 the Black Spot 

 about noon I stop at the captain 's door with some cool drink and medicine . he be lie very much as we have leave he , only a little high , and he seem both weak and excited . 
 " Jim , " he say , " you be the only one here that be worth anything , and you know I have   be always good to you . never a month but I have   give you a silver fourpenny for yourself . and now you see , mate , I be pretty low , and desert by all ; and Jim , you will bring I one noggin of rum , now , will not   you , matey ? " 
 " the doctor " I begin . 
 but he break in curse the doctor , in a feeble voice but heartily . " doctor be all swab , " he say ; " and that doctor there , why , what do he know about seafare man ? I be in place hot as pitch , and mate drop round with Yellow Jack , and the bless land a - heaving like the sea with earthquake what to the doctor know of land like that ? and I live on rum , I tell you . it be be meat and drink , and man and wife , to I ; and if I be not to have my rum now I be a poor old hulk on a lee shore , my blood'll be on you , Jim , and that doctor swab " ; and he run on again for a while with curse . " look , Jim , how my finger fidge , " he continue in the plead tone . " I can not   keep them still , not I. I have not   have a drop this blessed day . that doctor be a fool , I tell you . if I do not   have a drain o ' rum , Jim , I will have the horror ; I see some on them already . I see old Flint in the corner there , behind you ; as plain as print , I see he ; and if I get the horror , I be a man that have live rough , and I will raise Cain . your doctor hisself say one glass would not   hurt I . I will give you a golden guinea for a noggin , Jim . " 
 he be grow more and more excited , and this alarm I for my father , who be very low that day and need quiet ; besides , I be reassure by the doctor 's word , now quote to I , and rather offend by the offer of a bribe . 
 " I want none of your money , " say I , " but what you owe my father . I will get you one glass , and no more . " 
 when I bring it to he , he seize it greedily and drink it out . 
 " aye , aye , " say he , " that be some well , sure enough . and now , matey , do that doctor say how long I be to lie here in this old berth ? " 
 " a week at least , " say I. 
 " Thunder ! " he cry . " a week ! I can not   do that ; they would have the black spot on I by then . the lubber be go about to get the wind of I this blessed moment ; lubber as could not   keep what they get , and want to nail what be another 's . be that seamanly behaviour , now , I want to know ? but I be a save soul . I never waste good money of mine , nor lose it neither ; and I will trick them again . I be not afraid on them . I will shake out another reef , matey , and daddle them again . " 
 as he be thus speak , he have rise from bed with great difficulty , hold to my shoulder with a grip that almost make I cry out , and move his leg like so much dead weight . his word , spirit as they be in meaning , contrast sadly with the weakness of the voice in which they be utter . he pause when he have get into a sit position on the edge . 
 " that doctor be do I , " he murmur . " my ear be sing . lay I back . " 
 before I could do much to help he he have fall back again to his former place , where he lie for a while silent . 
 " Jim , " he say at length , " you see that seafare man today ? " 
 " Black Dog ? " I ask . 
 " ah ! Black Dog , " say he . " he be a bad un ; but there be bad that put he on . now , if I can not   get away nohow , and they tip I the black spot , mind you , it be my old sea - chest they be after ; you get on a horse you can , can not   you ? well , then , you get on a horse , and go to well , yes , I will ! to that eternal doctor swab , and tell he to pipe all hand magistrate and sich and he will lay them aboard at the Admiral Benbow all old Flint 's crew , man and boy , all on them that be leave . I be first mate , I be , old Flint 's first mate , and I be the on'y one as know the place . he give it I at Savannah , when he lie a - die , like as if I be to now , you see . but you will not   peach unless they get the black spot on I , or unless you see that Black Dog again or a seafare man with one leg , Jim he above all . " 
 " but what be the black spot , captain ? " I ask . 
 " that be a summon , mate . I will tell you if they get that . but you keep your weather - eye open , Jim , and I will share with you equal , upon my honour . " 
 he wander a little long , his voice grow weak ; but soon after I have give he his medicine , which he take like a child , with the remark , " if ever a seaman want drug , it be I , " he fall at last into a heavy , swoon - like sleep , in which I leave he . what I should have do have all go well I do not know . probably I should have tell the whole story to the doctor , for I be in mortal fear lest the captain should repent of his confession and make an end of I . but as thing fall out , my poor father die quite suddenly that evening , which put all other matter on one side . our natural distress , the visit of the neighbour , the arranging of the funeral , and all the work of the inn to be carry on in the meanwhile keep I so busy that I have scarcely time to think of the captain , far less to be afraid of he . 
 he get downstairs next morning , to be sure , and have his meal as usual , though he eat little and have more , I be afraid , than his usual supply of rum , for he help himself out of the bar , scowl and blow through his nose , and no one dare to cross he . on the night before the funeral he be as drunk as ever ; and it be shocking , in that house of mourning , to hear he sing away at his ugly old sea - song ; but weak as he be , we be all in the fear of death for he , and the doctor be suddenly take up with a case many mile away and be never near the house after my father 's death . I have say the captain be weak , and indeed he seem rather to grow weak than regain his strength . he clamber up and down stair , and go from the parlour to the bar and back again , and sometimes put his nose out of door to smell the sea , hold on to the wall as he go for support and breathe hard and fast like a man on a steep mountain . he never particularly address I , and it be my belief he have as good as forget his confidence ; but his temper be more flighty , and allow for his bodily weakness , more violent than ever . he have an alarming way now when he be drunk of draw his cutlass and lay it bare before he on the table . but with all that , he mind people less and seem shut up in his own thought and rather wandering . once , for instance , to our extreme wonder , he pip up to a different air , a kind of country love - song that he must have learn in his youth before he have begin to follow the sea . 
 so thing pass until , the day after the funeral , and about three o'clock of a bitter , foggy , frosty afternoon , I be stand at the door for a moment , full of sad thought about my father , when I see someone draw slowly near along the road . he be plainly blind , for he tap before he with a stick and wear a great green shade over his eye and nose ; and he be hunch , as if with age or weakness , and wear a huge old tattered sea - cloak with a hood that make he appear positively deform . I never see in my life a more dreadful - look figure . he stop a little from the inn , and raise his voice in an odd sing - song , address the air in front of he , " will any kind friend inform a poor blind man , who have lose the precious sight of his eye in the gracious defence of his native country , England and God bless King George ! where or in what part of this country he may now be ? " 
 " you be at the Admiral Benbow , Black Hill Cove , my good man , " say I. 
 " I hear a voice , " say he , " a young voice . will you give I your hand , my kind young friend , and lead I in ? " 
 I hold out my hand , and the horrible , soft - spoken , eyeless creature grip it in a moment like a vise . I be so much startled that I struggle to withdraw , but the blind man pull I close up to he with a single action of his arm . 
 " now , boy , " he say , " take I in to the captain . " 
 " Sir , " say I , " upon my word I dare not . " 
 " oh , " he sneer , " that be it ! take I in straight or I will break your arm . " 
 and he give it , as he speak , a wrench that make I cry out . 
 " Sir , " say I , " it be for yourself I mean . the captain be not what he use to be . he sit with a draw cutlass . another gentleman " 
 " come , now , march , " interrupt he ; and I never hear a voice so cruel , and cold , and ugly as that blind man 's . it cow I more than the pain , and I begin to obey he at once , walk straight in at the door and towards the parlour , where our sick old buccaneer be sit , daze with rum . the blind man clung close to I , hold I in one iron fist and lean almost more of his weight on I than I could carry . " lead I straight up to he , and when I be in view , cry out , ' here be a friend for you , Bill . ' if you do not , I will do this , " and with that he give I a twitch that I think would have make I faint . between this and that , I be so utterly terrified of the blind beggar that I forget my terror of the captain , and as I open the parlour door , cry out the word he have order in a trembling voice . 
 the poor captain raise his eye , and at one look the rum go out of he and leave he star sober . the expression of his face be not so much of terror as of mortal sickness . he make a movement to rise , but I do not believe he have enough force leave in his body . 
 " now , Bill , sit where you be , " say the beggar . " if I can not   see , I can hear a finger stir . business be business . hold out your left hand . boy , take his left hand by the wrist and bring it near to my right . " 
 we both obey he to the letter , and I see he pass something from the hollow of the hand that hold his stick into the palm of the captain 's , which close upon it instantly . 
 " and now that be do , " say the blind man ; and at the word he suddenly leave hold of I , and with incredible accuracy and nimbleness , skip out of the parlour and into the road , where , as I still stand motionless , I could hear his stick go tap - tap - tap into the distance . 
 it be some time before either I or the captain seem to gather our sens , but at length , and about at the same moment , I release his wrist , which I be still hold , and he draw in his hand and look sharply into the palm . 
 " ten o'clock ! " he cry . " six hour . we will do they yet , " and he spring to his foot . 
 even as he do so , he reel , put his hand to his throat , stand sway for a moment , and then , with a peculiar sound , fall from his whole height face foremost to the floor . 
 I run to he at once , call to my mother . but haste be all in vain . the captain have be strike dead by thunder apoplexy . it be a curious thing to understand , for I have certainly never like the man , though of late I have begin to pity he , but as soon as I see that he be dead , I burst into a flood of tear . it be the second death I have know , and the sorrow of the first be still fresh in my heart . 




 4 

 the Sea - chest 

 I lose no time , of course , in tell my mother all that I know , and perhaps should have tell she long before , and we see ourselves at once in a difficult and dangerous position . some of the man 's money if he have any be certainly due to we , but it be not likely that our captain 's shipmate , above all the two specimen see by I , Black Dog and the blind beggar , would be incline to give up their booty in payment of the dead man 's debt . the captain 's order to mount at once and ride for Doctor Livesey would have leave my mother alone and unprotecte , which be not to be think of . indeed , it seem impossible for either of we to remain much long in the house ; the fall of coal in the kitchen grate , the very ticking of the clock , fill we with alarm . the neighbourhood , to our ear , seem haunt by approach footstep ; and what between the dead body of the captain on the parlour floor and the thought of that detestable blind beggar hover near at hand and ready to return , there be moment when , as the saying go , I jump in my skin for terror . something must speedily be resolve upon , and it occur to we at last to go forth together and seek help in the neighbouring hamlet . no soon say than do . Bare - headed as we be , we run out at once in the gathering evening and the frosty fog . 
 the hamlet lie not many hundred yard away , though out of view , on the other side of the next cove ; and what greatly encourage I , it be in an opposite direction from that whence the blind man have make his appearance and whither he have presumably return . we be not many minute on the road , though we sometimes stop to lay hold of each other and hearken . but there be no unusual sound nothing but the low wash of the ripple and the croaking of the inmate of the wood . 
 it be already candle - light when we reach the hamlet , and I shall never forget how much I be cheer to see the yellow shine in door and window ; but that , as it prove , be the good of the help we be likely to get in that quarter . for you would have think man would have be ashamed of themselves no soul would consent to return with we to the Admiral Benbow . the more we tell of our trouble , the more man , woman , and child they cling to the shelter of their house . the name of Captain Flint , though it be strange to I , be well enough know to some there and carry a great weight of terror . some of the man who have be to field - work on the far side of the Admiral Benbow remember , besides , to have see several stranger on the road , and take they to be smuggler , to have bolt away ; and one at least have see a little lugger in what we call Kitt 's Hole . for that matter , anyone who be a comrade of the captain 's be enough to frighten they to death . and the short and the long of the matter be , that while we could get several who be willing enough to ride to Dr. Livesey 's , which lie in another direction , not one would help we to defend the inn . 
 they say cowardice be infectious ; but then argument be , on the other hand , a great emboldener ; and so when each have say his say , my mother make they a speech . she would not , she declare , lose money that belong to her fatherless boy ; " if none of the rest of you dare , " she say , " Jim and I dare . back we will go , the way we come , and small thank to you big , hulking , chicken - hearte man . we will have that chest open , if we die for it . and I will thank you for that bag , Mrs. Crossley , to bring back our lawful money in . " 
 of course I say I would go with my mother , and of course they all cry out at our foolhardiness , but even then not a man would go along with we . all they would do be to give I a loaded pistol lest we be attack , and to promise to have horse ready saddle in case we be pursue on our return , while one lad be to ride forward to the doctor 's in search of armed assistance . 
 my heart be beat finely when we two set forth in the cold night upon this dangerous venture . a full moon be begin to rise and peer redly through the upper edge of the fog , and this increase our haste , for it be plain , before we come forth again , that all would be as bright as day , and our departure expose to the eye of any watcher . we slip along the hedge , noiseless and swift , nor do we see or hear anything to increase our terror , till , to our relief , the door of the Admiral Benbow have close behind we . 
 I slip the bolt at once , and we stand and pant for a moment in the dark , alone in the house with the dead captain 's body . then my mother get a candle in the bar , and hold each other 's hand , we advance into the parlour . he lie as we have leave he , on his back , with his eye open and one arm stretch out . 
 " draw down the blind , Jim , " whisper my mother ; " they might come and watch outside . and now , " say she when I have do so , " we have to get the key off that ; and who be to touch it , I should like to know ! " and she give a kind of sob as she say the word . 
 I go down on my knee at once . on the floor close to his hand there be a little round of paper , blacken on the one side . I could not doubt that this be the BLACK SPOT ; and take it up , I find write on the other side , in a very good , clear hand , this short message : " you have till ten tonight . " 
 " he have till ten , Mother , " say I ; and just as I say it , our old clock begin strike . this sudden noise startle we shockingly ; but the news be good , for it be only six . 
 " now , Jim , " she say , " that key . " 
 I feel in his pocket , one after another . a few small coin , a thimble , and some thread and big needle , a piece of pigtail tobacco bite away at the end , his gully with the crooked handle , a pocket compass , and a tinder box be all that they contain , and I begin to despair . 
 " perhaps it be round his neck , " suggest my mother . 
 overcome a strong repugnance , I tear open his shirt at the neck , and there , sure enough , hang to a bit of tarry string , which I cut with his own gully , we find the key . at this triumph we be fill with hope and hurry upstairs without delay to the little room where he have sleep so long and where his box have stand since the day of his arrival . 
 it be like any other seaman 's chest on the outside , the initial " b " burn on the top of it with a hot iron , and the corner somewhat smash and break as by long , rough usage . 
 " give I the key , " say my mother ; and though the lock be very stiff , she have turn it and throw back the lid in a twinkling . 
 a strong smell of tobacco and tar rise from the interior , but nothing be to be see on the top except a suit of very good clothe , carefully brush and fold . they have never be wear , my mother say . under that , the miscellany begin a quadrant , a tin canikin , several stick of tobacco , two brace of very handsome pistol , a piece of bar silver , an old spanish watch and some other trinket of little value and mostly of foreign make , a pair of compass mount with brass , and five or six curious west indian shell . I have often wonder since why he should have carry about these shell with he in his wandering , guilty , and hunt life . 
 in the meantime , we have find nothing of any value but the silver and the trinket , and neither of these be in our way . underneath there be an old boat - cloak , whiten with sea - salt on many a harbour - bar . my mother pull it up with impatience , and there lie before we , the last thing in the chest , a bundle tie up in oilcloth , and look like paper , and a canvas bag that give forth , at a touch , the jingle of gold . 
 " I will show these rogue that I be an honest woman , " say my mother . " I will have my due , and not a farthing over . hold Mrs. Crossley 's bag . " and she begin to count over the amount of the captain 's score from the sailor 's bag into the one that I be hold . 
 it be a long , difficult business , for the coin be of all country and size doubloon , and louis d'ors , and guineas , and piece of eight , and I know not what besides , all shake together at random . the guineas , too , be about the scarcest , and it be with these only that my mother know how to make her count . 
 when we be about half - way through , I suddenly put my hand upon her arm , for I have hear in the silent frosty air a sound that bring my heart into my mouth the tap - tapping of the blind man 's stick upon the frozen road . it draw nearer and nearer , while we sit hold our breath . then it strike sharp on the inn door , and then we could hear the handle be turn and the bolt rattle as the wretched being try to enter ; and then there be a long time of silence both within and without . at last the tap recommence , and , to our indescribable joy and gratitude , die slowly away again until it cease to be hear . 
 " Mother , " say I , " take the whole and let us be go , " for I be sure the bolt door must have seem suspicious and would bring the whole hornet 's nest about our ear , though how thankful I be that I have bolt it , none could tell who have never meet that terrible blind man . 
 but my mother , frighten as she be , would not consent to take a fraction more than be due to she and be obstinately unwilling to be content with less . it be not yet seven , she say , by a long way ; she know her right and she would have they ; and she be still argue with I when a little low whistle sound a good way off upon the hill . that be enough , and more than enough , for both of we . 
 " I will take what I have , " she say , jump to her foot . 
 " and I will take this to square the count , " say I , pick up the oilskin packet . 
 next moment we be both grope downstairs , leave the candle by the empty chest ; and the next we have open the door and be in full retreat . we have not start a moment too soon . the fog be rapidly disperse ; already the moon shine quite clear on the high ground on either side ; and it be only in the exact bottom of the dell and round the tavern door that a thin veil still hang unbroken to conceal the first step of our escape . far less than half - way to the hamlet , very little beyond the bottom of the hill , we must come forth into the moonlight . nor be this all , for the sound of several footstep run come already to our ear , and as we look back in their direction , a light tossing to and fro and still rapidly advance show that one of the newcomer carry a lantern . 
 " my dear , " say my mother suddenly , " take the money and run on . I be go to faint . " 
 this be certainly the end for both of we , I think . how I curse the cowardice of the neighbour ; how I blame my poor mother for her honesty and her greed , for her past foolhardiness and present weakness ! we be just at the little bridge , by good fortune ; and I help she , totter as she be , to the edge of the bank , where , sure enough , she give a sigh and fall on my shoulder . I do not know how I find the strength to do it at all , and I be afraid it be roughly do , but I manage to drag she down the bank and a little way under the arch . far I could not move she , for the bridge be too low to let I do more than crawl below it . so there we have to stay my mother almost entirely expose and both of we within earshot of the inn . 




 5 

 the last of the Blind Man 

 MY curiosity , in a sense , be strong than my fear , for I could not remain where I be , but creep back to the bank again , whence , shelter my head behind a bush of broom , I might command the road before our door . I be scarcely in position ere my enemy begin to arrive , seven or eight of they , run hard , their foot beat out of time along the road and the man with the lantern some pace in front . three man run together , hand in hand ; and I make out , even through the mist , that the middle man of this trio be the blind beggar . the next moment his voice show I that I be right . 
 " down with the door ! " he cry . 
 " aye , aye , sir ! " answer two or three ; and a rush be make upon the Admiral Benbow , the lantern - bearer following ; and then I could see they pause , and hear speech pass in a low key , as if they be surprised to find the door open . but the pause be brief , for the blind man again issue his command . his voice sound louder and high , as if he be afire with eagerness and rage . 
 " in , in , in ! " he shout , and curse they for their delay . 
 four or five of they obey at once , two remain on the road with the formidable beggar . there be a pause , then a cry of surprise , and then a voice shout from the house , " Bill 's dead . " 
 but the blind man swear at they again for their delay . 
 " search he , some of you shirk lubber , and the rest of you aloft and get the chest , " he cry . 
 I could hear their foot rattle up our old stair , so that the house must have shake with it . promptly afterwards , fresh sound of astonishment arise ; the window of the captain 's room be throw open with a slam and a jingle of broken glass , and a man lean out into the moonlight , head and shoulder , and address the blind beggar on the road below he . 
 " Pew , " he cry , " they have   be before we . someone be turn the chest out alow and aloft . " 
 " be it there ? " roar Pew . 
 " the money be there . " 
 the blind man curse the money . 
 " Flint 's fist , I mean , " he cry . 
 " we do not   see it here nohow , " return the man . 
 " here , you below there , be it on Bill ? " cry the blind man again . 
 at that another fellow , probably he who have remain below to search the captain 's body , come to the door of the inn . " Bill be be overhaul a'ready , " say he ; " nothing left . " 
 " it be these people of the inn it be that boy . I wish I have put his eye out ! " cry the blind man , Pew . " there be no time ago they have the door bolt when I try it . Scatter , lad , and find them . " 
 " sure enough , they leave their glim here , " say the fellow from the window . 
 " Scatter and find them ! rout the house out ! " reiterate Pew , strike with his stick upon the road . 
 then there follow a great to - do through all our old inn , heavy foot pound to and fro , furniture throw over , door kick in , until the very rock re - echo and the man come out again , one after another , on the road and declare that we be nowhere to be find . and just the same whistle that have alarm my mother and myself over the dead captain 's money be once more clearly audible through the night , but this time twice repeat . I have think it to be the blind man 's trumpet , so to speak , summon his crew to the assault , but I now find that it be a signal from the hillside towards the hamlet , and from its effect upon the buccaneer , a signal to warn they of approach danger . 
 " there be Dirk again , " say one . " twice ! we will have to budge , mate . " 
 " Budge , you skulk ! " cry Pew . " Dirk be a fool and a coward from the first you would not   mind he . they must be close by ; they can not   be far ; you have your hand on it . scatter and look for they , dog ! oh , shiver my soul , " he cry , " if I have eye ! " 
 this appeal seem to produce some effect , for two of the fellow begin to look here and there among the lumber , but half - heartedly , I think , and with half an eye to their own danger all the time , while the rest stand irresolute on the road . 
 " you have your hand on thousand , you fool , and you hang a leg ! you would be as rich as king if you could find it , and you know it be here , and you stand there skulk . there be not   one of you dare face Bill , and I do it a blind man ! and I be to lose my chance for you ! I be to be a poor , crawl beggar , sponge for rum , when I might be roll in a coach ! if you have the pluck of a weevil in a biscuit you would catch they still . " 
 " hang it , Pew , we have   get the doubloon ! " grumble one . 
 " they might have hide the blessed thing , " say another . " take the Georges , Pew , and do not   stand here squall . " 
 Squalling be the word for it ; Pew 's anger rise so high at these objection till at last , his passion completely take the upper hand , he strike at they right and leave in his blindness and his stick sound heavily on more than one . 
 these , in their turn , curse back at the blind miscreant , threaten he in horrid term , and try in vain to catch the stick and wrest it from his grasp . 
 this quarrel be the saving of we , for while it be still rag , another sound come from the top of the hill on the side of the hamlet the tramp of horse gallop . almost at the same time a pistol - shot , flash and report , come from the hedge side . and that be plainly the last signal of danger , for the buccaneer turn at once and run , separate in every direction , one seaward along the cove , one slant across the hill , and so on , so that in half a minute not a sign of they remain but pew . he they have desert , whether in sheer panic or out of revenge for his ill word and blow I know not ; but there he remain behind , tap up and down the road in a frenzy , and grope and call for his comrade . finally he take a wrong turn and run a few step past I , towards the hamlet , cry , " Johnny , Black Dog , Dirk , " and other name , " you will not   leave old Pew , mat not old pew ! " 
 just then the noise of horse top the rise , and four or five rider come in sight in the moonlight and sweep at full gallop down the slope . 
 at this pew see his error , turn with a scream , and run straight for the ditch , into which he roll . but he be on his foot again in a second and make another dash , now utterly bewilder , right under the near of the come horse . 
 the rider try to save he , but in vain . down go pew with a cry that ring high into the night ; and the four hoof trample and spurn he and pass by . he fall on his side , then gently collapse upon his face and move no more . 
 I leap to my foot and hail the rider . they be pull up , at any rate , horrify at the accident ; and I soon see what they be . one , tail out behind the rest , be a lad that have go from the hamlet to Dr. Livesey 's ; the rest be revenue officer , whom he have meet by the way , and with whom he have have the intelligence to return at once . some news of the lugger in Kitt 's Hole have find its way to Supervisor Dance and set he forth that night in our direction , and to that circumstance my mother and I owe our preservation from death . 
 pew be dead , stone dead . as for my mother , when we have carry she up to the hamlet , a little cold water and salt and that soon bring she back again , and she be none the bad for her terror , though she still continue to deplore the balance of the money . in the meantime the supervisor ride on , as fast as he could , to Kitt 's Hole ; but his man have to dismount and grope down the dingle , lead , and sometimes support , their horse , and in continual fear of ambush ; so it be no great matter for surprise that when they get down to the Hole the lugger be already under way , though still close in . he hail she . a voice reply , tell he to keep out of the moonlight or he would get some lead in he , and at the same time a bullet whistle close by his arm . soon after , the lugger double the point and disappear . Mr. Dance stand there , as he say , " like a fish out of water , " and all he could do be to dispatch a man to B to warn the cutter . " and that , " say he , " be just about as good as nothing . they have   get off clean , and there be an end . only , " he add , " I be glad I trod on Master Pew 's corn , " for by this time he have hear my story . 
 I go back with he to the Admiral Benbow , and you can not imagine a house in such a state of smash ; the very clock have be throw down by these fellow in their furious hunt after my mother and myself ; and though nothing have actually be take away except the captain 's money - bag and a little silver from the till , I could see at once that we be ruin . Mr. Dance could make nothing of the scene . 
 " they get the money , you say ? well , then , Hawkins , what in fortune be they after ? More money , I suppose ? " 
 " no , sir ; not money , I think , " reply I. " in fact , sir , I believe I have the thing in my breast pocket ; and to tell you the truth , I should like to get it put in safety . " 
 " to be sure , boy ; quite right , " say he . " I will take it , if you like . " 
 " I think perhaps Dr. Livesey " I begin . 
 " perfectly right , " he interrupt very cheerily , " perfectly right a gentleman and a magistrate . and , now I come to think of it , I might as well ride round there myself and report to he or squire . Master Pew 's dead , when all be do ; not that I regret it , but he be dead , you see , and people will make it out against an officer of his Majesty 's revenue , if make it out they can . now , I will tell you , Hawkins , if you like , I will take you along . " 
 I thank he heartily for the offer , and we walk back to the hamlet where the horse be . by the time I have tell mother of my purpose they be all in the saddle . 
 " Dogger , " say Mr. Dance , " you have a good horse ; take up this lad behind you . " 
 as soon as I be mount , hold on to Dogger 's belt , the supervisor give the word , and the party strike out at a bounce trot on the road to Dr. Livesey 's house . 




 6 

 the Captain 's Papers 

 we ride hard all the way till we draw up before Dr. Livesey 's door . the house be all dark to the front . 
 Mr. Dance tell I to jump down and knock , and Dogger give I a stirrup to descend by . the door be open almost at once by the maid . 
 " be Dr. Livesey in ? " I ask . 
 no , she say , he have come home in the afternoon but have go up to the hall to dine and pass the evening with the squire . 
 " so there we go , boy , " say Mr. Dance . 
 this time , as the distance be short , I do not mount , but run with Dogger 's stirrup - leather to the lodge gate and up the long , leafless , moonlit avenue to where the white line of the hall building look on either hand on great old garden . here Mr. Dance dismount , and take I along with he , be admit at a word into the house . 
 the servant lead we down a matted passage and show we at the end into a great library , all line with bookcase and bust upon the top of they , where the squire and Dr. Livesey sit , pipe in hand , on either side of a bright fire . 
 I have never see the squire so near at hand . he be a tall man , over six foot high , and broad in proportion , and he have a bluff , rough - and - ready face , all roughen and redden and line in his long travel . his eyebrow be very black , and move readily , and this give he a look of some temper , not bad , you would say , but quick and high . 
 " come in , Mr. Dance , " say he , very stately and condescend . 
 " good evening , Dance , " say the doctor with a nod . " and good evening to you , friend Jim . what good wind bring you here ? " 
 the supervisor stand up straight and stiff and tell his story like a lesson ; and you should have see how the two gentleman lean forward and look at each other , and forget to smoke in their surprise and interest . when they hear how my mother go back to the inn , Dr. Livesey fairly slap his thigh , and the squire cry " Bravo ! " and break his long pipe against the grate . long before it be do , Mr. Trelawney   that , you will remember , be the squire 's name   have get up from his seat and be stride about the room , and the doctor , as if to hear the well , have take off his powdered wig and sit there look very strange indeed with his own close - cropped black poll . 
 at last Mr. Dance finish the story . 
 " Mr. Dance , " say the squire , " you be a very noble fellow . and as for rid down that black , atrocious miscreant , I regard it as an act of virtue , sir , like stamp on a cockroach . this lad Hawkins be a trump , I perceive . Hawkins , will you ring that bell ? Mr. Dance must have some ale . " 
 " and so , Jim , " say the doctor , " you have the thing that they be after , have you ? " 
 " here it be , sir , " say I , and give he the oilskin packet . 
 the doctor look it all over , as if his finger be itch to open it ; but instead of do that , he put it quietly in the pocket of his coat . 
 " squire , " say he , " when Dance have have his ale he must , of course , be off on his Majesty 's service ; but I mean to keep Jim Hawkins here to sleep at my house , and with your permission , I propose we should have up the cold pie and let he sup . " 
 " as you will , Livesey , " say the squire ; " Hawkins have earn well than cold pie . " 
 so a big pigeon pie be bring in and put on a sidetable , and I make a hearty supper , for I be as hungry as a hawk , while Mr. Dance be far compliment and at last dismiss . 
 " and now , squire , " say the doctor . 
 " and now , Livesey , " say the squire in the same breath . 
 " one at a time , one at a time , " laugh Dr. Livesey . " you have hear of this Flint , I suppose ? " 
 " hear of he ! " cry the squire . " hear of he , you say ! he be the bloodthirsty buccaneer that sail . Blackbeard be a child to Flint . the Spaniards be so prodigiously afraid of he that , I tell you , sir , I be sometimes proud he be an Englishman . I have   see his top - sail with these eye , off Trinidad , and the cowardly son of a rum - puncheon that I sail with put back put back , sir , into Port of Spain . " 
 " well , I have   hear of he myself , in England , " say the doctor . " but the point be , have he money ? " 
 " money ! " cry the squire . " have you hear the story ? what be these villain after but money ? what do they care for but money ? for what would they risk their rascal carcass but money ? " 
 " that we shall soon know , " reply the doctor . " but you be so confoundedly hot - headed and exclamatory that I can not get a word in . what I want to know be this : suppose that I have here in my pocket some clue to where Flint bury his treasure , will that treasure amount to much ? " 
 " Amount , sir ! " cry the squire . " it will amount to this : if we have the clue you talk about , I fit out a ship in Bristol dock , and take you and Hawkins here along , and I will have that treasure if I search a year . " 
 " very well , " say the doctor . " now , then , if Jim be agreeable , we will open the packet " ; and he lay it before he on the table . 
 the bundle be sew together , and the doctor have to get out his instrument case and cut the stitch with his medical scissor . it contain two thing a book and a seal paper . 
 " first of all we will try the book , " observe the doctor . 
 the squire and I be both peer over his shoulder as he open it , for Dr. Livesey have kindly motion I to come round from the side - table , where I have be eat , to enjoy the sport of the search . on the first page there be only some scrap of writing , such as a man with a pen in his hand might make for idleness or practice . one be the same as the tattoo mark , " Billy bone his fancy " ; then there be " Mr. W. Bones , mate , " " no more rum , " " Off Palm Key he get itt , " and some other snatch , mostly single word and unintelligible . I could not help wonder who it be that have " get itt , " and what " itt " be that he get . a knife in his back as like as not . 
 " not much instruction there , " say Dr. Livesey as he pass on . 
 the next ten or twelve page be fill with a curious series of entry . there be a date at one end of the line and at the other a sum of money , as in common account - book , but instead of explanatory writing , only a vary number of cross between the two . on the 12th of June , 1745 , for instance , a sum of seventy pound have plainly become due to someone , and there be nothing but six cross to explain the cause . in a few case , to be sure , the name of a place would be add , as " Offe Caraccas , " or a mere entry of latitude and longitude , as " 62o 17 ' 20 " , 19o 2 ' 40 " . " 
 the record last over nearly twenty year , the amount of the separate entry grow large as time go on , and at the end a grand total have be make out after five or six wrong addition , and these word append , " bone , his pile . " 
 " I can not   make head or tail of this , " say Dr. Livesey . 
 " the thing be as clear as noonday , " cry the squire . " this be the black - hearted hound 's account - book . these cross stand for the name of ship or town that they sink or plunder . the sum be the scoundrel 's share , and where he fear an ambiguity , you see he add something clear . ' Offe Caraccas , ' now ; you see , here be some unhappy vessel board off that coast . God help the poor soul that man her coral long ago . " 
 " right ! " say the doctor . " see what it be to be a traveller . right ! and the amount increase , you see , as he rise in rank . " 
 there be little else in the volume but a few bearing of place note in the blank leaf towards the end and a table for reduce French , English , and spanish money to a common value . 
 " Thrifty man ! " cry the doctor . " he be not   the one to be cheat . " 
 " and now , " say the squire , " for the other . " 
 the paper have be seal in several place with a thimble by way of seal ; the very thimble , perhaps , that I have find in the captain 's pocket . the doctor open the seal with great care , and there fall out the map of an island , with latitude and longitude , sounding , name of hill and bay and inlet , and every particular that would be need to bring a ship to a safe anchorage upon its shore . it be about nine mile long and five across , shape , you might say , like a fat dragon stand up , and have two fine land - lock harbour , and a hill in the centre part mark " the Spy - glass . " there be several addition of a later date , but above all , three cross of red ink two on the north part of the island , one in the southwest and beside this last , in the same red ink , and in a small , neat hand , very different from the captain 's tottery character , these word : " bulk of treasure here . " 
 over on the back the same hand have write this further information : 
  tall tree , Spy - glass shoulder , bear a point to 
  the N. of N.N.E. 

  Skeleton Island E.S.E. and by E. 

  ten foot . 

  the bar silver be in the north cache ; you can find 
  it by the trend of the east hummock , ten fathom 
  south of the black crag with the face on it . 

  the arm be easy find , in the sand - hill , n. 
  point of north inlet cape , bear E. and a 
  quarter N. 
  J.F. 
 that be all ; but brief as it be , and to I incomprehensible , it fill the squire and Dr. Livesey with delight . 
 " Livesey , " say the squire , " you will give up this wretched practice at once . tomorrow I start for Bristol . in three week ' time three week ! two week ten day we will have the good ship , sir , and the choice crew in England . Hawkins shall come as cabin - boy . you will make a famous cabin - boy , Hawkins . you , Livesey , be ship 's doctor ; I be admiral . we will take Redruth , Joyce , and Hunter . we will have favourable wind , a quick passage , and not the least difficulty in find the spot , and money to eat , to roll in , to play duck and drake with ever after . " 
 " Trelawney , " say the doctor , " I will go with you ; and I will go bail for it , so will Jim , and be a credit to the undertaking . there be only one man I be afraid of . " 
 " and who be that ? " cry the squire . " name the dog , sir ! " 
 " you , " reply the doctor ; " for you can not hold your tongue . we be not the only man who know of this paper . these fellow who attack the inn tonight bold , desperate blade , for sure and the rest who stay aboard that lugger , and more , I dare say , not far off , be , one and all , through thick and thin , bind that they will get that money . we must none of we go alone till we get to sea . Jim and I shall stick together in the meanwhile ; you will take Joyce and Hunter when you ride to Bristol , and from first to last , not one of we must breathe a word of what we have   find . " 
 " livesey , " return the squire , " you be always in the right of it . I will be as silent as the grave . " 




 PART two the Sea - cook 





 7 

 I go to Bristol 

 it be long than the squire imagine ere we be ready for the sea , and none of our first plan not even Dr. Livesey 's , of keep I beside he could be carry out as we intend . the doctor have to go to London for a physician to take charge of his practice ; the squire be hard at work at Bristol ; and I live on at the hall under the charge of old Redruth , the gamekeeper , almost a prisoner , but full of sea - dream and the most charming anticipation of strange island and adventure . I brood by the hour together over the map , all the detail of which I well remember . sit by the fire in the housekeeper 's room , I approach that island in my fancy from every possible direction ; I explore every acre of its surface ; I climb a thousand time to that tall hill they call the Spy - glass , and from the top enjoy the most wonderful and change prospect . sometimes the isle be thick with savage , with whom we fight , sometimes full of dangerous animal that hunt we , but in all my fancy nothing occur to I so strange and tragic as our actual adventure . 
 so the week pass on , till one fine day there come a letter address to Dr. Livesey , with this addition , " to be open , in the case of his absence , by Tom Redruth or young Hawkins . " obey this order , we find , or rather I find for the gamekeeper be a poor hand at read anything but print the follow important news : 
  Old Anchor Inn , Bristol , March 1 , 17 

  Dear Livesey as I do not know whether you 
  be at the hall or still in London , I send this in 
  double to both place . 

  the ship be buy and fit . she lie at 
  anchor , ready for sea . you never imagine a 
  sweet schooner a child might sail her two 
  hundred ton ; name , HISPANIOLA . 

  I get she through my old friend , blandly , who 
  have prove himself throughout the most surprising 
  trump . the admirable fellow literally slave in 
  my interest , and so , I may say , do everyone in 
  Bristol , as soon as they get wind of the port we 
  sail for treasure , I mean . 
 " Redruth , " say I , interrupt the letter , " Dr. Livesey will not like that . the squire have be talk , after all . " 
 " well , who be a well right ? " growl the gamekeeper . " a pretty rum go if squire be not   to talk for Dr. Livesey , I should think . " 
 at that I give up all attempt at commentary and read straight on : 
  blandly himself find the hispaniola , and 
  by the most admirable management get she for the 
  mere trifle . there be a class of man in Bristol 
  monstrously prejudiced against blandly . they go 
  the length of declare that this honest creature 
  would do anything for money , that the hispaniola 
  belong to he , and that he sell it I absurdly 
  high the most transparent calumny . none of they 
  dare , however , to deny the merit of the ship . 

  so far there be not a hitch . the 
  workpeople , to be sure rigger and what not be 
  most annoyingly slow ; but time cure that . it be 
  the crew that trouble I . 

  I wish a round score of man in case of 
  native , buccaneer , or the odious French and I 
  have the worry of the deuce itself to find so much 
  as half a dozen , till the most remarkable stroke 
  of fortune bring I the very man that I 
  require . 

  I be stand on the dock , when , by the 
  mere accident , I fall in talk with he . I find 
  he be an old sailor , keep a public - house , know 
  all the seafare man in Bristol , have lose his 
  health ashore , and want a good berth as cook to 
  get to sea again . he have hobble down there that 
  morning , he say , to get a smell of the salt . 

  I be monstrously touch so would you have 
  be and , out of pure pity , I engage he on the 
  spot to be ship 's cook . long John Silver , he be 
  call , and have lose a leg ; but that I regard as 
  a recommendation , since he lose it in his 
  country 's service , under the immortal Hawke . he 
  have no pension , Livesey . imagine the abominable 
  age we live in ! 

  well , sir , I think I have only find a cook , 
  but it be a crew I have discover . between 
  Silver and myself we get together in a few day a 
  company of the tough old salt imaginable not 
  pretty to look at , but fellow , by their face , of 
  the most indomitable spirit . I declare we could 
  fight a frigate . 

  Long John even get rid of two out of the six 
  or seven I have already engage . he show I in a 
  moment that they be just the sort of fresh - water 
  swab we have to fear in an adventure of 
  importance . 

  I be in the most magnificent health and 
  spirit , eat like a bull , sleep like a tree , 
  yet I shall not enjoy a moment till I hear my old 
  tarpaulin tramp round the capstan . Seaward , 
  ho ! hang the treasure ! it be the glory of the sea 
  that have turn my head . so now , Livesey , come 
  post ; do not lose an hour , if you respect I . 

  let young Hawkins go at once to see his 
  mother , with Redruth for a guard ; and then both 
  come full speed to Bristol . 
  John Trelawney 

  Postscript I do not tell you that blandly , 
  who , by the way , be to send a consort after we if 
  we do not   turn up by the end of August , have find 
  an admirable fellow for sail master a stiff 
  man , which I regret , but in all other respect a 
  treasure . long John Silver unearth a very 
  competent man for a mate , a man name Arrow . I 
  have a boatswain who pip , Livesey ; so thing 
  shall go man - o'-war fashion on board the good ship 
  hispaniola . 

  I forget to tell you that Silver be a man of 
  substance ; I know of my own knowledge that he have 
  a banker 's account , which have never be 
  overdrawn . he leave his wife to manage the inn ; 
  and as she be a woman of colour , a pair of old 
  bachelor like you and I may be excuse for 
  guess that it be the wife , quite as much as the 
  health , that send he back to rove . 
  J. T. 

  P.P.S. Hawkins may stay one night with his 
  mother . 
  J. T. 
 you can fancy the excitement into which that letter put I . I be half beside myself with glee ; and if ever I despise a man , it be old Tom Redruth , who could do nothing but grumble and lament . any of the under - gamekeeper would gladly have change place with he ; but such be not the squire 's pleasure , and the squire 's pleasure be like law among they all . nobody but old Redruth would have dare so much as even to grumble . 
 the next morning he and I set out on foot for the Admiral Benbow , and there I find my mother in good health and spirit . the captain , who have so long be a cause of so much discomfort , be go where the wicked cease from troubling . the squire have have everything repair , and the public room and the sign repaint , and have add some furniture above all a beautiful armchair for mother in the bar . he have find she a boy as an apprentice also so that she should not want help while I be go . 
 it be on see that boy that I understand , for the first time , my situation . I have think up to that moment of the adventure before I , not at all of the home that I be leave ; and now , at sight of this clumsy stranger , who be to stay here in my place beside my mother , I have my first attack of tear . I be afraid I lead that boy a dog 's life , for as he be new to the work , I have a hundred opportunity of set he right and put he down , and I be not slow to profit by they . 
 the night pass , and the next day , after dinner , Redruth and I be afoot again and on the road . I say good - bye to Mother and the cove where I have live since I be bear , and the dear old Admiral Benbow since he be repaint , no long quite so dear . one of my last thought be of the captain , who have so often stride along the beach with his cocked hat , his sabre - cut cheek , and his old brass telescope . next moment we have turn the corner and my home be out of sight . 
 the mail pick we up about dusk at the Royal George on the heath . I be wedge in between Redruth and a stout old gentleman , and in spite of the swift motion and the cold night air , I must have doze a great deal from the very first , and then sleep like a log up hill and down dale through stage after stage , for when I be awaken at last it be by a punch in the rib , and I open my eye to find that we be stand still before a large building in a city street and that the day have already break a long time . 
 " where be we ? " I ask . 
 " Bristol , " say Tom . " get down . " 
 Mr. Trelawney have take up his residence at an inn far down the dock to superintend the work upon the schooner . Thither we have now to walk , and our way , to my great delight , lie along the quay and beside the great multitude of ship of all size and rig and nation . in one , sailor be sing at their work , in another there be man aloft , high over my head , hang to thread that seem no thick than a spider 's . though I have live by the shore all my life , I seem never to have be near the sea till then . the smell of tar and salt be something new . I see the most wonderful figurehead , that have all be far over the ocean . I see , besides , many old sailor , with ring in their ear , and whisker curl in ringlet , and tarry pigtail , and their swaggering , clumsy sea - walk ; and if I have see as many king or archbishop I could not have be more delighted . 
 and I be go to sea myself , to sea in a schooner , with a pip boatswain and pig - tail singing seaman , to sea , bind for an unknown island , and to seek for bury treasure ! 
 while I be still in this delightful dream , we come suddenly in front of a large inn and meet Squire Trelawney , all dress out like a sea - officer , in stout blue cloth , come out of the door with a smile on his face and a capital imitation of a sailor 's walk . 
 " here you be , " he cry , " and the doctor come last night from London . Bravo ! the ship 's company complete ! " 
 " oh , sir , " cry I , " when do we sail ? " 
 " Sail ! " say he . " we sail tomorrow ! " 




 8 

 at the Sign of the Spy - glass 

 when I have do breakfast the squire give I a note address to John Silver , at the sign of the Spy - glass , and tell I I should easily find the place by follow the line of the dock and keep a bright lookout for a little tavern with a large brass telescope for sign . I set off , overjoy at this opportunity to see some more of the ship and seaman , and pick my way among a great crowd of people and cart and bale , for the dock be now at its busy , until I find the tavern in question . 
 it be a bright enough little place of entertainment . the sign be newly paint ; the window have neat red curtain ; the floor be cleanly sand . there be a street on each side and an open door on both , which make the large , low room pretty clear to see in , in spite of cloud of tobacco smoke . 
 the customer be mostly seafare man , and they talk so loudly that I hang at the door , almost afraid to enter . 
 as I be wait , a man come out of a side room , and at a glance I be sure he must be Long John . his left leg be cut off close by the hip , and under the left shoulder he carry a crutch , which he manage with wonderful dexterity , hop about upon it like a bird . he be very tall and strong , with a face as big as a ham plain and pale , but intelligent and smile . indeed , he seem in the most cheerful spirit , whistle as he move about among the table , with a merry word or a slap on the shoulder for the more favoured of his guest . 
 now , to tell you the truth , from the very first mention of Long John in Squire Trelawney 's letter I have take a fear in my mind that he might prove to be the very one - legged sailor whom I have watch for so long at the old Benbow . but one look at the man before I be enough . I have see the captain , and Black Dog , and the blind man , Pew , and I think I know what a buccaneer be like a very different creature , accord to I , from this clean and pleasant - temper landlord . 
 I pluck up courage at once , cross the threshold , and walk right up to the man where he stand , prop on his crutch , talk to a customer . 
 " Mr. Silver , sir ? " I ask , hold out the note . 
 " yes , my lad , " say he ; ' such be my name , to be sure . and who may you be ? " and then as he see the squire 's letter , he seem to I to give something almost like a start . 
 " oh ! " say he , quite loud , and offer his hand . " I see . you be our new cabin - boy ; please I be to see you . " 
 and he take my hand in his large firm grasp . 
 just then one of the customer at the far side rise suddenly and make for the door . it be close by he , and he be out in the street in a moment . but his hurry have attract my notice , and I recognize he at glance . it be the tallow - face man , want two finger , who have come first to the Admiral Benbow . 
 " oh , " I cry , ' stop he ! it be Black Dog ! " 
 " I do not   care two copper who he be , " cry Silver . " but he have not   pay his score . Harry , run and catch he . " 
 one of the other who be near the door leap up and start in pursuit . 
 " if he be Admiral Hawke he shall pay his score , " cry silver ; and then , relinquish my hand , " who do you say he be ? " he ask . " black what ? " 
 " Dog , sir , " say i. " have Mr. Trelawney not tell you of the buccaneer ? he be one of they . " 
 " so ? " cry Silver . " in my house ! Ben , run and help Harry . one of those swab , be he ? be that you drink with he , Morgan ? step up here . " 
 the man whom he call Morgan an old , grey - haire , mahogany - face sailor come forward pretty sheepishly , roll his quid . 
 " now , Morgan , " say Long John very sternly , " you never clap your eye on that Black Black Dog before , do you , now ? " 
 " not I , sir , " say Morgan with a salute . 
 " you do not   know his name , do you ? " 
 " no , sir . " 
 " by the power , Tom Morgan , it be as good for you ! " exclaim the landlord . " if you have be mix up with the like of that , you would never have put another foot in my house , you may lay to that . and what be he say to you ? " 
 " I do not   rightly know , sir , " answer Morgan . 
 " do you call that a head on your shoulder , or a bless dead - eye ? " cry Long John . " do not   rightly know , do not   you ! perhaps you do not   happen to rightly know who you be speak to , perhaps ? come , now , what be he jaw v'yage , cap'n , ship ? Pipe up ! what be it ? " 
 " we be a - talkin ' of keel - hauling , " answer Morgan . 
 " keel - hauling , be you ? and a mighty suitable thing , too , and you may lay to that . get back to your place for a lubber , Tom . " 
 and then , as Morgan roll back to his seat , Silver add to I in a confidential whisper that be very flattering , as I think , " he be quite an honest man , Tom Morgan , on'y stupid . and now , " he run on again , aloud , " let us see Black Dog ? no , I do not   know the name , not i. yet I kind of think I have   yes , I have   see the swab . he use to come here with a blind beggar , he use . " 
 " that he do , you may be sure , " say I. " I know that blind man too . his name be Pew . " 
 " it be ! " cry Silver , now quite excited . " Pew ! that be his name for certain . ah , he look a shark , he do ! if we run down this Black Dog , now , there will be news for Cap'n Trelawney ! Ben be a good runner ; few seaman run well than Ben . he should run he down , hand over hand , by the power ! he talk o ' keel - hauling , do he ? I'LL keel - haul he ! " 
 all the time he be jerk out these phrase he be stump up and down the tavern on his crutch , slapping table with his hand , and give such a show of excitement as would have convince an Old Bailey judge or a Bow Street runner . my suspicion have be thoroughly reawaken on find Black Dog at the Spy - glass , and I watch the cook narrowly . but he be too deep , and too ready , and too clever for I , and by the time the two man have come back out of breath and confess that they have lose the track in a crowd , and be scold like thief , I would have go bail for the innocence of Long John Silver . 
 " see here , now , Hawkins , " say he , " here be a blessed hard thing on a man like I , now , be not   it ? there be Cap'n Trelawney what be he to think ? here I have this confound son of a Dutchman sit in my own house drinking of my own rum ! here you come and tell I of it plain ; and here I let he give we all the slip before my blessed deadlight ! now , Hawkins , you do I justice with the cap'n . you be a lad , you be , but you be as smart as paint . I see that when you first come in . now , here it be : what could I do , with this old timber I hobble on ? when I be an a b master mariner I would have come up alongside of he , hand over hand , and broach he to in a brace of old shake , I would ; but now " 
 and then , all of a sudden , he stop , and his jaw drop as though he have remember something . 
 " the score ! " he burst out . " three go o ' rum ! why , shiver my timber , if I have not   forget my score ! " 
 and fall on a bench , he laugh until the tear run down his cheek . I could not help join , and we laugh together , peal after peal , until the tavern rang again . 
 " why , what a precious old sea - calf I be ! " he say at last , wipe his cheek . " you and I should get on well , Hawkins , for I will take my davy I should be rat ship 's boy . but come now , stand by to go about . this will not   do . Dooty be dooty , messmate . I will put on my old cockerel hat , and step along of you to Cap'n Trelawney , and report this here affair . for mind you , it be serious , young Hawkins ; and neither you nor I be come out of it with what I should make so bold as to call credit . nor you neither , say you ; not smart none of the pair of we smart . but dash my button ! that be a good un about my score . " 
 and he begin to laugh again , and that so heartily , that though I do not see the joke as he do , I be again oblige to join he in his mirth . 
 on our little walk along the quay , he make himself the most interesting companion , tell I about the different ship that we pass by , their rig , tonnage , and nationality , explain the work that be go forward how one be discharge , another taking in cargo , and a third making ready for sea and every now and then tell I some little anecdote of ship or seaman or repeat a nautical phrase till I have learn it perfectly . I begin to see that here be one of the good of possible shipmate . 
 when we get to the inn , the squire and Dr. Livesey be seat together , finish a quart of ale with a toast in it , before they should go aboard the schooner on a visit of inspection . 
 Long John tell the story from first to last , with a great deal of spirit and the most perfect truth . " that be how it be , now , be not   it , Hawkins ? " he would say , now and again , and I could always bear he entirely out . 
 the two gentleman regret that Black Dog have get away , but we all agree there be nothing to be do , and after he have be compliment , Long John take up his crutch and depart . 
 " all hand aboard by four this afternoon , " shout the squire after he . 
 " aye , aye , sir , " cry the cook , in the passage . 
 " well , squire , " say Dr. Livesey , " I do not   put much faith in your discovery , as a general thing ; but I will say this , John Silver suit I . " 
 " the man be a perfect trump , " declare the squire . 
 " and now , " add the doctor , " Jim may come on board with we , may he not ? " 
 " to be sure he may , " say squire . " take your hat , Hawkins , and we will see the ship . " 




 9 

 Powder and arm 

 the hispaniola lie some way out , and we go under the figurehead and round the stern of many other ship , and their cable sometimes grate underneath our keel , and sometimes swing above we . at last , however , we get alongside , and be meet and salute as we step aboard by the mate , Mr. Arrow , a brown old sailor with earring in his ear and a squint . he and the squire be very thick and friendly , but I soon observe that thing be not the same between Mr. Trelawney and the captain . 
 this last be a sharp - look man who seem angry with everything on board and be soon to tell we why , for we have hardly get down into the cabin when a sailor follow we . 
 " Captain Smollett , sir , ax to speak with you , " say he . 
 " I be always at the captain 's order . show he in , " say the squire . 
 the captain , who be close behind his messenger , enter at once and shut the door behind he . 
 " well , Captain Smollett , what have you to say ? all well , I hope ; all shipshape and seaworthy ? " 
 " well , sir , " say the captain , " well speak plain , I believe , even at the risk of offence . I do not   like this cruise ; I do not   like the man ; and I do not   like my officer . that be short and sweet . " 
 " perhaps , sir , you do not   like the ship ? " inquire the squire , very angry , as I could see . 
 " I can not   speak as to that , sir , not have see she try , " say the captain . " she seem a clever craft ; more I can not   say . " 
 " possibly , sir , you may not like your employer , either ? " say the squire . 
 but here Dr. Livesey cut in . 
 " stay a bit , " say he , ' stay a bit . no use of such question as that but to produce ill feeling . the captain have say too much or he have say too little , and I be bind to say that I require an explanation of his word . you do not , you say , like this cruise . now , why ? " 
 " I be engage , sir , on what we call seal order , to sail this ship for that gentleman where he should bid I , " say the captain . " so far so good . but now I find that every man before the mast know more than I do . I do not   call that fair , now , do you ? " 
 " no , " say Dr. Livesey , " I do not . " 
 " next , " say the captain , " I learn we be go after treasure hear it from my own hand , mind you . now , treasure be ticklish work ; I do not   like treasure voyage on any account , and I do not   like they , above all , when they be secret and when   beg your pardon , Mr. Trelawney   the secret have be tell to the parrot . " 
 " Silver 's parrot ? " ask the squire . 
 " it be a way of speak , " say the captain . " Blabbed , I mean . it be my belief neither of you gentleman know what you be about , but I will tell you my way of it life or death , and a close run . " 
 " that be all clear , and , I dare say , true enough , " reply Dr. Livesey . " we take the risk , but we be not so ignorant as you believe we . next , you say you do not   like the crew . be they not good seaman ? " 
 " I do not   like they , sir , " return Captain Smollett . " and I think I should have have the choosing of my own hand , if you go to that . " 
 " perhaps you should , " reply the doctor . " my friend should , perhaps , have take you along with he ; but the slight , if there be one , be unintentional . and you do not   like Mr. Arrow ? " 
 " I do not , sir . I believe he be a good seaman , but he be too free with the crew to be a good officer . a mate should keep himself to himself should not   drink with the man before the mast ! " 
 " do you mean he drink ? " cry the squire . 
 " no , sir , " reply the captain , " only that he be too familiar . " 
 " well , now , and the short and long of it , captain ? " ask the doctor . " tell we what you want . " 
 " well , gentleman , be you determined to go on this cruise ? " 
 " like iron , " answer the squire . 
 " very good , " say the captain . " then , as you have   hear I very patiently , say thing that I could not prove , hear I a few word more . they be put the powder and the arm in the fore hold . now , you have a good place under the cabin ; why not put they there ? first point . then , you be bring four of your own people with you , and they tell I some of they be to be berth forward . why not give they the berth here beside the cabin ? second point . " 
 " any more ? " ask Mr. Trelawney . 
 " one more , " say the captain . " there be be too much blabbing already . " 
 " far too much , " agree the doctor . 
 " I will tell you what I have   hear myself , " continue Captain Smollett : " that you have a map of an island , that there be cross on the map to show where treasure be , and that the island lie " and then he name the latitude and longitude exactly . 
 " I never tell that , " cry the squire , " to a soul ! " 
 " the hand know it , sir , " return the captain . 
 " Livesey , that must have be you or Hawkins , " cry the squire . 
 " it do not   much matter who it be , " reply the doctor . and I could see that neither he nor the captain pay much regard to Mr. Trelawney 's protestation . neither do I , to be sure , he be so loose a talker ; yet in this case I believe he be really right and that nobody have tell the situation of the island . 
 " well , gentleman , " continue the captain , " I do not   know who have this map ; but I make it a point , it shall be keep secret even from I and Mr. Arrow . otherwise I would ask you to let I resign . " 
 " I see , " say the doctor . " you wish we to keep this matter dark and to make a garrison of the stern part of the ship , man with my friend 's own people , and provide with all the arm and powder on board . in other word , you fear a mutiny . " 
 " Sir , " say Captain Smollett , " with no intention to take offence , I deny your right to put word into my mouth . no captain , sir , would be justify in go to sea at all if he have grind enough to say that . as for Mr. Arrow , I believe he thoroughly honest ; some of the man be the same ; all may be for what I know . but I be responsible for the ship 's safety and the life of every man Jack aboard of she . I see thing go , as I think , not quite right . and I ask you to take certain precaution or let I resign my berth . and that be all . " 
 " Captain Smollett , " begin the doctor with a smile , " do ever you hear the fable of the mountain and the mouse ? you will excuse I , I dare say , but you remind I of that fable . when you come in here , I will stake my wig , you mean more than this . " 
 " doctor , " say the captain , " you be smart . when I come in here I mean to get discharge . I have no thought that Mr. Trelawney would hear a word . " 
 " no more I would , " cry the squire . " have Livesey not be here I should have see you to the deuce . as it be , I have hear you . I will do as you desire , but I think the bad of you . " 
 " that be as you please , sir , " say the captain . " you will find I do my duty . " 
 and with that he take his leave . 
 " Trelawney , " say the doctor , " contrary to all my notion , I believe you have manage to get two honest man on board with you that man and John Silver . " 
 " Silver , if you like , " cry the squire ; " but as for that intolerable humbug , I declare I think his conduct unmanly , unsailorly , and downright un - English . " 
 " well , " say the doctor , " we shall see . " 
 when we come on deck , the man have begin already to take out the arm and powder , yo - ho - ing at their work , while the captain and Mr. Arrow stand by superintend . 
 the new arrangement be quite to my liking . the whole schooner have be overhaul ; six berth have be make astern out of what have be the after - part of the main hold ; and this set of cabin be only join to the galley and forecastle by a spar passage on the port side . it have be originally mean that the captain , Mr. Arrow , Hunter , Joyce , the doctor , and the squire be to occupy these six berth . now Redruth and I be to get two of they and Mr. Arrow and the captain be to sleep on deck in the companion , which have be enlarge on each side till you might almost have call it a round - house . very low it be still , of course ; but there be room to swing two hammock , and even the mate seem pleased with the arrangement . even he , perhaps , have be doubtful as to the crew , but that be only guess , for as you shall hear , we have not long the benefit of his opinion . 
 we be all hard at work , change the powder and the berth , when the last man or two , and Long John along with they , come off in a shore - boat . 
 the cook come up the side like a monkey for cleverness , and as soon as he see what be do , " so ho , mate ! " say he . " what be this ? " 
 " we be a - change of the powder , Jack , " answer one . 
 " why , by the power , " cry Long John , " if we do , we will miss the morning tide ! " 
 " my order ! " say the captain shortly . " you may go below , my man . hand will want supper . " 
 " aye , aye , sir , " answer the cook , and touch his forelock , he disappear at once in the direction of his galley . 
 " that be a good man , captain , " say the doctor . 
 " very likely , sir , " reply Captain Smollett . " easy with that , man easy , " he run on , to the fellow who be shift the powder ; and then suddenly observe I examine the swivel we carry amidship , a long brass nine , " here you , ship 's boy , " he cry , " out o ' that ! off with you to the cook and get some work . " 
 and then as I be hurry off I hear he say , quite loudly , to the doctor , " I will have no favourite on my ship . " 
 I assure you I be quite of the squire 's way of thinking , and hat the captain deeply . 




 10 

 the Voyage 

 all that night we be in a great bustle get thing stow in their place , and boatful of the squire 's friend , Mr. Blandly and the like , come off to wish he a good voyage and a safe return . we never have a night at the Admiral Benbow when I have half the work ; and I be dog - tired when , a little before dawn , the boatswain sound his pipe and the crew begin to man the capstan - bar . I might have be twice as weary , yet I would not have leave the deck , all be so new and interesting to I the brief command , the shrill note of the whistle , the man bustle to their place in the glimmer of the ship 's lantern . 
 " now , Barbecue , tip we a stave , " cry one voice . 
 " the old one , " cry another . 
 " aye , aye , mate , " say Long John , who be stand by , with his crutch under his arm , and at once break out in the air and word I know so well : 
 " fifteen man on the dead man 's chest " 
 and then the whole crew bore chorus : 
 " Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! " 
 and at the third " Ho ! " drive the bar before they with a will . 
 even at that exciting moment it carry I back to the old Admiral Benbow in a second , and I seem to hear the voice of the captain pip in the chorus . but soon the anchor be short up ; soon it be hang dripping at the bow ; soon the sail begin to draw , and the land and shipping to flit by on either side ; and before I could lie down to snatch an hour of slumber the hispaniola have begin her voyage to the Isle of Treasure . 
 I be not go to relate that voyage in detail . it be fairly prosperous . the ship prove to be a good ship , the crew be capable seaman , and the captain thoroughly understand his business . but before we come the length of Treasure Island , two or three thing have happen which require to be know . 
 Mr. Arrow , first of all , turn out even bad than the captain have fear . he have no command among the man , and people do what they please with he . but that be by no mean the bad of it , for after a day or two at sea he begin to appear on deck with hazy eye , red cheek , stutter tongue , and other mark of drunkenness . time after time he be order below in disgrace . sometimes he fall and cut himself ; sometimes he lie all day long in his little bunk at one side of the companion ; sometimes for a day or two he would be almost sober and attend to his work at least passably . 
 in the meantime , we could never make out where he get the drink . that be the ship 's mystery . watch he as we please , we could do nothing to solve it ; and when we ask he to his face , he would only laugh if he be drunk , and if he be sober deny solemnly that he ever taste anything but water . 
 he be not only useless as an officer and a bad influence amongst the man , but it be plain that at this rate he must soon kill himself outright , so nobody be much surprised , nor very sorry , when one dark night , with a head sea , he disappear entirely and be see no more . 
 " Overboard ! " say the captain . " well , gentleman , that save the trouble of put he in iron . " 
 but there we be , without a mate ; and it be necessary , of course , to advance one of the man . the boatswain , Job Anderson , be the likeli man aboard , and though he keep his old title , he serve in a way as mate . Mr. Trelawney have follow the sea , and his knowledge make he very useful , for he often take a watch himself in easy weather . and the coxswain , Israel Hands , be a careful , wily , old , experienced seaman who could be trust at a pinch with almost anything . 
 he be a great confidant of Long John Silver , and so the mention of his name lead I on to speak of our ship 's cook , Barbecue , as the man call he . 
 Aboard ship he carry his crutch by a lanyard round his neck , to have both hand as free as possible . it be something to see he wedge the foot of the crutch against a bulkhead , and prop against it , yield to every movement of the ship , get on with his cooking like someone safe ashore . still more strange be it to see he in the heavy of weather cross the deck . he have a line or two rig up to help he across the wide space Long John 's earring , they be call ; and he would hand himself from one place to another , now use the crutch , now trail it alongside by the lanyard , as quickly as another man could walk . yet some of the man who have sail with he before express their pity to see he so reduced . 
 " he be no common man , Barbecue , " say the coxswain to I . " he have good schooling in his young day and can speak like a book when so minded ; and brave a lion 's nothing alongside of Long John ! I see he grapple four and knock their head together he unarmed . " 
 all the crew respect and even obey he . he have a way of talk to each and do everybody some particular service . to I he be unweariedly kind , and always glad to see I in the galley , which he keep as clean as a new pin , the dish hang up burnish and his parrot in a cage in one corner . 
 " come away , Hawkins , " he would say ; " come and have a yarn with John . nobody more welcome than yourself , my son . sit you down and hear the news . here 's Cap'n Flint I call my parrot Cap'n Flint , after the famous buccaneer here 's Cap'n Flint predict success to our v'yage . be not   you , cap'n ? " 
 and the parrot would say , with great rapidity , " piece of eight ! piece of eight ! piece of eight ! " till you wonder that it be not out of breath , or till John throw his handkerchief over the cage . 
 " now , that bird , " he would say , " be , maybe , two hundred year old , Hawkins they live forever mostly ; and if anybody be see more wickedness , it must be the devil himself . she be sail with England , the great Cap'n England , the pirate . she be be at Madagascar , and at Malabar , and Surinam , and Providence , and Portobello . she be at the fishing up of the wreck plate ship . it be there she learn ' piece of eight , ' and little wonder ; three hundred and fifty thousand of them , Hawkins ! she be at the boarding of the viceroy of the Indies out of Goa , she be ; and to look at she you would think she be a babby . but you smell powder do not   you , cap'n ? " 
 " stand by to go about , " the parrot would scream . 
 " ah , she be a handsome craft , she be , " the cook would say , and give her sugar from his pocket , and then the bird would peck at the bar and swear straight on , pass belief for wickedness . " there , " John would add , " you can not   touch pitch and not be muck , lad . here be this poor old innocent bird o ' mine swear blue fire , and none the wiser , you may lay to that . she would swear the same , in a manner of speak , before chaplain . " and John would touch his forelock with a solemn way he have that make I think he be the good of man . 
 in the meantime , the squire and Captain Smollett be still on pretty distant term with one another . the squire make no bone about the matter ; he despise the captain . the captain , on his part , never speak but when he be speak to , and then sharp and short and dry , and not a word waste . he own , when drive into a corner , that he seem to have be wrong about the crew , that some of they be as brisk as he want to see and all have behave fairly well . as for the ship , he have take a downright fancy to she . " she will lie a point nearer the wind than a man have a right to expect of his own married wife , sir . but , " he would add , " all I say be , we be not home again , and I do not   like the cruise . " 
 the squire , at this , would turn away and march up and down the deck , chin in air . 
 " a trifle more of that man , " he would say , " and I shall explode . " 
 we have some heavy weather , which only prove the quality of the hispaniola . every man on board seem well content , and they must have be hard to please if they have be otherwise , for it be my belief there be never a ship 's company so spoil since Noah put to sea . double grog be go on the least excuse ; there be duff on odd day , as , for instance , if the squire hear it be any man 's birthday , and always a barrel of apple stand broach in the waist for anyone to help himself that have a fancy . 
 " never know good come of it yet , " the captain say to Dr. Livesey . " spoil forecastle hand , make devil . that be my belief . " 
 but good do come of the apple barrel , as you shall hear , for if it have not be for that , we should have have no note of warning and might all have perish by the hand of treachery . 
 this be how it come about . 
 we have run up the trade to get the wind of the island we be after I be not allow to be more plain and now we be run down for it with a bright lookout day and night . it be about the last day of our outward voyage by the large computation ; some time that night , or at late before noon of the morrow , we should sight the Treasure Island . we be head S.S.W. and have a steady breeze abeam and a quiet sea . the hispaniola roll steadily , dip her bowsprit now and then with a whiff of spray . all be draw alow and aloft ; everyone be in the brave spirit because we be now so near an end of the first part of our adventure . 
 now , just after sundown , when all my work be over and I be on my way to my berth , it occur to I that I should like an apple . I run on deck . the watch be all forward look out for the island . the man at the helm be watch the luff of the sail and whistle away gently to himself , and that be the only sound except the swish of the sea against the bow and around the side of the ship . 
 in I get bodily into the apple barrel , and find there be scarce an apple leave ; but sit down there in the dark , what with the sound of the water and the rock movement of the ship , I have either fall asleep or be on the point of do so when a heavy man sit down with rather a clash close by . the barrel shake as he lean his shoulder against it , and I be just about to jump up when the man begin to speak . it be Silver 's voice , and before I have hear a dozen word , I would not have show myself for all the world , but lie there , tremble and listen , in the extreme of fear and curiosity , for from these dozen word I understand that the life of all the honest man aboard depend upon I alone . 




 11 

 what I hear in the Apple Barrel 

 " no , not I , " say Silver . " Flint be cap'n ; I be quartermaster , along of my timber leg . the same broadside I lose my leg , old pew lose his deadlight . it be a master surgeon , he that ampytate I out of college and all Latin by the bucket , and what not ; but he be hang like a dog , and sun - dry like the rest , at Corso Castle . that be Roberts ' man , that be , and come of change name to their ship ROYAL FORTUNE and so on . now , what a ship be christen , so let she stay , I say . so it be with the CASSANDRA , as bring we all safe home from Malabar , after England take the viceroy of the Indies ; so it be with the old WALRUS , Flint 's old ship , as I have   see amuck with the red blood and fit to sink with gold . " 
 " ah ! " cry another voice , that of the young hand on board , and evidently full of admiration . " he be the flower of the flock , be Flint ! " 
 " Davis be a man too , by all account , " say Silver . " I never sail along of he ; first with England , then with Flint , that be my story ; and now here on my own account , in a manner of speak . I lay by nine hundred safe , from England , and two thousand after Flint . that be not   bad for a man before the mast all safe in bank . ' tain't   earn now , it be save do it , you may lay to that . where be all England 's man now ? I dunno . where 's Flint 's ? why , most on them aboard here , and glad to get the duff be beg before that , some on them . Old Pew , as have lose his sight , and might have think shame , spend twelve hundred pound in a year , like a lord in Parliament . where be he now ? well , he be dead now and under hatch ; but for two year before that , shiver my timber , the man be starve ! he beg , and he stole , and he cut throat , and starve at that , by the power ! " 
 " well , it be not   much use , after all , " say the young seaman . 
 " ' tain't   much use for fool , you may lay to it that , nor nothing , " cry Silver . " but now , you look here : you be young , you be , but you be as smart as paint . I see that when I set my eye on you , and I will talk to you like a man . " 
 you may imagine how I feel when I hear this abominable old rogue address another in the very same word of flattery as he have use to myself . I think , if I have be able , that I would have kill he through the barrel . meantime , he run on , little suppose he be overhear . 
 " here it be about gentleman of fortune . they live rough , and they risk swing , but they eat and drink like fighting - cock , and when a cruise be do , why , it be hundred of pound instead of hundred of farthing in their pocket . now , the most go for rum and a good fling , and to sea again in their shirt . but that be not the course I lay . I put it all away , some here , some there , and none too much anywhere , by reason of suspicion . I be fifty , mark you ; once back from this cruise , I set up gentleman in earnest . time enough too , say you . ah , but I have   live easy in the meantime , never deny myself o ' nothing heart desire , and slep ' soft and eat dainty all my day but when at sea . and how do I begin ? before the mast , like you ! " 
 " well , " say the other , " but all the other money be go now , be not   it ? you dare not   show face in Bristol after this . " 
 " why , where might you suppose it be ? " ask Silver derisively . 
 " at Bristol , in bank and place , " answer his companion . 
 " it be , " say the cook ; " it be when we weigh anchor . but my old missis have it all by now . and the Spy - glass be sell , lease and goodwill and rigging ; and the old girl be off to meet I . I would tell you where , for I trust you , but it would make jealousy among the mate . " 
 " and can you trust your missis ? " ask the other . 
 " gentleman of fortune , " return the cook , " usually trust little among themselves , and right they be , you may lay to it . but I have a way with I , I have . when a mate bring a slip on his cable one as know I , I mean it will not   be in the same world with old John . there be some that be fear of Pew , and some that be fear of Flint ; but Flint his own self be fear of I . fear he be , and proud . they be the roughest crew afloat , be Flint 's ; the devil himself would have be fear to go to sea with they . well now , I tell you , I be not a boasting man , and you see yourself how easy I keep company , but when I be quartermaster , LAMBS be not   the word for Flint 's old buccaneer . ah , you may be sure of yourself in old John 's ship . " 
 " well , I tell you now , " reply the lad , " I do not   half a quarter like the job till I have this talk with you , John ; but there be my hand on it now . " 
 " and a brave lad you be , and smart too , " answer Silver , shake hand so heartily that all the barrel shake , " and a fine figurehead for a gentleman of fortune I never clap my eye on . " 
 by this time I have begin to understand the meaning of their term . by a " gentleman of fortune " they plainly mean neither more nor less than a common pirate , and the little scene that I have overhear be the last act in the corruption of one of the honest hand perhaps of the last one leave aboard . but on this point I be soon to be relieve , for Silver give a little whistle , a third man stroll up and sit down by the party . 
 " Dick 's square , " say Silver . 
 " oh , I know'd Dick be square , " return the voice of the coxswain , Israel Hands . " he be no fool , be Dick . " and he turn his quid and spat . " but look here , " he go on , " here be what I want to know , Barbecue : how long be we a - go to stand off and on like a blessed bumboat ? I have   have a'most enough o ' Cap'n Smollett ; he be haze I long enough , by thunder ! I want to go into that cabin , I do . I want their pickle and wine , and that . " 
 " Israel , " say Silver , " your head be not   much account , nor ever be . but you be able to hear , I reckon ; leastway , your ear be big enough . now , here be what I say : you will berth forward , and you will live hard , and you will speak soft , and you will keep sober till I give the word ; and you may lay to that , my son . " 
 " well , I do not   say no , do I ? " growl the coxswain . " what I say be , when ? that be what I say . " 
 " when ! by the power ! " cry Silver . " well now , if you want to know , I will tell you when . the last moment I can manage , and that be when . here be a first - rate seaman , Cap'n Smollett , sail the bless ship for we . here be this squire and doctor with a map and such I do not   know where it be , do I ? no more do you , say you . well then , I mean this squire and doctor shall find the stuff , and help we to get it aboard , by the power . then we will see . if I be sure of you all , son of double dutchman , I would have Cap'n Smollett navigate we half - way back again before I strike . " 
 " why , we be all seaman aboard here , I should think , " say the lad Dick . 
 " we be all forecastle hand , you mean , " snap Silver . " we can steer a course , but who be to set one ? that be what all you gentleman split on , first and last . if I have my way , I would have Cap'n Smollett work we back into the trade at least ; then we would have no blessed miscalculation and a spoonful of water a day . but I know the sort you be . I will finish with them at the island , as soon be the blunt 's on board , and a pity it be . but you be never happy till you be drunk . split my side , I have   a sick heart to sail with the like of you ! " 
 " easy all , Long John , " cry Israel . " who be a - crossin ' of you ? " 
 " why , how many tall ship , think ye , now , have I see lay aboard ? and how many brisk lad dry in the sun at Execution Dock ? " cry Silver . " and all for this same hurry and hurry and hurry . you hear I ? I see a thing or two at sea , I have . if you would on'y lay your course , and a p'int to windward , you would ride in carriage , you would . but not you ! I know you . you will have your mouthful of rum tomorrow , and go hang . " 
 " everybody know you be a kind of a chapling , John ; but there be other as could hand and steer as well as you , " say Israel . " they like a bit o ' fun , they do . they be not   so high and dry , nohow , but take their fling , like jolly companion every one . " 
 " so ? " say Silver . " well , and where be they now ? pew be that sort , and he die a beggar - man . Flint be , and he die of rum at Savannah . ah , they be a sweet crew , they be ! On'y , where be they ? " 
 " but , " ask Dick , " when we do lay them athwart , what be we to do with them , anyhow ? " 
 " there be the man for I ! " cry the cook admiringly . " that be what I call business . well , what would you think ? put them ashore like maroon ? that would have be England 's way . or cut them down like that much pork ? that would have be Flint 's , or Billy Bones 's . " 
 " Billy be the man for that , " say Israel . " ' dead man do not   bite , ' say he . well , he be dead now hisself ; he know the long and short on it now ; and if ever a rough hand come to port , it be Billy . " 
 " right you be , " say silver ; " rough and ready . but mark you here , I be an easy man I be quite the gentleman , say you ; but this time it be serious . Dooty be dooty , mate . I give my vote death . when I be in Parlyment and rid in my coach , I do not   want none of these sea - lawyer in the cabin a - come home , unlooked for , like the devil at prayer . wait be what I say ; but when the time come , why , let she rip ! " 
 " John , " cry the coxswain , " you be a man ! " 
 " you will say so , Israel when you see , " say Silver . " only one thing I claim I claim Trelawney . I will wring his calf 's head off his body with these hand , Dick ! " he add , break off . " you just jump up , like a sweet lad , and get I an apple , to wet my pipe like . " 
 you may fancy the terror I be in ! I should have leap out and run for it if I have find the strength , but my limb and heart alike misgave I . I hear Dick begin to rise , and then someone seemingly stop he , and the voice of Hands exclaim , " oh , stow that ! do not   you get sucking of that bilge , John . let us have a go of the rum . " 
 " Dick , " say Silver , " I trust you . I have   a gauge on the keg , mind . there be the key ; you fill a pannikin and bring it up . " 
 terrify as I be , I could not help think to myself that this must have be how Mr. Arrow get the strong water that destroy he . 
 Dick be go but a little while , and during his absence Israel speak straight on in the cook 's ear . it be but a word or two that I could catch , and yet I gather some important news , for besides other scrap that tend to the same purpose , this whole clause be audible : " not another man of them'll jine . " hence there be still faithful man on board . 
 when Dick return , one after another of the trio take the pannikin and drink one " to luck , " another with a " here be to old Flint , " and Silver himself say , in a kind of song , " here be to ourselves , and hold your luff , plenty of prize and plenty of duff . " 
 just then a sort of brightness fall upon I in the barrel , and look up , I find the moon have rise and be silver the mizzen - top and shin white on the luff of the fore - sail ; and almost at the same time the voice of the lookout shout , " Land ho ! " 




 12 

 Council of War 

 there be a great rush of foot across the deck . I could hear people tumble up from the cabin and the forecastle , and slip in an instant outside my barrel , I dive behind the fore - sail , make a double towards the stern , and come out upon the open deck in time to join Hunter and Dr. Livesey in the rush for the weather bow . 
 there all hand be already congregate . a belt of fog have lift almost simultaneously with the appearance of the moon . away to the south - west of we we see two low hill , about a couple of mile apart , and rise behind one of they a third and high hill , whose peak be still bury in the fog . all three seem sharp and conical in figure . 
 so much I see , almost in a dream , for I have not yet recover from my horrid fear of a minute or two before . and then I hear the voice of Captain Smollett issue order . the hispaniola be lay a couple of point near the wind and now sail a course that would just clear the island on the east . 
 " and now , man , " say the captain , when all be sheet home , " have any one of you ever see that land ahead ? " 
 " I have , sir , " say Silver . " I have   water there with a trader I be cook in . " 
 " the anchorage be on the south , behind an islet , I fancy ? " ask the captain . 
 " yes , sir ; Skeleton Island they call it . it be a main place for pirate once , and a hand we have on board know all their name for it . that hill to the nor'ard they call the Fore - mast Hill ; there be three hill in a row run south'ard fore , main , and mizzen , sir . but the main that be the big un , with the cloud on it they usually call the Spy - glass , by reason of a lookout they keep when they be in the anchorage cleaning , for it be there they clean their ship , sir , ask your pardon . " 
 " I have a chart here , " say Captain Smollett . " see if that be the place . " 
 Long John 's eye burn in his head as he take the chart , but by the fresh look of the paper I know he be doom to disappointment . this be not the map we find in Billy Bones 's chest , but an accurate copy , complete in all thing name and height and sounding with the single exception of the red cross and the write note . sharp as must have be his annoyance , Silver have the strength of mind to hide it . 
 " yes , sir , " say he , " this be the spot , to be sure , and very prettily draw out . who might have do that , I wonder ? the pirate be too ignorant , I reckon . Aye , here it be : ' Capt . Kidd 's Anchorage ' just the name my shipmate call it . there be a strong current run along the south , and then away nor'ard up the west coast . right you be , sir , " say he , " to haul your wind and keep the weather of the island . leastway , if such be your intention as to enter and careen , and there be not   no well place for that in these water . " 
 " thank you , my man , " say Captain Smollett . " I will ask you later on to give we a help . you may go . " 
 I be surprised at the coolness with which John avow his knowledge of the island , and I own I be half - frightened when I see he draw near to myself . he do not know , to be sure , that I have overhear his council from the apple barrel , and yet I have by this time take such a horror of his cruelty , duplicity , and power that I could scarce conceal a shudder when he lay his hand upon my arm . 
 " ah , " say he , " this here be a sweet spot , this island a sweet spot for a lad to get ashore on . you will bathe , and you will climb tree , and you will hunt goat , you will ; and you will get aloft on they hill like a goat yourself . why , it make I young again . I be go to forget my timber leg , I be . it be a pleasant thing to be young and have ten toe , and you may lay to that . when you want to go a bit of explore , you just ask old John , and he will put up a snack for you to take along . " 
 and clap I in the friendly way upon the shoulder , he hobble off forward and go below . 
 Captain Smollett , the squire , and Dr. Livesey be talk together on the quarter - deck , and anxious as I be to tell they my story , I durst not interrupt they openly . while I be still cast about in my thought to find some probable excuse , Dr. Livesey call I to his side . he have leave his pipe below , and be a slave to tobacco , have mean that I should fetch it ; but as soon as I be near enough to speak and not to be overhear , I break immediately , " Doctor , let I speak . get the captain and squire down to the cabin , and then make some pretence to send for I . I have terrible news . " 
 the doctor change countenance a little , but next moment he be master of himself . 
 " thank you , Jim , " say he quite loudly , " that be all I want to know , " as if he have ask I a question . 
 and with that he turn on his heel and rejoin the other two . they speak together for a little , and though none of they start , or raise his voice , or so much as whistle , it be plain enough that Dr. Livesey have communicate my request , for the next thing that I hear be the captain give an order to Job Anderson , and all hand be pip on deck . 
 " my lad , " say Captain Smollett , " I have   a word to say to you . this land that we have sight be the place we have be sail for . Mr. Trelawney , be a very open - handed gentleman , as we all know , have just ask I a word or two , and as I be able to tell he that every man on board have do his duty , alow and aloft , as I never ask to see it do well , why , he and I and the doctor be go below to the cabin to drink your health and luck , and you will have grog serve out for you to drink our health and luck . I will tell you what I think of this : I think it handsome . and if you think as I do , you will give a good sea - cheer for the gentleman that do it . " 
 the cheer follow that be a matter of course ; but it ring out so full and hearty that I confess I could hardly believe these same man be plot for our blood . 
 " one more cheer for Cap'n Smollett , " cry Long John when the first have subside . 
 and this also be give with a will . 
 on the top of that the three gentleman go below , and not long after , word be send forward that Jim Hawkins be want in the cabin . 
 I find they all three seat round the table , a bottle of spanish wine and some raisin before they , and the doctor smoke away , with his wig on his lap , and that , I know , be a sign that he be agitated . the stern window be open , for it be a warm night , and you could see the moon shin behind on the ship 's wake . 
 " now , Hawkins , " say the squire , " you have something to say . speak up . " 
 I do as I be bid , and as short as I could make it , tell the whole detail of Silver 's conversation . nobody interrupt I till I be do , nor do any one of the three of they make so much as a movement , but they keep their eye upon my face from first to last . 
 " Jim , " say Dr. Livesey , " take a seat . " 
 and they make I sit down at table beside they , pour I out a glass of wine , fill my hand with raisin , and all three , one after the other , and each with a bow , drink my good health , and their service to I , for my luck and courage . 
 " now , captain , " say the squire , " you be right , and I be wrong . I own myself an ass , and I await your order . " 
 " no more an ass than I , sir , " return the captain . " I never hear of a crew that mean to mutiny but what show sign before , for any man that have an eye in his head to see the mischief and take step accord . but this crew , " he add , " beat I . " 
 " captain , " say the doctor , " with your permission , that be Silver . a very remarkable man . " 
 " he would look remarkably well from a yard - arm , sir , " return the captain . " but this be talk ; this do not   lead to anything . I see three or four point , and with Mr. Trelawney 's permission , I will name they . " 
 " you , sir , be the captain . it be for you to speak , " say Mr. Trelawney grandly . 
 " first point , " begin Mr. Smollett . " we must go on , because we can not   turn back . if I give the word to go about , they would rise at once . second point , we have time before we at least until this treasure 's find . third point , there be faithful hand . now , sir , it be get to come to blow soon or later , and what I propose be to take time by the forelock , as the saying be , and come to blow some fine day when they least expect it . we can count , I take it , on your own home servant , Mr. Trelawney ? " 
 " as upon myself , " declare the squire . 
 " Three , " reckon the captain ; " ourselves make seven , count Hawkins here . now , about the honest hand ? " 
 " most likely Trelawney 's own man , " say the doctor ; " those he have pick up for himself before he light on Silver . " 
 " Nay , " reply the squire . " Hands be one of mine . " 
 " I do think I could have trust Hands , " add the captain . 
 " and to think that they be all Englishmen ! " break out the squire . " Sir , I could find it in my heart to blow the ship up . " 
 " well , gentleman , " say the captain , " the good that I can say be not much . we must lay to , if you please , and keep a bright lookout . it be try on a man , I know . it would be pleasanter to come to blow . but there be no help for it till we know our man . Lay to , and whistle for a wind , that be my view . " 
 " Jim here , " say the doctor , " can help we more than anyone . the man be not shy with he , and Jim be a noticing lad . " 
 " Hawkins , I put prodigious faith in you , " add the squire . 
 I begin to feel pretty desperate at this , for I feel altogether helpless ; and yet , by an odd train of circumstance , it be indeed through I that safety come . in the meantime , talk as we please , there be only seven out of the twenty - six on whom we know we could rely ; and out of these seven one be a boy , so that the grown man on our side be six to their nineteen . 




 PART three my Shore Adventure 





 13 

 how my Shore Adventure begin 

 the appearance of the island when I come on deck next morning be altogether change . although the breeze have now utterly cease , we have make a great deal of way during the night and be now lie becalm about half a mile to the south - east of the low eastern coast . Grey - colour wood cover a large part of the surface . this even tint be indeed break up by streak of yellow sand - break in the low land , and by many tall tree of the pine family , out - top the other some singly , some in clump ; but the general colouring be uniform and sad . the hill run up clear above the vegetation in spire of naked rock . all be strangely shape , and the Spy - glass , which be by three or four hundred foot the tall on the island , be likewise the strange in configuration , run up sheer from almost every side and then suddenly cut off at the top like a pedestal to put a statue on . 
 the hispaniola be roll scupper under in the ocean swell . the boom be tear at the block , the rudder be bang to and fro , and the whole ship creaking , groaning , and jump like a manufactory . I have to cling tight to the backstay , and the world turn giddily before my eye , for though I be a good enough sailor when there be way on , this stand still and be roll about like a bottle be a thing I never learn to stand without a qualm or so , above all in the morning , on an empty stomach . 
 perhaps it be this perhaps it be the look of the island , with its grey , melancholy wood , and wild stone spire , and the surf that we could both see and hear foaming and thunder on the steep beach at least , although the sun shine bright and hot , and the shore bird be fish and cry all around we , and you would have think anyone would have be glad to get to land after be so long at sea , my heart sink , as the saying be , into my boot ; and from the first look onward , I hat the very thought of Treasure Island . 
 we have a dreary morning 's work before we , for there be no sign of any wind , and the boat have to be get out and man , and the ship warp three or four mile round the corner of the island and up the narrow passage to the haven behind Skeleton Island . I volunteer for one of the boat , where I have , of course , no business . the heat be swelter , and the man grumble fiercely over their work . Anderson be in command of my boat , and instead of keep the crew in order , he grumble as loud as the bad . 
 " well , " he say with an oath , " it be not forever . " 
 I think this be a very bad sign , for up to that day the man have go briskly and willingly about their business ; but the very sight of the island have relax the cord of discipline . 
 all the way in , Long John stand by the steersman and con the ship . he know the passage like the palm of his hand , and though the man in the chain get everywhere more water than be down in the chart , John never hesitate once . 
 " there be a strong scour with the ebb , " he say , " and this here passage have be dig out , in a manner of speak , with a spade . " 
 we bring up just where the anchor be in the chart , about a third of a mile from each shore , the mainland on one side and Skeleton Island on the other . the bottom be clean sand . the plunge of our anchor send up cloud of bird wheel and cry over the wood , but in less than a minute they be down again and all be once more silent . 
 the place be entirely land - lock , bury in wood , the tree come right down to high - water mark , the shore mostly flat , and the hilltop stand round at a distance in a sort of amphitheatre , one here , one there . two little river , or rather two swamp , empty out into this pond , as you might call it ; and the foliage round that part of the shore have a kind of poisonous brightness . from the ship we could see nothing of the house or stockade , for they be quite bury among tree ; and if it have not be for the chart on the companion , we might have be the first that have ever anchor there since the island arise out of the sea . 
 there be not a breath of air move , nor a sound but that of the surf boom half a mile away along the beach and against the rock outside . a peculiar stagnant smell hang over the anchorage a smell of sodden leaf and rot tree trunk . I observe the doctor sniff and sniffing , like someone taste a bad egg . 
 " I do not   know about treasure , " he say , " but I will stake my wig there be fever here . " 
 if the conduct of the man have be alarming in the boat , it become truly threatening when they have come aboard . they lie about the deck growl together in talk . the slight order be receive with a black look and grudgingly and carelessly obey . even the honest hand must have catch the infection , for there be not one man aboard to mend another . Mutiny , it be plain , hang over we like a thunder - cloud . 
 and it be not only we of the cabin party who perceive the danger . long John be hard at work go from group to group , spend himself in good advice , and as for example no man could have show a well . he fairly outstrip himself in willingness and civility ; he be all smile to everyone . if an order be give , John would be on his crutch in an instant , with the cheery " aye , aye , sir ! " in the world ; and when there be nothing else to do , he keep up one song after another , as if to conceal the discontent of the rest . 
 of all the gloomy feature of that gloomy afternoon , this obvious anxiety on the part of Long John appear the bad . 
 we hold a council in the cabin . 
 " Sir , " say the captain , " if I risk another order , the whole ship'll come about our ear by the run . you see , sir , here it be . I get a rough answer , do I not ? well , if I speak back , pike will be go in two shake ; if I do not , Silver will see there be something under that , and the game 's up . now , we have   only one man to rely on . " 
 " and who be that ? " ask the squire . 
 " Silver , sir , " return the captain ; " he be as anxious as you and I to smother thing up . this be a tiff ; he would soon talk them out of it if he have the chance , and what I propose to do be to give he the chance . let us allow the man an afternoon ashore . if they all go , why we will fight the ship . if they none of they go , well then , we hold the cabin , and God defend the right . if some go , you mark my word , sir , Silver'll bring them aboard again as mild as lamb . " 
 it be so decide ; loaded pistol be serve out to all the sure man ; Hunter , Joyce , and Redruth be take into our confidence and receive the news with less surprise and a well spirit than we have look for , and then the captain go on deck and address the crew . 
 " my lad , " say he , " we have   have a hot day and be all tired and out of sort . a turn ashore'll hurt nobody the boat be still in the water ; you can take the gig , and as many as please may go ashore for the afternoon . I will fire a gun half an hour before sundown . " 
 I believe the silly fellow must have think they would break their shin over treasure as soon as they be land , for they all come out of their sulk in a moment and give a cheer that start the echo in a faraway hill and send the bird once more fly and squall round the anchorage . 
 the captain be too bright to be in the way . he whip out of sight in a moment , leave silver to arrange the party , and I fancy it be as well he do so . have he be on deck , he could no long so much as have pretend not to understand the situation . it be as plain as day . Silver be the captain , and a mighty rebellious crew he have of it . the honest hand and I be soon to see it prove that there be such on board must have be very stupid fellow . or rather , I suppose the truth be this , that all hand be disaffect by the example of the ringleader only some more , some less ; and a few , be good fellow in the main , could neither be lead nor drive any far . it be one thing to be idle and skulk and quite another to take a ship and murder a number of innocent man . 
 at last , however , the party be make up . six fellow be to stay on board , and the remain thirteen , include silver , begin to embark . 
 then it be that there come into my head the first of the mad notion that contribute so much to save our life . if six man be leave by Silver , it be plain our party could not take and fight the ship ; and since only six be leave , it be equally plain that the cabin party have no present need of my assistance . it occur to I at once to go ashore . in a jiffy I have slip over the side and curl up in the fore - sheet of the near boat , and almost at the same moment she shove off . 
 no one take notice of I , only the bow oar say , " be that you , Jim ? keep your head down . " but Silver , from the other boat , look sharply over and call out to know if that be I ; and from that moment I begin to regret what I have do . 
 the crew race for the beach , but the boat I be in , have some start and be at once the light and the well man , shoot far ahead of her consort , and the bow have strike among the shore - side tree and I have catch a branch and swing myself out and plunge into the near thicket while Silver and the rest be still a hundred yard behind . 
 " Jim , Jim ! " I hear he shout . 
 but you may suppose I pay no heed ; jumping , duck , and break through , I run straight before my nose till I could run no long . 




 14 

 the First Blow 

 I be so pleased at have give the slip to Long John that I begin to enjoy myself and look around I with some interest on the strange land that I be in . 
 I have cross a marshy tract full of willow , bulrush , and odd , outlandish , swampy tree ; and I have now come out upon the skirt of an open piece of undulating , sandy country , about a mile long , dot with a few pine and a great number of contorted tree , not unlike the oak in growth , but pale in the foliage , like willow . on the far side of the open stand one of the hill , with two quaint , craggy peak shin vividly in the sun . 
 I now feel for the first time the joy of exploration . the isle be uninhabited ; my shipmate I have leave behind , and nothing live in front of I but dumb brute and fowl . I turn hither and thither among the tree . here and there be flower plant , unknown to I ; here and there I see snake , and one raise his head from a ledge of rock and hiss at I with a noise not unlike the spinning of a top . little do I suppose that he be a deadly enemy and that the noise be the famous rattle . 
 then I come to a long thicket of these oaklike tree live , or evergreen , oak , I hear afterwards they should be call which grow low along the sand like bramble , the bough curiously twist , the foliage compact , like thatch . the thicket stretch down from the top of one of the sandy knoll , spread and grow tall as it go , until it reach the margin of the broad , reedy fen , through which the near of the little river soak its way into the anchorage . the marsh be steam in the strong sun , and the outline of the Spy - glass tremble through the haze . 
 all at once there begin to go a sort of bustle among the bulrush ; a wild duck fly up with a quack , another follow , and soon over the whole surface of the marsh a great cloud of bird hang scream and circle in the air . I judge at once that some of my shipmate must be draw near along the border of the fen . nor be I deceive , for soon I hear the very distant and low tone of a human voice , which , as I continue to give ear , grow steadily louder and nearer . 
 this put I in a great fear , and I crawl under cover of the near live - oak and squat there , hearkening , as silent as a mouse . 
 another voice answer , and then the first voice , which I now recognize to be Silver 's , once more take up the story and run on for a long while in a stream , only now and again interrupt by the other . by the sound they must have be talk earnestly , and almost fiercely ; but no distinct word come to my hearing . 
 at last the speaker seem to have pause and perhaps to have sit down , for not only do they cease to draw any nearer , but the bird themselves begin to grow more quiet and to settle again to their place in the swamp . 
 and now I begin to feel that I be neglect my business , that since I have be so foolhardy as to come ashore with these desperado , the least I could do be to overhear they at their council , and that my plain and obvious duty be to draw as close as I could manage , under the favourable ambush of the crouch tree . 
 I could tell the direction of the speaker pretty exactly , not only by the sound of their voice but by the behaviour of the few bird that still hang in alarm above the head of the intruder . 
 crawl on all four , I make steadily but slowly towards they , till at last , raise my head to an aperture among the leaf , I could see clear down into a little green dell beside the marsh , and closely set about with tree , where Long John Silver and another of the crew stand face to face in conversation . 
 the sun beat full upon they . Silver have throw his hat beside he on the ground , and his great , smooth , blond face , all shin with heat , be lift to the other man 's in a kind of appeal . 
 " mate , " he be say , " it be because I think gold dust of you gold dust , and you may lay to that ! if I have not   take to you like pitch , do you think I would have be here a - warning of you ? all be up you can not   make nor mend ; it be to save your neck that I be a - speak , and if one of the wild un know it , where would I be , Tom now , tell I , where would I be ? " 
 " silver , " say the other man and I observe he be not only red in the face , but speak as hoarse as a crow , and his voice shake too , like a taut rope " silver , " say he , " you be old , and you be honest , or have the name for it ; and you have   money too , which lot of poor sailor have not ; and you be brave , or I be mistook . and will you tell I you will let yourself be lead away with that kind of a mess of swab ? not you ! as sure as God see I , I would soon lose my hand . if I turn agin my dooty " 
 and then all of a sudden he be interrupt by a noise . I have find one of the honest hand well , here , at that same moment , come news of another . far away out in the marsh there arise , all of a sudden , a sound like the cry of anger , then another on the back of it ; and then one horrid , long - draw scream . the rock of the Spy - glass re - echo it a score of time ; the whole troop of marsh - bird rise again , darken heaven , with a simultaneous whirr ; and long after that death yell be still ring in my brain , silence have re - establish its empire , and only the rustle of the redescende bird and the boom of the distant surge disturb the languor of the afternoon . 
 Tom have leap at the sound , like a horse at the spur , but Silver have not wink an eye . he stand where he be , rest lightly on his crutch , watch his companion like a snake about to spring . 
 " John ! " say the sailor , stretch out his hand . 
 " hand off ! " cry Silver , leap back a yard , as it seem to I , with the speed and security of a train gymnast . 
 " hand off , if you like , John Silver , " say the other . " it be a black conscience that can make you fear of I . but in heaven 's name , tell I , what be that ? " 
 " that ? " return Silver , smile away , but wary than ever , his eye a mere pin - point in his big face , but gleam like a crumb of glass . " that ? oh , I reckon that will be Alan . " 
 and at this point Tom flash out like a hero . 
 " Alan ! " he cry . " then rest his soul for a true seaman ! and as for you , John Silver , long you have   be a mate of mine , but you be mate of mine no more . if I die like a dog , I will die in my dooty . you have   kill Alan , have you ? kill I too , if you can . but I defy you . " 
 and with that , this brave fellow turn his back directly on the cook and set off walk for the beach . but he be not destine to go far . with a cry John seize the branch of a tree , whip the crutch out of his armpit , and send that uncouth missile hurtle through the air . it strike poor Tom , point foremost , and with stunning violence , right between the shoulder in the middle of his back . his hand fly up , he give a sort of gasp , and fall . 
 whether he be injure much or little , none could ever tell . like enough , to judge from the sound , his back be break on the spot . but he have no time give he to recover . silver , agile as a monkey even without leg or crutch , be on the top of he next moment and have twice bury his knife up to the hilt in that defenceless body . from my place of ambush , I could hear he pant aloud as he strike the blow . 
 I do not know what it rightly be to faint , but I do know that for the next little while the whole world swam away from before I in a whirling mist ; Silver and the bird , and the tall Spy - glass hilltop , go round and round and topsy - turvy before my eye , and all manner of bell ring and distant voice shout in my ear . 
 when I come again to myself the monster have pull himself together , his crutch under his arm , his hat upon his head . just before he Tom lie motionless upon the sward ; but the murderer mind he not a whit , cleanse his blood - stain knife the while upon a wisp of grass . everything else be unchanged , the sun still shin mercilessly on the steaming marsh and the tall pinnacle of the mountain , and I could scarce persuade myself that murder have be actually do and a human life cruelly cut short a moment since before my eye . 
 but now John put his hand into his pocket , bring out a whistle , and blow upon it several modulate blast that ring far across the heated air . I could not tell , of course , the meaning of the signal , but it instantly awake my fear . More man would be come . I might be discover . they have already slay two of the honest people ; after Tom and Alan , might not I come next ? 
 instantly I begin to extricate myself and crawl back again , with what speed and silence I could manage , to the more open portion of the wood . as I do so , I could hear hail come and go between the old buccaneer and his comrade , and this sound of danger lend I wing . as soon as I be clear of the thicket , I run as I never run before , scarce mind the direction of my flight , so long as it lead I from the murderer ; and as I run , fear grow and grow upon I until it turn into a kind of frenzy . 
 indeed , could anyone be more entirely lose than I ? when the gun fire , how should I dare to go down to the boat among those fiend , still smoke from their crime ? would not the first of they who see I wring my neck like a snipe 's ? would not my absence itself be an evidence to they of my alarm , and therefore of my fatal knowledge ? it be all over , I think . good - bye to the hispaniola ; good - bye to the squire , the doctor , and the captain ! there be nothing leave for I but death by starvation or death by the hand of the mutineer . 
 all this while , as I say , I be still run , and without take any notice , I have draw near to the foot of the little hill with the two peak and have get into a part of the island where the live - oak grow more widely apart and seem more like forest tree in their bearing and dimension . mingle with these be a few scattered pine , some fifty , some near seventy , foot high . the air too smell more freshly than down beside the marsh . 
 and here a fresh alarm bring I to a standstill with a thump heart . 




 15 

 the Man of the Island 

 from the side of the hill , which be here steep and stony , a spout of gravel be dislodge and fall rattle and bound through the tree . my eye turn instinctively in that direction , and I see a figure leap with great rapidity behind the trunk of a pine . what it be , whether bear or man or monkey , I could in no wise tell . it seem dark and shaggy ; more I know not . but the terror of this new apparition bring I to a stand . 
 I be now , it seem , cut off upon both side ; behind I the murderer , before I this lurking nondescript . and immediately I begin to prefer the danger that I know to those I know not . Silver himself appear less terrible in contrast with this creature of the wood , and I turn on my heel , and look sharply behind I over my shoulder , begin to retrace my step in the direction of the boat . 
 instantly the figure reappear , and make a wide circuit , begin to head I off . I be tired , at any rate ; but have I be as fresh as when I rise , I could see it be in vain for I to contend in speed with such an adversary . from trunk to trunk the creature flit like a deer , run manlike on two leg , but unlike any man that I have ever see , stoop almost double as it run . yet a man it be , I could no long be in doubt about that . 
 I begin to recall what I have hear of cannibal . I be within an ace of call for help . but the mere fact that he be a man , however wild , have somewhat reassure I , and my fear of silver begin to revive in proportion . I stand still , therefore , and cast about for some method of escape ; and as I be so think , the recollection of my pistol flash into my mind . as soon as I remember I be not defenceless , courage glow again in my heart and I set my face resolutely for this man of the island and walk briskly towards he . 
 he be conceal by this time behind another tree trunk ; but he must have be watch I closely , for as soon as I begin to move in his direction he reappear and take a step to meet I . then he hesitate , draw back , come forward again , and at last , to my wonder and confusion , throw himself on his knee and hold out his clasped hand in supplication . 
 at that I once more stop . 
 " who be you ? " I ask . 
 " Ben Gunn , " he answer , and his voice sound hoarse and awkward , like a rusty lock . " I be poor Ben Gunn , I be ; and I have not   speak with a Christian these three year . " 
 I could now see that he be a white man like myself and that his feature be even pleasing . his skin , wherever it be expose , be burn by the sun ; even his lip be black , and his fair eye look quite startling in so dark a face . of all the beggar - man that I have see or fancy , he be the chief for raggedness . he be clothe with tatter of old ship 's canvas and old sea - cloth , and this extraordinary patchwork be all hold together by a system of the most various and incongruous fastening , brass button , bit of stick , and loop of tarry gaskin . about his waist he wear an old brass - buckle leather belt , which be the one thing solid in his whole accoutrement . 
 " three year ! " I cry . " be you shipwreck ? " 
 " nay , mate , " say he ; " maroon . " 
 I have hear the word , and I know it stand for a horrible kind of punishment common enough among the buccaneer , in which the offender be put ashore with a little powder and shoot and leave behind on some desolate and distant island . 
 " Marooned three year agone , " he continue , " and live on goat since then , and berry , and oyster . wherever a man be , say I , a man can do for himself . but , mate , my heart be sore for christian diet . you might not   happen to have a piece of cheese about you , now ? no ? well , many be the long night I have   dream of cheese toast , mostly and wake up again , and here I be . " 
 " if ever I can get aboard again , " say I , " you shall have cheese by the stone . " 
 all this time he have be feel the stuff of my jacket , smooth my hand , look at my boot , and generally , in the interval of his speech , show a childish pleasure in the presence of a fellow creature . but at my last word he perk up into a kind of startled slyness . 
 " if ever you can get aboard again , say you ? " he repeat . " why , now , who be to hinder you ? " 
 " not you , I know , " be my reply . 
 " and right you be , " he cry . " now you what do you call yourself , mate ? " 
 " Jim , " I tell he . 
 " Jim , Jim , " say he , quite pleased apparently . " well , now , Jim , I have   live that rough as you would be ashamed to hear of . now , for instance , you would not   think I have have a pious mother to look at I ? " he ask . 
 " why , no , not in particular , " I answer . 
 " ah , well , " say he , " but I have remarkable pious . and I be a civil , pious boy , and could rattle off my catechism that fast , as you could not   tell one word from another . and here be what it come to , Jim , and it begin with chuck - farthen on the blessed grave - stone ! that be what it begin with , but it go further'n that ; and so my mother tell I , and predicke the whole , she do , the pious woman ! but it be Providence that put I here . I have   think it all out in this here lonely island , and I be back on piety . you do not   catch I taste rum so much , but just a thimbleful for luck , of course , the first chance I have . I be bind I will be good , and I see the way to . and , Jim " look all round he and lower his voice to a whisper " I be rich . " 
 I now feel sure that the poor fellow have go crazy in his solitude , and I suppose I must have show the feeling in my face , for he repeat the statement hotly : " Rich ! Rich ! I say . and I will tell you what : I will make a man of you , Jim . ah , Jim , you will bless your star , you will , you be the first that find I ! " 
 and at this there come suddenly a lower shadow over his face , and he tighten his grasp upon my hand and raise a forefinger threateningly before my eye . 
 " now , Jim , you tell I true : that be not   Flint 's ship ? " he ask . 
 at this I have a happy inspiration . I begin to believe that I have find an ally , and I answer he at once . 
 " it be not Flint 's ship , and Flint be dead ; but I will tell you true , as you ask I there be some of Flint 's hand aboard ; bad luck for the rest of we . " 
 " not a man with one leg ? " he gasp . 
 " silver ? " I ask . 
 " ah , Silver ! " say he . " that be his name . " 
 " he be the cook , and the ringleader too . " 
 he be still hold I by the wrist , and at that he give it quite a wring . 
 " if you be send by Long John , " he say , " I be as good as pork , and I know it . but where be you , do you suppose ? " 
 I have make my mind up in a moment , and by way of answer tell he the whole story of our voyage and the predicament in which we find ourselves . he hear I with the keen interest , and when I have do he pat I on the head . 
 " you be a good lad , Jim , " he say ; " and you be all in a clove hitch , be not   you ? well , you just put your trust in Ben Gunn Ben Gunn 's the man to do it . would you think it likely , now , that your squire would prove a liberal - minded one in case of help he be in a clove hitch , as you remark ? " 
 I tell he the squire be the most liberal of man . 
 " Aye , but you see , " return Ben Gunn , " I do not   mean give I a gate to keep , and a suit of livery clothe , and such ; that be not my mark , Jim . what I mean be , would he be likely to come down to the toon of , say one thousand pound out of money that be as good as a man 's own already ? " 
 " I be sure he would , " say i. " as it be , all hand be to share . " 
 " and a passage home ? " he add with a look of great shrewdness . 
 " why , " I cry , " the squire be a gentleman . and besides , if we get rid of the other , we should want you to help work the vessel home . " 
 " ah , " say he , ' so you would . " and he seem very much relieved . 
 " now , I will tell you what , " he go on . " so much I will tell you , and no more . I be in Flint 's ship when he bury the treasure ; he and six along six strong seaman . they be ashore nigh on a week , and we stand off and on in the old WALRUS . one fine day up go the signal , and here come Flint by himself in a little boat , and his head do up in a blue scarf . the sun be get up , and mortal white he look about the cutwater . but , there he be , you mind , and the six all dead dead and bury . how he do it , not a man aboard we could make out . it be battle , murder , and sudden death , leastway he against six . Billy Bones be the mate ; Long John , he be quartermaster ; and they ask he where the treasure be . ' ah , ' say he , ' you can go ashore , if you like , and stay , ' he say ; ' but as for the ship , she will beat up for more , by thunder ! ' that be what he say . 
 " well , I be in another ship three year back , and we sight this island . ' boy , ' say I , ' here be Flint 's treasure ; let us land and find it . ' the cap'n be displeased at that , but my messmate be all of a mind and land . twelve day they look for it , and every day they have the bad word for I , until one fine morning all hand go aboard . ' as for you , Benjamin Gunn , ' say they , ' here be a musket , ' they say , ' and a spade , and pick - axe . you can stay here and find Flint 's money for yourself , ' they say . 
 " well , Jim , three year have I be here , and not a bite of christian diet from that day to this . but now , you look here ; look at I . do I look like a man before the mast ? no , say you . nor I be not , neither , I say . " 
 and with that he wink and pinch I hard . 
 " just you mention they word to your squire , Jim , " he go on . " nor he be not , neither that be the word . three year he be the man of this island , light and dark , fair and rain ; and sometimes he would maybe think upon a prayer   say you , and sometimes he would maybe think of his old mother , so be as she be alive   you will say ; but the most part of Gunn 's time   this be what you will say   the most part of his time be take up with another matter . and then you will give he a nip , like I do . " 
 and he pinch I again in the most confidential manner . 
 " then , " he continue , " then you will up , and you will say this : Gunn be a good man   you will say , and he put a precious sight more confidence a precious sight , mind that in a gen'leman bear than in these gen'leman of fortune , have be one hisself . " 
 " well , " I say , " I do not   understand one word that you have   be say . but that be neither here nor there ; for how be I to get on board ? " 
 " ah , " say he , " that be the hitch , for sure . well , there be my boat , that I make with my two hand . I keep she under the white rock . if the bad come to the bad , we might try that after dark . hi ! " he break out . " what be that ? " 
 for just then , although the sun have still an hour or two to run , all the echo of the island awake and bellow to the thunder of a cannon . 
 " they have begin to fight ! " I cry . " follow I . " 
 and I begin to run towards the anchorage , my terror all forget , while close at my side the marooned man in his goatskin trot easily and lightly . 
 " left , left , " say he ; " keep to your left hand , mate Jim ! under the tree with you ! Theer 's where I kill my first goat . they do not   come down here now ; they be all mastheade on they mounting for the fear of Benjamin Gunn . ah ! and there be the cetemery " cemetery , he must have mean . " you see the mound ? I come here and pray , now and then , when I think maybe a Sunday would be about doo . it be not   quite a chapel , but it seem more solemn like ; and then , say you , Ben Gunn be short - hand no chapling , nor so much as a Bible and a flag , you say . " 
 so he keep talk as I run , neither expect nor receive any answer . 
 the cannon - shot be follow after a considerable interval by a volley of small arm . 
 another pause , and then , not a quarter of a mile in front of I , I behold the Union Jack flutter in the air above a wood . 




 PART four the Stockade 





 16 

 Narrative continue by the doctor : how the ship be abandon 

 it be about half past one three bell in the sea phrase that the two boat go ashore from the hispaniola . the captain , the squire , and I be talk matter over in the cabin . have there be a breath of wind , we should have fall on the six mutineer who be leave aboard with we , slip our cable , and away to sea . but the wind be want ; and to complete our helplessness , down come Hunter with the news that Jim Hawkins have slip into a boat and be go ashore with the rest . 
 it never occur to we to doubt Jim Hawkins , but we be alarmed for his safety . with the man in the temper they be in , it seem an even chance if we should see the lad again . we run on deck . the pitch be bubble in the seam ; the nasty stench of the place turn I sick ; if ever a man smell fever and dysentery , it be in that abominable anchorage . the six scoundrel be sit grumble under a sail in the forecastle ; ashore we could see the gig make fast and a man sit in each , hard by where the river run in . one of they be whistle " Lillibullero . " 
 wait be a strain , and it be decide that Hunter and I should go ashore with the jolly - boat in quest of information . 
 the gig have lean to their right , but Hunter and I pull straight in , in the direction of the stockade upon the chart . the two who be leave guard their boat seem in a bustle at our appearance ; " Lillibullero " stop off , and I could see the pair discuss what they ought to do . have they go and tell Silver , all might have turn out differently ; but they have their order , I suppose , and decide to sit quietly where they be and hark back again to " Lillibullero . " 
 there be a slight bend in the coast , and I steer so as to put it between we ; even before we land we have thus lose sight of the gig . I jump out and come as near run as I durst , with a big silk handkerchief under my hat for coolness ' sake and a brace of pistol ready prim for safety . 
 I have not go a hundred yard when I reach the stockade . 
 this be how it be : a spring of clear water rise almost at the top of a knoll . well , on the knoll , and enclose the spring , they have clap a stout loghouse fit to hold two score of people on a pinch and loophole for musketry on either side . all round this they have clear a wide space , and then the thing be complete by a pal six foot high , without door or opening , too strong to pull down without time and labour and too open to shelter the besieger . the people in the log - house have they in every way ; they stand quiet in shelter and shoot the other like partridge . all they want be a good watch and food ; for , short of a complete surprise , they might have hold the place against a regiment . 
 what particularly take my fancy be the spring . for though we have a good enough place of it in the cabin of the HISPANIOLA , with plenty of arm and ammunition , and thing to eat , and excellent wine , there have be one thing overlook we have no water . I be think this over when there come ring over the island the cry of a man at the point of death . I be not new to violent death I have serve his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland , and get a wound myself at Fontenoy but I know my pulse go dot and carry one . " Jim Hawkins be go , " be my first thought . 
 it be something to have be an old soldier , but more still to have be a doctor . there be no time to dilly - dally in our work . and so now I make up my mind instantly , and with no time lose return to the shore and jump on board the jolly - boat . 
 by good fortune Hunter pull a good oar . we make the water fly , and the boat be soon alongside and I aboard the schooner . 
 I find they all shake , as be natural . the squire be sit down , as white as a sheet , think of the harm he have lead we to , the good soul ! and one of the six forecastle hand be little well . 
 " there be a man , " say Captain Smollett , nod towards he , " new to this work . he come nigh - hand fainting , doctor , when he hear the cry . another touch of the rudder and that man would join we . " 
 I tell my plan to the captain , and between we we settle on the detail of its accomplishment . 
 we put old Redruth in the gallery between the cabin and the forecastle , with three or four loaded musket and a mattress for protection . Hunter bring the boat round under the stern - port , and Joyce and I set to work load she with powder tin , musket , bag of biscuit , keg of pork , a cask of cognac , and my invaluable medicine chest . 
 in the meantime , the squire and the captain stay on deck , and the latter hail the coxswain , who be the principal man aboard . 
 " Mr. Hands , " he say , " here be two of we with a brace of pistol each . if any one of you six make a signal of any description , that man 's dead . " 
 they be a good deal take aback , and after a little consultation one and all tumble down the fore companion , think no doubt to take we on the rear . but when they see Redruth wait for they in the spar galley , they go about ship at once , and a head pop out again on deck . 
 " down , dog ! " cry the captain . 
 and the head pop back again ; and we hear no more , for the time , of these six very faint - hearted seaman . 
 by this time , tumble thing in as they come , we have the jolly - boat load as much as we dare . Joyce and I get out through the stern - port , and we make for shore again as fast as oar could take we . 
 this second trip fairly arouse the watcher along shore . " Lillibullero " be drop again ; and just before we lose sight of they behind the little point , one of they whip ashore and disappear . I have half a mind to change my plan and destroy their boat , but I fear that Silver and the other might be close at hand , and all might very well be lose by try for too much . 
 we have soon touch land in the same place as before and set to provision the block house . all three make the first journey , heavily laden , and toss our store over the palisade . then , leave Joyce to guard they one man , to be sure , but with half a dozen musket Hunter and I return to the jolly - boat and load ourselves once more . so we proceed without pause to take breath , till the whole cargo be bestow , when the two servant take up their position in the block house , and I , with all my power , scull back to the hispaniola . 
 that we should have risk a second boat load seem more daring than it really be . they have the advantage of number , of course , but we have the advantage of arm . not one of the man ashore have a musket , and before they could get within range for pistol shooting , we flatter ourselves we should be able to give a good account of a half - dozen at least . 
 the squire be wait for I at the stern window , all his faintness go from he . he catch the painter and make it fast , and we fall to load the boat for our very life . pork , powder , and biscuit be the cargo , with only a musket and a cutlass apiece for the squire and I and Redruth and the captain . the rest of the arm and powder we drop overboard in two fathom and a half of water , so that we could see the bright steel shin far below we in the sun , on the clean , sandy bottom . 
 by this time the tide be begin to ebb , and the ship be swing round to her anchor . voice be hear faintly halloae in the direction of the two gig ; and though this reassure we for Joyce and Hunter , who be well to the eastward , it warn our party to be off . 
 Redruth retreat from his place in the gallery and drop into the boat , which we then bring round to the ship 's counter , to be handy for Captain Smollett . 
 " now , man , " say he , " do you hear I ? " 
 there be no answer from the forecastle . 
 " it be to you , Abraham Gray it be to you I be speak . " 
 still no reply . 
 " Gray , " resume Mr. Smollett , a little louder , " I be leave this ship , and I order you to follow your captain . I know you be a good man at bottom , and I dare say not one of the lot of you be as bad as he make out . I have my watch here in my hand ; I give you thirty second to join I in . " 
 there be a pause . 
 " come , my fine fellow , " continue the captain ; " do not   hang so long in stay . I be risk my life and the life of these good gentleman every second . " 
 there be a sudden scuffle , a sound of blow , and out burst Abraham Gray with a knife cut on the side of the cheek , and come run to the captain like a dog to the whistle . 
 " I be with you , sir , " say he . 
 and the next moment he and the captain have drop aboard of we , and we have shove off and give way . 
 we be clear out of the ship , but not yet ashore in our stockade . 




 17 

 Narrative continue by the doctor : the Jolly - boat 's last trip 

 this fifth trip be quite different from any of the other . in the first place , the little gallipot of a boat that we be in be gravely overload . five grown man , and three of they Trelawney , Redruth , and the captain over six foot high , be already more than she be mean to carry . add to that the powder , pork , and bread - bag . the gunwale be lip astern . several time we ship a little water , and my breech and the tail of my coat be all soak wet before we have go a hundred yard . 
 the captain make we trim the boat , and we get she to lie a little more evenly . all the same , we be afraid to breathe . 
 in the second place , the ebb be now make a strong rippling current run westward through the basin , and then south'ard and seaward down the strait by which we have enter in the morning . even the ripple be a danger to our overloaded craft , but the bad of it be that we be sweep out of our true course and away from our proper landing - place behind the point . if we let the current have its way we should come ashore beside the gig , where the pirate might appear at any moment . 
 " I can not keep her head for the stockade , sir , " say I to the captain . I be steer , while he and Redruth , two fresh man , be at the oar . " the tide keep wash she down . could you pull a little strong ? " 
 " not without swamp the boat , " say he . " you must bear up , sir , if you please bear up until you see you be gain . " 
 I try and find by experiment that the tide keep sweep we westward until I have lay her head due east , or just about right angle to the way we ought to go . 
 " we will never get ashore at this rate , " say I. 
 " if it be the only course that we can lie , sir , we must even lie it , " return the captain . " we must keep upstream . you see , sir , " he go on , " if once we drop to leeward of the landing - place , it be hard to say where we should get ashore , besides the chance of be board by the gig ; whereas , the way we go the current must slacken , and then we can dodge back along the shore . " 
 " the current 's less a'ready , sir , " say the man Gray , who be sit in the fore - sheet ; " you can ease she off a bit . " 
 " thank you , my man , " say I , quite as if nothing have happen , for we have all quietly make up our mind to treat he like one of ourselves . 
 suddenly the captain speak up again , and I think his voice be a little change . 
 " the gun ! " say he . 
 " I have think of that , " say I , for I make sure he be think of a bombardment of the fort . " they could never get the gun ashore , and if they do , they could never haul it through the wood . " 
 " look astern , doctor , " reply the captain . 
 we have entirely forget the long nine ; and there , to our horror , be the five rogue busy about she , get off her jacket , as they call the stout tarpaulin cover under which she sail . not only that , but it flash into my mind at the same moment that the round - shot and the powder for the gun have be leave behind , and a stroke with an axe would put it all into the possession of the evil one abroad . 
 " Israel be Flint 's gunner , " say Gray hoarsely . 
 at any risk , we put the boat 's head direct for the landing - place . by this time we have get so far out of the run of the current that we keep steerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate of rowing , and I could keep she steady for the goal . but the bad of it be that with the course I now hold we turn our broadside instead of our stern to the hispaniola and offer a target like a barn door . 
 I could hear as well as see that brandy - faced rascal Israel Hands plump down a round - shot on the deck . 
 " who be the good shot ? " ask the captain . 
 " Mr. Trelawney , out and away , " say I. 
 " Mr. Trelawney , will you please pick I off one of these man , sir ? hand , if possible , " say the captain . 
 Trelawney be as cool as steel . he look to the priming of his gun . 
 " now , " cry the captain , " easy with that gun , sir , or you will swamp the boat . all hand stand by to trim she when he aim . " 
 the squire raise his gun , the rowing cease , and we lean over to the other side to keep the balance , and all be so nicely contrive that we do not ship a drop . 
 they have the gun , by this time , slew round upon the swivel , and Hands , who be at the muzzle with the rammer , be in consequence the most expose . however , we have no luck , for just as Trelawney fire , down he stoop , the ball whistle over he , and it be one of the other four who fall . 
 the cry he give be echo not only by his companion on board but by a great number of voice from the shore , and look in that direction I see the other pirate troop out from among the tree and tumble into their place in the boat . 
 " here come the gig , sir , " say I. 
 " give way , then , " cry the captain . " we must not   mind if we swamp she now . if we can not   get ashore , all be up . " 
 " only one of the gig be be man , sir , " I add ; " the crew of the other most likely go round by shore to cut we off . " 
 " they will have a hot run , sir , " return the captain . " Jack ashore , you know . it be not they I mind ; it be the round - shot . Carpet bowl ! my lady 's maid could not   miss . tell we , squire , when you see the match , and we will hold water . " 
 in the meanwhile we have be make headway at a good pace for a boat so overloaded , and we have ship but little water in the process . we be now close in ; thirty or forty stroke and we should beach she , for the ebb have already disclose a narrow belt of sand below the cluster tree . the gig be no long to be fear ; the little point have already conceal it from our eye . the ebb - tide , which have so cruelly delay we , be now make reparation and delay our assailant . the one source of danger be the gun . 
 " if I durst , " say the captain , " I would stop and pick off another man . " 
 but it be plain that they mean nothing should delay their shot . they have never so much as look at their fall comrade , though he be not dead , and I could see he try to crawl away . 
 " ready ! " cry the squire . 
 " hold ! " cry the captain , quick as an echo . 
 and he and Redruth back with a great heave that send her stern bodily under water . the report fall in at the same instant of time . this be the first that Jim hear , the sound of the squire 's shot not have reach he . where the ball pass , not one of we precisely know , but I fancy it must have be over our head and that the wind of it may have contribute to our disaster . 
 at any rate , the boat sink by the stern , quite gently , in three foot of water , leave the captain and myself , face each other , on our foot . the other three take complete header , and come up again drench and bubble . 
 so far there be no great harm . no life be lose , and we could wade ashore in safety . but there be all our store at the bottom , and to make thing bad , only two gun out of five remain in a state for service . mine I have snatch from my knee and hold over my head , by a sort of instinct . as for the captain , he have carry his over his shoulder by a bandoleer , and like a wise man , lock uppermost . the other three have go down with the boat . 
 to add to our concern , we hear voice already draw near we in the wood along shore , and we have not only the danger of be cut off from the stockade in our half - crippled state but the fear before we whether , if Hunter and Joyce be attack by half a dozen , they would have the sense and conduct to stand firm . Hunter be steady , that we know ; Joyce be a doubtful case a pleasant , polite man for a valet and to brush one 's clothe , but not entirely fit for a man of war . 
 with all this in our mind , we wad ashore as fast as we could , leave behind we the poor jolly - boat and a good half of all our powder and provision . 




 18 

 Narrative continue by the doctor : end of the First Day 's fighting 

 we make our good speed across the strip of wood that now divide we from the stockade , and at every step we take the voice of the buccaneer rang nearer . soon we could hear their footfall as they run and the cracking of the branch as they breast across a bit of thicket . 
 I begin to see we should have a brush for it in earnest and look to my priming . 
 " Captain , " say I , " Trelawney be the dead shot . give he your gun ; his own be useless . " 
 they exchange gun , and Trelawney , silent and cool as he have be since the beginning of the bustle , hang a moment on his heel to see that all be fit for service . at the same time , observe Gray to be unarmed , I hand he my cutlass . it do all our heart good to see he spit in his hand , knit his brow , and make the blade sing through the air . it be plain from every line of his body that our new hand be worth his salt . 
 forty pace far we come to the edge of the wood and see the stockade in front of we . we strike the enclosure about the middle of the south side , and almost at the same time , seven mutineer Job Anderson , the boatswain , at their head appear in full cry at the southwestern corner . 
 they pause as if take aback , and before they recover , not only the squire and I , but Hunter and Joyce from the block house , have time to fire . the four shot come in rather a scatter volley , but they do the business : one of the enemy actually fall , and the rest , without hesitation , turn and plunge into the tree . 
 after reload , we walk down the outside of the palisade to see to the fallen enemy . he be stone dead shoot through the heart . 
 we begin to rejoice over our good success when just at that moment a pistol crack in the bush , a ball whistle close past my ear , and poor Tom Redruth stumble and fall his length on the ground . both the squire and I return the shot , but as we have nothing to aim at , it be probable we only waste powder . then we reload and turn our attention to poor Tom . 
 the captain and Gray be already examine he , and I see with half an eye that all be over . 
 I believe the readiness of our return volley have scatter the mutineer once more , for we be suffer without further molestation to get the poor old gamekeeper hoist over the stockade and carry , groan and bleeding , into the log - house . 
 poor old fellow , he have not utter one word of surprise , complaint , fear , or even acquiescence from the very beginning of our trouble till now , when we have lay he down in the log - house to die . he have lain like a Trojan behind his mattress in the gallery ; he have follow every order silently , doggedly , and well ; he be the old of our party by a score of year ; and now , sullen , old , serviceable servant , it be he that be to die . 
 the squire drop down beside he on his knee and kiss his hand , cry like a child . 
 " be I go , doctor ? " he ask . 
 " Tom , my man , " say I , " you be go home . " 
 " I wish I have have a lick at they with the gun first , " he reply . 
 " Tom , " say the squire , ' say you forgive I , will not   you ? " 
 " would that be respectful like , from I to you , squire ? " be the answer . " Howsoever , so be it , amen ! " 
 after a little while of silence , he say he think somebody might read a prayer . " it be the custom , sir , " he add apologetically . and not long after , without another word , he pass away . 
 in the meantime the captain , whom I have observe to be wonderfully swollen about the chest and pocket , have turn out a great many various store the british colour , a Bible , a coil of stoutish rope , pen , ink , the log - book , and pound of tobacco . he have find a longish fir - tree lie felled and trim in the enclosure , and with the help of Hunter he have set it up at the corner of the log - house where the trunk cross and make an angle . then , climb on the roof , he have with his own hand bent and run up the colour . 
 this seem mightily to relieve he . he re - enter the log - house and set about count up the store as if nothing else exist . but he have an eye on Tom 's passage for all that , and as soon as all be over , come forward with another flag and reverently spread it on the body . 
 " do not   you take on , sir , " he say , shake the squire 's hand . " all be well with he ; no fear for a hand that be be shoot down in his duty to captain and owner . it may not   be good divinity , but it be a fact . " 
 then he pull I aside . 
 " Dr. Livesey , " he say , " in how many week do you and squire expect the consort ? " 
 I tell he it be a question not of week but of month , that if we be not back by the end of August blandly be to send to find we , but neither soon nor later . " you can calculate for yourself , " I say . 
 " why , yes , " return the captain , scratch his head ; " and make a large allowance , sir , for all the gift of Providence , I should say we be pretty close haul . " 
 " how do you mean ? " I ask . 
 " it be a pity , sir , we lose that second load . that be what I mean , " reply the captain . " as for powder and shot , we will do . but the ration be short , very short so short , Dr. Livesey , that we be perhaps as well without that extra mouth . " 
 and he point to the dead body under the flag . 
 just then , with a roar and a whistle , a round - shot pass high above the roof of the log - house and plump far beyond we in the wood . 
 " Oho ! " say the captain . " blaze away ! you have   little enough powder already , my lad . " 
 at the second trial , the aim be well , and the ball descend inside the stockade , scatter a cloud of sand but do no further damage . 
 " Captain , " say the squire , " the house be quite invisible from the ship . it must be the flag they be aim at . would it not be wise to take it in ? " 
 " strike my colour ! " cry the captain . " no , sir , not I " ; and as soon as he have say the word , I think we all agree with he . for it be not only a piece of stout , seamanly , good feeling ; it be good policy besides and show our enemy that we despise their cannonade . 
 all through the evening they keep thunder away . ball after ball fly over or fall short or kick up the sand in the enclosure , but they have to fire so high that the shot fall dead and bury itself in the soft sand . we have no ricochet to fear , and though one pop in through the roof of the log - house and out again through the floor , we soon get use to that sort of horse - play and mind it no more than cricket . 
 " there be one good thing about all this , " observe the captain ; " the wood in front of we be likely clear . the ebb have make a good while ; our store should be uncover . volunteer to go and bring in pork . " 
 Gray and Hunter be the first to come forward . well armed , they steal out of the stockade , but it prove a useless mission . the mutineer be bold than we fancy or they put more trust in Israel 's gunnery . for four or five of they be busy carry off our store and wad out with they to one of the gig that lie close by , pull an oar or so to hold she steady against the current . silver be in the stern - sheet in command ; and every man of they be now provide with a musket from some secret magazine of their own . 
 the captain sit down to his log , and here be the beginning of the entry : 
  Alexander Smollett , master ; David Livesey , ship 's 
  doctor ; Abraham Gray , carpenter 's mate ; John 
  Trelawney , owner ; John Hunter and Richard Joyce , 
  owner 's servant , landsman be all that be leave 
  faithful of the ship 's company with store for ten 
  day at short ration , come ashore this day and fly 
  british colour on the log - house in Treasure Island . 
  Thomas Redruth , owner 's servant , landsman , shoot by the 
  mutineer ; James Hawkins , cabin - boy 
 and at the same time , I be wonder over poor Jim Hawkins ' fate . 
 a hail on the land side . 
 " somebody hail we , " say Hunter , who be on guard . 
 " Doctor ! squire ! captain ! Hullo , Hunter , be that you ? " come the cry . 
 and I run to the door in time to see Jim Hawkins , safe and sound , come climb over the stockade . 




 19 

 Narrative Resumed by Jim Hawkins : the Garrison in the Stockade 

 as soon as Ben Gunn see the colour he come to a halt , stop I by the arm , and sit down . 
 " now , " say he , " there be your friend , sure enough . " 
 " far more likely it be the mutineer , " I answer . 
 " that ! " he cry . " why , in a place like this , where nobody put in but gen'leman of fortune , Silver would fly the Jolly Roger , you do not   make no doubt of that . no , that be your friend . there be be blow too , and I reckon your friend have have the good of it ; and here they be ashore in the old stockade , as be make year and year ago by Flint . ah , he be the man to have a headpiece , be Flint ! bar rum , his match be never see . he be afraid of none , not he ; on'y Silver Silver be that genteel . " 
 " well , " say I , " that may be so , and so be it ; all the more reason that I should hurry on and join my friend . " 
 " nay , mate , " return Ben , " not you . you be a good boy , or I be mistook ; but you be on'y a boy , all tell . now , Ben Gunn be fly . Rum would not   bring I there , where you be go not rum would not , till I see your bear gen'leman and get it on his word of honour . and you will not   forget my word ; ' a precious sight   that be what you will say , a precious sight more confidence ' and then nip he . " 
 and he pinch I the third time with the same air of cleverness . 
 " and when Ben Gunn be want , you know where to find he , Jim . just wheer you find he today . and he that come be to have a white thing in his hand , and he be to come alone . oh ! and you will say this : ' Ben Gunn , ' say you , ' have reason of his own . ' " 
 " well , " say I , " I believe I understand . you have something to propose , and you wish to see the squire or the doctor , and you be to be find where I find you . be that all ? " 
 " and when ? say you , " he add . " why , from about noon observation to about six bell . " 
 " good , " say I , " and now may I go ? " 
 " you will not   forget ? " he inquire anxiously . " precious sight , and reason of his own , say you . reason of his own ; that be the mainstay ; as between man and man . well , then " still hold I " I reckon you can go , Jim . and , Jim , if you be to see Silver , you would not   go for to sell Ben Gunn ? wild horse would not   draw it from you ? no , say you . and if they pirate camp ashore , Jim , what would you say but there would be widder in the morning ? " 
 here he be interrupt by a loud report , and a cannonball come tear through the tree and pitch in the sand not a hundred yard from where we two be talk . the next moment each of we have take to his heel in a different direction . 
 for a good hour to come frequent report shake the island , and ball keep crash through the wood . I move from hiding - place to hiding - place , always pursue , or so it seem to I , by these terrifying missile . but towards the end of the bombardment , though still I durst not venture in the direction of the stockade , where the ball fall oftenest , I have begin , in a manner , to pluck up my heart again , and after a long detour to the east , creep down among the shore - side tree . 
 the sun have just set , the sea breeze be rustle and tumble in the wood and ruffle the grey surface of the anchorage ; the tide , too , be far out , and great tract of sand lie uncover ; the air , after the heat of the day , chill I through my jacket . 
 the HISPANIOLA still lay where she have anchor ; but , sure enough , there be the Jolly Roger the black flag of piracy fly from her peak . even as I look , there come another red flash and another report that send the echo clatter , and one more round - shot whistle through the air . it be the last of the cannonade . 
 I lay for some time watch the bustle which succeed the attack . man be demolish something with axis on the beach near the stockade the poor jolly - boat , I afterwards discover . away , near the mouth of the river , a great fire be glow among the tree , and between that point and the ship one of the gig keep come and go , the man , whom I have see so gloomy , shout at the oar like child . but there be a sound in their voice which suggest rum . 
 at length I think I might return towards the stockade . I be pretty far down on the low , sandy spit that enclose the anchorage to the east , and be join at half - water to Skeleton Island ; and now , as I rise to my foot , I see , some distance far down the spit and rise from among low bush , an isolated rock , pretty high , and peculiarly white in colour . it occur to I that this might be the white rock of which Ben Gunn have speak and that some day or other a boat might be want and I should know where to look for one . 
 then I skirt among the wood until I have regain the rear , or shoreward side , of the stockade , and be soon warmly welcome by the faithful party . 
 I have soon tell my story and begin to look about I . the log - house be make of unsquared trunk of pine roof , wall , and floor . the latter stand in several place as much as a foot or a foot and a half above the surface of the sand . there be a porch at the door , and under this porch the little spring well up into an artificial basin of a rather odd kind no other than a great ship 's kettle of iron , with the bottom knock out , and sink " to her bearing , " as the captain say , among the sand . 
 little have be leave besides the framework of the house , but in one corner there be a stone slab lay down by way of hearth and an old rusty iron basket to contain the fire . 
 the slope of the knoll and all the inside of the stockade have be clear of timber to build the house , and we could see by the stump what a fine and lofty grove have be destroy . Most of the soil have be wash away or bury in drift after the removal of the tree ; only where the streamlet run down from the kettle a thick bed of moss and some fern and little creep bush be still green among the sand . very close around the stockade too close for defence , they say the wood still flourish high and dense , all of fir on the land side , but towards the sea with a large admixture of live - oak . 
 the cold evening breeze , of which I have speak , whistle through every chink of the rude building and sprinkle the floor with a continual rain of fine sand . there be sand in our eye , sand in our tooth , sand in our supper , sand dance in the spring at the bottom of the kettle , for all the world like porridge begin to boil . our chimney be a square hole in the roof ; it be but a little part of the smoke that find its way out , and the rest eddy about the house and keep we cough and pip the eye . 
 add to this that Gray , the new man , have his face tie up in a bandage for a cut he have get in break away from the mutineer and that poor old Tom Redruth , still unburied , lie along the wall , stiff and stark , under the Union Jack . 
 if we have be allow to sit idle , we should all have fall in the blue , but Captain Smollett be never the man for that . all hand be call up before he , and he divide we into watch . the doctor and Gray and I for one ; the squire , Hunter , and Joyce upon the other . tired though we all be , two be send out for firewood ; two more be set to dig a grave for Redruth ; the doctor be name cook ; I be put sentry at the door ; and the captain himself go from one to another , keep up our spirit and lend a hand wherever it be want . 
 from time to time the doctor come to the door for a little air and to rest his eye , which be almost smoke out of his head , and whenever he do so , he have a word for I . 
 " that man Smollett , " he say once , " be a well man than I be . and when I say that it mean a deal , Jim . " 
 another time he come and be silent for a while . then he put his head on one side , and look at I . 
 " be this Ben Gunn a man ? " he ask . 
 " I do not know , sir , " say I. " I be not very sure whether he be sane . " 
 " if there be any doubt about the matter , he be , " return the doctor . " a man who have be three year bite his nail on a desert island , Jim , can not   expect to appear as sane as you or I . it do not   lie in human nature . be it cheese you say he have a fancy for ? " 
 " yes , sir , cheese , " I answer . 
 " well , Jim , " say he , " just see the good that come of be dainty in your food . you have   see my snuff - box , have not   you ? and you never see I take snuff , the reason be that in my snuff - box I carry a piece of Parmesan cheese a cheese make in Italy , very nutritious . well , that be for Ben Gunn ! " 
 before supper be eat we bury old Tom in the sand and stand round he for a while bare - headed in the breeze . a good deal of firewood have be get in , but not enough for the captain 's fancy , and he shake his head over it and tell we we " must get back to this tomorrow rather lively . " then , when we have eat our pork and each have a good stiff glass of brandy grog , the three chief get together in a corner to discuss our prospect . 
 it appear they be at their wit ' end what to do , the store be so low that we must have be starve into surrender long before help come . but our good hope , it be decide , be to kill off the buccaneer until they either haul down their flag or run away with the hispaniola . from nineteen they be already reduce to fifteen , two other be wound , and one at least the man shoot beside the gun severely wound , if he be not dead . every time we have a crack at they , we be to take it , save our own life , with the extreme care . and besides that , we have two able ally rum and the climate . 
 as for the first , though we be about half a mile away , we could hear they roar and sing late into the night ; and as for the second , the doctor stake his wig that , camp where they be in the marsh and unprovide with remedy , the half of they would be on their back before a week . 
 " so , " he add , " if we be not all shoot down first they will be glad to be pack in the schooner . it be always a ship , and they can get to buccaneer again , I suppose . " 
 " first ship that ever I lose , " say Captain Smollett . 
 I be dead tired , as you may fancy ; and when I get to sleep , which be not till after a great deal of tossing , I sleep like a log of wood . 
 the rest have long be up and have already breakfast and increase the pile of firewood by about half as much again when I be waken by a bustle and the sound of voice . 
 " Flag of truce ! " I hear someone say ; and then , immediately after , with a cry of surprise , " silver himself ! " 
 and at that , up I jump , and rub my eye , run to a loophole in the wall . 




 20 

 Silver 's Embassy 

 sure enough , there be two man just outside the stockade , one of they wave a white cloth , the other , no less a person than Silver himself , stand placidly by . 
 it be still quite early , and the cold morning that I think I ever be abroad in a chill that pierce into the marrow . the sky be bright and cloudless overhead , and the top of the tree shine rosily in the sun . but where Silver stand with his lieutenant , all be still in shadow , and they wad knee - deep in a low white vapour that have crawl during the night out of the morass . the chill and the vapour take together tell a poor tale of the island . it be plainly a damp , feverish , unhealthy spot . 
 " keep indoor , man , " say the captain . " ten to one this be a trick . " 
 then he hail the buccaneer . 
 " who go ? stand , or we fire . " 
 " Flag of truce , " cry Silver . 
 the captain be in the porch , keep himself carefully out of the way of a treacherous shot , should any be intend . he turn and speak to we , " Doctor 's watch on the lookout . Dr. Livesey take the north side , if you please ; Jim , the east ; Gray , west . the watch below , all hand to load musket . lively , man , and careful . " 
 and then he turn again to the mutineer . 
 " and what do you want with your flag of truce ? " he cry . 
 this time it be the other man who reply . 
 " Cap'n Silver , sir , to come on board and make term , " he shout . 
 " Cap'n silver ! do not   know he . who be he ? " cry the captain . and we could hear he add to himself , " Cap'n , be it ? my heart , and here 's promotion ! " 
 Long John answer for himself . " I , sir . these poor lad have choose I cap'n , after your desertion , sir " lay a particular emphasis upon the word " desertion . " " we be willing to submit , if we can come to term , and no bone about it . all I ask be your word , Cap'n Smollett , to let I safe and sound out of this here stockade , and one minute to get out o ' shot before a gun be fire . " 
 " my man , " say Captain Smollett , " I have not the slight desire to talk to you . if you wish to talk to I , you can come , that be all . if there be any treachery , it will be on your side , and the Lord help you . " 
 " that be enough , cap'n , " shout Long John cheerily . " a word from you be enough . I know a gentleman , and you may lay to that . " 
 we could see the man who carry the flag of truce attempt to hold Silver back . nor be that wonderful , see how cavali have be the captain 's answer . but Silver laugh at he aloud and slap he on the back as if the idea of alarm have be absurd . then he advance to the stockade , throw over his crutch , get a leg up , and with great vigour and skill succeed in surmount the fence and drop safely to the other side . 
 I will confess that I be far too much take up with what be go on to be of the slight use as sentry ; indeed , I have already desert my eastern loophole and creep up behind the captain , who have now seat himself on the threshold , with his elbow on his knee , his head in his hand , and his eye fix on the water as it bubble out of the old iron kettle in the sand . he be whistle " Come , Lasses and Lads . " 
 Silver have terrible hard work get up the knoll . what with the steepness of the incline , the thick tree stump , and the soft sand , he and his crutch be as helpless as a ship in stay . but he stick to it like a man in silence , and at last arrive before the captain , whom he salute in the handsome style . he be trick out in his good ; an immense blue coat , thick with brass button , hang as low as to his knee , and a fine laced hat be set on the back of his head . 
 " here you be , my man , " say the captain , raise his head . " you have well sit down . " 
 " you be not   a - go to let I inside , cap'n ? " complain Long John . " it be a main cold morning , to be sure , sir , to sit outside upon the sand . " 
 " why , silver , " say the captain , " if you have please to be an honest man , you might have be sit in your galley . it be your own doing . you be either my ship 's cook and then you be treat handsome or Cap'n Silver , a common mutineer and pirate , and then you can go hang ! " 
 " well , well , cap'n , " return the sea - cook , sit down as he be bid on the sand , " you will have to give I a hand up again , that be all . a sweet pretty place you have of it here . ah , there be Jim ! the top of the morning to you , Jim . Doctor , here be my service . why , there you all be together like a happy family , in a manner of speak . " 
 " if you have anything to say , my man , well say it , " say the captain . 
 " right you be , Cap'n Smollett , " reply Silver . " Dooty be dooty , to be sure . well now , you look here , that be a good lay of yours last night . I do not   deny it be a good lay . some of you pretty handy with a handspike - end . and I will not deny neither but what some of my people be shake maybe all be shake ; maybe I be shake myself ; maybe that be why I be here for term . but you mark I , cap'n , it will not   do twice , by thunder ! we will have to do sentry - go and ease off a point or so on the rum . maybe you think we be all a sheet in the wind 's eye . but I will tell you I be sober ; I be on'y dog tired ; and if I have awoke a second soon , I would ' a catch you at the act , I would . he be not   dead when I get round to he , not he . " 
 " well ? " say Captain Smollett as cool as can be . 
 all that Silver say be a riddle to he , but you would never have guess it from his tone . as for I , I begin to have an inkling . Ben Gunn 's last word come back to my mind . I begin to suppose that he have pay the buccaneer a visit while they all lay drunk together round their fire , and I reckon up with glee that we have only fourteen enemy to deal with . 
 " well , here it be , " say Silver . " we want that treasure , and we will have it that be our point ! you would just as soon save your life , I reckon ; and that be your . you have a chart , have not   you ? " 
 " that be as may be , " reply the captain . 
 " oh , well , you have , I know that , " return Long John . " you need not   be so husky with a man ; there be not   a particle of service in that , and you may lay to it . what I mean be , we want your chart . now , I never mean you no harm , myself . " 
 " that will not   do with I , my man , " interrupt the captain . " we know exactly what you mean to do , and we do not   care , for now , you see , you can not   do it . " 
 and the captain look at he calmly and proceed to fill a pipe . 
 " if Abe Gray " Silver break out . 
 " avast there ! " cry Mr. Smollett . " Gray tell I nothing , and I ask he nothing ; and what be more , I would see you and he and this whole island blow clean out of the water into blaze first . so there be my mind for you , my man , on that . " 
 this little whiff of temper seem to cool Silver down . he have be grow nettled before , but now he pull himself together . 
 " like enough , " say he . " I would set no limit to what gentleman might consider shipshape , or might not , as the case be . and seein ' as how you be about to take a pipe , cap'n , I will make so free as do likewise . " 
 and he fill a pipe and light it ; and the two man sit silently smoke for quite a while , now look each other in the face , now stop their tobacco , now lean forward to spit . it be as good as the play to see they . 
 " now , " resume Silver , " here it be . you give we the chart to get the treasure by , and drop shoot poor seaman and stoving of their head in while asleep . you do that , and we will offer you a choice . either you come aboard along of we , once the treasure ship , and then I will give you my affy - davy , upon my word of honour , to clap you somewhere safe ashore . or if that be not   to your fancy , some of my hand be rough and have old score on account of hazing , then you can stay here , you can . we will divide store with you , man for man ; and I will give my affy - davy , as before to speak the first ship I sight , and send them here to pick you up . now , you will own that be talk . handsomer you could not   look to get , now you . and I hope " raise his voice " that all hand in this here block house will overhaul my word , for what be speak to one be speak to all . " 
 Captain Smollett rise from his seat and knock out the ash of his pipe in the palm of his left hand . 
 " be that all ? " he ask . 
 " every last word , by thunder ! " answer John . " refuse that , and you have   see the last of I but musket - ball . " 
 " very good , " say the captain . " now you will hear I . if you will come up one by one , unarmed , I will engage to clap you all in iron and take you home to a fair trial in England . if you will not , my name be Alexander Smollett , I have   fly my sovereign 's colour , and I will see you all to Davy Jones . you can not   find the treasure . you can not   sail the ship there be not a man among you fit to sail the ship . you can not   fight we Gray , there , get away from five of you . your ship 's in iron , Master Silver ; you be on a lee shore , and so you will find . I stand here and tell you so ; and they be the last good word you will get from I , for in the name of heaven , I will put a bullet in your back when next I meet you . Tramp , my lad . bundle out of this , please , hand over hand , and double quick . " 
 Silver 's face be a picture ; his eye start in his head with wrath . he shake the fire out of his pipe . 
 " give I a hand up ! " he cry . 
 " not I , " return the captain . 
 " who will give I a hand up ? " he roar . 
 not a man among we move . growl the foul imprecation , he crawl along the sand till he get hold of the porch and could hoist himself again upon his crutch . then he spit into the spring . 
 " there ! " he cry . " that be what I think of ye . before an hour 's out , I will stove in your old block house like a rum puncheon . laugh , by thunder , laugh ! before an hour 's out , ye'll laugh upon the other side . they that die'll be the lucky one . " 
 and with a dreadful oath he stumble off , plough down the sand , be help across the stockade , after four or five failure , by the man with the flag of truce , and disappear in an instant afterwards among the tree . 




 21 

 the attack 

 as soon as Silver disappear , the captain , who have be closely watch he , turn towards the interior of the house and find not a man of we at his post but Gray . it be the first time we have ever see he angry . 
 " quarter ! " he roar . and then , as we all slunk back to our place , " Gray , " he say , " I will put your name in the log ; you have   stand by your duty like a seaman . Mr. Trelawney , I be surprised at you , sir . Doctor , I think you have wear the king 's coat ! if that be how you serve at Fontenoy , sir , you would have be well in your berth . " 
 the doctor 's watch be all back at their loophole , the rest be busy load the spare musket , and everyone with a red face , you may be certain , and a flea in his ear , as the saying be . 
 the captain look on for a while in silence . then he speak . 
 " my lad , " say he , " I have   give Silver a broadside . I pitch it in red - hot on purpose ; and before the hour 's out , as he say , we shall be board . we be outnumber , I need not   tell you that , but we fight in shelter ; and a minute ago I should have say we fight with discipline . I have   no manner of doubt that we can drub they , if you choose . " 
 then he go the round and see , as he say , that all be clear . 
 on the two short side of the house , east and west , there be only two loophole ; on the south side where the porch be , two again ; and on the north side , five . there be a round score of musket for the seven of we ; the firewood have be build into four pile table , you might say one about the middle of each side , and on each of these table some ammunition and four loaded musket be lay ready to the hand of the defender . in the middle , the cutlass lie range . 
 " toss out the fire , " say the captain ; " the chill be past , and we must not   have smoke in our eye . " 
 the iron fire - basket be carry bodily out by Mr. Trelawney , and the ember smother among sand . 
 " Hawkins have not   have his breakfast . Hawkins , help yourself , and back to your post to eat it , " continue Captain Smollett . " Lively , now , my lad ; you will want it before you have   do . Hunter , serve out a round of brandy to all hand . " 
 and while this be go on , the captain complete , in his own mind , the plan of the defence . 
 " Doctor , you will take the door , " he resume . " see , and do not   expose yourself ; keep within , and fire through the porch . hunter , take the east side , there . Joyce , you stand by the west , my man . Mr. Trelawney , you be the good shot you and Gray will take this long north side , with the five loophole ; it be there the danger be . if they can get up to it and fire in upon we through our own port , thing would begin to look dirty . Hawkins , neither you nor I be much account at the shooting ; we will stand by to load and bear a hand . " 
 as the captain have say , the chill be past . as soon as the sun have climb above our girdle of tree , it fall with all its force upon the clearing and drink up the vapour at a draught . soon the sand be bake and the resin melt in the log of the block house . jacket and coat be fling aside , shirt throw open at the neck and roll up to the shoulder ; and we stand there , each at his post , in a fever of heat and anxiety . 
 an hour pass away . 
 " hang they ! " say the captain . " this be as dull as the doldrums . Gray , whistle for a wind . " 
 and just at that moment come the first news of the attack . 
 " if you please , sir , " say Joyce , " if I see anyone , be I to fire ? " 
 " I tell you so ! " cry the captain . 
 " thank you , sir , " return Joyce with the same quiet civility . 
 nothing follow for a time , but the remark have set we all on the alert , strain ear and eye the musketeer with their piece balance in their hand , the captain out in the middle of the block house with his mouth very tight and a frown on his face . 
 so some second pass , till suddenly Joyce whip up his musket and fire . the report have scarcely die away ere it be repeat and repeat from without in a scatter volley , shoot behind shot , like a string of geese , from every side of the enclosure . several bullet strike the log - house , but not one enter ; and as the smoke clear away and vanish , the stockade and the wood around it look as quiet and empty as before . not a bough wave , not the gleam of a musket - barrel betray the presence of our foe . 
 " do you hit your man ? " ask the captain . 
 " no , sir , " reply Joyce . " I believe not , sir . " 
 " next good thing to tell the truth , " mutter Captain Smollett . " load his gun , Hawkins . how many should say there be on your side , doctor ? " 
 " I know precisely , " say Dr. Livesey . " three shot be fire on this side . I see the three flash two close together one farth to the west . " 
 " Three ! " repeat the captain . " and how many on your , Mr. Trelawney ? " 
 but this be not so easily answer . there have come many from the north seven by the squire 's computation , eight or nine accord to Gray . from the east and west only a single shot have be fire . it be plain , therefore , that the attack would be develop from the north and that on the other three side we be only to be annoy by a show of hostility . but Captain Smollett make no change in his arrangement . if the mutineer succeed in cross the stockade , he argue , they would take possession of any unprotected loophole and shoot we down like rat in our own stronghold . 
 nor have we much time leave to we for thought . suddenly , with a loud huzza , a little cloud of pirate leap from the wood on the north side and run straight on the stockade . at the same moment , the fire be once more open from the wood , and a rifle ball sing through the doorway and knock the doctor 's musket into bit . 
 the boarder swarm over the fence like monkey . squire and Gray fire again and yet again ; three man fall , one forwards into the enclosure , two back on the outside . but of these , one be evidently more frightened than hurt , for he be on his foot again in a crack and instantly disappear among the tree . 
 two have bite the dust , one have flee , four have make good their footing inside our defence , while from the shelter of the wood seven or eight man , each evidently supply with several musket , keep up a hot though useless fire on the log - house . 
 the four who have board make straight before they for the building , shout as they run , and the man among the tree shout back to encourage they . several shot be fire , but such be the hurry of the marksman that not one appear to have take effect . in a moment , the four pirate have swarm up the mound and be upon we . 
 the head of Job Anderson , the boatswain , appear at the middle loophole . 
 " at them , all hand all hand ! " he roar in a voice of thunder . 
 at the same moment , another pirate grasp Hunter 's musket by the muzzle , wrench it from his hand , pluck it through the loophole , and with one stunning blow , lay the poor fellow senseless on the floor . meanwhile a third , run unharmed all around the house , appear suddenly in the doorway and fall with his cutlass on the doctor . 
 our position be utterly reversed . a moment since we be fire , under cover , at an exposed enemy ; now it be we who lie uncovered and could not return a blow . 
 the log - house be full of smoke , to which we owe our comparative safety . cry and confusion , the flash and report of pistol - shot , and one loud groan ring in my ear . 
 " out , lad , out , and fight them in the open ! cutlass ! " cry the captain . 
 I snatch a cutlass from the pile , and someone , at the same time snatch another , give I a cut across the knuckle which I hardly feel . I dash out of the door into the clear sunlight . someone be close behind , I know not whom . right in front , the doctor be pursue his assailant down the hill , and just as my eye fall upon he , beat down his guard and send he sprawl on his back with a great slash across the face . 
 " round the house , lad ! round the house ! " cry the captain ; and even in the hurly - burly , I perceive a change in his voice . 
 mechanically , I obey , turn eastward , and with my cutlass raise , run round the corner of the house . next moment I be face to face with Anderson . he roar aloud , and his hanger go up above his head , flash in the sunlight . I have not time to be afraid , but as the blow still hang impending , leap in a trice upon one side , and miss my foot in the soft sand , roll headlong down the slope . 
 when I have first sally from the door , the other mutineer have be already swarm up the palisade to make an end of we . one man , in a red night - cap , with his cutlass in his mouth , have even get upon the top and throw a leg across . well , so short have be the interval that when I find my foot again all be in the same posture , the fellow with the red night - cap still half - way over , another still just show his head above the top of the stockade . and yet , in this breath of time , the fight be over and the victory be ours . 
 Gray , follow close behind I , have cut down the big boatswain ere he have time to recover from his last blow . another have be shoot at a loophole in the very act of fire into the house and now lay in agony , the pistol still smoke in his hand . a third , as I have see , the doctor have dispose of at a blow . of the four who have scale the palisade , one only remain unaccounted for , and he , have leave his cutlass on the field , be now clamber out again with the fear of death upon he . 
 " fire fire from the house ! " cry the doctor . " and you , lad , back into cover . " 
 but his word be unheeded , no shot be fire , and the last boarder make good his escape and disappear with the rest into the wood . in three second nothing remain of the attack party but the five who have fall , four on the inside and one on the outside of the palisade . 
 the doctor and Gray and I run full speed for shelter . the survivor would soon be back where they have leave their musket , and at any moment the fire might recommence . 
 the house be by this time somewhat clear of smoke , and we see at a glance the price we have pay for victory . hunter lie beside his loophole , stun ; Joyce by his , shoot through the head , never to move again ; while right in the centre , the squire be support the captain , one as pale as the other . 
 " the captain 's wound , " say Mr. Trelawney . 
 " have they run ? " ask Mr. Smollett . 
 " all that could , you may be bind , " return the doctor ; " but there be five of they will never run again . " 
 " five ! " cry the captain . " come , that be well . five against three leaf we four to nine . that be well odd than we have at start . we be seven to nineteen then , or think we be , and that be as bad to bear . " 
  the mutineer be soon only eight in number , for the man shoot by Mr. Trelawney on board the schooner die that same evening of his wound . but this be , of course , not know till after by the faithful party . 




 PART five my Sea Adventure 





 22 

 how my Sea Adventure begin 

 there be no return of the mutineer not so much as another shot out of the wood . they have " get their ration for that day , " as the captain put it , and we have the place to ourselves and a quiet time to overhaul the wounded and get dinner . squire and I cook outside in spite of the danger , and even outside we could hardly tell what we be at , for horror of the loud groan that reach we from the doctor 's patient . 
 out of the eight man who have fall in the action , only three still breathe that one of the pirate who have be shoot at the loophole , Hunter , and Captain Smollett ; and of these , the first two be as good as dead ; the mutineer indeed die under the doctor 's knife , and Hunter , do what we could , never recover consciousness in this world . he linger all day , breathe loudly like the old buccaneer at home in his apoplectic fit , but the bone of his chest have be crush by the blow and his skull fracture in fall , and some time in the follow night , without sign or sound , he go to his maker . 
 as for the captain , his wound be grievous indeed , but not dangerous . no organ be fatally injure . Anderson 's ball for it be Job that shoot he first have break his shoulder - blade and touch the lung , not badly ; the second have only tear and displace some muscle in the calf . he be sure to recover , the doctor say , but in the meantime , and for week to come , he must not walk nor move his arm , nor so much as speak when he could help it . 
 my own accidental cut across the knuckle be a flea - bite . Doctor Livesey patch it up with plaster and pull my ear for I into the bargain . 
 after dinner the squire and the doctor sit by the captain 's side awhile in consultation ; and when they have talk to their heart ' content , it be then a little past noon , the doctor take up his hat and pistol , girt on a cutlass , put the chart in his pocket , and with a musket over his shoulder cross the palisade on the north side and set off briskly through the tree . 
 Gray and I be sit together at the far end of the block house , to be out of earshot of our officer consult ; and Gray take his pipe out of his mouth and fairly forget to put it back again , so thunder - strike he be at this occurrence . 
 " why , in the name of Davy Jones , " say he , " be Dr. Livesey mad ? " 
 " why no , " say I. " he be about the last of this crew for that , I take it . " 
 " well , shipmate , " say Gray , " mad he may not be ; but if he be not , you mark my word , I be . " 
 " I take it , " reply I , " the doctor have his idea ; and if I be right , he be go now to see Ben Gunn . " 
 I be right , as appear later ; but in the meantime , the house be stifle hot and the little patch of sand inside the palisade ablaze with midday sun , I begin to get another thought into my head , which be not by any mean so right . what I begin to do be to envy the doctor walk in the cool shadow of the wood with the bird about he and the pleasant smell of the pine , while I sit grilling , with my clothe stick to the hot resin , and so much blood about I and so many poor dead body lie all around that I take a disgust of the place that be almost as strong as fear . 
 all the time I be wash out the block house , and then wash up the thing from dinner , this disgust and envy keep grow strong and strong , till at last , be near a bread - bag , and no one then observe I , I take the first step towards my escapade and fill both pocket of my coat with biscuit . 
 I be a fool , if you like , and certainly I be go to do a foolish , over - bold act ; but I be determined to do it with all the precaution in my power . these biscuit , should anything befall I , would keep I , at least , from starve till far on in the next day . 
 the next thing I lay hold of be a brace of pistol , and as I already have a powder - horn and bullet , I feel myself well supply with arm . 
 as for the scheme I have in my head , it be not a bad one in itself . I be to go down the sandy spit that divide the anchorage on the east from the open sea , find the white rock I have observe last evening , and ascertain whether it be there or not that Ben Gunn have hide his boat , a thing quite worth do , as I still believe . but as I be certain I should not be allow to leave the enclosure , my only plan be to take french leave and slip out when nobody be watch , and that be so bad a way of do it as make the thing itself wrong . but I be only a boy , and I have make my mind up . 
 well , as thing at last fall out , I find an admirable opportunity . the squire and Gray be busy help the captain with his bandage , the coast be clear , I make a bolt for it over the stockade and into the thickest of the tree , and before my absence be observe I be out of cry of my companion . 
 this be my second folly , far bad than the first , as I leave but two sound man to guard the house ; but like the first , it be a help towards save all of we . 
 I take my way straight for the east coast of the island , for I be determined to go down the sea side of the spit to avoid all chance of observation from the anchorage . it be already late in the afternoon , although still warm and sunny . as I continue to thread the tall wood , I could hear from far before I not only the continuous thunder of the surf , but a certain tossing of foliage and grinding of bough which show I the sea breeze have set in high than usual . soon cool draught of air begin to reach I , and a few step far I come forth into the open border of the grove , and see the sea lie blue and sunny to the horizon and the surf tumble and toss its foam along the beach . 
 I have never see the sea quiet round Treasure Island . the sun might blaze overhead , the air be without a breath , the surface smooth and blue , but still these great roller would be run along all the external coast , thunder and thunder by day and night ; and I scarce believe there be one spot in the island where a man would be out of earshot of their noise . 
 I walk along beside the surf with great enjoyment , till , think I be now get far enough to the south , I take the cover of some thick bush and creep warily up to the ridge of the spit . 
 behind I be the sea , in front the anchorage . the sea breeze , as though it have the soon blow itself out by its unusual violence , be already at an end ; it have be succeed by light , variable air from the south and south - east , carry great bank of fog ; and the anchorage , under lee of Skeleton Island , lie still and leaden as when first we enter it . the hispaniola , in that unbroken mirror , be exactly portray from the truck to the waterline , the Jolly Roger hang from her peak . 
 alongside lie one of the gig , silver in the stern - sheet he I could always recognize while a couple of man be lean over the stern bulwark , one of they with a red cap the very rogue that I have see some hour before stride - leg upon the palisade . apparently they be talk and laugh , though at that distance upwards of a mile I could , of course , hear no word of what be say . all at once there begin the most horrid , unearthly scream , which at first startle I badly , though I have soon remember the voice of Captain Flint and even think I could make out the bird by her bright plumage as she sit perch upon her master 's wrist . 
 soon after , the jolly - boat shove off and pull for shore , and the man with the red cap and his comrade go below by the cabin companion . 
 just about the same time , the sun have go down behind the Spy - glass , and as the fog be collect rapidly , it begin to grow dark in earnest . I see I must lose no time if I be to find the boat that evening . 
 the white rock , visible enough above the brush , be still some eighth of a mile far down the spit , and it take I a goodish while to get up with it , crawl , often on all four , among the scrub . night have almost come when I lay my hand on its rough side . right below it there be an exceedingly small hollow of green turf , hide by bank and a thick underwood about knee - deep , that grow there very plentifully ; and in the centre of the dell , sure enough , a little tent of goat - skin , like what the gipsy carry about with they in England . 
 I drop into the hollow , lift the side of the tent , and there be Ben Gunn 's boat home - make if ever anything be home - make ; a rude , lop - sided framework of tough wood , and stretch upon that a covering of goat - skin , with the hair inside . the thing be extremely small , even for I , and I can hardly imagine that it could have float with a full - sized man . there be one thwart set as low as possible , a kind of stretcher in the bow , and a double paddle for propulsion . 
 I have not then see a coracle , such as the ancient Britons make , but I have see one since , and I can give you no fairer idea of Ben Gunn 's boat than by say it be like the first and the bad coracle ever make by man . but the great advantage of the coracle it certainly possess , for it be exceedingly light and portable . 
 well , now that I have find the boat , you would have think I have have enough of truantry for once , but in the meantime I have take another notion and become so obstinately fond of it that I would have carry it out , I believe , in the tooth of Captain Smollett himself . this be to slip out under cover of the night , cut the hispaniola adrift , and let she go ashore where she fancy . I have quite make up my mind that the mutineer , after their repulse of the morning , have nothing nearer their heart than to up anchor and away to sea ; this , I think , it would be a fine thing to prevent , and now that I have see how they leave their watchman unprovide with a boat , I think it might be do with little risk . 
 down I sit to wait for darkness , and make a hearty meal of biscuit . it be a night out of ten thousand for my purpose . the fog have now bury all heaven . as the last ray of daylight dwindle and disappear , absolute blackness settle down on Treasure Island . and when , at last , I shoulder the coracle and grope my way stumblingly out of the hollow where I have sup , there be but two point visible on the whole anchorage . 
 one be the great fire on shore , by which the defeat pirate lie carouse in the swamp . the other , a mere blur of light upon the darkness , indicate the position of the anchor ship . she have swing round to the ebb her bow be now towards I the only light on board be in the cabin , and what I see be merely a reflection on the fog of the strong ray that flow from the stern window . 
 the ebb have already run some time , and I have to wade through a long belt of swampy sand , where I sink several time above the ankle , before I come to the edge of the retreating water , and wad a little way in , with some strength and dexterity , set my coracle , keel downward , on the surface . 




 23 

 the Ebb - tide run 

 the coracle as I have ample reason to know before I be do with she be a very safe boat for a person of my height and weight , both buoyant and clever in a seaway ; but she be the most cross - grain , lop - sided craft to manage . do as you please , she always make more leeway than anything else , and turn round and round be the manoeuvre she be good at . even Ben Gunn himself have admit that she be " queer to handle till you know her way . " 
 certainly I do not know her way . she turn in every direction but the one I be bind to go ; the most part of the time we be broadside on , and I be very sure I never should have make the ship at all but for the tide . by good fortune , paddle as I please , the tide be still sweep I down ; and there lie the hispaniola right in the fairway , hardly to be miss . 
 first she loom before I like a blot of something yet black than darkness , then her spar and hull begin to take shape , and the next moment , as it seem   for , the far I go , the brisker grow the current of the ebb , I be alongside of her hawser and have lay hold . 
 the hawser be as taut as a bowstring , and the current so strong she pull upon her anchor . all round the hull , in the blackness , the ripple current bubble and chatter like a little mountain stream . one cut with my sea - gully and the hispaniola would go hum down the tide . 
 so far so good , but it next occur to my recollection that a taut hawser , suddenly cut , be a thing as dangerous as a kicking horse . ten to one , if I be so foolhardy as to cut the hispaniola from her anchor , I and the coracle would be knock clean out of the water . 
 this bring I to a full stop , and if fortune have not again particularly favour I , I should have have to abandon my design . but the light air which have begin blow from the south - east and south have haul round after nightfall into the south - west . just while I be meditate , a puff come , catch the hispaniola , and force she up into the current ; and to my great joy , I feel the hawser slacken in my grasp , and the hand by which I hold it dip for a second under water . 
 with that I make my mind up , take out my gully , open it with my tooth , and cut one strand after another , till the vessel swing only by two . then I lay quiet , wait to sever these last when the strain should be once more lighten by a breath of wind . 
 all this time I have hear the sound of loud voice from the cabin , but to say truth , my mind have be so entirely take up with other thought that I have scarcely give ear . now , however , when I have nothing else to do , I begin to pay more heed . 
 one I recognize for the coxswain 's , Israel Hands , that have be Flint 's gunner in former day . the other be , of course , my friend of the red night - cap . both man be plainly the bad of drink , and they be still drink , for even while I be listen , one of they , with a drunken cry , open the stern window and throw out something , which I divine to be an empty bottle . but they be not only tipsy ; it be plain that they be furiously angry . oath fly like hailstone , and every now and then there come forth such an explosion as I think be sure to end in blow . but each time the quarrel pass off and the voice grumble lower for a while , until the next crisis come and in its turn pass away without result . 
 on shore , I could see the glow of the great camp - fire burn warmly through the shore - side tree . someone be sing , a dull , old , drone sailor 's song , with a droop and a quaver at the end of every verse , and seemingly no end to it at all but the patience of the singer . I have hear it on the voyage more than once and remember these word : 
  " but one man of her crew alive , 
  what put to sea with seventy - five . " 
 and I think it be a ditty rather too dolefully appropriate for a company that have meet such cruel loss in the morning . but , indeed , from what I see , all these buccaneer be as callous as the sea they sail on . 
 at last the breeze come ; the schooner sidle and draw nearer in the dark ; I feel the hawser slacken once more , and with a good , tough effort , cut the last fibre through . 
 the breeze have but little action on the coracle , and I be almost instantly sweep against the bow of the hispaniola . at the same time , the schooner begin to turn upon her heel , spin slowly , end for end , across the current . 
 I work like a fiend , for I expect every moment to be swamp ; and since I find I could not push the coracle directly off , I now shove straight astern . at length I be clear of my dangerous neighbour , and just as I give the last impulsion , my hand come across a light cord that be trail overboard across the stern bulwark . instantly I grasp it . 
 why I should have do so I can hardly say . it be at first mere instinct , but once I have it in my hand and find it fast , curiosity begin to get the upper hand , and I determine I should have one look through the cabin window . 
 I pull in hand over hand on the cord , and when I judge myself near enough , rise at infinite risk to about half my height and thus command the roof and a slice of the interior of the cabin . 
 by this time the schooner and her little consort be glide pretty swiftly through the water ; indeed , we have already fetch up level with the camp - fire . the ship be talk , as sailor say , loudly , tread the innumerable ripple with an incessant weltering splash ; and until I get my eye above the window - sill I could not comprehend why the watchman have take no alarm . one glance , however , be sufficient ; and it be only one glance that I durst take from that unsteady skiff . it show I Hands and his companion lock together in deadly wrestle , each with a hand upon the other 's throat . 
 I drop upon the thwart again , none too soon , for I be near overboard . I could see nothing for the moment but these two furious , encrimsoned face sway together under the smoky lamp , and I shut my eye to let they grow once more familiar with the darkness . 
 the endless ballad have come to an end at last , and the whole diminished company about the camp - fire have break into the chorus I have hear so often : 
  " fifteen man on the dead man 's chest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! 
  drink and the devil have do for the rest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! " 
 I be just think how busy drink and the devil be at that very moment in the cabin of the HISPANIOLA , when I be surprise by a sudden lurch of the coracle . at the same moment , she yaw sharply and seem to change her course . the speed in the meantime have strangely increase . 
 I open my eye at once . all round I be little ripple , comb over with a sharp , bristle sound and slightly phosphorescent . the hispaniola herself , a few yard in whose wake I be still be whirl along , seem to stagger in her course , and I see her spar toss a little against the blackness of the night ; nay , as I look long , I make sure she also be wheel to the southward . 
 I glance over my shoulder , and my heart jump against my rib . there , right behind I , be the glow of the camp - fire . the current have turn at right angle , sweeping round along with it the tall schooner and the little dancing coracle ; ever quicken , ever bubble high , ever mutter louder , it go spin through the narrow for the open sea . 
 suddenly the schooner in front of I give a violent yaw , turn , perhaps , through twenty degree ; and almost at the same moment one shout follow another from on board ; I could hear foot pound on the companion ladder and I know that the two drunkard have at last be interrupt in their quarrel and awaken to a sense of their disaster . 
 I lie down flat in the bottom of that wretched skiff and devoutly recommend my spirit to its maker . at the end of the strait , I make sure we must fall into some bar of rag breaker , where all my trouble would be end speedily ; and though I could , perhaps , bear to die , I could not bear to look upon my fate as it approach . 
 so I must have lain for hour , continually beat to and fro upon the billow , now and again wet with flying spray , and never cease to expect death at the next plunge . gradually weariness grow upon I ; a numbness , an occasional stupor , fall upon my mind even in the midst of my terror , until sleep at last supervene and in my sea - toss coracle I lay and dream of home and the old Admiral Benbow . 




 24 

 the Cruise of the Coracle 

 it be broad day when I awake and find myself toss at the south - west end of Treasure Island . the sun be up but be still hide from I behind the great bulk of the Spy - glass , which on this side descend almost to the sea in formidable cliff . 
 Haulbowline Head and Mizzen - mast Hill be at my elbow , the hill bare and dark , the head bind with cliff forty or fifty foot high and fringe with great mass of fall rock . I be scarce a quarter of a mile to seaward , and it be my first thought to paddle in and land . 
 that notion be soon give over . among the fall rock the breaker spout and bellowed ; loud reverberation , heavy spray fly and fall , succeed one another from second to second ; and I see myself , if I venture near , dash to death upon the rough shore or spend my strength in vain to scale the beetle crag . 
 nor be that all , for crawl together on flat table of rock or let themselves drop into the sea with loud report I behold huge slimy monster soft snail , as it be , of incredible bigness two or three score of they together , make the rock to echo with their barking . 
 I have understand since that they be sea lion , and entirely harmless . but the look of they , add to the difficulty of the shore and the high running of the surf , be more than enough to disgust I of that landing - place . I feel willing rather to starve at sea than to confront such peril . 
 in the meantime I have a well chance , as I suppose , before I . North of Haulbowline Head , the land run in a long way , leave at low tide a long stretch of yellow sand . to the north of that , again , there come another cape Cape of the Woods , as it be mark upon the chart bury in tall green pine , which descend to the margin of the sea . 
 I remember what Silver have say about the current that set northward along the whole west coast of Treasure Island , and see from my position that I be already under its influence , I prefer to leave Haulbowline Head behind I and reserve my strength for an attempt to land upon the kindlier - look cape of the Woods . 
 there be a great , smooth swell upon the sea . the wind blow steady and gentle from the south , there be no contrariety between that and the current , and the billow rise and fall unbroken . 
 have it be otherwise , I must long ago have perish ; but as it be , it be surprising how easily and securely my little and light boat could ride . often , as I still lie at the bottom and keep no more than an eye above the gunwale , I would see a big blue summit heave close above I ; yet the coracle would but bounce a little , dance as if on spring , and subside on the other side into the trough as lightly as a bird . 
 I begin after a little to grow very bold and sit up to try my skill at paddle . but even a small change in the disposition of the weight will produce violent change in the behaviour of a coracle . and I have hardly move before the boat , give up at once her gentle dancing movement , run straight down a slope of water so steep that it make I giddy , and strike her nose , with a spout of spray , deep into the side of the next wave . 
 I be drench and terrify , and fall instantly back into my old position , whereupon the coracle seem to find her head again and lead I as softly as before among the billow . it be plain she be not to be interfere with , and at that rate , since I could in no way influence her course , what hope have I leave of reach land ? 
 I begin to be horribly frightened , but I keep my head , for all that . first , move with all care , I gradually bale out the coracle with my sea - cap ; then , get my eye once more above the gunwale , I set myself to study how it be she manage to slip so quietly through the roller . 
 I find each wave , instead of the big , smooth glossy mountain it look from shore or from a vessel 's deck , be for all the world like any range of hill on dry land , full of peak and smooth place and valley . the coracle , leave to herself , turn from side to side , thread , so to speak , her way through these low part and avoid the steep slope and high , topple summit of the wave . 
 " well , now , " think I to myself , " it be plain I must lie where I be and not disturb the balance ; but it be plain also that I can put the paddle over the side and from time to time , in smooth place , give she a shove or two towards land . " no soon think upon than do . there I lay on my elbow in the most try attitude , and every now and again give a weak stroke or two to turn her head to shore . 
 it be very tiring and slow work , yet I do visibly gain ground ; and as we draw near the Cape of the Woods , though I see I must infallibly miss that point , I have still make some hundred yard of easting . I be , indeed , close in . I could see the cool green tree - top sway together in the breeze , and I feel sure I should make the next promontory without fail . 
 it be high time , for I now begin to be torture with thirst . the glow of the sun from above , its thousandfold reflection from the wave , the sea - water that fall and dry upon I , cake my very lip with salt , combine to make my throat burn and my brain ache . the sight of the tree so near at hand have almost make I sick with longing , but the current have soon carry I past the point , and as the next reach of sea open out , I behold a sight that change the nature of my thought . 
 right in front of I , not half a mile away , I behold the hispaniola under sail . I make sure , of course , that I should be take ; but I be so distressed for want of water that I scarce know whether to be glad or sorry at the thought , and long before I have come to a conclusion , surprise have take entire possession of my mind and I could do nothing but stare and wonder . 
 the hispaniola be under her main - sail and two jib , and the beautiful white canvas shine in the sun like snow or silver . when I first sight she , all her sail be draw ; she be lie a course about north - west , and I presume the man on board be go round the island on their way back to the anchorage . presently she begin to fetch more and more to the westward , so that I think they have sight I and be go about in chase . at last , however , she fall right into the wind 's eye , be take dead aback , and stand there awhile helpless , with her sail shiver . 
 " clumsy fellow , " say I ; " they must still be drunk as owl . " and I think how Captain Smollett would have set they skip . 
 meanwhile the schooner gradually fall off and fill again upon another tack , sail swiftly for a minute or so , and bring up once more dead in the wind 's eye . again and again be this repeat . to and fro , up and down , north , south , east , and west , the hispaniola sail by swoop and dash , and at each repetition end as she have begin , with idly flap canvas . it become plain to I that nobody be steer . and if so , where be the man ? either they be dead drunk or have desert she , I think , and perhaps if I could get on board I might return the vessel to her captain . 
 the current be bear coracle and schooner southward at an equal rate . as for the latter 's sailing , it be so wild and intermittent , and she hang each time so long in iron , that she certainly gain nothing , if she do not even lose . if only I dare to sit up and paddle , I make sure that I could overhaul she . the scheme have an air of adventure that inspire I , and the thought of the water breaker beside the fore companion double my grow courage . 
 up I get , be welcome almost instantly by another cloud of spray , but this time stick to my purpose and set myself , with all my strength and caution , to paddle after the unsteered hispaniola . once I ship a sea so heavy that I have to stop and bail , with my heart flutter like a bird , but gradually I get into the way of the thing and guide my coracle among the wave , with only now and then a blow upon her bow and a dash of foam in my face . 
 I be now gain rapidly on the schooner ; I could see the brass glisten on the tiller as it bang about , and still no soul appear upon her deck . I could not choose but suppose she be desert . if not , the man be lie drunk below , where I might batten they down , perhaps , and do what I choose with the ship . 
 for some time she have be do the bad thing possible for I stand still . she head nearly due south , yawing , of course , all the time . each time she fall off , her sail partly fill , and these bring she in a moment right to the wind again . I have say this be the bad thing possible for I , for helpless as she look in this situation , with the canvas cracking like cannon and the block trundling and bang on the deck , she still continue to run away from I , not only with the speed of the current , but by the whole amount of her leeway , which be naturally great . 
 but now , at last , I have my chance . the breeze fall for some second , very low , and the current gradually turn she , the hispaniola revolve slowly round her centre and at last present I her stern , with the cabin window still gap open and the lamp over the table still burn on into the day . the main - sail hung droop like a banner . she be stock - still but for the current . 
 for the last little while I have even lose , but now redouble my effort , I begin once more to overhaul the chase . 
 I be not a hundred yard from she when the wind come again in a clap ; she fill on the port tack and be off again , stoop and skim like a swallow . 
 my first impulse be one of despair , but my second be towards joy . round she come , till she be broadside on to I round still till she have cover a half and then two third and then three quarter of the distance that separate we . I could see the wave boil white under her forefoot . immensely tall she look to I from my low station in the coracle . 
 and then , of a sudden , I begin to comprehend . I have scarce time to think scarce time to act and save myself . I be on the summit of one swell when the schooner come stoop over the next . the bowsprit be over my head . I spring to my foot and leap , stamp the coracle under water . with one hand I catch the jib - boom , while my foot be lodge between the stay and the brace ; and as I still clung there pant , a dull blow tell I that the schooner have charge down upon and strike the coracle and that I be leave without retreat on the HISPANIOLA . 




 25 

 I strike the Jolly Roger 

 I had scarce gain a position on the bowsprit when the fly jib flap and fill upon the other tack , with a report like a gun . the schooner tremble to her keel under the reverse , but next moment , the other sail still draw , the jib flap back again and hung idle . 
 this have nearly toss I off into the sea ; and now I lose no time , crawl back along the bowsprit , and tumble head foremost on the deck . 
 I be on the lee side of the forecastle , and the mainsail , which be still draw , conceal from I a certain portion of the after - deck . not a soul be to be see . the plank , which have not be swab since the mutiny , bear the print of many foot , and an empty bottle , break by the neck , tumble to and fro like a live thing in the scupper . 
 suddenly the hispaniola come right into the wind . the jib behind I crack aloud , the rudder slam to , the whole ship give a sickening heave and shudder , and at the same moment the main - boom swung inboard , the sheet groaning in the block , and show I the lee after - deck . 
 there be the two watchman , sure enough : red - cap on his back , as stiff as a handspike , with his arm stretch out like those of a crucifix and his tooth show through his open lip ; Israel Hands prop against the bulwark , his chin on his chest , his hand lie open before he on the deck , his face as white , under its tan , as a tallow candle . 
 for a while the ship keep buck and sidle like a vicious horse , the sail filling , now on one tack , now on another , and the boom swing to and fro till the mast groan aloud under the strain . now and again too there would come a cloud of light spray over the bulwark and a heavy blow of the ship 's bow against the swell ; so much heavy weather be make of it by this great rig ship than by my home - make , lop - sided coracle , now go to the bottom of the sea . 
 at every jump of the schooner , red - cap slip to and fro , but what be ghastly to behold neither his attitude nor his fix tooth - disclose grin be anyway disturb by this rough usage . at every jump too , Hands appear still more to sink into himself and settle down upon the deck , his foot slide ever the far out , and the whole body cant towards the stern , so that his face become , little by little , hide from I ; and at last I could see nothing beyond his ear and the fray ringlet of one whisker . 
 at the same time , I observe , around both of they , splash of dark blood upon the plank and begin to feel sure that they have kill each other in their drunken wrath . 
 while I be thus look and wonder , in a calm moment , when the ship be still , Israel Hands turn partly round and with a low moan writhe himself back to the position in which I have see he first . the moan , which tell of pain and deadly weakness , and the way in which his jaw hung open go right to my heart . but when I remember the talk I have overhear from the apple barrel , all pity leave I . 
 I walk aft until I reach the main - mast . 
 " come aboard , Mr. Hands , " I say ironically . 
 he roll his eye round heavily , but he be too far go to express surprise . all he could do be to utter one word , " Brandy . " 
 it occur to I there be no time to lose , and dodge the boom as it once more lurch across the deck , I slip aft and down the companion stair into the cabin . 
 it be such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy . all the lockfast place have be break open in quest of the chart . the floor be thick with mud where ruffians have sit down to drink or consult after wad in the marsh round their camp . the bulkhead , all paint in clear white and bead round with gilt , bear a pattern of dirty hand . dozen of empty bottle clink together in corner to the rolling of the ship . one of the doctor 's medical book lie open on the table , half of the leaf gutte out , I suppose , for pipelight . in the midst of all this the lamp still cast a smoky glow , obscure and brown as umber . 
 I go into the cellar ; all the barrel be go , and of the bottle a most surprising number have be drunk out and throw away . certainly , since the mutiny begin , not a man of they could ever have be sober . 
 forage about , I find a bottle with some brandy leave , for Hands ; and for myself I rout out some biscuit , some pickle fruit , a great bunch of raisin , and a piece of cheese . with these I come on deck , put down my own stock behind the rudder head and well out of the coxswain 's reach , go forward to the water - breaker , and have a good deep drink of water , and then , and not till then , give Hands the brandy . 
 he must have drink a gill before he take the bottle from his mouth . 
 " Aye , " say he , " by thunder , but I want some o ' that ! " 
 I have sit down already in my own corner and begin to eat . 
 " much hurt ? " I ask he . 
 he grunt , or rather , I might say , he bark . 
 " if that doctor be aboard , " he say , " I would be right enough in a couple of turn , but I do not   have no manner of luck , you see , and that be what be the matter with I . as for that swab , he be good and dead , he be , " he add , indicate the man with the red cap . " he warn't   no seaman anyhow . and where mought you have come from ? " 
 " well , " say I , " I have   come aboard to take possession of this ship , Mr. Hands ; and you will please regard I as your captain until further notice . " 
 he look at I sourly enough but say nothing . some of the colour have come back into his cheek , though he still look very sick and still continue to slip out and settle down as the ship bang about . 
 " by the by , " I continue , " I can not   have these colour , Mr. Hands ; and by your leave , I will strike them . well none than these . " 
 and again dodge the boom , I run to the colour line , hand down their cursed black flag , and chuck it overboard . 
 " God save the king ! " say I , wave my cap . " and there be an end to Captain Silver ! " 
 he watch I keenly and slyly , his chin all the while on his breast . 
 " I reckon , " he say at last , " I reckon , Cap'n Hawkins , you will kind of want to get ashore now . s'pose we talk . " 
 " why , yes , " say I , " with all my heart , Mr. Hands . say on . " and I go back to my meal with a good appetite . 
 " this man , " he begin , nod feebly at the corpse " O'Brien be his name , a rank irelander this man and I get the canvas on she , mean for to sail she back . well , he be dead now , he be as dead as bilge ; and who be to sail this ship , I do not   see . without I give you a hint , you be not   that man , as far be I can tell . now , look here , you give I food and drink and a old scarf or ankecher to tie my wound up , you do , and I will tell you how to sail she , and that be about square all round , I take it . " 
 " I will tell you one thing , " say I : " I be not go back to Captain Kidd 's anchorage . I mean to get into North Inlet and beach she quietly there . " 
 " to be sure you do , " he cry . " why , I be not   sich an infernal lubber after all . I can see , can not   I ? I have   try my fling , I have , and I have   lose , and it be you have the wind of I . North Inlet ? why , I have not   no ch'ice , not I ! I would help you sail she up to Execution Dock , by thunder ! so I would . " 
 well , as it seem to I , there be some sense in this . we strike our bargain on the spot . in three minute I have the hispaniola sailing easily before the wind along the coast of Treasure Island , with good hope of turn the northern point ere noon and beat down again as far as North Inlet before high water , when we might beach she safely and wait till the subside tide permit we to land . 
 then I lash the tiller and go below to my own chest , where I get a soft silk handkerchief of my mother 's . with this , and with my aid , Hands bind up the great bleed stab he have receive in the thigh , and after he have eat a little and have a swallow or two more of the brandy , he begin to pick up visibly , sit straighter up , speak louder and clear , and look in every way another man . 
 the breeze serve we admirably . we skim before it like a bird , the coast of the island flash by and the view change every minute . soon we be past the high land and bowl beside low , sandy country , sparsely dot with dwarf pine , and soon we be beyond that again and have turn the corner of the rocky hill that end the island on the north . 
 I be greatly elated with my new command , and please with the bright , sunshiny weather and these different prospect of the coast . I have now plenty of water and good thing to eat , and my conscience , which have smite I hard for my desertion , be quiet by the great conquest I have make . I should , I think , have have nothing leave I to desire but for the eye of the coxswain as they follow I derisively about the deck and the odd smile that appear continually on his face . it be a smile that have in it something both of pain and weakness a haggard old man 's smile ; but there be , besides that , a grain of derision , a shadow of treachery , in his expression as he craftily watch , and watch , and watch I at my work . 




 26 

 Israel Hands 

 the wind , serve we to a desire , now haul into the west . we could run so much the easy from the north - east corner of the island to the mouth of the North Inlet . only , as we have no power to anchor and dare not beach she till the tide have flow a good deal far , time hang on our hand . the coxswain tell I how to lay the ship to ; after a good many trial I succeed , and we both sit in silence over another meal . 
 " Cap'n , " say he at length with that same uncomfortable smile , " here be my old shipmate , O'Brien ; s'pose you be to heave he overboard . I be not   partic'lar as a rule , and I do not   take no blame for settle his hash , but I do not   reckon he ornamental now , do you ? " 
 " I be not strong enough , and I do not   like the job ; and there he lie , for I , " say I. 
 " this here be an unlucky ship , this hispaniola , Jim , " he go on , blink . " there be a power of man be kill in this hispaniola a sight o ' poor seaman dead and go since you and I take ship to Bristol . I never see sich dirty luck , not I. there be this here O'Brien now he be dead , be not   he ? well now , I be no scholar , and you be a lad as can read and figure , and to put it straight , do you take it as a dead man be dead for good , or do he come alive again ? " 
 " you can kill the body , Mr. Hands , but not the spirit ; you must know that already , " I reply . " O'Brien there be in another world , and may be watch we . " 
 " ah ! " say he . " well , that be unfort'nate appear as if kill party be a waste of time . Howsomever , sperrit do not   reckon for much , by what I have   see . I will chance it with the sperrit , Jim . and now , you have   speak up free , and I will take it kind if you would step down into that there cabin and get I a well , a shiver my timber ! I can not   hit the name on ' t ; well , you get I a bottle of wine , Jim this here brandy 's too strong for my head . " 
 now , the coxswain 's hesitation seem to be unnatural , and as for the notion of his prefer wine to brandy , I entirely disbelieve it . the whole story be a pretext . he want I to leave the deck so much be plain ; but with what purpose I could in no way imagine . his eye never meet mine ; they keep wander to and fro , up and down , now with a look to the sky , now with a flitting glance upon the dead O'Brien . all the time he keep smile and put his tongue out in the most guilty , embarrassed manner , so that a child could have tell that he be bent on some deception . I be prompt with my answer , however , for I see where my advantage lie and that with a fellow so densely stupid I could easily conceal my suspicion to the end . 
 " some wine ? " I say . " far well . will you have white or red ? " 
 " well , I reckon it be about the blessed same to I , shipmate , " he reply ; ' so it be strong , and plenty of it , what be the odd ? " 
 " all right , " I answer . " I will bring you port , Mr. Hands . but I will have to dig for it . " 
 with that I scuttle down the companion with all the noise I could , slip off my shoe , run quietly along the spar gallery , mount the forecastle ladder , and pop my head out of the fore companion . I know he would not expect to see I there , yet I take every precaution possible , and certainly the bad of my suspicion prove too true . 
 he have rise from his position to his hand and knee , and though his leg obviously hurt he pretty sharply when he move for I could hear he stifle a groan yet it be at a good , rattle rate that he trail himself across the deck . in half a minute he have reach the port scupper and pick , out of a coil of rope , a long knife , or rather a short dirk , discolour to the hilt with blood . he look upon it for a moment , thrust forth his under jaw , try the point upon his hand , and then , hastily conceal it in the bosom of his jacket , trundle back again into his old place against the bulwark . 
 this be all that I require to know . Israel could move about , he be now arm , and if he have be at so much trouble to get rid of I , it be plain that I be mean to be the victim . what he would do afterwards whether he would try to crawl right across the island from North Inlet to the camp among the swamp or whether he would fire Long Tom , trust that his own comrade might come first to help he be , of course , more than I could say . 
 yet I feel sure that I could trust he in one point , since in that our interest jump together , and that be in the disposition of the schooner . we both desire to have she strand safe enough , in a sheltered place , and so that , when the time come , she could be get off again with as little labour and danger as might be ; and until that be do I consider that my life would certainly be spar . 
 while I be thus turn the business over in my mind , I have not be idle with my body . I have steal back to the cabin , slip once more into my shoe , and lay my hand at random on a bottle of wine , and now , with this for an excuse , I make my reappearance on the deck . 
 hand lie as I have leave he , all fall together in a bundle and with his eyelid lower as though he be too weak to bear the light . he look up , however , at my coming , knock the neck off the bottle like a man who have do the same thing often , and take a good swig , with his favourite toast of " here 's luck ! " then he lie quiet for a little , and then , pull out a stick of tobacco , beg I to cut he a quid . 
 " cut I a junk o ' that , " say he , " for I have not   no knife and hardly strength enough , so be as I have . ah , Jim , Jim , I reckon I have   miss stay ! cut I a quid , as'll likely be the last , lad , for I be for my long home , and no mistake . " 
 " well , " say I , " I will cut you some tobacco , but if I be you and think myself so badly , I would go to my prayer like a christian man . " 
 " why ? " say he . " now , you tell I why . " 
 " why ? " I cry . " you be ask I just now about the dead . you have   break your trust ; you have   live in sin and lie and blood ; there be a man you kill lie at your foot this moment , and you ask I why ! for God 's mercy , Mr. Hands , that be why . " 
 I speak with a little heat , think of the bloody dirk he have hide in his pocket and design , in his ill thought , to end I with . he , for his part , take a great draught of the wine and speak with the most unusual solemnity . 
 " for thirty year , " he say , " I have   sail the sea and see good and bad , well and bad , fair weather and foul , provision run out , knife go , and what not . well , now I tell you , I never see good come o ' goodness yet . he as strike first be my fancy ; dead man do not   bite ; they be my view amen , so be it . and now , you look here , " he add , suddenly change his tone , " we have   have about enough of this foolery . the tide 's make good enough by now . you just take my order , Cap'n Hawkins , and we will sail slap in and be do with it . " 
 all tell , we have scarce two mile to run ; but the navigation be delicate , the entrance to this northern anchorage be not only narrow and shoal , but lie east and west , so that the schooner must be nicely handle to be get in . I think I be a good , prompt subaltern , and I be very sure that hand be an excellent pilot , for we go about and about and dodge in , shave the bank , with a certainty and a neatness that be a pleasure to behold . 
 Scarcely have we pass the head before the land close around we . the shore of North Inlet be as thickly woode as those of the southern anchorage , but the space be long and narrow and more like , what in truth it be , the estuary of a river . right before we , at the southern end , we see the wreck of a ship in the last stage of dilapidation . it have be a great vessel of three mast but have lie so long expose to the injury of the weather that it be hang about with great webs of dripping seaweed , and on the deck of it shore bush have take root and now flourish thick with flower . it be a sad sight , but it show we that the anchorage be calm . 
 " now , " say hand , " look there ; there be a pet bit for to beach a ship in . fine flat sand , never a cat 's paw , tree all around of it , and flower a - blowing like a garding on that old ship . " 
 " and once beach , " I inquire , " how shall we get she off again ? " 
 " why , so , " he reply : " you take a line ashore there on the other side at low water , take a turn about one of they big pine ; bring it back , take a turn around the capstan , and lie to for the tide . come high water , all hand take a pull upon the line , and off she come as sweet as natur ' . and now , boy , you stand by . we be near the bit now , and she be too much way on she . starboard a little so steady starboard larboard a little steady steady ! " 
 so he issue his command , which I breathlessly obey , till , all of a sudden , he cry , " now , my hearty , luff ! " and I put the helm hard up , and the hispaniola swung round rapidly and run stem on for the low , woode shore . 
 the excitement of these last manoeuvre have somewhat interfere with the watch I have keep hitherto , sharply enough , upon the coxswain . even then I be still so much interested , wait for the ship to touch , that I have quite forget the peril that hang over my head and stand crane over the starboard bulwark and watch the ripple spread wide before the bow . I might have fall without a struggle for my life have not a sudden disquietude seize upon I and make I turn my head . perhaps I have hear a creak or see his shadow move with the tail of my eye ; perhaps it be an instinct like a cat 's ; but , sure enough , when I look round , there be Hands , already half - way towards I , with the dirk in his right hand . 
 we must both have cry out aloud when our eye meet , but while mine be the shrill cry of terror , his be a roar of fury like a charge bully 's . at the same instant , he throw himself forward and I leapt sideways towards the bow . as I do so , I let go of the tiller , which spring sharp to leeward , and I think this save my life , for it strike Hands across the chest and stop he , for the moment , dead . 
 before he could recover , I be safe out of the corner where he have I trap , with all the deck to dodge about . just forward of the main - mast I stop , draw a pistol from my pocket , take a cool aim , though he have already turn and be once more come directly after I , and draw the trigger . the hammer fall , but there follow neither flash nor sound ; the priming be useless with sea - water . I curse myself for my neglect . why have not I , long before , reprime and reload my only weapon ? then I should not have be as now , a mere flee sheep before this butcher . 
 wound as he be , it be wonderful how fast he could move , his grizzle hair tumble over his face , and his face itself as red as a red ensign with his haste and fury . I have no time to try my other pistol , nor indeed much inclination , for I be sure it would be useless . one thing I see plainly : I must not simply retreat before he , or he would speedily hold I box into the bow , as a moment since he have so nearly box I in the stern . once so catch , and nine or ten inch of the blood - stain dirk would be my last experience on this side of eternity . I place my palm against the main - mast , which be of a goodish bigness , and wait , every nerve upon the stretch . 
 see that I mean to dodge , he also pause ; and a moment or two pass in feint on his part and correspond movement upon mine . it be such a game as I have often play at home about the rock of Black Hill Cove , but never before , you may be sure , with such a wildly beat heart as now . still , as I say , it be a boy 's game , and I think I could hold my own at it against an elderly seaman with a wound thigh . indeed my courage have begin to rise so high that I allow myself a few darting thought on what would be the end of the affair , and while I see certainly that I could spin it out for long , I see no hope of any ultimate escape . 
 well , while thing stand thus , suddenly the hispaniola strike , stagger , ground for an instant in the sand , and then , swift as a blow , cant over to the port side till the deck stand at an angle of forty - five degree and about a puncheon of water splash into the scupper hole and lie , in a pool , between the deck and bulwark . 
 we be both of we capsize in a second , and both of we roll , almost together , into the scupper , the dead red - cap , with his arm still spread out , tumbling stiffly after we . so near be we , indeed , that my head come against the coxswain 's foot with a crack that make my tooth rattle . Blow and all , I be the first afoot again , for Hands have get involve with the dead body . the sudden canting of the ship have make the deck no place for run on ; I have to find some new way of escape , and that upon the instant , for my foe be almost touch I . quick as think , I spring into the mizzen shroud , rattle up hand over hand , and do not draw a breath till I be seat on the cross - tree . 
 I have be save by be prompt ; the dirk have strike not half a foot below I as I pursue my upward flight ; and there stand Israel Hands with his mouth open and his face upturned to mine , a perfect statue of surprise and disappointment . 
 now that I have a moment to myself , I lose no time in change the priming of my pistol , and then , have one ready for service , and to make assurance doubly sure , I proceed to draw the load of the other and recharge it afresh from the beginning . 
 my new employment strike Hands all of a heap ; he begin to see the dice go against he , and after an obvious hesitation , he also haul himself heavily into the shroud , and with the dirk in his tooth , begin slowly and painfully to mount . it cost he no end of time and groan to haul his wound leg behind he , and I have quietly finish my arrangement before he be much more than a third of the way up . then , with a pistol in either hand , I address he . 
 " one more step , Mr. Hands , " say I , " and I will blow your brain out ! dead man do not   bite , you know , " I add with a chuckle . 
 he stop instantly . I could see by the working of his face that he be try to think , and the process be so slow and laborious that , in my new - find security , I laugh aloud . at last , with a swallow or two , he speak , his face still wear the same expression of extreme perplexity . in order to speak he have to take the dagger from his mouth , but in all else he remain unmoved . 
 " Jim , " say he , " I reckon we be fouled , you and I , and we will have to sign article . I would have have you but for that there lurch , but I do not   have no luck , not I ; and I reckon I will have to strike , which come hard , you see , for a master mariner to a ship 's younker like you , Jim . " 
 I be drink in his word and smile away , as conceite as a cock upon a wall , when , all in a breath , back go his right hand over his shoulder . something sing like an arrow through the air ; I feel a blow and then a sharp pang , and there I be pin by the shoulder to the mast . in the horrid pain and surprise of the moment I scarce can say it be by my own volition , and I be sure it be without a conscious aim both my pistol go off , and both escape out of my hand . they do not fall alone ; with a choke cry , the coxswain loose his grasp upon the shroud and plunge head first into the water . 




 27 

 " Pieces of Eight " 

 owe to the ca not of the vessel , the mast hang far out over the water , and from my perch on the cross - tree I have nothing below I but the surface of the bay . hand , who be not so far up , be in consequence near to the ship and fall between I and the bulwark . he rise once to the surface in a lather of foam and blood and then sink again for good . as the water settle , I could see he lie huddle together on the clean , bright sand in the shadow of the vessel 's side . a fish or two whip past his body . sometimes , by the quivering of the water , he appear to move a little , as if he be try to rise . but he be dead enough , for all that , be both shoot and drown , and be food for fish in the very place where he have design my slaughter . 
 I be no soon certain of this than I begin to feel sick , faint , and terrify . the hot blood be run over my back and chest . the dirk , where it have pin my shoulder to the mast , seem to burn like a hot iron ; yet it be not so much these real suffering that distress I , for these , it seem to I , I could bear without a murmur ; it be the horror I have upon my mind of fall from the cross - tree into that still green water , beside the body of the coxswain . 
 I clung with both hand till my nail ache , and I shut my eye as if to cover up the peril . gradually my mind come back again , my pulse quiet down to a more natural time , and I be once more in possession of myself . 
 it be my first thought to pluck forth the dirk , but either it stick too hard or my nerve fail I , and I desist with a violent shudder . oddly enough , that very shudder do the business . the knife , in fact , have come the near in the world to miss I altogether ; it hold I by a mere pinch of skin , and this the shudder tear away . the blood run down the fast , to be sure , but I be my own master again and only tack to the mast by my coat and shirt . 
 these last I break through with a sudden jerk , and then regain the deck by the starboard shroud . for nothing in the world would I have again venture , shake as I be , upon the overhang port shroud from which Israel have so lately fall . 
 I go below and do what I could for my wound ; it pain I a good deal and still bleed freely , but it be neither deep nor dangerous , nor do it greatly gall I when I use my arm . then I look around I , and as the ship be now , in a sense , my own , I begin to think of clear it from its last passenger the dead man , O'Brien . 
 he have pitch , as I have say , against the bulwark , where he lie like some horrible , ungainly sort of puppet , life - size , indeed , but how different from life 's colour or life 's comeliness ! in that position I could easily have my way with he , and as the habit of tragical adventure have wear off almost all my terror for the dead , I take he by the waist as if he have be a sack of bran and with one good heave , tumble he overboard . he go in with a sound plunge ; the red cap come off and remain float on the surface ; and as soon as the splash subside , I could see he and Israel lie side by side , both waver with the tremulous movement of the water . O'Brien , though still quite a young man , be very bald . there he lay , with that bald head across the knee of the man who have kill he and the quick fish steer to and fro over both . 
 I be now alone upon the ship ; the tide have just turn . the sun be within so few degree of set that already the shadow of the pine upon the western shore begin to reach right across the anchorage and fall in pattern on the deck . the evening breeze have spring up , and though it be well ward off by the hill with the two peak upon the east , the cordage have begin to sing a little softly to itself and the idle sail to rattle to and fro . 
 I begin to see a danger to the ship . the jib I speedily douse and bring tumbling to the deck , but the main - sail be a hard matter . of course , when the schooner cant over , the boom have swing out - board , and the cap of it and a foot or two of sail hang even under water . I think this make it still more dangerous ; yet the strain be so heavy that I half fear to meddle . at last I get my knife and cut the halyard . the peak drop instantly , a great belly of loose canvas float broad upon the water , and since , pull as I like , I could not budge the downhall , that be the extent of what I could accomplish . for the rest , the hispaniola must trust to luck , like myself . 
 by this time the whole anchorage have fall into shadow the last ray , I remember , fall through a glade of the wood and shin bright as jewel on the flowery mantle of the wreck . it begin to be chill ; the tide be rapidly fleeting seaward , the schooner settle more and more on her beam - end . 
 I scramble forward and look over . it seem shallow enough , and hold the cut hawser in both hand for a last security , I let myself drop softly overboard . the water scarcely reach my waist ; the sand be firm and cover with ripple mark , and I wad ashore in great spirit , leave the hispaniola on her side , with her main - sail trailing wide upon the surface of the bay . about the same time , the sun go fairly down and the breeze whistle low in the dusk among the tossing pine . 
 at least , and at last , I be off the sea , nor have I return thence empty - handed . there lie the schooner , clear at last from buccaneer and ready for our own man to board and get to sea again . I have nothing nearer my fancy than to get home to the stockade and boast of my achievement . possibly I might be blame a bit for my truantry , but the recapture of the hispaniola be a clenching answer , and I hop that even Captain Smollett would confess I have not lose my time . 
 so think , and in famous spirit , I begin to set my face homeward for the block house and my companion . I remember that the most easterly of the river which drain into Captain Kidd 's anchorage run from the two - peak hill upon my left , and I bent my course in that direction that I might pass the stream while it be small . the wood be pretty open , and keep along the low spur , I have soon turn the corner of that hill , and not long after wad to the mid - calf across the watercourse . 
 this bring I near to where I have encounter Ben Gunn , the maroon ; and I walk more circumspectly , keep an eye on every side . the dusk have come nigh hand completely , and as I open out the cleft between the two peak , I become aware of a wavering glow against the sky , where , as I judge , the man of the island be cook his supper before a roar fire . and yet I wonder , in my heart , that he should show himself so careless . for if I could see this radiance , might it not reach the eye of Silver himself where he camp upon the shore among the marsh ? 
 gradually the night fall blacker ; it be all I could do to guide myself even roughly towards my destination ; the double hill behind I and the Spy - glass on my right hand loom faint and fainter ; the star be few and pale ; and in the low ground where I wander I keep trip among bush and roll into sandy pit . 
 suddenly a kind of brightness fall about I . I look up ; a pale glimmer of moonbeam have alight on the summit of the Spy - glass , and soon after I see something broad and silvery move low down behind the tree , and know the moon have rise . 
 with this to help I , I pass rapidly over what remain to I of my journey , and sometimes walk , sometimes run , impatiently draw near to the stockade . yet , as I begin to thread the grove that lie before it , I be not so thoughtless but that I slack my pace and go a trifle warily . it would have be a poor end of my adventure to get shoot down by my own party in mistake . 
 the moon be climb higher and high , its light begin to fall here and there in mass through the more open district of the wood , and right in front of I a glow of a different colour appear among the tree . it be red and hot , and now and again it be a little darken as it be , the ember of a bonfire smouldering . 
 for the life of I I could not think what it might be . 
 at last I come right down upon the border of the clearing . the western end be already steep in moonshine ; the rest , and the block house itself , still lie in a black shadow chequer with long silvery streak of light . on the other side of the house an immense fire have burn itself into clear ember and shed a steady , red reverberation , contrast strongly with the mellow paleness of the moon . there be not a soul stir nor a sound beside the noise of the breeze . 
 I stop , with much wonder in my heart , and perhaps a little terror also . it have not be our way to build great fire ; we be , indeed , by the captain 's order , somewhat niggardly of firewood , and I begin to fear that something have go wrong while I be absent . 
 I steal round by the eastern end , keep close in shadow , and at a convenient place , where the darkness be thickest , cross the palisade . 
 to make assurance surer , I get upon my hand and knee and crawl , without a sound , towards the corner of the house . as I draw nearer , my heart be suddenly and greatly lightened . it be not a pleasant noise in itself , and I have often complain of it at other time , but just then it be like music to hear my friend snore together so loud and peaceful in their sleep . the sea - cry of the watch , that beautiful " All be well , " never fall more reassuringly on my ear . 
 in the meantime , there be no doubt of one thing ; they keep an infamous bad watch . if it have be Silver and his lad that be now creep in on they , not a soul would have see daybreak . that be what it be , think I , to have the captain wound ; and again I blame myself sharply for leave they in that danger with so few to mount guard . 
 by this time I have get to the door and stand up . all be dark within , so that I could distinguish nothing by the eye . as for sound , there be the steady drone of the snorer and a small occasional noise , a flickering or pecking that I could in no way account for . 
 with my arm before I I walk steadily in . I should lie down in my own place   I think with a silent chuckle   and enjoy their face when they find I in the morning . 
 my foot strike something yield it be a sleeper 's leg ; and he turn and groan , but without awake . 
 and then , all of a sudden , a shrill voice break forth out of the darkness : 
 " piece of eight ! piece of eight ! piece of eight ! piece of eight ! piece of eight ! " and so forth , without pause or change , like the clacking of a tiny mill . 
 Silver 's green parrot , Captain Flint ! it be she whom I have hear peck at a piece of bark ; it be she , keep well watch than any human being , who thus announce my arrival with her wearisome refrain . 
 I have no time leave I to recover . at the sharp , clip tone of the parrot , the sleeper awake and spring up ; and with a mighty oath , the voice of Silver cry , " who go ? " 
 I turn to run , strike violently against one person , recoil , and run full into the arm of a second , who for his part close upon and hold I tight . 
 " bring a torch , Dick , " say Silver when my capture be thus assure . 
 and one of the man leave the log - house and presently return with a light brand . 




 PART six Captain Silver 





 28 

 in the Enemy 's Camp 

 the red glare of the torch , light up the interior of the block house , show I the bad of my apprehension realize . the pirate be in possession of the house and store : there be the cask of cognac , there be the pork and bread , as before , and what tenfold increase my horror , not a sign of any prisoner . I could only judge that all have perish , and my heart smite I sorely that I have not be there to perish with they . 
 there be six of the buccaneer , all tell ; not another man be leave alive . five of they be on their foot , flushed and swollen , suddenly call out of the first sleep of drunkenness . the sixth have only rise upon his elbow ; he be deadly pale , and the blood - stain bandage round his head tell that he have recently be wound , and still more recently dress . I remember the man who have be shoot and have run back among the wood in the great attack , and doubt not that this be he . 
 the parrot sit , preen her plumage , on Long John 's shoulder . he himself , I think , look somewhat pale and more stern than I be use to . he still wear the fine broadcloth suit in which he have fulfil his mission , but it be bitterly the bad for wear , daub with clay and tear with the sharp brier of the wood . 
 " so , " say he , " here be Jim Hawkins , shiver my timber ! drop in , like , eh ? well , come , I take that friendly . " 
 and thereupon he sit down across the brandy cask and begin to fill a pipe . 
 " give I a loan of the link , Dick , " say he ; and then , when he have a good light , " that will do , lad , " he add ; ' stick the glim in the wood heap ; and you , gentleman , bring yourself to ! you need not   stand up for Mr. Hawkins ; he'll excuse you , you may lay to that . and so , Jim " stop the tobacco " here you be , and quite a pleasant surprise for poor old John . I see you be smart when first I set my eye on you , but this here get away from I clean , it do . " 
 to all this , as may be well suppose , I make no answer . they have set I with my back against the wall , and I stand there , look silver in the face , pluckily enough , I hope , to all outward appearance , but with black despair in my heart . 
 Silver take a whiff or two of his pipe with great composure and then run on again . 
 " now , you see , Jim , so be as you be here , " say he , " I will give you a piece of my mind . I have   always like you , I have , for a lad of spirit , and the picter of my own self when I be young and handsome . I always want you to jine and take your share , and die a gentleman , and now , my cock , you have   get to . Cap'n Smollett 's a fine seaman , as I will own up to any day , but stiff on discipline . ' Dooty be dooty , ' say he , and right he be . just you keep clear of the cap'n . the doctor himself be go dead again you ' ungrateful scamp ' be what he say ; and the short and the long of the whole story be about here : you can not   go back to your own lot , for they will not   have you ; and without you start a third ship 's company all by yourself , which might be lonely , you will have to jine with Cap'n silver . " 
 so far so good . my friend , then , be still alive , and though I partly believe the truth of Silver 's statement , that the cabin party be incense at I for my desertion , I be more relieved than distressed by what I hear . 
 " I do not   say nothing as to your be in our hand , " continue Silver , " though there you be , and you may lay to it . I be all for argyment ; I never see good come out o ' threaten . if you like the service , well , you will jine ; and if you do not , Jim , why , you be free to answer no free and welcome , shipmate ; and if fairer can be say by mortal seaman , shiver my side ! " 
 " be I to answer , then ? " I ask with a very tremulous voice . through all this sneer talk , I be make to feel the threat of death that overhang I , and my cheek burn and my heart beat painfully in my breast . 
 " Lad , " say Silver , " no one be a - pressing of you . take your bearing . none of we will not   hurry you , mate ; time go so pleasant in your company , you see . " 
 " well , " say I , grow a bit bolder , " if I be to choose , I declare I have a right to know what be what , and why you be here , and where my friend be . " 
 " Wot 's wot ? " repeat one of the buccaneer in a deep growl . " ah , he would be a lucky one as know that ! " 
 " you will perhaps batten down your hatch till you be speak to , my friend , " cry Silver truculently to this speaker . and then , in his first gracious tone , he reply to I , " yesterday morning , Mr. Hawkins , " say he , " in the dog - watch , down come Doctor Livesey with a flag of truce . say he , ' Cap'n silver , you be sell out . Ship 's go . ' well , maybe we have be take a glass , and a song to help it round . I will not   say no . leastway , none of we have look out . we look out , and by thunder , the old ship be go ! I never see a pack o ' fool look fishy ; and you may lay to that , if I tell you that look the fishiest . ' well , ' say the doctor , ' let us bargain . ' we bargain , he and I , and here we be : store , brandy , block house , the firewood you be thoughtful enough to cut , and in a manner of speak , the whole blessed boat , from cross - tree to kelson . as for they , they have   tramp ; I do not   know where be they be . " 
 he draw again quietly at his pipe . 
 " and lest you should take it into that head of your , " he go on , " that you be include in the treaty , here be the last word that be say : ' how many be you , ' say I , ' to leave ? ' ' four , ' say he ; ' four , and one of we wound . as for that boy , I do not   know where he be , confound he , ' say he , ' nor I do not   much care . we be about sick of he . ' these be his word . 
 " be that all ? " I ask . 
 " well , it be all that you be to hear , my son , " return Silver . 
 " and now I be to choose ? " 
 " and now you be to choose , and you may lay to that , " say Silver . 
 " well , " say I , " I be not such a fool but I know pretty well what I have to look for . let the bad come to the bad , it be little I care . I have   see too many die since I fall in with you . but there be a thing or two I have to tell you , " I say , and by this time I be quite excited ; " and the first be this : here you be , in a bad way ship lose , treasure lose , man lose , your whole business go to wreck ; and if you want to know who do it it be I ! I be in the apple barrel the night we sight land , and I hear you , John , and you , Dick Johnson , and Hands , who be now at the bottom of the sea , and tell every word you say before the hour be out . and as for the schooner , it be I who cut her cable , and it be I that kill the man you have aboard of she , and it be I who bring she where you will never see she more , not one of you . the laugh be on my side ; I have   have the top of this business from the first ; I no more fear you than I fear a fly . kill I , if you please , or spare I . but one thing I will say , and no more ; if you spare I , bygone be bygone , and when you fellow be in court for piracy , I will save you all I can . it be for you to choose . kill another and do yourself no good , or spare I and keep a witness to save you from the gallow . " 
 I stop , for , I tell you , I be out of breath , and to my wonder , not a man of they move , but all sit star at I like as many sheep . and while they be still star , I break out again , " and now , Mr. Silver , " I say , " I believe you be the good man here , and if thing go to the bad , I will take it kind of you to let the doctor know the way I take it . " 
 " I will bear it in mind , " say Silver with an accent so curious that I could not , for the life of I , decide whether he be laugh at my request or have be favourably affect by my courage . 
 " I will put one to that , " cry the old mahogany - face seaman Morgan by name whom I have see in Long John 's public - house upon the quay of Bristol . " it be he that know Black Dog . " 
 " well , and see here , " add the sea - cook . " I will put another again to that , by thunder ! for it be this same boy that fake the chart from Billy bone . first and last , we have   split upon Jim Hawkins ! " 
 " then here go ! " say Morgan with an oath . 
 and he spring up , draw his knife as if he have be twenty . 
 " Avast , there ! " cry Silver . " who be you , Tom Morgan ? maybe you think you be cap'n here , perhaps . by the power , but I will teach you well ! cross I , and you will go where many a good man 's go before you , first and last , these thirty year back some to the yard - arm , shiver my timber , and some by the board , and all to feed the fish . there be never a man look I between the eye and see a good day a'terwards , Tom Morgan , you may lay to that . " 
 Morgan pause , but a hoarse murmur rise from the other . 
 " Tom 's right , " say one . 
 " I stand haze long enough from one , " add another . " I will be hang if I will be haze by you , John Silver . " 
 " do any of you gentleman want to have it out with I ? " roar Silver , bend far forward from his position on the keg , with his pipe still glow in his right hand . " put a name on what you be at ; you be not   dumb , I reckon . he that want shall get it . have I live this many year , and a son of a rum puncheon cock his hat athwart my hawse at the latter end of it ? you know the way ; you be all gentleman o ' fortune , by your account . well , I be ready . take a cutlass , he that dare , and I will see the colour of his inside , crutch and all , before that pipe 's empty . " 
 not a man stir ; not a man answer . 
 " that be your sort , be it ? " he add , return his pipe to his mouth . " well , you be a gay lot to look at , anyway . not much worth to fight , you be not . p'r'ap you can understand King George 's English . I be cap'n here by ' lection . I be cap'n here because I be the good man by a long sea - mile . you will not   fight , as gentleman o ' fortune should ; then , by thunder , you will obey , and you may lay to it ! I like that boy , now ; I never see a well boy than that . he be more a man than any pair of rat of you in this here house , and what I say be this : let I see he that will lay a hand on he that be what I say , and you may lay to it . " 
 there be a long pause after this . I stand straight up against the wall , my heart still go like a sledge - hammer , but with a ray of hope now shin in my bosom . silver leant back against the wall , his arm cross , his pipe in the corner of his mouth , as calm as though he have be in church ; yet his eye keep wander furtively , and he keep the tail of it on his unruly follower . they , on their part , draw gradually together towards the far end of the block house , and the low hiss of their whispering sound in my ear continuously , like a stream . one after another , they would look up , and the red light of the torch would fall for a second on their nervous face ; but it be not towards I , it be towards Silver that they turn their eye . 
 " you seem to have a lot to say , " remark Silver , spit far into the air . " Pipe up and let I hear it , or lie to . " 
 " ax your pardon , sir , " return one of the man ; " you be pretty free with some of the rule ; maybe you will kindly keep an eye upon the rest . this crew 's dissatisfied ; this crew do not   vally bully a marlin - spike ; this crew have its right like other crew , I will make so free as that ; and by your own rule , I take it we can talk together . I ax your pardon , sir , acknowledge you for to be captae at this present ; but I claim my right , and step outside for a council . " 
 and with an elaborate sea - salute , this fellow , a long , ill - look , yellow - eyed man of five and thirty , step coolly towards the door and disappear out of the house . one after another the rest follow his example , each make a salute as he pass , each add some apology . " accord to rule , " say one . " Forecastle council , " say Morgan . and so with one remark or another all march out and leave Silver and I alone with the torch . 
 the sea - cook instantly remove his pipe . 
 " now , look you here , Jim Hawkins , " he say in a steady whisper that be no more than audible , " you be within half a plank of death , and what be a long sight bad , of torture . they be go to throw I off . but , you mark , I stand by you through thick and thin . I do not   mean to ; no , not till you speak up . I be about desperate to lose that much blunt , and be hang into the bargain . but I see you be the right sort . I say to myself , you stand by Hawkins , John , and Hawkins'll stand by you . you be his last card , and by the living thunder , John , he be your ! back to back , say I. you save your witness , and he will save your neck ! " 
 I begin dimly to understand . 
 " you mean all be lose ? " I ask . 
 " Aye , by gum , I do ! " he answer . " Ship gone , neck go that be the size of it . once I look into that bay , Jim Hawkins , and see no schooner well , I be tough , but I give out . as for that lot and their council , mark I , they be outright fool and coward . I will save your life if so be as I can from they . but , see here , Jim tit for tat you save Long John from swing . " 
 I be bewilder ; it seem a thing so hopeless he be ask he , the old buccaneer , the ringleader throughout . 
 " what I can do , that I will do , " I say . 
 " it be a bargain ! " cry Long John . " you speak up plucky , and by thunder , I have   a chance ! " 
 he hobble to the torch , where it stand prop among the firewood , and take a fresh light to his pipe . 
 " understand I , Jim , " he say , return . " I have   a head on my shoulder , I have . I be on squire 's side now . I know you have   get that ship safe somewhere . how you do it , I do not   know , but safe it be . I guess Hands and O'Brien turn soft . I never much believe in neither of they . now you mark I . I ask no question , nor I will not   let other . I know when a game 's up , I do ; and I know a lad that be staunch . ah , you that be young you and I might have do a power of good together ! " 
 he draw some cognac from the cask into a tin cannikin . 
 " will you taste , messmate ? " he ask ; and when I have refuse : " well , I will take a drain myself , Jim , " say he . " I need a caulker , for there 's trouble on hand . and talk o ' trouble , why do that doctor give I the chart , Jim ? " 
 my face express a wonder so unaffected that he see the needlessness of further question . 
 " ah , well , he do , though , " say he . " and there be something under that , no doubt something , surely , under that , Jim bad or good . " 
 and he take another swallow of the brandy , shake his great fair head like a man who look forward to the bad . 




 29 

 the Black Spot again 

 the council of buccaneer have last some time , when one of they re - enter the house , and with a repetition of the same salute , which have in my eye an ironical air , beg for a moment 's loan of the torch . Silver briefly agree , and this emissary retire again , leave we together in the dark . 
 " there be a breeze come , Jim , " say Silver , who have by this time adopt quite a friendly and familiar tone . 
 I turn to the loophole near I and look out . the ember of the great fire have so far burn themselves out and now glow so low and duskily that I understand why these conspirator desire a torch . about half - way down the slope to the stockade , they be collect in a group ; one hold the light , another be on his knee in their midst , and I see the blade of an open knife shine in his hand with vary colour in the moon and torchlight . the rest be all somewhat stooping , as though watch the manoeuvre of this last . I could just make out that he have a book as well as a knife in his hand , and be still wonder how anything so incongruous have come in their possession when the kneeling figure rise once more to his foot and the whole party begin to move together towards the house . 
 " here they come , " say I ; and I return to my former position , for it seem beneath my dignity that they should find I watch they . 
 " well , let them come , lad let them come , " say silver cheerily . " I have   still a shot in my locker . " 
 the door open , and the five man , standing huddle together just inside , push one of their number forward . in any other circumstance it would have be comical to see his slow advance , hesitate as he set down each foot , but hold his closed right hand in front of he . 
 " step up , lad , " cry Silver . " I will not   eat you . hand it over , lubber . I know the rule , I do ; I will not   hurt a depytation . " 
 thus encourage , the buccaneer step forth more briskly , and have pass something to Silver , from hand to hand , slip yet more smartly back again to his companion . 
 the sea - cook look at what have be give he . 
 " the black spot ! I think so , " he observe . " where might you have get the paper ? why , hillo ! look here , now ; this be not   lucky ! you have   go and cut this out of a Bible . what fool 's cut a Bible ? " 
 " ah , there ! " say Morgan . " there ! wot do I say ? no good'll come o ' that , I say . " 
 " well , you have   about fix it now , among you , " continue Silver . " you will all swing now , I reckon . what soft - head lubber have a Bible ? " 
 " it be Dick , " say one . 
 " Dick , be it ? then Dick can get to prayer , " say Silver . " he be see his slice of luck , have Dick , and you may lay to that . " 
 but here the long man with the yellow eye strike in . 
 " Belay that talk , John Silver , " he say . " this crew have tip you the black spot in full council , as in dooty bind ; just you turn it over , as in dooty bind , and see what be write there . then you can talk . " 
 " thanky , George , " reply the sea - cook . " you always be brisk for business , and have the rule by heart , George , as I be pleased to see . well , what be it , anyway ? ah ! ' depose ' that be it , be it ? very pretty write , to be sure ; like print , I swear . your hand o ' write , George ? why , you be gettin ' quite a leadin ' man in this here crew . you will be cap'n next , I should not   wonder . just oblige I with that torch again , will you ? this pipe do not   draw . " 
 " come , now , " say George , " you do not   fool this crew no more . you be a funny man , by your account ; but you be over now , and you will maybe step down off that barrel and help vote . " 
 " I think you say you know the rule , " return Silver contemptuously . " leastway , if you do not , I do ; and I wait here and I be still your cap'n , mind till you out with your grievance and I reply ; in the meantime , your black spot be not   worth a biscuit . after that , we will see . " 
 " oh , " reply George , " you do not   be under no kind of apprehension ; we're all square , we be . first , you have   make a hash of this cruise you will be a bold man to say no to that . second , you let the enemy out o ' this here trap for nothing . why do they want out ? I dunno , but it be pretty plain they want it . third , you would not   let we go at they upon the march . oh , we see through you , John Silver ; you want to play booty , that be what be wrong with you . and then , fourth , there be this here boy . " 
 " be that all ? " ask Silver quietly . 
 " enough , too , " retort George . " we will all swing and sun - dry for your bungling . " 
 " well now , look here , I will answer these four p'int ; one after another I will answer them . I make a hash o ' this cruise , do I ? well now , you all know what I want , and you all know if that have be do that we would ' a be aboard the hispaniola this night as ever be , every man of we alive , and fit , and full of good plum - duff , and the treasure in the hold of she , by thunder ! well , who cross I ? who force my hand , as be the lawful cap'n ? who tip I the black spot the day we land and begin this dance ? ah , it be a fine dance I be with you there and look mighty like a hornpipe in a rope 's end at execution Dock by London town , it do . but who do it ? why , it be Anderson , and hand , and you , George Merry ! and you be the last above board of that same meddle crew ; and you have the Davy Jones 's insolence to up and stand for cap'n over I you , that sink the lot of we ! by the power ! but this top the stiff yarn to nothing . " 
 Silver pause , and I could see by the face of George and his late comrade that these word have not be say in vain . 
 " that be for number one , " cry the accused , wipe the sweat from his brow , for he have be talk with a vehemence that shake the house . " why , I give you my word , I be sick to speak to you . you have   neither sense nor memory , and I leave it to fancy where your mother be that let you come to sea . Sea ! gentleman o ' fortune ! I reckon tailor be your trade . " 
 " go on , John , " say Morgan . " speak up to the other . " 
 " ah , the other ! " return John . " they be a nice lot , be not   they ? you say this cruise be bungle . ah ! by gum , if you could understand how bad it be bungle , you would see ! we be that near the gibbet that my neck 's stiff with think on it . you have   see them , maybe , hang in chain , bird about them , seaman p'inte them out as they go down with the tide . ' who be that ? ' say one . ' that ! why , that be John Silver . I know he well , ' say another . and you can hear the chain a - jangle as you go about and reach for the other buoy . now , that be about where we be , every mother 's son of we , thank to he , and Hands , and Anderson , and other ruination fool of you . and if you want to know about number four , and that boy , why , shiver my timber , be not   he a hostage ? be we a - go to waste a hostage ? no , not we ; he might be our last chance , and I should not   wonder . kill that boy ? not I , mate ! and number three ? ah , well , there be a deal to say to number three . maybe you do not   count it nothing to have a real college doctor to see you every day you , John , with your head break or you , George Merry , that have the ague shake upon you not six hour agone , and have your eye the colour of lemon peel to this same moment on the clock ? and maybe , perhaps , you do not   know there be a consort come either ? but there be , and not so long till then ; and we will see who will be glad to have a hostage when it come to that . and as for number two , and why I make a bargain well , you come crawl on your knee to I to make it on your knee you come , you be that downhearted and you would have starve too if I have not   but that be a trifle ! you look there that be why ! " 
 and he cast down upon the floor a paper that I instantly recognize none other than the chart on yellow paper , with the three red cross , that I have find in the oilcloth at the bottom of the captain 's chest . why the doctor have give it to he be more than I could fancy . 
 but if it be inexplicable to I , the appearance of the chart be incredible to the survive mutineer . they leap upon it like cat upon a mouse . it go from hand to hand , one tear it from another ; and by the oath and the cry and the childish laughter with which they accompany their examination , you would have think , not only they be finger the very gold , but be at sea with it , besides , in safety . 
 " yes , " say one , " that be flint , sure enough . J. F. , and a score below , with a clove hitch to it ; so he do ever . " 
 " mighty pretty , " say George . " but how be we to get away with it , and we no ship . " 
 Silver suddenly spring up , and support himself with a hand against the wall : " now I give you warning , George , " he cry . " one more word of your sauce , and I will call you down and fight you . how ? why , how do I know ? you have ought to tell I that you and the rest , that lose I my schooner , with your interference , burn you ! but not you , you can not ; you hain't   get the invention of a cockroach . but civil you can speak , and shall , George Merry , you may lay to that . " 
 " that be fair enow , " say the old man Morgan . 
 " Fair ! I reckon so , " say the sea - cook . " you lose the ship ; I find the treasure . who be the well man at that ? and now I resign , by thunder ! Elect whom you please to be your cap'n now ; I be do with it . " 
 " silver ! " they cry . " Barbecue forever ! Barbecue for cap'n ! " 
 " so that be the toon , be it ? " cry the cook . " George , I reckon you will have to wait another turn , friend ; and lucky for you as I be not a revengeful man . but that be never my way . and now , shipmate , this black spot ? ' tain't   much good now , be it ? Dick 's cross his luck and spoil his Bible , and that be about all . " 
 " it will do to kiss the book on still , will not   it ? " growl Dick , who be evidently uneasy at the curse he have bring upon himself . 
 " a Bible with a bit cut out ! " return Silver derisively . " not it . it do not   bind no more'n a ballad - book . " 
 " do not   it , though ? " cry Dick with a sort of joy . " well , I reckon that be worth have too . " 
 " here , Jim here be a cur'osity for you , " say Silver , and he toss I the paper . 
 it be around about the size of a crown piece . one side be blank , for it have be the last leaf ; the other contain a verse or two of Revelation these word among the rest , which strike sharply home upon my mind : " without be dog and murderer . " the print side have be blacken with wood ash , which already begin to come off and soil my finger ; on the blank side have be write with the same material the one word " Depposed . " I have that curiosity beside I at this moment , but not a trace of writing now remain beyond a single scratch , such as a man might make with his thumb - nail . 
 that be the end of the night 's business . soon after , with a drink all round , we lie down to sleep , and the outside of Silver 's vengeance be to put George Merry up for sentinel and threaten he with death if he should prove unfaithful . 
 it be long ere I could close an eye , and heaven know I have matter enough for thought in the man whom I have slay that afternoon , in my own most perilous position , and above all , in the remarkable game that I see Silver now engage upon keep the mutineer together with one hand and grasp with the other after every mean , possible and impossible , to make his peace and save his miserable life . he himself sleep peacefully and snore aloud , yet my heart be sore for he , wicked as he be , to think on the dark peril that environ and the shameful gibbet that await he . 




 30 

 on Parole 

 I be waken indeed , we be all waken , for I could see even the sentinel shake himself together from where he have fall against the door - post by a clear , hearty voice hail we from the margin of the wood : 
 " Block house , ahoy ! " it cry . " here be the doctor . " 
 and the doctor it be . although I be glad to hear the sound , yet my gladness be not without admixture . I remember with confusion my insubordinate and stealthy conduct , and when I see where it have bring I among what companion and surround by what danger I feel ashamed to look he in the face . 
 he must have rise in the dark , for the day have hardly come ; and when I run to a loophole and look out , I see he stand , like Silver once before , up to the mid - leg in creep vapour . 
 " you , doctor ! top o ' the morning to you , sir ! " cry Silver , broad awake and beam with good nature in a moment . " bright and early , to be sure ; and it be the early bird , as the saying go , that get the ration . George , shake up your timber , son , and help Dr. Livesey over the ship 's side . all a - do well , your patient be all well and merry . " 
 so he patter on , stand on the hilltop with his crutch under his elbow and one hand upon the side of the log - house quite the old John in voice , manner , and expression . 
 " we have   quite a surprise for you too , sir , " he continue . " we have   a little stranger here he ! he ! a noo boarder and lodger , sir , and look fit and taut as a fiddle ; slep ' like a supercargo , he do , right alongside of John stem to stem we be , all night . " 
 Dr. Livesey be by this time across the stockade and pretty near the cook , and I could hear the alteration in his voice as he say , " not Jim ? " 
 " the very same Jim as ever be , " say Silver . 
 the doctor stop outright , although he do not speak , and it be some second before he seem able to move on . 
 " well , well , " he say at last , " duty first and pleasure afterwards , as you might have say yourself , Silver . let we overhaul these patient of your . " 
 a moment afterwards he have enter the block house and with one grim nod to I proceed with his work among the sick . he seem under no apprehension , though he must have know that his life , among these treacherous demon , depend on a hair ; and he rattle on to his patient as if he be pay an ordinary professional visit in a quiet english family . his manner , I suppose , react on the man , for they behave to he as if nothing have occur , as if he be still ship 's doctor and they still faithful hand before the mast . 
 " you be do well , my friend , " he say to the fellow with the bandaged head , " and if ever any person have a close shave , it be you ; your head must be as hard as iron . well , George , how go it ? you be a pretty colour , certainly ; why , your liver , man , be upside down . do you take that medicine ? do he take that medicine , man ? " 
 " aye , aye , sir , he take it , sure enough , " return Morgan . 
 " because , you see , since I be mutineer ' doctor , or prison doctor as I prefer to call it , " say Doctor Livesey in his pleasantest way , " I make it a point of honour not to lose a man for King George   God bless he !   and the gallow . " 
 the rogue look at each other but swallow the home - thrust in silence . 
 " Dick do not   feel well , sir , " say one . 
 " do not   he ? " reply the doctor . " well , step up here , Dick , and let I see your tongue . no , I should be surprised if he do ! the man 's tongue be fit to frighten the French . another fever . " 
 " ah , there , " say Morgan , " that come of sp'iling bible . " 
 " that come as you call it of be arrant ass , " retort the doctor , " and not have sense enough to know honest air from poison , and the dry land from a vile , pestiferous slough . I think it most probable though of course it be only an opinion that you will all have the deuce to pay before you get that malaria out of your system . camp in a bog , would you ? silver , I be surprised at you . you be less of a fool than many , take you all round ; but you do not   appear to I to have the rudiment of a notion of the rule of health . 
 " well , " he add after he have dose they round and they have take his prescription , with really laughable humility , more like charity schoolchildren than blood - guilty mutineer and pirate " well , that be do for today . and now I should wish to have a talk with that boy , please . " 
 and he nod his head in my direction carelessly . 
 George Merry be at the door , spit and splutter over some bad - taste medicine ; but at the first word of the doctor 's proposal he swing round with a deep flush and cry " no ! " and swore . 
 Silver strike the barrel with his open hand . 
 " Si - lence ! " he roar and look about he positively like a lion . " doctor , " he go on in his usual tone , " I be a - thinking of that , know as how you have a fancy for the boy . we be all humbly grateful for your kindness , and as you see , put faith in you and take the drug down like that much grog . and I take it I have   find a way as'll suit all . Hawkins , will you give I your word of honour as a young gentleman for a young gentleman you be , although poor bear your word of honour not to slip your cable ? " 
 I readily give the pledge require . 
 " then , doctor , " say Silver , " you just step outside o ' that stockade , and once you be there I will bring the boy down on the inside , and I reckon you can yarn through the spar . good day to you , sir , and all our dootie to the squire and Cap'n Smollett . " 
 the explosion of disapproval , which nothing but Silver 's black look have restrain , break out immediately the doctor have leave the house . Silver be roundly accuse of play double of try to make a separate peace for himself , of sacrifice the interest of his accomplice and victim , and , in one word , of the identical , exact thing that he be do . it seem to I so obvious , in this case , that I could not imagine how he be to turn their anger . but he be twice the man the rest be , and his last night 's victory have give he a huge preponderance on their mind . he call they all the fool and dolt you can imagine , say it be necessary I should talk to the doctor , flutter the chart in their face , ask they if they could afford to break the treaty the very day they be bind a - treasure - hunting . 
 " no , by thunder ! " he cry . " it be we must break the treaty when the time come ; and till then I will gammon that doctor , if I have to ile his boot with brandy . " 
 and then he bid they get the fire light , and stalk out upon his crutch , with his hand on my shoulder , leave they in a disarray , and silence by his volubility rather than convinced . 
 " slow , lad , slow , " he say . " they might round upon we in a twinkle of an eye if we be see to hurry . " 
 very deliberately , then , do we advance across the sand to where the doctor await we on the other side of the stockade , and as soon as we be within easy speaking distance Silver stop . 
 " you will make a note of this here also , doctor , " say he , " and the boy'll tell you how I save his life , and be depose for it too , and you may lay to that . Doctor , when a man 's steering as near the wind as I play chuck - farthe with the last breath in his body , like you would not   think it too much , mayhap , to give he one good word ? you will please bear in mind it be not my life only now it be that boy 's into the bargain ; and you will speak I fair , doctor , and give I a bit o ' hope to go on , for the sake of mercy . " 
 Silver be a changed man once he be out there and have his back to his friend and the block house ; his cheek seem to have fall in , his voice tremble ; never be a soul more dead in earnest . 
 " why , John , you be not afraid ? " ask Dr. Livesey . 
 " Doctor , I be no coward ; no , not I not so much ! " and he snap his finger . " if I be I would not   say it . but I will own up fairly , I have   the shake upon I for the gallow . you be a good man and a true ; I never see a well man ! and you will not forget what I do good , not any more than you will forget the bad , I know . and I step aside see here and leave you and Jim alone . and you will put that down for I too , for it be a long stretch , be that ! " 
 so say , he step back a little way , till he be out of earshot , and there sit down upon a tree - stump and begin to whistle , spin round now and again upon his seat so as to command a sight , sometimes of I and the doctor and sometimes of his unruly ruffian as they go to and fro in the sand between the fire which they be busy rekindling and the house , from which they bring forth pork and bread to make the breakfast . 
 " so , Jim , " say the doctor sadly , " here you be . as you have brew , so shall you drink , my boy . Heaven know , I can not find it in my heart to blame you , but this much I will say , be it kind or unkind : when Captain Smollett be well , you dare not have go off ; and when he be ill and could not   help it , by George , it be downright cowardly ! " 
 I will own that I here begin to weep . " doctor , " I say , " you might spare I . I have blame myself enough ; my life 's forfeit anyway , and I should have be dead by now if Silver have not   stand for I ; and doctor , believe this , I can die and I dare say I deserve it but what I fear be torture . if they come to torture I " 
 " Jim , " the doctor interrupt , and his voice be quite change , " Jim , I can not   have this . whip over , and we will run for it . " 
 " doctor , " say I , " I pass my word . " 
 " I know , I know , " he cry . " we can not   help that , Jim , now . I will take it on my shoulder , holus bolus , blame and shame , my boy ; but stay here , I can not let you . jump ! one jump , and you be out , and we will run for it like antelope . " 
 " no , " I reply ; " you know right well you would not   do the thing yourself neither you nor squire nor captain ; and no more will I. Silver trust I ; I pass my word , and back I go . but , doctor , you do not let I finish . if they come to torture I , I might let slip a word of where the ship be , for I get the ship , part by luck and part by risk , and she lie in North Inlet , on the southern beach , and just below high water . at half tide she must be high and dry . " 
 " the ship ! " exclaim the doctor . 
 rapidly I describe to he my adventure , and he hear I out in silence . 
 " there be a kind of fate in this , " he observe when I have do . " every step , it be you that save our life ; and do you suppose by any chance that we be go to let you lose your ? that would be a poor return , my boy . you find out the plot ; you find Ben Gunn the good deed that ever you do , or will do , though you live to ninety . oh , by Jupiter , and talk of Ben Gunn ! why , this be the mischief in person . silver ! " he cry . " Silver ! I will give you a piece of advice , " he continue as the cook draw near again ; " do not   you be in any great hurry after that treasure . " 
 " why , sir , I do my possible , which that be not , " say Silver . " I can only , ask your pardon , save my life and the boy be by seek for that treasure ; and you may lay to that . " 
 " well , Silver , " reply the doctor , " if that be so , I will go one step far : look out for squall when you find it . " 
 " Sir , " say Silver , " as between man and man , that be too much and too little . what you be after , why you leave the block house , why you give I that there chart , I do not   know , now , do I ? and yet I do your bidding with my eye shut and never a word of hope ! but no , this here be too much . if you will not   tell I what you mean plain out , just say so and I will leave the helm . " 
 " no , " say the doctor musingly ; " I have   no right to say more ; it be not my secret , you see , Silver , or , I give you my word , I would tell it you . but I will go as far with you as I dare go , and a step beyond , for I will have my wig sort by the captain or I be mistaken ! and first , I will give you a bit of hope ; Silver , if we both get alive out of this wolf - trap , I will do my good to save you , short of perjury . " 
 Silver 's face be radiant . " you could not   say more , I be sure , sir , not if you be my mother , " he cry . 
 " well , that be my first concession , " add the doctor . " my second be a piece of advice : keep the boy close beside you , and when you need help , halloo . I be off to seek it for you , and that itself will show you if I speak at random . good - bye , Jim . " 
 and Dr. Livesey shake hand with I through the stockade , nod to Silver , and set off at a brisk pace into the wood . 




 31 

 the Treasure - hunt Flint 's Pointer 

 " JIM , " say Silver when we be alone , " if I save your life , you save mine ; and I will not forget it . I see the doctor wave you to run for it with the tail of my eye , I do ; and I see you say no , as plain as hear . Jim , that be one to you . this be the first glint of hope I have since the attack fail , and I owe it you . and now , Jim , we be to go in for this here treasure - hunting , with seal order too , and I do not   like it ; and you and I must stick close , back to back like , and we will save our neck in spite o ' fate and fortune . " 
 just then a man hail we from the fire that breakfast be ready , and we be soon seat here and there about the sand over biscuit and fried junk . they have light a fire fit to roast an ox , and it be now grow so hot that they could only approach it from the windward , and even there not without precaution . in the same wasteful spirit , they have cook , I suppose , three time more than we could eat ; and one of they , with an empty laugh , throw what be leave into the fire , which blaze and roar again over this unusual fuel . I never in my life see man so careless of the morrow ; hand to mouth be the only word that can describe their way of do ; and what with waste food and sleeping sentry , though they be bold enough for a brush and be do with it , I could see their entire unfitness for anything like a prolonged campaign . 
 even Silver , eat away , with Captain Flint upon his shoulder , have not a word of blame for their recklessness . and this the more surprised I , for I think he have never show himself so cunning as he do then . 
 " aye , mate , " say he , " it be lucky you have Barbecue to think for you with this here head . I get what I want , I do . sure enough , they have the ship . where they have it , I do not   know yet ; but once we hit the treasure , we will have to jump about and find out . and then , mate , we that have the boat , I reckon , have the upper hand . " 
 thus he keep run on , with his mouth full of the hot bacon ; thus he restore their hope and confidence , and , I more than suspect , repair his own at the same time . 
 " as for hostage , " he continue , " that be his last talk , I guess , with they he love so dear . I have   get my piece o ' news , and thanky to he for that ; but it be over and do . I will take he in a line when we go treasure - hunting , for we will keep he like so much gold , in case of accident , you mark , and in the meantime . once we get the ship and treasure both and off to sea like jolly companion , why then we will talk Mr. Hawkins over , we will , and we will give he his share , to be sure , for all his kindness . " 
 it be no wonder the man be in a good humour now . for my part , I be horribly cast down . should the scheme he have now sketch prove feasible , Silver , already doubly a traitor , would not hesitate to adopt it . he have still a foot in either camp , and there be no doubt he would prefer wealth and freedom with the pirate to a bare escape from hang , which be the good he have to hope on our side . 
 Nay , and even if thing so fall out that he be force to keep his faith with Dr. Livesey , even then what danger lie before we ! what a moment that would be when the suspicion of his follower turn to certainty and he and I should have to fight for dear life he a cripple and I a boy against five strong and active seaman ! 
 add to this double apprehension the mystery that still hang over the behaviour of my friend , their unexplained desertion of the stockade , their inexplicable cession of the chart , or hard still to understand , the doctor 's last warning to silver , " look out for squall when you find it , " and you will readily believe how little taste I find in my breakfast and with how uneasy a heart I set forth behind my captor on the quest for treasure . 
 we make a curious figure , have anyone be there to see we all in soil sailor clothe and all but I armed to the tooth . Silver have two gun sling about he one before and one behind besides the great cutlass at his waist and a pistol in each pocket of his square - tail coat . to complete his strange appearance , Captain Flint sit perch upon his shoulder and gabbling odd and end of purposeless sea - talk . I have a line about my waist and follow obediently after the sea - cook , who hold the loose end of the rope , now in his free hand , now between his powerful tooth . for all the world , I be lead like a dancing bear . 
 the other man be variously burthen , some carry pick and shovel for that have be the very first necessary they bring ashore from the hispaniola other laden with pork , bread , and brandy for the midday meal . all the store , I observe , come from our stock , and I could see the truth of Silver 's word the night before . have he not strike a bargain with the doctor , he and his mutineer , desert by the ship , must have be drive to subsist on clear water and the proceed of their hunting . water would have be little to their taste ; a sailor be not usually a good shot ; and besides all that , when they be so short of eatable , it be not likely they would be very flush of powder . 
 well , thus equip , we all set out even the fellow with the broken head , who should certainly have keep in shadow and straggle , one after another , to the beach , where the two gig await we . even these bore trace of the drunken folly of the pirate , one in a broken thwart , and both in their muddy and unbailed condition . both be to be carry along with we for the sake of safety ; and so , with our number divide between they , we set forth upon the bosom of the anchorage . 
 as we pull over , there be some discussion on the chart . the red cross be , of course , far too large to be a guide ; and the term of the note on the back , as you will hear , admit of some ambiguity . they run , the reader may remember , thus : 
  tall tree , Spy - glass shoulder , bear a point to 
  the N. of N.N.E. 
  Skeleton Island E.S.E. and by E. 
  ten foot . 
 a tall tree be thus the principal mark . now , right before we the anchorage be bound by a plateau from two to three hundred foot high , adjoining on the north the slop southern shoulder of the Spy - glass and rise again towards the south into the rough , cliffy eminence call the Mizzen - mast Hill . the top of the plateau be dot thickly with pine - tree of vary height . every here and there , one of a different specie rise forty or fifty foot clear above its neighbour , and which of these be the particular " tall tree " of Captain Flint could only be decide on the spot , and by the reading of the compass . 
 yet , although that be the case , every man on board the boat have pick a favourite of his own ere we be half - way over , Long John alone shrug his shoulder and bid they wait till they be there . 
 we pull easily , by Silver 's direction , not to weary the hand prematurely , and after quite a long passage , land at the mouth of the second river that which run down a woody cleft of the Spy - glass . Thence , bend to our left , we begin to ascend the slope towards the plateau . 
 at the first outset , heavy , miry ground and a matted , marish vegetation greatly delay our progress ; but by little and little the hill begin to steepen and become stony under foot , and the wood to change its character and to grow in a more open order . it be , indeed , a most pleasant portion of the island that we be now approach . a heavy - scented broom and many flower shrub have almost take the place of grass . thicket of green nutmeg - tree be dot here and there with the red column and the broad shadow of the pine ; and the first mingle their spice with the aroma of the other . the air , besides , be fresh and stirring , and this , under the sheer sunbeam , be a wonderful refreshment to our sens . 
 the party spread itself abroad , in a fan shape , shout and leap to and fro . about the centre , and a good way behind the rest , Silver and I follow I tethered by my rope , he plough , with deep pant , among the slide gravel . from time to time , indeed , I have to lend he a hand , or he must have miss his footing and fall backward down the hill . 
 we have thus proceed for about half a mile and be approach the brow of the plateau when the man upon the farth left begin to cry aloud , as if in terror . shout after shout come from he , and the other begin to run in his direction . 
 " he can not   ' a find the treasure , " say old Morgan , hurry past we from the right , " for that be clean a - top . " 
 indeed , as we find when we also reach the spot , it be something very different . at the foot of a pretty big pine and involve in a green creeper , which have even partly lift some of the small bone , a human skeleton lay , with a few shred of clothing , on the ground . I believe a chill strike for a moment to every heart . 
 " he be a seaman , " say George Merry , who , bold than the rest , have go up close and be examine the rag of clothing . " leastway , this be good sea - cloth . " 
 " aye , aye , " say silver ; " like enough ; you would not   look to find a bishop here , I reckon . but what sort of a way be that for bone to lie ? ' tain't   in natur ' . " 
 indeed , on a second glance , it seem impossible to fancy that the body be in a natural position . but for some disarray   the work , perhaps , of the bird that have feed upon he or of the slow - grow creeper that have gradually envelop his remain   the man lie perfectly straight his foot point in one direction , his hand , raise above his head like a diver 's , point directly in the opposite . 
 " I have   take a notion into my old numbskull , " observe silver . " here be the compass ; there be the tip - top p'int o ' Skeleton Island , stickin ' out like a tooth . just take a bearing , will you , along the line of they bone . " 
 it be do . the body point straight in the direction of the island , and the compass read duly E.S.E. and by E. 
 " I think so , " cry the cook ; " this here be a p'inter . right up there be our line for the Pole Star and the jolly dollar . but , by thunder ! if it do not   make I cold inside to think of Flint . this be one of his joke , and no mistake . he and these six be alone here ; he kill them , every man ; and this one he haul here and lay down by compass , shiver my timber ! they be long bone , and the hair be be yellow . Aye , that would be Allardyce . you mind Allardyce , Tom Morgan ? " 
 " aye , aye , " return Morgan ; " I mind he ; he owe I money , he do , and take my knife ashore with he . " 
 " speak of knife , " say another , " why do not   we find his'n lie round ? Flint warn't   the man to pick a seaman 's pocket ; and the bird , I guess , would leave it be . " 
 " by the power , and that be true ! " cry Silver . 
 " there be not   a thing leave here , " say Merry , still feel round among the bone ; " not a copper doit nor a baccy box . it do not   look nat'ral to I . " 
 " no , by gum , it do not , " agree silver ; " not nat'ral , nor not nice , say you . great gun ! messmate , but if Flint be live , this would be a hot spot for you and I . six they be , and six be we ; and bone be what they be now . " 
 " I see he dead with these here deadlight , " say Morgan . " Billy take I in . there he lay , with penny - piece on his eye . " 
 " dead aye , sure enough he be dead and go below , " say the fellow with the bandage ; " but if ever sperrit walk , it would be Flint 's . dear heart , but he die bad , do Flint ! " 
 " Aye , that he do , " observe another ; " now he rag , and now he holler for the rum , and now he sing . ' fifteen Men ' be his only song , mate ; and I tell you true , I never rightly like to hear it since . it be main hot , and the windy be open , and I hear that old song comin ' out as clear as clear and the death - haul on the man already . " 
 " come , come , " say silver ; ' stow this talk . he be dead , and he do not   walk , that I know ; leastway , he will not   walk by day , and you may lay to that . Care kill a cat . fetch ahead for the doubloon . " 
 we start , certainly ; but in spite of the hot sun and the star daylight , the pirate no long run separate and shout through the wood , but keep side by side and speak with bated breath . the terror of the dead buccaneer have fall on their spirit . 




 32 

 the treasure - hunt the Voice among the Trees 

 partly from the damp influence of this alarm , partly to rest silver and the sick folk , the whole party sit down as soon as they have gain the brow of the ascent . 
 the plateau be somewhat tilt towards the west , this spot on which we have pause command a wide prospect on either hand . before we , over the tree - top , we behold the Cape of the wood fringe with surf ; behind , we not only look down upon the anchorage and Skeleton Island , but see clear across the spit and the eastern lowland a great field of open sea upon the east . Sheer above we rise the Spyglass , here dot with single pine , there black with precipice . there be no sound but that of the distant breaker , mount from all round , and the chirp of countless insect in the brush . not a man , not a sail , upon the sea ; the very largeness of the view increase the sense of solitude . 
 silver , as he sit , take certain bearing with his compass . 
 " there be three ' tall tree ' " say he , " about in the right line from Skeleton Island . ' spy - glass shoulder , ' I take it , mean that low p'int there . it be child 's play to find the stuff now . I have   half a mind to dine first . " 
 " I do not   feel sharp , " growl Morgan . " Thinkin ' o ' Flint I think it be as do I . " 
 " ah , well , my son , you praise your star he be dead , " say Silver . 
 " he be an ugly devil , " cry a third pirate with a shudder ; " that blue in the face too ! " 
 " that be how the rum take he , " add Merry . " Blue ! well , I reckon he be blue . that be a true word . " 
 ever since they have find the skeleton and get upon this train of thought , they have speak low and low , and they have almost get to whispering by now , so that the sound of their talk hardly interrupt the silence of the wood . all of a sudden , out of the middle of the tree in front of we , a thin , high , tremble voice strike up the well - know air and word : 
  " fifteen man on the dead man 's chest 
  Yo - ho - ho , and a bottle of rum ! " 
 I never have see man more dreadfully affect than the pirate . the colour go from their six face like enchantment ; some leap to their foot , some claw hold of other ; Morgan grovel on the ground . 
 " it be Flint , by ! " cry Merry . 
 the song have stop as suddenly as it begin break off , you would have say , in the middle of a note , as though someone have lay his hand upon the singer 's mouth . come through the clear , sunny atmosphere among the green tree - top , I think it have sound airily and sweetly ; and the effect on my companion be the stranger . 
 " come , " say Silver , struggle with his ashen lip to get the word out ; " this will not   do . stand by to go about . this be a rum start , and I can not   name the voice , but it be someone skylark someone that be flesh and blood , and you may lay to that . " 
 his courage have come back as he speak , and some of the colour to his face along with it . already the other have begin to lend an ear to this encouragement and be come a little to themselves , when the same voice break out again not this time singing , but in a faint distant hail that echo yet fainter among the cleft of the Spy - glass . 
 " Darby M'Graw , " it wail for that be the word that well describe the sound " Darby M'Graw ! Darby M'Graw ! " again and again and again ; and then rise a little high , and with an oath that I leave out : " Fetch aft the rum , Darby ! " 
 the buccaneer remain rooted to the ground , their eye start from their head . long after the voice have die away they still star in silence , dreadfully , before they . 
 " that fix it ! " gasp one . " let us go . " 
 " they be his last word , " moan Morgan , " his last word above board . " 
 Dick have his Bible out and be pray volubly . he have be well bring up , have Dick , before he come to sea and fall among bad companion . 
 still Silver be unconquered . I could hear his tooth rattle in his head , but he have not yet surrender . 
 " nobody in this here island ever hear of Darby , " he mutter ; " not one but we that be here . " and then , make a great effort : " shipmate , " he cry , " I be here to get that stuff , and I will not be beat by man or devil . I never be fear of Flint in his life , and , by the power , I will face he dead . there be seven hundred thousand pound not a quarter of a mile from here . when do ever a gentleman o ' fortune show his stern to that much dollar for a boozy old seaman with a blue mug and he dead too ? " 
 but there be no sign of reawaken courage in his follower , rather , indeed , of grow terror at the irreverence of his word . 
 " Belay there , John ! " say Merry . " do not   you cross a sperrit . " 
 and the rest be all too terrified to reply . they would have run away severally have they dare ; but fear keep they together , and keep they close by John , as if his daring help they . he , on his part , have pretty well fight his weakness down . 
 " Sperrit ? well , maybe , " he say . " but there be one thing not clear to I . there be an echo . now , no man ever see a sperrit with a shadow ; well then , what be he do with an echo to he , I should like to know ? that be not   in natur ' , surely ? " 
 this argument seem weak enough to I . but you can never tell what will affect the superstitious , and to my wonder , George Merry be greatly relieve . 
 " well , that be so , " he say . " you have   a head upon your shoulder , John , and no mistake . ' bout ship , mate ! this here crew be on a wrong tack , I do believe . and come to think on it , it be like Flint 's voice , I grant you , but not just so clear - away like it , after all . it be liker somebody else 's voice now it be liker " 
 " by the power , Ben Gunn ! " roar Silver . 
 " Aye , and so it be , " cry Morgan , spring on his knee . " Ben Gunn it be ! " 
 " it do not   make much odd , do it , now ? " ask Dick . " Ben Gunn be not here in the body any more'n Flint . " 
 but the old hand greet this remark with scorn . 
 " why , nobody mind Ben Gunn , " cry Merry ; " dead or alive , nobody mind he . " 
 it be extraordinary how their spirit have return and how the natural colour have revive in their face . soon they be chat together , with interval of listening ; and not long after , hear no further sound , they shoulder the tool and set forth again , Merry walk first with Silver 's compass to keep they on the right line with Skeleton Island . he have say the truth : dead or alive , nobody mind Ben Gunn . 
 Dick alone still hold his Bible , and look around he as he go , with fearful glance ; but he find no sympathy , and Silver even joke he on his precaution . 
 " I tell you , " say he " I tell you you have sp'ile your Bible . if it be not   no good to swear by , what do you suppose a sperrit would give for it ? not that ! " and he snap his big finger , halt a moment on his crutch . 
 but Dick be not to be comfort ; indeed , it be soon plain to I that the lad be fall sick ; hasten by heat , exhaustion , and the shock of his alarm , the fever , predict by Dr. Livesey , be evidently grow swiftly higher . 
 it be fine open walking here , upon the summit ; our way lie a little downhill , for , as I have say , the plateau tilt towards the west . the pine , great and small , grow wide apart ; and even between the clump of nutmeg and azalea , wide open space bake in the hot sunshine . Striking , as we do , pretty near north - west across the island , we draw , on the one hand , ever near under the shoulder of the Spy - glass , and on the other , look ever wider over that western bay where I have once toss and tremble in the coracle . 
 the first of the tall tree be reach , and by the bearing prove the wrong one . so with the second . the third rise nearly two hundred foot into the air above a clump of underwood a giant of a vegetable , with a red column as big as a cottage , and a wide shadow around in which a company could have manoeuvre . it be conspicuous far to sea both on the east and west and might have be enter as a sailing mark upon the chart . 
 but it be not its size that now impress my companion ; it be the knowledge that seven hundred thousand pound in gold lie somewhere bury below its spread shadow . the thought of the money , as they draw near , swallow up their previous terror . their eye burn in their head ; their foot grow speedy and lighter ; their whole soul be find up in that fortune , that whole lifetime of extravagance and pleasure , that lie wait there for each of they . 
 silver hobble , grunt , on his crutch ; his nostril stand out and quiver ; he curse like a madman when the fly settle on his hot and shiny countenance ; he pluck furiously at the line that hold I to he and from time to time turn his eye upon I with a deadly look . certainly he take no pain to hide his thought , and certainly I read they like print . in the immediate nearness of the gold , all else have be forget : his promise and the doctor 's warning be both thing of the past , and I could not doubt that he hop to seize upon the treasure , find and board the hispaniola under cover of night , cut every honest throat about that island , and sail away as he have at first intend , laden with crime and rich . 
 shake as I be with these alarm , it be hard for I to keep up with the rapid pace of the treasure - hunter . now and again I stumble , and it be then that Silver pluck so roughly at the rope and launch at I his murderous glance . Dick , who have drop behind we and now bring up the rear , be babble to himself both prayer and curse as his fever keep rise . this also add to my wretchedness , and to crown all , I be haunt by the thought of the tragedy that have once be act on that plateau , when that ungodly buccaneer with the blue face he who die at Savannah , sing and shout for drink have there , with his own hand , cut down his six accomplice . this grove that be now so peaceful must then have ring with cry , I think ; and even with the thought I could believe I hear it ring still . 
 we be now at the margin of the thicket . 
 " Huzza , mate , all together ! " shout Merry ; and the foremost break into a run . 
 and suddenly , not ten yard far , we behold they stop . a low cry arise . Silver double his pace , dig away with the foot of his crutch like one possess ; and next moment he and I have come also to a dead halt . 
 before we be a great excavation , not very recent , for the side have fall in and grass have sprout on the bottom . in this be the shaft of a pick break in two and the board of several packing - case strew around . on one of these board I see , brand with a hot iron , the name WALRUS the name of Flint 's ship . 
 all be clear to probation . the CACHE have be find and rifle ; the seven hundred thousand pound be go ! 




 33 

 the fall of a chieftain 

 THERE never be such an overturn in this world . each of these six man be as though he have be strike . but with Silver the blow pass almost instantly . every thought of his soul have be set full - stretch , like a racer , on that money ; well , he be bring up , in a single second , dead ; and he keep his head , find his temper , and change his plan before the other have have time to realize the disappointment . 
 " Jim , " he whisper , " take that , and stand by for trouble . " 
 and he pass I a double - barrel pistol . 
 at the same time , he begin quietly move northward , and in a few step have put the hollow between we two and the other five . then he look at I and nod , as much as to say , " here be a narrow corner , " as , indeed , I think it be . his look be not quite friendly , and I be so revolted at these constant change that I could not forbear whispering , " so you have   change side again . " 
 there be no time leave for he to answer in . the buccaneer , with oath and cry , begin to leap , one after another , into the pit and to dig with their finger , throw the board aside as they do so . Morgan find a piece of gold . he hold it up with a perfect spout of oath . it be a two - guinea piece , and it go from hand to hand among they for a quarter of a minute . 
 " two guineas ! " roar Merry , shake it at Silver . " that be your seven hundred thousand pound , be it ? you be the man for bargain , be not   you ? you be he that never bungle nothing , you wooden - headed lubber ! " 
 " dig away , boy , " say Silver with the cool insolence ; " you will find some pig - nuts and I should not   wonder . " 
 " pig - nuts ! " repeat Merry , in a scream . " mate , do you hear that ? I tell you now , that man there know it all along . look in the face of he and you will see it write there . " 
 " ah , Merry , " remark Silver , ' stand for cap'n again ? you be a push lad , to be sure . " 
 but this time everyone be entirely in Merry 's favour . they begin to scramble out of the excavation , dart furious glance behind they . one thing I observe , which look well for we : they all get out upon the opposite side from Silver . 
 well , there we stand , two on one side , five on the other , the pit between we , and nobody screw up high enough to offer the first blow . silver never move ; he watch they , very upright on his crutch , and look as cool as ever I see he . he be brave , and no mistake . 
 at last Merry seem to think a speech might help matter . 
 " Mates , " say he , " there be two of they alone there ; one be the old cripple that bring we all here and blunder we down to this ; the other 's that cub that I mean to have the heart of . now , mate " 
 he be raise his arm and his voice , and plainly mean to lead a charge . but just then crack ! crack ! crack ! three musket - shot flash out of the thicket . Merry tumble head foremost into the excavation ; the man with the bandage spin round like a teetotum and fall all his length upon his side , where he lie dead , but still twitch ; and the other three turn and run for it with all their might . 
 before you could wink , Long John have fire two barrel of a pistol into the struggle Merry , and as the man roll up his eye at he in the last agony , " George , " say he , " I reckon I settle you . " 
 at the same moment , the doctor , Gray , and Ben Gunn join we , with smoking musket , from among the nutmeg - tree . 
 " Forward ! " cry the doctor . " double quick , my lad . we must head them off the boat . " 
 and we set off at a great pace , sometimes plunge through the bush to the chest . 
 I tell you , but Silver be anxious to keep up with we . the work that man go through , leap on his crutch till the muscle of his chest be fit to burst , be work no sound man ever equal ; and so think the doctor . as it be , he be already thirty yard behind we and on the verge of strangle when we reach the brow of the slope . 
 " Doctor , " he hail , ' see there ! no hurry ! " 
 sure enough there be no hurry . in a more open part of the plateau , we could see the three survivor still run in the same direction as they have start , right for Mizzenmast Hill . we be already between they and the boat ; and so we four sit down to breathe , while Long John , mop his face , come slowly up with we . 
 " thank ye kindly , doctor , " say he . " you come in in about the nick , I guess , for I and Hawkins . and so it be you , Ben Gunn ! " he add . " well , you be a nice one , to be sure . " 
 " I be Ben Gunn , I be , " reply the maroon , wriggle like an eel in his embarrassment . " and , " he add , after a long pause , " how do , Mr. Silver ? pretty well , I thank ye , say you . " 
 " Ben , Ben , " murmur silver , " to think as you have   do I ! " 
 the doctor send back Gray for one of the pick - axis desert , in their flight , by the mutineer , and then as we proceed leisurely downhill to where the boat be lie , relate in a few word what have take place . it be a story that profoundly interested silver ; and Ben Gunn , the half - idiot maroon , be the hero from begin to end . 
 Ben , in his long , lonely wandering about the island , have find the skeleton it be he that have rifle it ; he have find the treasure ; he have dig it up   it be the haft of his pick - axe that lie break in the excavation ; he have carry it on his back , in many weary journey , from the foot of the tall pine to a cave he have on the two - point hill at the north - east angle of the island , and there it have lain store in safety since two month before the arrival of the HISPANIOLA . 
 when the doctor have worm this secret from he on the afternoon of the attack , and when next morning he see the anchorage desert , he have go to Silver , give he the chart , which be now useless give he the store , for Ben Gunn 's cave be well supply with goat ' meat salt by himself give anything and everything to get a chance of move in safety from the stockade to the two - point hill , there to be clear of malaria and keep a guard upon the money . 
 " as for you , Jim , " he say , " it go against my heart , but I do what I think well for those who have stand by their duty ; and if you be not one of these , whose fault be it ? " 
 that morning , find that I be to be involve in the horrid disappointment he have prepare for the mutineer , he have run all the way to the cave , and leave the squire to guard the captain , have take Gray and the maroon and start , make the diagonal across the island to be at hand beside the pine . soon , however , he see that our party have the start of he ; and Ben Gunn , be fleet of foot , have be dispatch in front to do his good alone . then it have occur to he to work upon the superstition of his former shipmate , and he be so far successful that Gray and the doctor have come up and be already ambush before the arrival of the treasure - hunter . 
 " ah , " say Silver , " it be fortunate for I that I have Hawkins here . you would have let old John be cut to bit , and never give it a thought , doctor . " 
 " not a thought , " reply Dr. Livesey cheerily . 
 and by this time we have reach the gig . the doctor , with the pick - axe , demolish one of they , and then we all get aboard the other and set out to go round by sea for North Inlet . 
 this be a run of eight or nine mile . silver , though he be almost kill already with fatigue , be set to an oar , like the rest of we , and we be soon skim swiftly over a smooth sea . soon we pass out of the strait and double the south - east corner of the island , round which , four day ago , we have tow the hispaniola . 
 as we pass the two - point hill , we could see the black mouth of Ben Gunn 's cave and a figure stand by it , lean on a musket . it be the squire , and we wave a handkerchief and give he three cheer , in which the voice of Silver join as heartily as any . 
 three mile far , just inside the mouth of North Inlet , what should we meet but the hispaniola , cruise by herself ? the last flood have lift she , and have there be much wind or a strong tide current , as in the southern anchorage , we should never have find she more , or find she strand beyond help . as it be , there be little amiss beyond the wreck of the main - sail . another anchor be get ready and drop in a fathom and a half of water . we all pull round again to Rum Cove , the near point for Ben Gunn 's treasure - house ; and then Gray , single - handed , return with the gig to the HISPANIOLA , where he be to pass the night on guard . 
 a gentle slope run up from the beach to the entrance of the cave . at the top , the squire meet we . to I he be cordial and kind , say nothing of my escapade either in the way of blame or praise . at Silver 's polite salute he somewhat flushed . 
 " John Silver , " he say , " you be a prodigious villain and impost a monstrous imposter , sir . I be tell I be not to prosecute you . well , then , I will not . but the dead man , sir , hang about your neck like mill - stone . " 
 " thank you kindly , sir , " reply Long John , again salute . 
 " I dare you to thank I ! " cry the squire . " it be a gross dereliction of my duty . stand back . " 
 and thereupon we all enter the cave . it be a large , airy place , with a little spring and a pool of clear water , overhang with fern . the floor be sand . before a big fire lie Captain Smollett ; and in a far corner , only duskily flicker over by the blaze , I behold great heap of coin and quadrilateral build of bar of gold . that be Flint 's treasure that we have come so far to seek and that have cost already the life of seventeen man from the hispaniola . how many it have cost in the amassing , what blood and sorrow , what good ship scuttle on the deep , what brave man walk the plank blindfold , what shot of cannon , what shame and lie and cruelty , perhaps no man alive could tell . yet there be still three upon that island silver , and old Morgan , and Ben Gunn who have each take his share in these crime , as each have hop in vain to share in the reward . 
 " come in , Jim , " say the captain . " you be a good boy in your line , Jim , but I do not   think you and me'll go to sea again . you be too much of the bear favourite for I . be that you , John Silver ? what bring you here , man ? " 
 " come back to my dooty , sir , " return Silver . 
 " ah ! " say the captain , and that be all he say . 
 what a supper I have of it that night , with all my friend around I ; and what a meal it be , with Ben Gunn 's salt goat and some delicacy and a bottle of old wine from the hispaniola . never , I be sure , be people gayer or happy . and there be Silver , sit back almost out of the firelight , but eat heartily , prompt to spring forward when anything be want , even join quietly in our laughter the same bland , polite , obsequious seaman of the voyage out . 




 34 

 and last 

 the next morning we fall early to work , for the transportation of this great mass of gold near a mile by land to the beach , and thence three mile by boat to the HISPANIOLA , be a considerable task for so small a number of workman . the three fellow still abroad upon the island do not greatly trouble we ; a single sentry on the shoulder of the hill be sufficient to ensure we against any sudden onslaught , and we think , besides , they have have more than enough of fight . 
 therefore the work be push on briskly . Gray and Ben Gunn come and go with the boat , while the rest during their absence pile treasure on the beach . two of the bar , sling in a rope 's end , make a good load for a grown man one that he be glad to walk slowly with . for my part , as I be not much use at carry , I be keep busy all day in the cave pack the mint money into bread - bag . 
 it be a strange collection , like Billy Bones 's hoard for the diversity of coinage , but so much large and so much more varied that I think I never have more pleasure than in sort they . English , French , spanish , Portuguese , george , and Louises , doubloon and double guineas and moidore and sequin , the picture of all the king of Europe for the last hundred year , strange oriental piece stamp with what look like wisps of string or bit of spider 's web , round piece and square piece , and piece bore through the middle , as if to wear they round your neck nearly every variety of money in the world must , I think , have find a place in that collection ; and for number , I be sure they be like autumn leaf , so that my back ache with stoop and my finger with sort they out . 
 Day after day this work go on ; by every evening a fortune have be stow aboard , but there be another fortune wait for the morrow ; and all this time we hear nothing of the three survive mutineer . 
 at last I think it be on the third night the doctor and I be stroll on the shoulder of the hill where it overlook the lowland of the isle , when , from out the thick darkness below , the wind bring we a noise between shrieking and singing . it be only a snatch that reach our ear , follow by the former silence . 
 " Heaven forgive they , " say the doctor ; " ' tis the mutineer ! " 
 " all drunk , sir , " strike in the voice of Silver from behind we . 
 silver , I should say , be allow his entire liberty , and in spite of daily rebuff , seem to regard himself once more as quite a privileged and friendly dependent . indeed , it be remarkable how well he bear these slight and with what unwearye politeness he keep on try to ingratiate himself with all . yet , I think , none treat he well than a dog , unless it be Ben Gunn , who be still terribly afraid of his old quartermaster , or myself , who have really something to thank he for ; although for that matter , I suppose , I have reason to think even bad of he than anybody else , for I have see he meditate a fresh treachery upon the plateau . accordingly , it be pretty gruffly that the doctor answer he . 
 " drunk or raving , " say he . 
 " right you be , sir , " reply silver ; " and precious little odd which , to you and I . " 
 " I suppose you would hardly ask I to call you a humane man , " return the doctor with a sneer , " and so my feeling may surprise you , Master Silver . but if I be sure they be rave as I be morally certain one , at least , of they be down with fever I should leave this camp , and at whatever risk to my own carcass , take they the assistance of my skill . " 
 " ask your pardon , sir , you would be very wrong , " quoth Silver . " you would lose your precious life , and you may lay to that . I be on your side now , hand and glove ; and I should not   wish for to see the party weaken , let alone yourself , see as I know what I owe you . but these man down there , they could not   keep their word no , not suppose they wish to ; and what be more , they could not   believe as you could . " 
 " no , " say the doctor . " you be the man to keep your word , we know that . " 
 well , that be about the last news we have of the three pirate . only once we hear a gunshot a great way off and suppose they to be hunt . a council be hold , and it be decide that we must desert they on the island to the huge glee , I must say , of Ben Gunn , and with the strong approval of Gray . we leave a good stock of powder and shot , the bulk of the salt goat , a few medicine , and some other necessary , tool , clothing , a spare sail , a fathom or two of rope , and by the particular desire of the doctor , a handsome present of tobacco . 
 that be about our last doing on the island . before that , we have get the treasure stow and have ship enough water and the remainder of the goat meat in case of any distress ; and at last , one fine morning , we weigh anchor , which be about all that we could manage , and stand out of North Inlet , the same colour fly that the captain have fly and fight under at the palisade . 
 the three fellow must have be watch we close than we think for , as we soon have prove . for come through the narrow , we have to lie very near the southern point , and there we see all three of they kneel together on a spit of sand , with their arm raise in supplication . it go to all our heart , I think , to leave they in that wretched state ; but we could not risk another mutiny ; and to take they home for the gibbet would have be a cruel sort of kindness . the doctor hail they and tell they of the store we have leave , and where they be to find they . but they continue to call we by name and appeal to we , for God 's sake , to be merciful and not leave they to die in such a place . 
 at last , see the ship still bear on her course and be now swiftly draw out of earshot , one of they I know not which it be leapt to his foot with a hoarse cry , whip his musket to his shoulder , and send a shot whistle over Silver 's head and through the main - sail . 
 after that , we keep under cover of the bulwark , and when next I look out they have disappear from the spit , and the spit itself have almost melt out of sight in the grow distance . that be , at least , the end of that ; and before noon , to my inexpressible joy , the high rock of Treasure Island have sink into the blue round of sea . 
 we be so short of man that everyone on board have to bear a hand only the captain lie on a mattress in the stern and give his order , for though greatly recover he be still in want of quiet . we lay her head for the near port in Spanish America , for we could not risk the voyage home without fresh hand ; and as it be , what with baffle wind and a couple of fresh gale , we be all wear out before we reach it . 
 it be just at sundown when we cast anchor in a most beautiful land - lock gulf , and be immediately surround by shore boat full of Negroes and Mexican Indians and half - blood sell fruit and vegetable and offer to dive for bit of money . the sight of so many good - humour face   especially the black , the taste of the tropical fruit , and above all the light that begin to shine in the town make a most charming contrast to our dark and bloody sojourn on the island ; and the doctor and the squire , take I along with they , go ashore to pass the early part of the night . here they meet the captain of an english man - of - war , fall in talk with he , go on board his ship , and , in short , have so agreeable a time that day be break when we come alongside the hispaniola . 
 Ben Gunn be on deck alone , and as soon as we come on board he begin , with wonderful contortion , to make we a confession . silver be go . the maroon have connive at his escape in a shore boat some hour ago , and he now assure we he have only do so to preserve our life , which would certainly have be forfeit if " that man with the one leg have stay aboard . " but this be not all . the sea - cook have not go empty - handed . he have cut through a bulkhead unobserved and have remove one of the sack of coin , worth perhaps three or four hundred guinea , to help he on his further wandering . 
 I think we be all pleased to be so cheaply quit of he . 
 well , to make a long story short , we get a few hand on board , make a good cruise home , and the hispaniola reach Bristol just as Mr. Blandly be begin to think of fit out her consort . five man only of those who have sail return with she . " drink and the devil have do for the rest , " with a vengeance , although , to be sure , we be not quite in so bad a case as that other ship they sing about : 
  with one man of her crew alive , 
  what put to sea with seventy - five . 
 all of we have an ample share of the treasure and use it wisely or foolishly , accord to our nature . Captain Smollett be now retire from the sea . Gray not only save his money , but be suddenly smit with the desire to rise , also study his profession , and he be now mate and part owner of a fine full - rig ship , marry beside , and the father of a family . as for Ben Gunn , he get a thousand pound , which he spend or lose in three week , or to be more exact , in nineteen day , for he be back beg on the twentieth . then he be give a lodge to keep , exactly as he have fear upon the island ; and he still live , a great favourite , though something of a butt , with the country boy , and a notable singer in church on Sundays and saint ' day . 
 of Silver we have hear no more . that formidable seafare man with one leg have at last go clean out of my life ; but I dare say he meet his old negress , and perhaps still live in comfort with she and Captain Flint . it be to be hop so , I suppose , for his chance of comfort in another world be very small . 
 the bar silver and the arm still lie , for all that I know , where Flint bury they ; and certainly they shall lie there for I . Oxen and wain - rope would not bring I back again to that accurse island ; and the bad dream that ever I have be when I hear the surf boom about its coast or start upright in bed with the sharp voice of Captain Flint still ring in my ear : " piece of eight ! piece of eight ! " 
