THE BLACK ARROW a tale of the two rose 

 Critic on the Hearth : 

 no one but myself know what I have suffer , nor what my book have gain , by your unsleepe watchfulness and admirable pertinacity . and now here be a volume that go into the world and lack your imprimatur : a strange thing in our joint life ; and the reason of it strange still ! I have watch with interest , with pain , and at length with amusement , your unavaile attempt to peruse the Black Arrow ; and I think I should lack humour indeed , if I let the occasion slip and do not place your name in the fly - leaf of the only book of mine that you have never read and never will read . 

 that other may display more constancy be still my hope . the tale be write year ago for a particular audience and   I may say   in rivalry with a particular author ; I think I should do well to name he , Mr. Alfred R. Phillips . it be not without its reward at the time . I could not , indeed , displace Mr. Phillips from his well - win priority ; but in the eye of reader who think less than nothing of Treasure Island , the Black Arrow be suppose to mark a clear advance . those who read volume and those who read story paper belong to different world . the verdict on Treasure Island be reverse in the other court ; I wonder , will it be the same with its successor ? 

 R. L. S. 

 Saranac Lake , April 8 , 1888 . 

 PROLOGUE JOHN AMEND - ALL 

 on a certain afternoon , in the late springtime , the bell upon Tunstall Moat House be hear ring at an unaccustomed hour . far and near , in the forest and in the field along the river , people begin to desert their labour and hurry towards the sound ; and in Tunstall hamlet a group of poor country - folk stand wonder at the summon . 

 tunstall hamlet at that period , in the reign of old King Henry VI . , wear much the same appearance as it wear to - day . a score or so of house , heavily frame with oak , stand scatter in a long green valley ascend from the river . at the foot , the road cross a bridge , and mount on the other side , disappear into the fringe of the forest on its way to the Moat House , and far forth to Holywood Abbey . half - way up the village , the church stand among yew . on every side the slope be crown and the view bound by the green elm and green oak - tree of the forest . 

 hard by the bridge , there be a stone cross upon a knoll , and here the group have collect half a dozen woman and one tall fellow in a russet smock discuss what the bell betide . an express have go through the hamlet half an hour before , and drink a pot of ale in the saddle , not dare to dismount for the hurry of his errand ; but he have be ignorant himself of what be forward , and only bear seal letter from Sir Daniel Brackley to Sir Oliver Oates , the parson , who keep the Moat House in the master s absence . 

 but now there be the noise of a horse ; and soon , out of the edge of the wood and over the echo bridge , there ride up young Master Richard Shelton , Sir Daniel s ward . he , at the least , would know , and they hail he and beg he to explain . he draw bridle willingly enough a young fellow not yet eighteen , sun - brown and grey - eye , in a jacket of deer s leather , with a black velvet collar , a green hood upon his head , and a steel cross - bow at his back . the express , it appear , have bring great news . a battle be impend . Sir Daniel have send for every man that could draw a bow or carry a bill to go post - haste to Kettley , under pain of his severe displeasure ; but for whom they be to fight , or of where the battle be expect , Dick know nothing . Sir Oliver would come shortly himself , and Bennet Hatch be arm at that moment , for he it be who should lead the party . 

 " it be the ruin of this kind land , " a woman say . " if the baron live at war , ploughfolk must eat root . " 

 " Nay , " say Dick , " every man that follow shall have sixpence a day , and archer twelve . " 

 " if they live , " return the woman , " that may very well be ; but how if they die , my master ? " 

 " they can not well die than for their natural lord , " say Dick . 

 " no natural lord of mine , " say the man in the smock . " I follow the Walsinghams ; so we all do down brierly way , till two year ago , come Candlemas . and now I must side with Brackley ! it be the law that do it ; call ye that natural ? but now , what with Sir Daniel and what with Sir Oliver that know more of law than honesty I have no natural lord but poor King Harry the Sixt , God bless he ! the poor innocent that can not tell his right hand from his left . " 

 " ye speak with an ill tongue , friend , " answer Dick , " to miscall your good master and my lord the king in the same libel . but King Harry praise be the saint ! have come again into his right mind , and will have all thing peaceably ordain . and as for Sir Daniel , y be very brave behind his back . but I will be no tale - bearer ; and let that suffice . " 

 " I say no harm of you , Master Richard , " return the peasant . " Y be a lad ; but when ye come to a man s inch , ye will find ye have an empty pocket . I say no more : the saint help Sir Daniel s neighbour , and the blessed Maid protect his ward ! " 

 " Clipsby , " say Richard , " you speak what I can not hear with honour . Sir Daniel be my good master , and my guardian . " 

 " come , now , will ye read I a riddle ? " return Clipsby . " on whose side be Sir Daniel ? " 

 " I know not , " say Dick , colour a little ; for his guardian have change side continually in the trouble of that period , and every change have bring he some increase of fortune . 

 " ay , " return Clipsby , " you , nor no man . for , indeed , he be one that go to bed Lancaster and get up York . " 

 just then the bridge ring under horse - shoe iron , and the party turn and see Bennet Hatch come gallop a brown - face , grizzle fellow , heavy of hand and grim of mien , arm with sword and spear , a steel salet on his head , a leather jack upon his body . he be a great man in these part ; Sir Daniel s right hand in peace and war , and at that time , by his master s interest , bailiff of the hundred . 

 " Clipsby , " he shout , " off to the Moat House , and send all other laggard the same gate . Bowyer will give you jack and salet . we must ride before curfew . look to it : he that be last at the lych - gate Sir Daniel shall reward . look to it right well ! I know you for a man of naught . Nance , " he add , to one of the woman , " be old Appleyard up town ? " 

 " I ll warrant you , " reply the woman . " in his field , for sure . " 

 so the group disperse , and while Clipsby walk leisurely over the bridge , Bennet and young Shelton ride up the road together , through the village and past the church . 

 " Ye will see the old shrew , " say Bennet . " he will waste more time grumble and prating of Harry the Fift than would serve a man to shoe a horse . and all because he have be to the french war ! " 

 the house to which they be bind be the last in the village , stand alone among lilac ; and beyond it , on three side , there be open meadow rise towards the border of the wood . 

 Hatch dismount , throw his rein over the fence , and walk down the field , Dick keep close at his elbow , to where the old soldier be dig , knee - deep in his cabbage , and now and again , in a crack voice , sing a snatch of song . he be all dress in leather , only his hood and tippet be of black frieze , and tie with scarlet ; his face be like a walnut - shell , both for colour and wrinkle ; but his old grey eye be still clear enough , and his sight unabate . perhaps he be deaf ; perhaps he think it unworthy of an old archer of Agincourt to pay any heed to such disturbance ; but neither the surly note of the alarm bell , nor the near approach of Bennet and the lad , appear at all to move he ; and he continue obstinately dig , and pip up , very thin and shaky : 

 " now , dear lady , if thy will be , 
 I pray you that you will rue on I . " 

 " Nick Appleyard , " say Hatch , " Sir Oliver commend he to you , and bid that ye shall come within this hour to the Moat House , there to take command . " 

 the old fellow look up . 

 " save you , my master ! " he say , grin . " and where goeth Master Hatch ? " 

 " Master Hatch be off to Kettley , with every man that we can horse , " return Bennet . " there be a fight toward , it seem , and my lord stay a reinforcement . " 

 " ay , verily , " return Appleyard . " and what will ye leave I to garrison withal ? " 

 " I leave you six good man , and Sir Oliver to boot , " answer Hatch . 

 " it ll not hold the place , " say appleyard ; " the number sufficeth not . it would take two score to make it good . " 

 " why , it s for that we come to you , old shrew ! " reply the other . " who else be there but you that could do aught in such a house with such a garrison ? " 

 " ay ! when the pinch come , ye remember the old shoe , " return Nick . " there be not a man of you can back a horse or hold a bill ; and as for archery St. Michael ! if old Harry the Fift be back again , he would stand and let ye shoot at he for a farthen a shoot ! " 

 " Nay , Nick , there s some can draw a good bow yet , " say Bennet . 

 " draw a good bow ! " cry Appleyard . " yes ! but who ll shoot I a good shoot ? it s there the eye come in , and the head between your shoulder . now , what might you call a long shoot , Bennet Hatch ? " 

 " well , " say Bennet , look about he , " it would be a long shoot from here into the forest . " 

 " ay , it would be a longish shoot , " say the old fellow , turn to look over his shoulder ; and then he put up his hand over his eye , and stand star . 

 " why , what be you look at ? " ask Bennet , with a chuckle . " do , you see Harry the Fift ? " 

 the veteran continue look up the hill in silence . the sun shine broadly over the shelve meadow ; a few white sheep wander browse ; all be still but the distant jangle of the bell . 

 " what be it , appleyard ? " ask Dick . 

 " why , the bird , " say appleyard . 

 and , sure enough , over the top of the forest , where it run down in a tongue among the meadow , and end in a pair of goodly green elm , about a bowshot from the field where they be stand , a flight of bird be skim to and fro , in evident disorder . 

 " what of the bird ? " say Bennet . 

 " ay ! " return Appleyard , " y be a wise man to go to war , Master Bennet . bird be a good sentry ; in forest place they be the first line of battle . look you , now , if we lay here in camp , there might be archer skulk down to get the wind of we ; and here would you be , none the wiser ! " 

 " why , old shrew , " say Hatch , " there be no man nearer we than Sir Daniel s , at Kettley ; y be as safe as in London Tower ; and ye raise scare upon a man for a few chaffinch and sparrow ! " 

 " hear he ! " grin Appleyard . " how many a rogue would give his two crop ear to have a shoot at either of we ? Saint Michael , man ! they hate we like two polecat ! " 

 " well , sooth it be , they hate Sir Daniel , " answer Hatch , a little sobered . 

 " ay , they hate Sir Daniel , and they hate every man that serve with he , " say appleyard ; " and in the first order of hat , they hate Bennet Hatch and old Nicholas the bowman . see ye here : if there be a stout fellow yonder in the wood - edge , and you and I stand fair for he as , by Saint George , we stand ! which , think ye , would he choose ? " 

 " you , for a good wager , " answer Hatch . 

 " my surcoat to a leather belt , it would be you ! " cry the old archer . " Ye burn Grimstone , Bennet they ll ne er forgive you that , my master . and as for I , I ll soon be in a good place , God grant , and out of bow - shoot ay , and cannon - shoot of all their malice . I be an old man , and draw fast to homeward , where the bed be ready . but for you , Bennet , y be to remain behind here at your own peril , and if ye come to my year unhanged , the old true - blue english spirit will be dead . " 

 " Y be the shrewish old dolt in Tunstall Forest , " return Hatch , visibly ruffle by these threat . " get ye to your arm before Sir Oliver come , and leave prating for one good while . an ye have talk so much with Harry the Fift , his ear would ha be rich than his pocket . " 

 an arrow sing in the air , like a huge hornet ; it strike old Appleyard between the shoulder - blade , and pierce he clean through , and he fall forward on his face among the cabbage . Hatch , with a broken cry , leapt into the air ; then , stoop double , he run for the cover of the house . and in the meanwhile Dick Shelton have drop behind a lilac , and have his crossbow bent and shoulder , cover the point of the forest . 

 not a leaf stir . the sheep be patiently browse ; the bird have settle . but there lie the old man , with a cloth - yard arrow stand in his back ; and there be Hatch hold to the gable , and Dick crouch and ready behind the lilac bush . 

 " D ye see aught ? " cry Hatch . 

 " not a twig stir , " say Dick . 

 " I think shame to leave he lie , " say Bennet , come forward once more with hesitate step and a very pale countenance . " keep a good eye on the wood , Master Shelton keep a clear eye on the wood . the saint assoil we ! here be a good shoot ! " 

 Bennet raise the old archer on his knee . he be not yet dead ; his face work , and his eye shut and open like machinery , and he have a most horrible , ugly look of one in pain . 

 " can ye hear , old Nick ? " ask Hatch . " have ye a last wish before ye wend , old brother ? " 

 " pluck out the shaft , and let I pass , a Mary s name ! " gasp Appleyard . " I be do with Old England . pluck it out ! " 

 " Master Dick , " say Bennet , " come hither , and pull I a good pull upon the arrow . he would fain pass , the poor sinner . " 

 Dick lay down his cross - bow , and pull hard upon the arrow , draw it forth . a gush of blood follow ; the old archer scramble half upon his foot , call once upon the name of God , and then fall dead . Hatch , upon his knee among the cabbage , pray fervently for the welfare of the pass spirit . but even as he pray , it be plain that his mind be still divided , and he keep ever an eye upon the corner of the wood from which the shot have come . when he have do , he get to his foot again , draw off one of his mailed gauntlet , and wipe his pale face , which be all wet with terror . 

 " ay , " he say , " it ll be my turn next . " 

 " who hath do this , Bennet ? " Richard ask , still hold the arrow in his hand . 

 " Nay , the saint know , " say Hatch . " here be a good two score christian soul that we have hunt out of house and hold , he and I. he have pay his shot , poor shrew , nor will it be long , mayhap , ere I pay mine . Sir Daniel driveth over - hard . " 

 " this be a strange shaft , " say the lad , look at the arrow in his hand . 

 " ay , by my faith ! " cry Bennet . " black , and black - feather . here be an ill - favour shaft , by my sooth ! for black , they say , bode burial . and here be word write . wipe the blood away . what read ye ? " 

 " Appulyaird fro Jon Amend - All , " read Shelton . " what should this betoken ? " 

 " Nay , I like it not , " return the retainer , shake his head . " John Amend - All ! here be a rogue s name for those that be up in the world ! but why stand we here to make a mark ? take he by the knee , good Master Shelton , while I lift he by the shoulder , and let we lay he in his house . this will be a rare shog to poor Sir Oliver ; he will turn paper colour ; he will pray like a windmill . " 

 they take up the old archer , and carry he between they into his house , where he have dwelt alone . and there they lay he on the floor , out of regard for the mattress , and seek , as well they might , to straighten and compose his limb . 

 Appleyard s house be clean and bare . there be a bed , with a blue cover , a cupboard , a great chest , a pair of joint - stool , a hinged table in the chimney corner , and hang upon the wall the old soldier s armoury of bow and defensive armour . Hatch begin to look about he curiously . 

 " Nick have money , " he say . " he may have have three score pound put by . I would I could light upon t ! when ye lose an old friend , Master Richard , the good consolation be to heir he . see , now , this chest . I would go a mighty wager there be a bushel of gold therein . he have a strong hand to get , and a hard hand to keep withal , have Appleyard the archer . now may God rest his spirit ! near eighty year he be afoot and about , and ever get ; but now he s on the broad of his back , poor shrew , and no more lacketh ; and if his chattel come to a good friend , he would be merry , methink , in heaven . " 

 " come , Hatch , " say Dick , " respect his stone - blind eye . would ye rob the man before his body ? Nay , he would walk ! " 

 Hatch make several sign of the cross ; but by this time his natural complexion have return , and he be not easily to be dash from any purpose . it would have go hard with the chest have not the gate sound , and presently after the door of the house open and admit a tall , portly , ruddy , black - eyed man of near fifty , in a surplice and black robe . 

 " appleyard " the newcomer be say , as he enter ; but he stop dead . " Ave Maria ! " he cry . " saint be our shield ! what cheer be this ? " 

 " cold cheer with Appleyard , sir parson , " answer Hatch , with perfect cheerfulness . " Shot at his own door , and alighteth even now at purgatory gate . ay ! there , if tale be true , he shall lack neither coal nor candle . " 

 Sir Oliver grope his way to a joint - stool , and sit down upon it , sick and white . 

 " this be a judgment ! o , a great stroke ! " he sob , and rattle off a leash of prayer . 

 Hatch meanwhile reverently doff his salet and kneel down . 

 " ay , Bennet , " say the priest , somewhat recover , " and what may this be ? what enemy hath do this ? " 

 " here , Sir Oliver , be the arrow . see , it be write upon with word , " say Dick . 

 " Nay , " cry the priest , " this be a foul hearing ! John Amend - All ! a right lollardy word . and black of hue , as for an omen ! sir , this knave arrow like I not . but it importeth rather to take counsel . who should this be ? bethink you , Bennet . of so many black ill - willer , which should he be that doth so hardily outface we ? simnel ? I do much question it . the Walsinghams ? Nay , they be not yet so broken ; they still think to have the law over we , when time change . there be Simon Malmesbury , too . how think ye , Bennet ? " 

 " what think ye , sir , " return Hatch , " of Ellis Duckworth ? " 

 " Nay , Bennet , never . Nay , not he , " say the priest . " there cometh never any rise , Bennet , from below so all judicious chronicler concord in their opinion ; but rebellion travelleth ever downward from above ; and when Dick , Tom , and Harry take they to their bill , look ever narrowly to see what lord be profit thereby . now , Sir Daniel , have once more join he to the Queen s party , be in ill odour with the Yorkist lord . Thence , Bennet , come the blow by what procure , I yet seek ; but therein lie the nerve of this discomfiture . " 

 " an t please you , Sir Oliver , " say Bennet , " the axle be so hot in this country that I have long be smell fire . so do this poor sinner , appleyard . and , by your leave , man s spirit be so foully inclined to all of we , that it need neither York nor Lancaster to spur they on . hear my plain thought : you , that be a clerk , and Sir Daniel , that sail on any wind , ye have take many man s good , and beat and hang not a few . Y be call to count for this ; in the end , I wot not how , ye have ever the uppermost at law , and ye think all patch . but give I leave , Sir Oliver : the man that ye have dispossess and beat be but the angrier , and some day , when the black devil be by , he will up with his bow and clout I a yard of arrow through your inward . " 

 " Nay , Bennet , y be in the wrong . Bennet , ye should be glad to be correct , " say Sir Oliver . " Y be a prater , Bennet , a talker , a babbler ; your mouth be wide than your two ear . mend it , Bennet , mend it . " 

 " Nay , I say no more . have it as ye list , " say the retainer . 

 the priest now rise from the stool , and from the writing - case that hang about his neck take forth wax and a taper , and a flint and steel . with these he seal up the chest and the cupboard with Sir Daniel s arm , Hatch look on disconsolate ; and then the whole party proceed , somewhat timorously , to sally from the house and get to horse . 

 " tis time we be on the road , Sir Oliver , " say Hatch , as he hold the priest s stirrup while he mount . 

 " ay ; but , Bennet , thing be change , " return the parson . " there be now no Appleyard rest his soul ! to keep the garrison . I shall keep you , Bennet . I must have a good man to rest I on in this day of black arrow . the arrow that flieth by day , saith the evangel ; I have no mind of the context ; nay , I be a sluggard priest , I be too deep in man s affair . well , let we ride forth , Master Hatch . the jackman should be at the church by now . " 

 so they ride forward down the road , with the wind after they , blow the tail of the parson s cloak ; and behind they , as they go , cloud begin to arise and blot out the sink sun . they have pass three of the scatter house that make up Tunstall hamlet , when , come to a turn , they see the church before they . ten or a dozen house cluster immediately round it ; but to the back the churchyard be next the meadow . at the lych - gate , near a score of man be gather , some in the saddle , some stand by their horse head . they be variously armed and mount ; some with spear , some with bill , some with bow , and some bestride plough - horse , still splash with the mire of the furrow ; for these be the very dreg of the country , and all the well man and the fair equipment be already with Sir Daniel in the field . 

 " we have not do amiss , praise be the cross of Holywood ! Sir Daniel will be right well content , " observe the priest , inwardly number the troop . 

 " who go ? stand ! if ye be true ! " shout Bennet . a man be see slip through the churchyard among the yews ; and at the sound of this summon he discard all concealment , and fairly take to his heel for the forest . the man at the gate , who have be hitherto unaware of the stranger s presence , wake and scatter . those who have dismount begin scramble into the saddle ; the rest ride in pursuit ; but they have to make the circuit of the consecrated ground , and it be plain their quarry would escape they . Hatch , roar an oath , put his horse at the hedge , to head he off ; but the beast refuse , and send his rider sprawl in the dust . and though he be up again in a moment , and have catch the bridle , the time have go by , and the fugitive have gain too great a lead for any hope of capture . 

 the wise of all have be Dick Shelton . instead of start in a vain pursuit , he have whip his crossbow from his back , bend it , and set a quarrel to the string ; and now , when the other have desist , he turn to Bennet and ask if he should shoot . 

 " Shoot ! shoot ! " cry the priest , with sanguinary violence . 

 " cover he , Master Dick , " say Bennet . " bring I he down like a ripe apple . " 

 the fugitive be now within but a few leap of safety ; but this last part of the meadow run very steeply uphill ; and the man run slow in proportion . what with the greyness of the fall night , and the uneven movement of the runner , it be no easy aim ; and as Dick level his bow , he feel a kind of pity , and a half desire that he might miss . the quarrel speed . 

 the man stumble and fall , and a great cheer arise from Hatch and the pursuer . but they be count their corn before the harvest . the man fall lightly ; he be lightly afoot again , turn and wave his cap in a bravado , and be out of sight next moment in the margin of the wood . 

 " and the plague go with he ! " cry Bennet . " he have thief heel ; he can run , by St Banbury ! but you touch he , Master Shelton ; he have steal your quarrel , may he never have good I grudge he less ! " 

 " Nay , but what make he by the church ? " ask Sir Oliver . " I be shrewdly afeare there have be mischief here . Clipsby , good fellow , get ye down from your horse , and search thoroughly among the yew . " 

 Clipsby be go but a little while ere he return carry a paper . 

 " this writing be pin to the church door , " he say , hand it to the parson . " I find naught else , sir parson . " 

 " now , by the power of Mother Church , " cry Sir Oliver , " but this run hard on sacrilege ! for the king s good pleasure , or the lord of the manor well ! but that every run - the - hedge in a green jerkin should fasten paper to the chancel door nay , it run hard on sacrilege , hard ; and man have burn for matter of less weight . but what have we here ? the light fall apace . Good Master Richard , y have young eye . read I , I pray , this libel . " 

 Dick Shelton take the paper in his hand and read it aloud . it contain some line of very rugged doggerel , hardly even rhyme , write in a gross character , and most uncouthly spelt . with the spelling somewhat better , this be how they run : 

 " I have four blak arrow under my belt , 
 four for the greef that I have feel , 
 four for the nomber of ill menne 
 that have opressid I now and then . 

 one be go ; one be wele speed ; 
 Old Apulyaird be de . 

 one be for Maister Bennet Hatch , 
 that burn Grimstone , wall and thatch . 

 one for Sir Oliver Oates , 
 that cut Sir Harry Shelton s throat . 

 Sir Daniel , ye shull have the fourt ; 
 we shall think it fair sport . 

 Ye shull each have your own part , 
 a blak arrow in each blak heart . 
 get ye to your knee for to pray : 
 Ye be ded theeve , by yea and nay ! 

 " Jon Amend - All 
 of the Green Wood , 
 and his jolly fellaweship . 

 " Item , we have mo arrowes and goode hempen cord for othere of your following . " 

 " now , well - a - day for charity and the christian grace ! " cry Sir Oliver , lamentably . " sir , this be an ill world , and groweth daily bad . I will swear upon the cross of Holywood I be as innocent of that good knight s hurt , whether in act or purpose , as the babe unchristene . neither be his throat cut ; for therein they be again in error , as there still live credible witness to show . " 

 " it boot not , sir parson , " say Bennet . " here be unseasonable talk . " 

 " Nay , Master Bennet , not so . keep ye in your due place , good Bennet , " answer the priest . " I shall make mine innocence appear . I will , upon no consideration , lose my poor life in error . I take all man to witness that I be clear of this matter . I be not even in the Moat House . I be send of an errand before nine upon the clock " 

 " Sir Oliver , " say Hatch , interrupting , " since it please you not to stop this sermon , I will take other mean . Goffe , sound to horse . " 

 and while the tucket be sound , Bennet move close to the bewildered parson , and whisper violently in his ear . 

 Dick Shelton see the priest s eye turn upon he for an instant in a startled glance . he have some cause for thought ; for this Sir Harry Shelton be his own natural father . but he say never a word , and keep his countenance unmove . 

 Hatch and Sir Oliver discuss together for a while their altered situation ; ten man , it be decide between they , should be reserve , not only to garrison the Moat House , but to escort the priest across the wood . in the meantime , as Bennet be to remain behind , the command of the reinforcement be give to Master Shelton . indeed , there be no choice ; the man be loutish fellow , dull and unskilled in war , while Dick be not only popular , but resolute and grave beyond his age . although his youth have be spend in these rough , country place , the lad have be well teach in letter by Sir Oliver , and Hatch himself have show he the management of arm and the first principle of command . Bennet have always be kind and helpful ; he be one of those who be cruel as the grave to those they call their enemy , but ruggedly faithful and well willing to their friend ; and now , while Sir Oliver enter the next house to write , in his swift , exquisite penmanship , a memorandum of the last occurrence to his master , Sir Daniel Brackley , Bennet come up to his pupil to wish he God - speed upon his enterprise . 

 " Ye must go the long way about , Master Shelton , " he say ; " round by the bridge , for your life ! keep a sure man fifty pace afore you , to draw shot ; and go softly till y be past the wood . if the rogue fall upon you , ride for t ; ye will do naught by stand . and keep ever forward , Master Shelton ; turn I not back again , an ye love your life ; there be no help in Tunstall , mind ye that . and now , since ye go to the great war about the king , and I continue to dwell here in extreme jeopardy of my life , and the saint alone can certify if we shall meet again below , I give you my last counsel now at your riding . keep an eye on Sir Daniel ; he be unsure . put not your trust in the jack - priest ; he intendeth not amiss , but doth the will of other ; it be a hand - gun for Sir Daniel ! get your good lordship where ye go ; make you strong friend ; look to it . and think ever a pater - noster - while on Bennet Hatch . there be bad rogue afoot than Bennet . so , God - speed ! " 

 " and Heaven be with you , Bennet ! " return Dick . " Ye be a good friend to I - ward , and so I shall say ever . " 

 " and , look ye , master , " add Hatch , with a certain embarrassment , " if this amend - all should get a shaft into I , ye might , mayhap , lie out a gold mark or mayhap a pound for my poor soul ; for it be like to go stiff with I in purgatory . " 

 " ye shall have your will of it , Bennet , " answer Dick . " but , what cheer , man ! we shall meet again , where ye shall have more need of ale than mass . " 

 " the saint so grant it , Master Dick ! " return the other . " but here come Sir Oliver . an he be as quick with the long - bow as with the pen , he would be a brave man - at - arm . " 

 Sir Oliver give Dick a sealed packet , with this superscription : " to my ryght worchypful master , Sir Daniel Brackley , knyght , be thy delyvere in haste . " 

 and Dick , put it in the bosom of his jacket , give the word and set forth westward up the village . 

 BOOK I the two LADS 

 chapter I at the sign of the sun in kettley 

 Sir Daniel and his man lie in and about Kettley that night , warmly quarter and well patrol . but the Knight of Tunstall be one who never rest from money - getting ; and even now , when he be on the brink of an adventure which should make or mar he , he be up an hour after midnight to squeeze poor neighbour . he be one who traffic greatly in disputed inheritance ; it be his way to buy out the most unlikely claimant , and then , by the favour he curry with great lord about the king , procure unjust decision in his favour ; or , if that be too roundabout , to seize the dispute manor by force of arm , and rely on his influence and Sir Oliver s cunning in the law to hold what he have snatch . Kettley be one such place ; it have come very lately into his clutch ; he still meet with opposition from the tenant ; and it be to overawe discontent that he have lead his troop that way . 

 by two in the morning , Sir Daniel sit in the inn room , close by the fireside , for it be cold at that hour among the fen of Kettley . by his elbow stand a pottle of spiced ale . he have take off his visored headpiece , and sit with his bald head and thin , dark visage rest on one hand , wrap warmly in a sanguine - coloured cloak . at the low end of the room about a dozen of his man stand sentry over the door or lie asleep on bench ; and somewhat near hand , a young lad , apparently of twelve or thirteen , be stretch in a mantle on the floor . the host of the Sun stand before the great man . 

 " now , mark I , mine host , " Sir Daniel say , " follow but mine order , and I shall be your good lord ever . I must have good man for head borough , and I will have Adam - a - more high constable ; see to it narrowly . if other man be choose , it shall avail you nothing ; rather it shall be find to your sore cost . for those that have pay rent to Walsingham I shall take good measure you among the rest , mine host . " 

 " good knight , " say the host , " I will swear upon the cross of Holywood I do but pay to Walsingham upon compulsion . Nay , bully knight , I love not the rogue Walsinghams ; they be as poor as thief , bully knight . give I a great lord like you . Nay ; ask I among the neighbour , I be stout for Brackley . " 

 " it may be , " say Sir Daniel , dryly . " ye shall then pay twice . " 

 the innkeeper make a horrid grimace ; but this be a piece of bad luck that might readily befall a tenant in these unruly time , and he be perhaps glad to make his peace so easily . 

 " bring up yon fellow , Selden ! " cry the knight . 

 and one of his retainer lead up a poor , cringe old man , as pale as a candle , and all shake with the fen fever . 

 " Sirrah , " say Sir Daniel , " your name ? " 

 " an t please your worship , " reply the man , " my name be Condall Condall of Shoreby , at your good worship s pleasure . " 

 " I have hear you ill report on , " return the knight . " ye deal in treason , rogue ; ye trudge the country leasing ; y be heavily suspicione of the death of several . how , fellow , be ye so bold ? but I will bring you down . " 

 " right honourable and my reverend lord , " the man cry , " here be some hodge - podge , save your good presence . I be but a poor private man , and have hurt none . " 

 " the under - sheriff do report of you most vilely , " say the knight . " seize I , saith he , that Tyndal of Shoreby . " 

 " Condall , my good lord ; Condall be my poor name , " say the unfortunate . 

 " Condall or Tyndal , it be all one , " reply Sir Daniel , coolly . " for , by my sooth , y be here and I do mightily suspect your honesty . if ye would save your neck , write I swiftly an obligation for twenty pound . " 

 " for twenty pound , my good lord ! " cry Condall . " here be midsummer madness ! my whole estate amounteth not to seventy shilling . " 

 " Condall or Tyndal , " return Sir Daniel , grinning , " I will run my peril of that loss . write I down twenty , and when I have recover all I may , I will be good lord to you , and pardon you the rest . " 

 " alas ! my good lord , it may not be ; I have no skill to write , " say Condall . 

 " well - a - day ! " return the knight . " here , then , be no remedy . yet I would fain have spar you , Tyndal , have my conscience suffer . Selden , take I this old shrew softly to the near elm , and hang I he tenderly by the neck , where I may see he at my riding . fare ye well , good Master Condall , dear Master Tyndal ; y be post - haste for Paradise ; fare ye then well ! " 

 " Nay , my right pleasant lord , " reply Condall , force an obsequious smile , " an ye be so masterful , as doth right well become you , I will even , with all my poor skill , do your good bidding . " 

 " friend , " quoth Sir Daniel , " ye will now write two score . go to ! y be too cunning for a livelihood of seventy shilling . Selden , see he write I this in good form , and have it duly witness . " 

 and Sir Daniel , who be a very merry knight , none merry in England , take a drink of his mulled ale , and lie back , smile . 

 meanwhile , the boy upon the floor begin to stir , and presently sit up and look about he with a scare . 

 " Hither , " say Sir Daniel ; and as the other rise at his command and come slowly towards he , he lean back and laugh outright . " by the rood ! " he cry , " a sturdy boy ! " 

 the lad flush crimson with anger , and dart a look of hate out of his dark eye . now that he be on his leg , it be more difficult to make certain of his age . his face look somewhat old in expression , but it be as smooth as a young child s ; and in bone and body he be unusually slender , and somewhat awkward of gait . 

 " Ye have call I , Sir Daniel , " he say . " be it to laugh at my poor plight ? " 

 " Nay , now , let laugh , " say the knight . " good shrew , let laugh , I pray you . an ye could see yourself , I warrant ye would laugh the first . " 

 " well , " cry the lad , flush , " ye shall answer this when ye answer for the other . laugh while yet ye may ! " 

 " Nay , now , good cousin , " reply Sir Daniel , with some earnestness , " think not that I mock at you , except in mirth , as between kinsfolk and singular friend . I will make you a marriage of a thousand pound , go to ! and cherish you exceedingly . I take you , indeed , roughly , as the time demand ; but from henceforth I shall ungrudgingly maintain and cheerfully serve you . ye shall be Mrs. Shelton Lady Shelton , by my troth ! for the lad promiseth bravely . Tut ! ye will not shy for honest laughter ; it purgeth melancholy . they be no rogue who laugh , good cousin . good mine host , lie I a meal now for my cousin , Master John . sit ye down , sweetheart , and eat . " 

 " Nay , " say Master John , " I will break no bread . since ye force I to this sin , I will fast for my soul s interest . but , good mine host , I pray you of courtesy give I a cup of fair water ; I shall be much beholden to your courtesy indeed . " 

 " ye shall have a dispensation , go to ! " cry the knight . " shalt be well shriven , by my faith ! Content you , then , and eat . " 

 but the lad be obstinate , drink a cup of water , and , once more wrap himself closely in his mantle , sit in a far corner , brood . 

 in an hour or two , there rise a stir in the village of sentry challenge and the clatter of arm and horse ; and then a troop draw up by the inn door , and Richard Shelton , splash with mud , present himself upon the threshold . 

 " save you , Sir Daniel , " he say . 

 " how ! Dickie Shelton ! " cry the knight ; and at the mention of Dick s name the other lad look curiously across . " what maketh Bennet Hatch ? " 

 " please you , sir knight , to take cognisance of this packet from Sir Oliver , wherein be all thing fully state , " answer Richard , present the priest s letter . " and please you far , ye be good make all speed to Risingham ; for on the way hither we encounter one riding furiously with letter , and by his report , my Lord of Risingham be sore best , and lack exceedingly your presence . " 

 " how say you ? Sore best ? " return the knight . " Nay , then , we will make speed sit down , good Richard . as the world go in this poor realm of England , he that rid softli rid sure . Delay , they say , begetteth peril ; but it be rather this itch of do that undo man ; mark it , Dick . but let I see , first , what cattle ye have bring . Selden , a link here at the door ! " 

 and Sir Daniel stride forth into the village street , and , by the red glow of a torch , inspect his new troop . he be an unpopular neighbour and an unpopular master ; but as a leader in war he be well - beloved by those who ride behind his pennant . his dash , his proved courage , his forethought for the soldier comfort , even his rough gibe , be all to the taste of the bold blade in jack and salet . 

 " Nay , by the rood ! " he cry , " what poor dog be these ? here be some as crooked as a bow , and some as lean as a spear . friend , ye shall ride in the front of the battle ; I can spare you , friend . mark I this old villain on the piebald ! a two - year mutton riding on a hog would look more soldierly ! ha ! Clipsby , be ye there , old rat ? Y be a man I could lose with a good heart ; ye shall go in front of all , with a bull s eye paint on your jack , to be the well butt for archery ; sirrah , ye shall show I the way . " 

 " I will show you any way , Sir Daniel , but the way to change side , " return Clipsby , sturdily . 

 Sir Daniel laugh a guffaw . 

 " why , well say ! " he cry . " hast a shrewd tongue in thy mouth , go to ! I will forgive you for that merry word . Selden , see they feed , both man and brute . " 

 the knight re - enter the inn . 

 " now , friend Dick , " he say , " fall to . here be good ale and bacon . eat , while that I read . " 

 Sir Daniel open the packet , and as he read his brow darken . when he have do he sit a little , musing . then he look sharply at his ward . 

 " Dick , " say he , " Y have see this penny rhyme ? " 

 the lad reply in the affirmative . 

 " it bear your father s name , " continue the knight ; " and our poor shrew of a parson be , by some mad soul , accuse of slay he . " 

 " he do most eagerly deny it , " answer Dick . 

 " he do ? " cry the knight , very sharply . " Heed he not . he have a loose tongue ; he babble like a jack - sparrow . some day , when I may find the leisure , Dick , I will myself more fully inform you of these matter . there be one Duckworth shrewdly blame for it ; but the time be troubled , and there be no justice to be get . " 

 " it befell at the Moat House ? " Dick venture , with a beating at his heart . 

 " it befell between the Moat House and Holywood , " reply Sir Daniel , calmly ; but he shoot a covert glance , black with suspicion , at Dick s face . " and now , " add the knight , " speed you with your meal ; ye shall return to Tunstall with a line from I . " 

 Dick s face fall sorely . 

 " Prithee , Sir Daniel , " he cry , " send one of the villain ! I beseech you let I to the battle . I can strike a stroke , I promise you . " 

 " I misdoubt it not , " reply Sir Daniel , sit down to write . " but here , Dick , be no honour to be win . I lie in Kettley till I have sure tiding of the war , and then ride to join I with the conqueror . cry not on cowardice ; it be but wisdom , Dick ; for this poor realm so tosseth with rebellion , and the king s name and custody so changeth hand , that no man may be certain of the morrow . toss - pot and shuttle - wit run in , but my Lord Good - Counsel sit o one side , wait . " 

 with that , Sir Daniel , turn his back to Dick , and quite at the farth end of the long table , begin to write his letter , with his mouth on one side , for this business of the Black Arrow stick sorely in his throat . 

 meanwhile , young Shelton be go on heartily enough with his breakfast , when he feel a touch upon his arm , and a very soft voice whispering in his ear . 

 " make not a sign , I do beseech you , " say the voice , " but of your charity tell I the straight way to Holywood . beseech you , now , good boy , comfort a poor soul in peril and extreme distress , and set I so far forth upon the way to my repose . " 

 " take the path by the windmill , " answer Dick , in the same tone ; " it will bring you to Till Ferry ; there inquire again . " 

 and without turn his head , he fall again to eat . but with the tail of his eye he catch a glimpse of the young lad call Master John stealthily creep from the room . 

 " why , " think Dick , " he be a young as I. Good boy doth he call I ? an I have know , I should have see the varlet hang ere I have tell he . well , if he go through the fen , I may come up with he and pull his ear . " 

 half an hour later , Sir Daniel give Dick the letter , and bid he speed to the Moat House . and , again , some half an hour after Dick s departure , a messenger come , in hot haste , from my Lord of Risingham . 

 " Sir Daniel , " the messenger say , " ye lose great honour , by my sooth ! the fight begin again this morning ere the dawn , and we have beat their van and scatter their right wing . only the main battle standeth fast . an we have your fresh man , we should tilt you they all into the river . what , sir knight ! will ye be the last ? it stand not with your good credit . " 

 " Nay , " cry the knight , " I be but now upon the march . Selden , sound I the tucket . Sir , I be with you on the instant . it be not two hour since the more part of my command come in , sir messenger . what would ye have ? spurring be good meat , but yet it kill the charger . Bustle , boy ! " 

 by this time the tucket be sound cheerily in the morning , and from all side Sir Daniel s man pour into the main street and form before the inn . they have sleep upon their arm , with charger saddle , and in ten minute five - score man - at - arm and archer , cleanly equipped and briskly discipline , stand rank and ready . the chief part be in Sir Daniel s livery , murrey and blue , which give the great show to their array . the well armed ride first ; and away out of sight , at the tail of the column , come the sorry reinforcement of the night before . Sir Daniel look with pride along the line . 

 " here be the lad to serve you in a pinch , " he say . 

 " they be pretty man , indeed , " reply the messenger . " it but augment my sorrow that ye have not march the early . " 

 " well , " say the knight , " what would ye ? the beginning of a feast and the end of a fray , sir messenger ; " and he mount into his saddle . " why ! how now ! " he cry . " John ! Joanna ! Nay , by the sacred rood ! where be she ? Host , where be that girl ? " 

 " Girl , Sir Daniel ? " cry the landlord . " Nay , sir , I see no girl . " 

 " boy , then , dotard ! " cry the knight . " could ye not see it be a wench ? she in the murrey - colour mantle she that break she fast with water , rogue where be she ? " 

 " Nay , the saint bless we ! Master John , ye call he , " say the host . " well , I think none evil . he be go . I see he she I see she in the stable a good hour agone ; a be saddle a grey horse . " 

 " now , by the rood ! " cry Sir Daniel , " the wench be worth five hundred pound to I and more . " 

 " Sir knight , " observe the messenger , with bitterness , " while that ye be here , roar for five hundred pound , the realm of England be elsewhere be lose and win . " 

 " it be well say , " reply Sir Daniel . " Selden , fall I out with six cros - bowman ; hunt I she down . I care not what it cost ; but , at my returning , let I find she at the Moat House . be it upon your head . and now , sir messenger , we march . " 

 and the troop break into a good trot , and Selden and his six man be leave behind upon the street of Kettley , with the star villager . 

 CHAPTER II in the FEN 

 it be near six in the May morning when Dick begin to ride down into the fen upon his homeward way . the sky be all blue ; the jolly wind blow loud and steady ; the windmill - sail be spin ; and the willow over all the fen ripple and whiten like a field of corn . he have be all night in the saddle , but his heart be good and his body sound , and he ride right merrily . 

 the path go down and down into the marsh , till he lose sight of all the neighbouring landmark but Kettley windmill on the knoll behind he , and the extreme top of Tunstall Forest far before . on either hand there be great field of blow reed and willow , pool of water shake in the wind , and treacherous bog , as green as emerald , to tempt and to betray the traveller . the path lie almost straight through the morass . it be already very ancient ; its foundation have be lay by roman soldiery ; in the lapse of age much of it have sink , and every here and there , for a few hundred yard , it lie submerge below the stagnant water of the fen . 

 about a mile from Kettley , Dick come to one such break in the plain line of causeway , where the reed and willow grow dispersedly like little island and confuse the eye . the gap , besides , be more than usually long ; it be a place where any stranger might come readily to mischief ; and Dick bethink he , with something like a pang , of the lad whom he have so imperfectly direct . as for himself , one look backward to where the windmill sail be turn black against the blue of heaven one look forward to the high ground of Tunstall Forest , and he be sufficiently direct and hold straight on , the water wash to his horse s knee , as safe as on a highway . 

 half - way across , and when he have already sight the path rise high and dry upon the farth side , he be aware of a great splashing on his right , and see a grey horse , sink to its belly in the mud , and still spasmodically struggle . instantly , as though it have divine the neighbourhood of help , the poor beast begin to neigh most piercingly . it roll , meanwhile , a blood - shot eye , insane with terror ; and as it sprawl wallow in the quag , cloud of stinging insect rise and buzz about it in the air . 

 " Alack ! " think Dick , " can the poor lad have perish ? there be his horse , for certain a brave grey ! Nay , comrade , if thou criest to I so piteously , I will do all man can to help thee . shalt not lie there to drown by inch ! " 

 and he make ready his crossbow , and put a quarrel through the creature s head . 

 Dick ride on after this act of rugged mercy , somewhat sober in spirit , and look closely about he for any sign of his less happy predecessor in the way . " I would I have dare to tell he far , " he think ; " for I fear he have miscarry in the slough . " 

 and just as he be so think , a voice cry upon his name from the causeway side , and , look over his shoulder , he see the lad s face peer from a clump of reed . 

 " be ye there ? " he say , rein in . " ye lie so close among the reed that I have pass you by . I see your horse bemire , and put he from his agony ; which , by my sooth ! an ye have be a more merciful rider , ye have do yourself . but come forth out of your hiding . here be none to trouble you . " 

 " nay , good boy , I have no arm , nor skill to use they if I have , " reply the other , step forth upon the pathway . 

 " why call I boy ? " cry Dick . " Y be not , I trow , the elder of we twain . " 

 " Good Master Shelton , " say the other , " prithee forgive I . I have none the least intention to offend . rather I would in every way beseech your gentleness and favour , for I be now bad best than ever , have lose my way , my cloak , and my poor horse . to have a riding - rod and spur , and never a horse to sit upon ! and before all , " he add , look ruefully upon his clothe " before all , to be so sorrily besmirch ! " 

 " tut ! " cry Dick . " would ye mind a ducking ? blood of wound or dust of travel that s a man s adornment . " 

 " Nay , then , I like he well plain , " observe the lad . " but , prithee , how shall I do ? Prithee , good Master Richard , help I with your good counsel . if I come not safe to Holywood , I be undo . " 

 " Nay , " say Dick , dismounting , " I will give more than counsel . take my horse , and I will run awhile , and when I be weary we shall change again , that so , rid and run , both may go the speedier . " 

 so the change be make , and they go forward as briskly as they durst on the uneven causeway , Dick with his hand upon the other s knee . 

 " how call ye your name ? " ask Dick . 

 " call I John Matcham , " reply the lad . 

 " and what make ye to Holywood ? " Dick continue . 

 " I seek sanctuary from a man that would oppress I , " be the answer . " the good Abbot of Holywood be a strong pillar to the weak . " 

 " and how come ye with Sir Daniel , Master Matcham ? " pursue Dick . 

 " Nay , " cry the other , " by the abuse of force ! he hath take I by violence from my own place ; dress I in these weed ; ride with I till my heart be sick ; gibe I till I could a wept ; and when certain of my friend pursue , think to have I back , clap I in the rear to stand their shot ! I be even graze in the right foot , and walk but lamely . Nay , there shall come a day between we ; he shall smart for all ! " 

 " would ye shoot at the moon with a hand - gun ? " say Dick . " tis a valiant knight , and hath a hand of iron . an he guess I have make or meddle with your flight , it would go sore with I . " 

 " ay , poor boy , " return the other , " y be his ward , I know it . by the same token , so be I , or so he saith ; or else he hath buy my marriage I wot not rightly which ; but it be some handle to oppress I by . " 

 " boy again ! " say Dick . 

 " Nay , then , shall I call you girl , good Richard ? " ask Matcham . 

 " never a girl for I , " return Dick . " I do abjure the crew of they ! " 

 " ye speak boyishly , " say the other . " ye think more of they than ye pretend . " 

 " not I , " say Dick , stoutly . " they come not in my mind . a plague of they , say I ! give I to hunt and to fight and to feast , and to live with jolly forester . I never hear of a maid yet that be for any service , save one only ; and she , poor shrew , be burn for a witch and the wear of man s clothe in spite of nature . " 

 Master Matcham cross himself with fervour , and appear to pray . 

 " what make ye ? " Dick inquire . 

 " I pray for her spirit , " answer the other , with a somewhat troubled voice . 

 " for a witch s spirit ? " Dick cry . " but pray for she , an ye list ; she be the good wench in Europe , be this Joan of Arc . Old Appleyard the archer run from she , he say , as if she have be Mahoun . Nay , she be a brave wench . " 

 " well , but , good Master Richard , " resume Matcham , " an ye like maid so little , y be no true natural man ; for God make they twain by intention , and bring true love into the world , to be man s hope and woman s comfort . " 

 " Faugh ! " say Dick . " Y be a milk - sop baby , so to harp on woman . an ye think I be no true man , get down upon the path , and whether at fist , back - sword , or bow and arrow , I will prove my manhood on your body . " 

 " Nay , I be no fighter , " say Matcham , eagerly . " I mean no tittle of offence . I mean but pleasantry . and if I talk of woman , it be because I hear ye be to marry . " 

 " I to marry ! " Dick exclaim . " well , it be the first I hear of it . and with whom be I to marry ? " 

 " one Joan Sedley , " reply Matcham , colour . " it be Sir Daniel s do ; he hath money to gain upon both side ; and , indeed , I have hear the poor wench bemoan herself pitifully of the match . it seem she be of your mind , or else distaste to the bridegroom . " 

 " well ! marriage be like death , it come to all , " say Dick , with resignation . " and she bemoan herself ? I pray ye now , see there how shuttle - witted be these girl : to bemoan herself before that she have see I ! do I bemoan myself ? not i. an I be to marry , I will marry dry - eyed ! but if ye know she , prithee , of what favour be she ? fair or foul ? and be she shrewish or pleasant ? " 

 " Nay , what matter it ? " say Matcham . " an y be to marry , ye can but marry . what matter foul or fair ? these be but toy . Y be no milksop , Master Richard ; ye will we d with dry eye , anyhow . " 

 " it be well say , " reply Shelton . " little I reck . " 

 " your lady wife be like to have a pleasant lord , " say Matcham . 

 " she shall have the lord Heaven make she for , " return Dick . " it trow there be bad as well as well . " 

 " ah , the poor wench ! " cry the other . 

 " and why so poor ? " ask Dick . 

 " to we d a man of wood , " reply his companion . " o I , for a wooden husband ! " 

 " I think I be a man of wood , indeed , " say Dick , " to trudge afoot the while you ride my horse ; but it be good wood , I trow . " 

 " Good Dick , forgive I , " cry the other . " Nay , y be the good heart in England ; I but laugh . forgive I now , sweet Dick . " 

 " Nay , no fool word , " return Dick , a little embarrassed by his companion s warmth . " no harm be do . I be not touchy , praise the saint . " 

 and at that moment the wind , which be blow straight behind they as they go , bring they the rough flourish of Sir Daniel s trumpeter . 

 " Hark ! " say Dick , " the tucket soundeth . " 

 " ay , " say Matcham , " they have find my flight , and now I be unhorse ! " and he become pale as death . 

 " Nay , what cheer ! " return Dick . " Y have a long start , and we be near the ferry . and it be I , methink , that be unhorse . " 

 " alack , I shall be take ! " cry the fugitive . " Dick , kind Dick , beseech ye help I but a little ! " 

 " why , now , what aileth thee ? " say Dick . " methink I help you very patently . but my heart be sorry for so spiritless a fellow ! and see ye here , John Matcham sith John Matcham be your name I , Richard Shelton , tide what betideth , come what may , will see you safe in Holywood . the saint so do to I again if I default you . come , pick I up a good heart , Sir White - face . the way better here ; spur I the horse . go fast ! fast ! Nay , mind not for I ; I can run like a deer . " 

 so , with the horse trot hard , and Dick run easily alongside , they cross the remainder of the fen , and come out upon the bank of the river by the ferryman s hut . 

 CHAPTER III the FEN FERRY 

 the river till be a wide , sluggish , clayey water , ooze out of fen , and in this part of its course it strain among some score of willow - cover , marshy islet . 

 it be a dingy stream ; but upon this bright , spirited morning everything be become beautiful . the wind and the martens break it up into innumerable dimple ; and the reflection of the sky be scatter over all the surface in crumb of smile blue . 

 a creek run up to meet the path , and close under the bank the ferryman s hut lie snugly . it be of wattle and clay , and the grass grow green upon the roof . 

 Dick go to the door and open it . within , upon a foul old russet cloak , the ferryman lie stretch and shiver ; a great hulk of a man , but lean and shake by the country fever . 

 " hey , Master Shelton , " he say , " be ye for the ferry ? Ill time , ill time ! look to yourself . there be a fellowship abroad . Ye be well turn round on your two heel and try the bridge . " 

 " Nay ; time s in the saddle , " answer Dick . " Time will ride , Hugh Ferryman . I be hot in haste . " 

 " a wilful man ! " return the ferryman , rise . " an ye win safe to the Moat House , y have do lucky ; but I say no more . " and then catch sight of Matcham , " who be this ? " he ask , as he pause , blink , on the threshold of his cabin . 

 " it be my kinsman , Master Matcham , " answer Dick . 

 " give ye good day , good ferryman , " say Matcham , who have dismount , and now come forward , lead the horse . " launch I your boat , I prithee ; we be sore in haste . " 

 the gaunt ferryman continue star . 

 " by the mass ! " he cry at length , and laugh with open throat . 

 Matcham colour to his neck and wince ; and Dick , with an angry countenance , put his hand on the lout s shoulder . 

 " how now , churl ! " he cry . " fall to thy business , and leave mock thy better . " 

 Hugh Ferryman grumblingly undo his boat , and shove it a little forth into the deep water . then Dick lead in the horse , and Matcham follow . 

 " Ye be mortal small make , master , " say Hugh , with a wide grin ; " something o the wrong model , belike . Nay , Master Shelton , I be for you , " he add , get to his oar . " a cat may look at a king . I do but take a shot of the eye at Master Matcham . " 

 " Sirrah , no more word , " say Dick . " bend I your back . " 

 they be by that time at the mouth of the creek , and the view open up and down the river . everywhere it be enclose with island . clay bank be fall in , willow nodding , reed wave , marten dipping and piping . there be no sign of man in the labyrinth of water . 

 " my master , " say the ferryman , keep the boat steady with one oar , " I have a shrew guess that John - a - Fenne be on the island . he bear I a black grudge to all Sir Daniel s. how if I turn I up stream and land you an arrow - flight above the path ? Ye be good not meddle with John Fenne . " 

 " how , then ? be he of this company ? " ask Dick . 

 " Nay , mum be the word , " say Hugh . " but I would go up water , Dick . how if Master Matcham come by an arrow ? " and he laugh again . 

 " be it so , Hugh , " answer Dick . 

 " look ye , then , " pursue Hugh . " sith it shall so be , unsle I your cross - bow so : now make it ready good ; place I a quarrel . ay , keep it so , and look upon I grimly . " 

 " what meaneth this ? " ask Dick . 

 " why , my master , if I steal you across , it must be under force or fear , " reply the ferryman ; " for else , if John Fenne get wind of it , he be like to prove my most distressful neighbour . " 

 " do these churl ride so roughly ? " Dick inquire . " do they command Sir Daniel s own ferry ? " 

 " Nay , " whisper the ferryman , wink . " mark I ! Sir Daniel shall down . his time be out . he shall down . Mum ! " and he bend over his oar . 

 they pull a long way up the river , turn the tail of an island , and come softly down a narrow channel next the opposite bank . then Hugh hold water in midstream . 

 " I must land you here among the willow , " he say . 

 " here be no path but willow swamp and quagmire , " answer Dick . 

 " Master Shelton , " reply Hugh , " I dare not take ye nearer down , for your own sake now . he watcheth I the ferry , lie on his bow . all that go by and owe Sir Daniel goodwill , he shooteth down like rabbit . I hear he swear it by the rood . an I have not know you of old day ay , and from so high upward I would a let you go on ; but for old day remembrance , and because ye have this toy with you that s not fit for wound or warfare , I do risk my two poor ear to have you over whole . content you ; I can no more , on my salvation ! " 

 Hugh be still speak , lie on his oar , when there come a great shout from among the willow on the island , and sound follow as of a strong man breast roughly through the wood . 

 " a murrain ! " cry Hugh . " he be on the upper island all the while ! " he pull straight for shore . " threat I with your bow , good Dick ; threat I with it plain , " he add . " I have try to save your skin , save you mine ! " 

 the boat run into a tough thicket of willow with a crash . Matcham , pale , but steady and alert , at a sign from Dick , run along the thwart and leap ashore ; Dick , take the horse by the bridle , seek to follow , but what with the animal s bulk , and what with the closeness of the thicket , both stick fast . the horse neigh and trample ; and the boat , which be swing in an eddy , come on and off and pitch with violence . 

 " it may not be , Hugh ; here be no landing , " cry Dick ; but he still struggle valiantly with the obstinate thicket and the startled animal . 

 a tall man appear upon the shore of the island , a long - bow in his hand . Dick see he for an instant , with the corner of his eye , bend the bow with a great effort , his face crimson with hurry . 

 " who go ? " he shout . " Hugh , who go ? " 

 " Tis Master Shelton , John , " reply the ferryman . 

 " Stand , Dick Shelton ! " bawl the man upon the island . " ye shall have no hurt , upon the rood ! stand ! back out , Hugh Ferryman . " 

 Dick cry a taunt answer . 

 " Nay , then , ye shall go afoot , " return the man ; and he let drive an arrow . 

 the horse , strike by the shaft , lash out in agony and terror ; the boat capsize , and the next moment all be struggle in the eddy of the river . 

 when Dick come up , he be within a yard of the bank ; and before his eye be clear , his hand have close on something firm and strong that instantly begin to drag he forward . it be the riding - rod , that Matcham , crawl forth upon an overhanging willow , have opportunely thrust into his grasp . 

 " by the mass ! " cry Dick , as he be help ashore , " that make a life I owe you . I swim like a cannon - ball . " and he turn instantly towards the island . 

 midway over , Hugh Ferryman be swim with his upturned boat , while John - a - Fenne , furious at the ill - fortune of his shot , bawl to he to hurry . 

 " come , Jack , " say Shelton , " run for it ! Ere Hugh can hale his barge across , or the pair of em can get it right , we may be out of cry . " 

 and add example to his word , he begin to run , dodge among the willow , and in marshy place leap from tussock to tussock . he have no time to look for his direction ; all he could do be to turn his back upon the river , and put all his heart to run . 

 presently , however , the ground begin to rise , which show he he be still in the right way , and soon after they come forth upon a slope of solid turf , where elm begin to mingle with the willow . 

 but here Matcham , who have be drag far into the rear , throw himself fairly down . 

 " leave I , Dick ! " he cry , pantingly ; " I can no more . " 

 Dick turn , and come back to where his companion lay . 

 " Nay , Jack , leave thee ! " he cry . " that be a knave s trick , to be sure , when ye risk a shot and a ducking , ay , and a drowning too , to save my life . Drowning , in sooth ; for why I do not pull you in along with I , the saint alone can tell ! " 

 " Nay , " say Matcham , " I would a save we both , good Dick , for I can swim . " 

 " can ye so ? " cry Dick , with open eye . it be the one manly accomplishment of which he be himself incapable . in the order of the thing that he admire , next to have kill a man in single fight come swim . " well , " he say , " here be a lesson to despise no man . I promise to care for you as far as Holywood , and , by the rood , Jack , y be more capable to care for I . " 

 " well , Dick , we re friend now , " say Matcham . 

 " Nay , I never be unfriend , " answer Dick . " Y be a brave lad in your way , albeit something of a milksop , too . I never meet your like before this day . but , prithee , fetch back your breath , and let we on . here be no place for chatter . " 

 " my foot hurt shrewdly , " say Matcham . 

 " Nay , I have forget your foot , " return Dick . " well , we must go the gentli . I would I know rightly where we be . I have clean lose the path ; yet that may be for the well , too . an they watch the ferry , they watch the path , belike , as well . I would Sir Daniel be back with two score man ; he would sweep I these rascal as the wind sweep leaf . come , Jack , lean ye on my shoulder , ye poor shrew . Nay , y be not tall enough . what age be ye , for a wager ? twelve ? " 

 " Nay , I be sixteen , " say Matcham . 

 " Y be poorly grow to height , then , " answer Dick . " but take my hand . we shall go softly , never fear . I owe you a life ; I be a good repayer , Jack , of good or evil . " 

 they begin to go forward up the slope . 

 " we must hit the road , early or late , " continue Dick ; " and then for a fresh start . by the mass ! but y ave a rickety hand , Jack . if I have a hand like that , I would think shame . I tell you , " he go on , with a sudden chuckle , " I swear by the mass I believe Hugh Ferryman take you for a maid . " 

 " Nay , never ! " cry the other , colour high . 

 " a do , though , for a wager ! " Dick exclaim . " small blame to he . ye look liker maid than man ; and I tell you more y be a strange - look rogue for a boy ; but for a hussy , Jack , ye would be right fair ye would . Ye would be well favour for a wench . " 

 " well , " say Matcham , " ye know right well that I be none . " 

 " Nay , I know that ; I do but jest , " say Dick . " Ye ll be a man before your mother , Jack . what cheer , my bully ! ye shall strike shrewd stroke . now , which , I marvel , of you or I , shall be first knight , Jack ? for knighted I shall be , or die for t. Sir Richard Shelton , Knight : it soundeth bravely . but Sir John Matcham soundeth not amiss . " 

 " Prithee , Dick , stop till I drink , " say the other , pause where a little clear spring well out of the slope into a gravelled basin no big than a pocket . " and o , Dick , if I might come by anything to eat ! my very heart ache with hunger . " 

 " why , fool , do ye not eat at Kettley ? " ask Dick . 

 " I have make a vow it be a sin I have be lead into , " stammer Matcham ; " but now , if it be but dry bread , I would eat it greedily . " 

 " sit ye , then , and eat , " say Dick , " while that I scout a little forward for the road . " and he take a wallet from his girdle , wherein be bread and piece of dry bacon , and , while Matcham fall heartily to , strike far forth among the tree . 

 a little beyond there be a dip in the ground , where a streamlet soak among dead leaf ; and beyond that , again , the tree be well grow and stand wide , and oak and beech begin to take the place of willow and elm . the continued tossing and pour of the wind among the leaf sufficiently conceal the sound of his footstep on the mast ; it be for the ear what a moonless night be to the eye ; but for all that Dick go cautiously , slip from one big trunk to another , and look sharply about he as he go . suddenly a doe pass like a shadow through the underwood in front of he , and he pause , disgust at the chance . this part of the wood have be certainly desert , but now that the poor deer have run , she be like a messenger he should have send before he to announce his come ; and instead of push far , he turn he to the near well - grow tree , and rapidly begin to climb . 

 Luck have serve he well . the oak on which he have mount be one of the tall in that quarter of the wood , and easily out - top its neighbour by a fathom and a half ; and when Dick have clamber into the topmost fork and clung there , swing dizzily in the great wind , he see behind he the whole fenny plain as far as Kettley , and the Till wander among woody islet , and in front of he , the white line of high - road winding through the forest . the boat have be right it be even now midway on the ferry . beyond that there be no sign of man , nor aught move but the wind . he be about to descend , when , take a last view , his eye light upon a string of move point about the middle of the fen . plainly a small troop be thread the causeway , and that at a good pace ; and this give he some concern as he shin vigorously down the trunk and return across the wood for his companion . 

 CHAPTER IV a GREENWOOD COMPANY 

 Matcham be well rest and revive ; and the two lad , wing by what Dick have see , hurry through the remainder of the outwood , cross the road in safety , and begin to mount into the high ground of Tunstall Forest . the tree grow more and more in grove , with heathy place in between , sandy , gorsy , and dot with old yew . the ground become more and more uneven , full of pit and hillock . and with every step of the ascent the wind still blow the shriller , and the tree bent before the gust like fishing - rod . 

 they have just enter one of the clearing , when Dick suddenly clap down upon his face among the bramble , and begin to crawl slowly backward towards the shelter of the grove . Matcham , in great bewilderment , for he could see no reason for this flight , still imitate his companion s course ; and it be not until they have gain the harbour of a thicket that he turn and beg he to explain . 

 for all reply , Dick point with his finger . 

 at the far end of the clearing , a fir grow high above the neighbouring wood , and plant its black shock of foliage clear against the sky . for about fifty foot above the ground the trunk grow straight and solid like a column . at that level , it split into two massive bough ; and in the fork , like a mast - head seaman , there stand a man in a green tabard , spy far and wide . the sun glisten upon his hair ; with one hand he shade his eye to look abroad , and he keep slowly roll his head from side to side , with the regularity of a machine . 

 the lad exchange glance . 

 " let we try to the left , " say Dick . " we have near fall foully , Jack . " 

 ten minute afterwards they strike into a beat path . 

 " here be a piece of forest that I know not , " Dick remark . " where goeth I this track ? " 

 " let we even try , " say Matcham . 

 a few yard far , the path come to the top of a ridge and begin to go down abruptly into a cup - shape hollow . at the foot , out of a thick wood of flower hawthorn , two or three roofless gable , blacken as if by fire , and a single tall chimney mark the ruin of a house . 

 " what may this be ? " whisper Matcham . 

 " Nay , by the mass , I know not , " answer Dick . " I be all at sea . let we go warily . " 

 with beat heart , they descend through the hawthorn . here and there , they pass sign of recent cultivation ; fruit tree and pot herb run wild among the thicket ; a sun - dial have fall in the grass ; it seem they be tread what once have be a garden . yet a little far and they come forth before the ruin of the house . 

 it have be a pleasant mansion and a strong . a dry ditch be dig deep about it ; but it be now choke with masonry , and bridge by a fallen rafter . the two farth wall still stand , the sun shin through their empty window ; but the remainder of the building have collapse , and now lie in a great cairn of ruin , grime with fire . already in the interior a few plant be spring green among the chink . 

 " now I bethink I , " whisper Dick , " this must be Grimstone . it be a hold of one Simon Malmesbury ; Sir Daniel be his bane ! twa Bennet Hatch that burn it , now five year agone . in sooth , twa pity , for it be a fair house . " 

 down in the hollow , where no wind blow , it be both warm and still ; and Matcham , lay one hand upon Dick s arm , hold up a warning finger . 

 " Hist ! " he say . 

 then come a strange sound , break on the quiet . it be twice repeat ere they recognise its nature . it be the sound of a big man clear his throat ; and just then a hoarse , untuneful voice break into singing . 

 " then up and spake the master , the king of the outlaws : 
  what make ye here , my merry man , among the greenwood shaw ? 
 and Gamelyn make answer he look never adown : 
  O , they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town ! " 

 the singer pause , a faint clink of iron follow , and then silence . 

 the two lad stand look at each other . whoever he might be , their invisible neighbour be just beyond the ruin . and suddenly the colour come into Matcham s face , and next moment he have cross the fall rafter , and be climb cautiously on the huge pile of lumber that fill the interior of the roofless house . Dick would have withhold he , have he be in time ; as it be , he be fain to follow . 

 right in the corner of the ruin , two rafter have fall crosswise , and protect a clear space no large than a pew in church . into this the lad silently lower themselves . there they be perfectly conceal , and through an arrow - loophole command a view upon the farth side . 

 peer through this , they be strike stiff with terror at their predicament . to retreat be impossible ; they scarce dare to breathe . upon the very margin of the ditch , not thirty foot from where they crouch , an iron caldron bubble and steam above a glow fire ; and close by , in an attitude of listening , as though he have catch some sound of their clambering among the ruin , a tall , red - face , batter - look man stand poise , an iron spoon in his right hand , a horn and a formidable dagger at his belt . plainly this be the singer ; plainly he have be stir the caldron , when some incautious step among the lumber have fall upon his ear . a little far off , another man lie slumber , roll in a brown cloak , with a butterfly hover above his face . all this be in a clearing white with daisy ; and at the extreme verge , a bow , a sheaf of arrow , and part of a deer s carcase , hang upon a flowering hawthorn . 

 presently the fellow relax from his attitude of attention , raise the spoon to his mouth , taste its content , nod , and then fall again to stir and singing . 

 " o , they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town , " he croak , take up his song where he have leave it . 

 " o , sir , we walk not here at all an evil thing to do . 
 but if we meet with the good king s deer to shoot a shaft into . " 

 still as he sing , he take from time to time , another spoonful of the broth , blow upon it , and taste it , with all the air of an experienced cook . at length , apparently , he judge the mess be ready ; for take the horn from his girdle , he blow three modulate call . 

 the other fellow awoke , roll over , brush away the butterfly , and look about he . 

 " how now , brother ? " he say . " Dinner ? " 

 " ay , sot , " reply the cook , " dinner it be , and a dry dinner , too , with neither ale nor bread . but there be little pleasure in the greenwood now ; time be when a good fellow could live here like a mitred abbot , set aside the rain and the white frost ; he have his heart s desire both of ale and wine . but now be man s spirit dead ; and this John Amend - All , save we and guard we ! but a stuff booby to scare crow withal . " 

 " Nay , " return the other , " y be too set on meat and drinking , lawless . bide ye a bit ; the good time cometh . " 

 " look ye , " return the cook , " I have even wait for this good time sith that I be so high . I have be a grey friar ; I have be a king s archer ; I have be a shipman , and sail the salt sea ; and I have be in greenwood before this , forsooth ! and shoot the king s deer . what cometh of it ? naught ! I be well to have bid in the cloister . John Abbot availeth more than John Amend - All . by r Lady ! here they come . " 

 one after another , tall , likely fellow begin to stroll into the lawn . each as he come produce a knife and a horn cup , help himself from the caldron , and sit down upon the grass to eat . they be very variously equipped and armed ; some in rusty smock , and with nothing but a knife and an old bow ; other in the height of forest gallantry , all in Lincoln green , both hood and jerkin , with dainty peacock arrow in their belt , a horn upon a baldrick , and a sword and dagger at their side . they come in the silence of hunger , and scarce growl a salutation , but fall instantly to meat . 

 there be , perhaps , a score of they already gather , when a sound of suppress cheering arise close by among the hawthorn , and immediately after five or six woodman carry a stretcher debauch upon the lawn . a tall , lusty fellow , somewhat grizzle , and as brown as a smoked ham , walk before they with an air of some authority , his bow at his back , a bright boar - spear in his hand . 

 " lad ! " he cry , " good fellow all , and my right merry friend , y have sing this while on a dry whistle and live at little ease . but what say I ever ? Abide Fortune constantly ; she turneth , turneth swift . and lo ! here be her little firstle even that good creature , ale ! " 

 there be a murmur of applause as the bearer set down the stretcher and display a goodly cask . 

 " and now haste ye , boy , " the man continue . " there be work toward . a handful of archer be but now come to the ferry ; murrey and blue be their wear ; they be our butt they shall all taste arrow no man of they shall struggle through this wood . for , lad , we be here some fifty strong , each man of we most foully wrong ; for some they have lose land , and some friend ; and some they have be outlaw all oppress ! who , then , hath do this evil ? Sir Daniel , by the rood ! shall he then profit ? shall he sit snug in our house ? shall he till our field ? shall he suck the bone he rob we of ? I trow not . he getteth he strength at law ; he gaineth case ; nay , there be one case he shall not gain I have a writ here at my belt that , please the saint , shall conquer he . " 

 lawless the cook be by this time already at his second horn of ale . he raise it , as if to pledge the speaker . 

 " Master Ellis , " he say , " y be for vengeance well it becometh you ! but your poor brother o the greenwood , that have never land to lose nor friend to think upon , looketh rather , for his poor part , to the profit of the thing . he have liever a gold noble and a pottle of canary wine than all the vengeance in purgatory . " 

 " lawless , " reply the other , " to reach the Moat House , Sir Daniel must pass the forest . we shall make that passage dearer , pardy , than any battle . then , when he hath get to earth with such ragged handful as escapeth we all his great friend fall and flee away , and none to give he aid we shall beleaguer that old fox about , and great shall be the fall of he . tis a fat buck ; he will make a dinner for we all . " 

 " ay , " return Lawless , " I have eat many of these dinner beforehand ; but the cooking of they be hot work , good Master Ellis . and meanwhile what do we ? we make black arrow , we write rhyme , and we drink fair cold water , that discomfortable drink . " 

 " Y be untrue , will Lawless . ye still smell of the Grey Friars buttery ; greed be your undoing , " answer Ellis . " we take twenty pound from appleyard . we take seven mark from the messenger last night . a day ago we have fifty from the merchant . " 

 " and to - day , " say one of the man , " I stop a fat pardoner rid apace for Holywood . here be his purse . " 

 Ellis count the content . 

 " five score shilling ! " he grumble . " Fool , he have more in his sandal , or stitch into his tippet . Y be but a child , Tom Cuckow ; ye have lose the fish . " 

 but , for all that , Ellis pocket the purse with nonchalance . he stand lean on his boar - spear , and look round upon the rest . they , in various attitude , take greedily of the venison pottage , and liberally wash it down with ale . this be a good day ; they be in luck ; but business press , and they be speedy in their eating . the first - comer have by this time even despatch their dinner . some lie down upon the grass and fall instantly asleep , like boa - constrictor ; other talk together , or overhaul their weapon : and one , whose humour be particularly gay , hold forth an ale - horn , begin to sing : 

 " here be no law in good green shaw , 
  here be no lack of meat ; 
  tis merry and quiet , with deer for our diet , 
  in summer , when all be sweet . 

 come winter again , with wind and rain 
  come winter , with snow and sleet , 
 get home to your place , with hood on your face , 
  and sit by the fire and eat . " 

 all this while the two lad have listen and lain close ; only Richard have unsling his cross - bow , and hold ready in one hand the windac , or grappling - iron that he use to bend it . otherwise they have not dare to stir ; and this scene of forest life have go on before their eye like a scene upon a theatre . but now there come a strange interruption . the tall chimney which over - top the remainder of the ruin rise right above their hiding - place . there come a whistle in the air , and then a sound smack , and the fragment of a break arrow fall about their ear . some one from the upper quarter of the wood , perhaps the very sentinel they see post in the fir , have shoot an arrow at the chimney - top . 

 Matcham could not restrain a little cry , which he instantly stifle , and even Dick start with surprise , and drop the windac from his finger . but to the fellow on the lawn , this shaft be an expect signal . they be all afoot together , tighten their belt , test their bow - string , loosen sword and dagger in the sheath . Ellis hold up his hand ; his face have suddenly assume a look of savage energy ; the white of his eye shine in his sun - brown face . 

 " lad , " he say , " ye know your place . let not one man s soul escape you . appleyard be a whet before a meal ; but now we go to table . I have three man whom I will bitterly avenge Harry Shelton , Simon Malmesbury , and " strike his broad bosom " and Ellis Duckworth , by the mass ! " 

 another man come , red with hurry , through the thorn . 

 " tis not Sir Daniel ! " he pant . " they be but seven . be the arrow go ? " 

 " it strike but now , " reply Ellis . 

 " a murrain ! " cry the messenger . " methought I hear it whistle . and I go dinnerless ! " 

 in the space of a minute , some run , some walk sharply , accord as their station be near or far away , the man of the Black Arrow have all disappear from the neighbourhood of the ruin house ; and the caldron , and the fire , which be now burn low , and the dead deer s carcase on the hawthorn , remain alone to testify they have be there . 

 CHAPTER V " BLOODY as the hunter " 

 the lad lie quiet till the last footstep have melt on the wind . then they arise , and with many an ache , for they be weary with constraint , clamber through the ruin , and recrosse the ditch upon the rafter . Matcham have pick up the windac and go first , Dick follow stiffly , with his cross - bow on his arm . 

 " and now , " say Matcham , " forth to Holywood . " 

 " to Holywood ! " cry Dick , " when good fellow stand shot ? not I ! I would see you hang first , Jack ! " 

 " Ye would leave I , would ye ? " Matcham ask . 

 " ay , by my sooth ! " return Dick . " an I be not in time to warn these lad , I will go die with they . what ! would ye have I leave my own man that I have live among . I trow not ! give I my windac . " 

 but there be nothing far from Matcham s mind . 

 " Dick , " he say , " ye sware before the saint that ye would see I safe to Holywood . would ye be forswear ? would you desert I a perjurer ? " 

 " Nay , I sware for the good , " return Dick . " I mean it too ; but now ! but look ye , Jack , turn again with I . let I but warn these man , and , if need must , stand shoot with they ; then shall all be clear , and I will on again to Holywood and purge mine oath . " 

 " ye but deride I , " answer Matcham . " these man ye go to succour be the I same that hunt I to my ruin . " 

 Dick scratch his head . 

 " I can not help it , Jack , " he say . " here be no remedy . what would ye ? ye run no great peril , man ; and these be in the way of death . death ! " he add . " think of it ! what a murrain do ye keep I here for ? give I the windac . Saint George ! shall they all die ? " 

 " Richard Shelton , " say Matcham , look he squarely in the face , " would ye , then , join party with Sir Daniel ? have ye not ear ? hear ye not this Ellis , what he say ? or have ye no heart for your own kindly blood and the father that man slew ? Harry Shelton , he say ; and Sir Harry Shelton be your father , as the sun shin in heaven . " 

 " what would ye ? " Dick cry again . " would ye have I credit thief ? " 

 " Nay , I have hear it before now , " return Matcham . " the fame goeth currently , it be Sir Daniel slay he . he slay he under oath ; in his own house he shed the innocent blood . heaven weary for the avenging on t ; and you the man s son ye go about to comfort and defend the murderer ! " 

 " Jack , " cry the lad " I know not . it may be ; what know I ? but , see here : this man hath breed I up and foster I , and his man I have hunt with and play among ; and to leave they in the hour of peril O , man , if I do that , I be stark dead to honour ! Nay , Jack , ye would not ask it ; ye would not wish I to be base . " 

 " but your father , Dick ? " say Matcham , somewhat wavering . " your father ? and your oath to I ? Ye take the saint to witness . " 

 " my father ? " cry Shelton . " Nay , he would have I go ! if Sir Daniel slay he , when the hour come this hand shall slay Sir Daniel ; but neither he nor his will I desert in peril . and for mine oath , good Jack , ye shall absolve I of it here . for the life sake of many man that hurt you not , and for mine honour , ye shall set I free . " 

 " I , Dick ? never ! " return Matcham . " an ye leave I , y be forsworn , and so I shall declare it . " 

 " my blood heat , " say Dick . " give I the windac ! give it I ! " 

 " I ll not , " say Matcham . " I ll save you in your tooth . " 

 " not ? " cry Dick . " I ll make you ! " 

 " try it , " say the other . 

 they stand , look in each other s eye , each ready for a spring . then Dick leap ; and though Matcham turn instantly and flee , in two bound he be over - take , the windac be twist from his grasp , he be throw roughly to the ground , and Dick stand across he , flushed and menacing , with double fist . Matcham lie where he have fall , with his face in the grass , not think of resistance . 

 Dick bend his bow . 

 " I ll teach you ! " he cry , fiercely . " oath or no oath , ye may go hang for I ! " 

 and he turn and begin to run . Matcham be on his foot at once , and begin run after he . 

 " what d ye want ? " cry Dick , stop . " what make ye after I ? stand off ! " 

 " will follow an I please , " say Matcham . " this wood be free to I . " 

 " stand back , by r Lady ! " return Dick , raise his bow . 

 " ah , y be a brave boy ! " retort Matcham . " Shoot ! " 

 Dick lower his weapon in some confusion . 

 " see here , " he say . " Y have do I ill enough . go , then . go your way in fair wise ; or , whether I will or not , I must even drive you to it . " 

 " well , " say Matcham , doggedly , " y be the strong . do your bad . I shall not leave to follow thee , Dick , unless thou makest I , " he add . 

 Dick be almost beside himself . it go against his heart to beat a creature so defenceless ; and , for the life of he , he know no other way to rid himself of this unwelcome and , as he begin to think , perhaps untrue companion . 

 " Y be mad , I think , " he cry . " fool - fellow , I be haste to your foe ; as fast as foot can carry I , go I thither . " 

 " I care not , Dick , " reply the lad . " if y be bind to die , Dick , I ll die too . I would liever go with you to prison than to go free without you . " 

 " well , " return the other , " I may stand no long prate . follow I , if ye must ; but if ye play I false , it shall but little advance you , mark ye that . Shalt have a quarrel in thine inward , boy . " 

 so say , Dick take once more to his heel , keep in the margin of the thicket and look briskly about he as he go . at a good pace he rattle out of the dell , and come again into the more open quarter of the wood . to the left a little eminence appear , spot with golden gorse , and crown with a black tuft of fir . 

 " I shall see from there , " he think , and strike for it across a heathy clearing . 

 he have go but a few yard , when Matcham touch he on the arm , and point . to the eastward of the summit there be a dip , and , as it be , a valley pass to the other side ; the heath be not yet out ; all the ground be rusty , like an unscoured buckler , and dot sparingly with yew ; and there , one follow another , Dick see half a score green jerkin mount the ascent , and march at their head , conspicuous by his boar - spear , Ellis Duckworth in person . one after another gain the top , show for a moment against the sky , and then dip upon the further side , until the last be go . 

 Dick look at Matcham with a kindly eye . 

 " so y be to be true to I , Jack ? " he ask . " I think ye be of the other party . " 

 Matcham begin to sob . 

 " what cheer ! " cry Dick . " now the saint behold we ! would ye snivel for a word ? " 

 " ye hurt I , " sob Matcham . " Ye hurt I when ye throw I down . Y be a coward to abuse your strength . " 

 " Nay , that be fool s talk , " say Dick , roughly . " Y have no title to my windac , Master John . I would a do right to have well baste you . if ye go with I , ye must obey I ; and so , come . " 

 Matcham have half a thought to stay behind ; but , see that Dick continue to scour full - tilt towards the eminence and not so much as look across his shoulder , he soon think well of that , and begin to run in turn . but the ground be very difficult and steep ; Dick have already a long start , and have , at any rate , the light heel , and he have long since come to the summit , crawl forward through the fir , and ensconce himself in a thick tuft of gorse , before Matcham , pant like a deer , rejoin he , and lie down in silence by his side . 

 below , in the bottom of a considerable valley , the short cut from Tunstall hamlet wind downwards to the ferry . it be well beat , and the eye follow it easily from point to point . here it be border by open glade ; there the forest close upon it ; every hundred yard it run beside an ambush . far down the path , the sun shine on seven steel salet , and from time to time , as the tree open , Selden and his man could be see rid briskly , still bend upon Sir Daniel s mission . the wind have somewhat fall , but still tussle merrily with the tree , and , perhaps , have Appleyard be there , he would have draw a warning from the troubled conduct of the bird . 

 " now , mark , " Dick whisper . " they be already well advanced into the wood ; their safety lieth rather in continue forward . but see ye where this wide glade runneth down before we , and in the midst of it , these two score tree make like an island ? there be their safety . an they but come sound as far as that , I will make shift to warn they . but my heart misgiveth I ; they be but seven against so many , and they but carry cross - bow . the long - bow , Jack , will have the uppermost ever . " 

 meanwhile , Selden and his man still wound up the path , ignorant of their danger , and momently draw nearer hand . once , indeed , they pause , draw into a group , and seem to point and listen . but it be something from far away across the plain that have arrest their attention a hollow growl of cannon that come , from time to time , upon the wind , and tell of the great battle . it be worth a thought , to be sure ; for if the voice of the big gun be thus become audible in Tunstall Forest , the fight must have roll ever eastward , and the day , by consequence , go sore against Sir Daniel and the lord of the dark rose . 

 but presently the little troop begin again to move forward , and come next to a very open , heathy portion of the way , where but a single tongue of forest run down to join the road . they be but just abreast of this , when an arrow shone fly . one of the man throw up his arm , his horse rear , and both fall and struggle together in a mass . even from where the boy lay they could hear the rumour of the man s voice cry out ; they could see the startled horse prance , and , presently , as the troop begin to recover from their first surprise , one fellow beginning to dismount . a second arrow from somewhat far off glanced in a wide arch ; a second rider bit the dust . the man who be dismount lose hold upon the rein , and his horse flee galloping , and drag he by the foot along the road , bump from stone to stone , and batter by the flee hoof . the four who still keep the saddle instantly break and scatter ; one wheel and ride , shrieking , towards the ferry ; the other three , with loose rein and fly raiment , come gallop up the road from Tunstall . from every clump they pass an arrow speed . soon a horse fall , but the rider find his foot and continue to pursue his comrade till a second shot despatch he . another man fall ; then another horse ; out of the whole troop there be but one fellow leave , and he on foot ; only , in different direction , the noise of the galloping of three riderless horse be die fast into the distance . 

 all this time not one of the assailant have for a moment show himself . here and there along the path , horse or man roll , undespatched , in his agony ; but no merciful enemy break cover to put they from their pain . 

 the solitary survivor stand bewilder in the road beside his fallen charger . he have come the length of that broad glade , with the island of timber , point out by Dick . he be not , perhaps , five hundred yard from where the boy lie hide ; and they could see he plainly , look to and fro in deadly expectation . but nothing come ; and the man begin to pluck up his courage , and suddenly unslung and bent his bow . at the same time , by something in his action , Dick recognise Selden . 

 at this offer of resistance , from all about he in the covert of the wood there go up the sound of laughter . a score of man , at least , for this be the very thickest of the ambush , join in this cruel and untimely mirth . then an arrow glance over Selden s shoulder ; and he leap and run a little back . another dart strike quiver at his heel . he make for the cover . a third shaft leap out right in his face , and fall short in front of he . and then the laughter be repeat loudly , rise and reecho from different thicket . 

 it be plain that his assailant be but bait he , as man , in those day , bait the poor bull , or as the cat still trifle with the mouse . the skirmish be well over ; far down the road , a fellow in green be already calmly gather the arrow ; and now , in the evil pleasure of their heart , they give themselves the spectacle of their poor fellow - sinner in his torture . 

 Selden begin to understand ; he utter a roar of anger , shoulder his cross - bow , and send a quarrel at a venture into the wood . Chance favour he , for a slight cry respond . then , throw down his weapon , Selden begin to run before he up the glade , and almost in a straight line for Dick and Matcham . 

 the companion of the Black Arrow now begin to shoot in earnest . but they be properly serve ; their chance have past ; most of they have now to shoot against the sun ; and Selden , as he run , bound from side to side to baffle and deceive their aim . well of all , by turn up the glade he have defeat their preparation ; there be no marksman post higher up than the one whom he have just kill or wound ; and the confusion of the forester counsel soon become apparent . a whistle sound thrice , and then again twice . it be repeat from another quarter . the wood on either side become full of the sound of people burst through the underwood ; and a bewildered deer run out into the open , stand for a second on three foot , with nose in air , and then plunge again into the thicket . 

 Selden still run , bounding ; ever and again an arrow follow he , but still would miss . it begin to appear as if he might escape . Dick have his bow armed , ready to support he ; even Matcham , forgetful of his interest , take side at heart for the poor fugitive ; and both lad glow and tremble in the ardour of their heart . 

 he be within fifty yard of they , when an arrow strike he and he fall . he be up again , indeed , upon the instant ; but now he run staggering , and , like a blind man , turn aside from his direction . 

 Dick leap to his foot and wave to he . 

 " here ! " he cry . " this way ! here be help ! Nay , run , fellow run ! " 

 but just then a second arrow strike Selden in the shoulder , between the plate of his brigandine , and , pierce through his jack , bring he , like a stone , to earth . 

 " o , the poor heart ! " cry Matcham , with clasped hand . 

 and Dick stand petrify upon the hill , a mark for archery . 

 ten to one he have speedily be shoot for the forester be furious with themselves , and take unawares by Dick s appearance in the rear of their position but instantly , out of a quarter of the wood surprisingly near to the two lad , a stentorian voice arise , the voice of Ellis Duckworth . 

 " hold ! " it roar . " shoot not ! take he alive ! it be young Shelton Harry s son . " 

 and immediately after a shrill whistle sound several time , and be again take up and repeat far off . the whistle , it appear , be John Amend - All s battle trumpet , by which he publish his direction . 

 " ah , foul fortune ! " cry Dick . " we be undo . swiftly , Jack , come swiftly ! " 

 and the pair turn and run back through the open pine clump that cover the summit of the hill . 

 CHAPTER VI to the DAY S END 

 it be , indeed , high time for they to run . on every side the company of the Black Arrow be make for the hill . some , be well runner , or have open ground to run upon , have far outstrip the other , and be already close upon the goal ; some , follow valley , have spread out to right and leave , and outflank the lad on either side . 

 Dick plunge into the near cover . it be a tall grove of oak , firm under foot and clear of underbrush , and as it lie down hill , they make good speed . there follow next a piece of open , which Dick avoid , hold to his left . two minute after , and the same obstacle arise , the lad follow the same course . thus it follow that , while the lad , bend continually to the left , draw nearer and near to the high road and the river which they have cross an hour or two before , the great bulk of their pursuer be lean to the other hand , and run towards Tunstall . 

 the lad pause to breathe . there be no sound of pursuit . Dick put his ear to the ground , and still there be nothing ; but the wind , to be sure , still make a turmoil in the tree , and it be hard to make certain . 

 " on again , " say Dick ; and , tired as they be , and Matcham limp with his injured foot , they pull themselves together , and once more pelt down the hill . 

 three minute later , they be breast through a low thicket of evergreen . high overhead , the tall tree make a continuous roof of foliage . it be a pillare grove , as high as a cathedral , and except for the holly among which the lad be struggle , open and smoothly swarde . 

 on the other side , push through the last fringe of evergreen , they blunder forth again into the open twilight of the grove . 

 " stand ! " cry a voice . 

 and there , between the huge stem , not fifty foot before they , they behold a stout fellow in green , sore blow with run , who instantly draw an arrow to the head and cover they . Matcham stop with a cry ; but Dick , without a pause , run straight upon the forester , draw his dagger as he go . the other , whether he be startle by the daring of the onslaught , or whether he be hamper by his order , do not shoot ; he stand waver ; and before he have time to come to himself , Dick bound at his throat , and send he sprawl backward on the turf . the arrow go one way and the bow another with a sound twang . the disarmed forester grapple his assailant ; but the dagger shine and descend twice . then come a couple of groan , and then Dick rise to his foot again , and the man lie motionless , stab to the heart . 

 " on ! " say Dick ; and he once more pelt forward , Matcham trail in the rear . to say truth , they make but poor speed of it by now , labour dismally as they run , and catch for their breath like fish . Matcham have a cruel stitch , and his head swam ; and as for Dick , his knee be like lead . but they keep up the form of run with undiminished courage . 

 presently they come to the end of the grove . it stop abruptly ; and there , a few yard before they , be the high road from Risingham to Shoreby , lie , at this point , between two even wall of forest . 

 at the sight Dick pause ; and as soon as he stop run , he become aware of a confused noise , which rapidly grow louder . it be at first like the rush of a very high gust of wind , but soon it become more definite , and resolve itself into the galloping of horse ; and then , in a flash , a whole company of man - at - arm come drive round the corner , sweep before the lad , and be go again upon the instant . they ride as for their life , in complete disorder ; some of they be wound ; riderless horse gallop at their side with bloody saddle . they be plainly fugitive from the great battle . 

 the noise of their passage have scarce begin to die away towards Shoreby , before fresh hoof come echo in their wake , and another deserter clatter down the road ; this time a single rider and , by his splendid armour , a man of high degree . close after he there follow several baggage - waggon , flee at an ungainly canter , the driver flail at the horse as if for life . these must have run early in the day ; but their cowardice be not to save they . for just before they come abreast of where the lad stand wonder , a man in hack armour , and seemingly beside himself with fury , overtake the waggon , and with the truncheon of a sword , begin to cut the driver down . some leap from their place and plunge into the wood ; the other he sabre as they sit , curse they the while for coward in a voice that be scarce human . 

 all this time the noise in the distance have continue to increase ; the rumble of cart , the clatter of horse , the cry of man , a great , confused rumour , come swell on the wind ; and it be plain that the rout of a whole army be pour , like an inundation , down the road . 

 Dick stand sombre . he have mean to follow the highway till the turn for Holywood , and now he have to change his plan . but above all , he have recognise the colour of Earl Risingham , and he know that the battle have go finally against the rose of Lancaster . have Sir Daniel join , and be he now a fugitive and ruin ? or have he desert to the side of York , and be he forfeit to honour ? it be an ugly choice . 

 " come , " he say , sternly ; and , turn on his heel , he begin to walk forward through the grove , with Matcham limp in his rear . 

 for some time they continue to thread the forest in silence . it be now grow late ; the sun be set in the plain beyond Kettley ; the tree - top overhead glow golden ; but the shadow have begin to grow dark and the chill of the night to fall . 

 " if there be anything to eat ! " cry Dick , suddenly , pause as he speak . 

 Matcham sit down and begin to weep . 

 " Ye can weep for your own supper , but when it be to save man s life , your heart be hard enough , " say Dick , contemptuously . " Y ave seven death upon your conscience , Master John ; I ll ne er forgive you that . " 

 " Conscience ! " cry Matcham , look fiercely up . " mine ! and ye have the man s red blood upon your dagger ! and wherefore do ye slay he , the poor soul ? he draw his arrow , but he let not fly ; he hold you in his hand , and spar you ! tis as brave to kill a kitten , as a man that not defend himself . " 

 Dick be strike dumb . 

 " I slay he fair . I run I in upon his bow , " he cry . 

 " it be a coward blow , " return Matcham . " Y be but a lout and bully , Master Dick ; ye but abuse advantage ; let there come a strong , we will see you truckle at his boot ! ye care not for vengeance , neither for your father s death that go unpaid , and his poor ghost that clamoureth for justice . but if there come but a poor creature in your hand that lacketh skill and strength , and would befriend you , down she shall go ! " 

 Dick be too furious to observe that " she . " 

 " Marry ! " he cry , " and here be news ! of any two the one will still be strong . the well man throweth the bad , and the bad be well serve . ye deserve a belting , Master Matcham , for your ill - guidance and unthankfulness to meward ; and what ye deserve ye shall have . " 

 and Dick , who , even in his angriest temper , still preserve the appearance of composure , begin to unbuckle his belt . 

 " here shall be your supper , " he say , grimly . Matcham have stop his tear ; he be as white as a sheet , but he look Dick steadily in the face , and never move . Dick take a step , swing the belt . then he pause , embarrass by the large eye and the thin , weary face of his companion . his courage begin to subside . 

 " say ye be in the wrong , then , " he say , lamely . 

 " Nay , " say Matcham , " I be in the right . come , cruel ! I be lame ; I be weary ; I resist not ; I ne er do thee hurt ; come , beat I coward ! " 

 Dick raise the belt at this last provocation , but Matcham wince and draw himself together with so cruel an apprehension , that his heart fail he yet again . the strap fall by his side , and he stand irresolute , feel like a fool . 

 " a plague upon thee , shrew ! " he say . " an ye be so feeble of hand , ye should keep the close guard upon your tongue . but I ll be hang before I beat you ! " and he put on his belt again . " beat you I will not , " he continue ; " but forgive you ? never . I know ye not ; ye be my master s enemy ; I lend you my horse ; my dinner ye have eat ; y ave call I a man o wood , a coward , and a bully . Nay , by the mass ! the measure be fill , and runneth over . tis a great thing to be weak , I trow : ye can do your bad , yet shall none punish you ; ye may steal a man s weapon in the hour of need , yet may the man not take his own again ; y be weak , forsooth ! Nay , then , if one cometh charge at you with a lance , and crieth he be weak , ye must let he pierce your body through ! tut ! fool word ! " 

 " and yet ye beat I not , " return Matcham . 

 " let be , " say Dick " let be . I will instruct you . Y ave be ill - nurture , methink , and yet ye have the making of some good , and , beyond all question , save I from the river . Nay , I have forget it ; I be as thankless as thyself . but , come , let we on . an we be for Holywood this night , ay , or to - morrow early , we have well set forward speedily . " 

 but though Dick have talk himself back into his usual good - humour , Matcham have forgive he nothing . his violence , the recollection of the forester whom he have slay above all , the vision of the upraised belt , be thing not easily to be forget . 

 " I will thank you , for the form s sake , " say Matcham . " but , in sooth , good Master Shelton , I have liever find my way alone . here be a wide wood ; prithee , let each choose his path ; I owe you a dinner and a lesson . fare ye well ! " 

 " Nay , " cry Dick , " if that be your tune , so be it , and a plague be with you ! " 

 each turn aside , and they begin walk off severally , with no thought of the direction , intent solely on their quarrel . but Dick have not go ten pace ere his name be call , and Matcham come run after . 

 " Dick , " he say , " it be unmannerly to part so coldly . here be my hand , and my heart with it . for all that wherein you have so excellently serve and help I not for the form , but from the heart , I thank you . fare ye right well . " 

 " well , lad , " return Dick , take the hand which be offer he , " good speed to you , if speed you may . but I misdoubt it shrewdly . Y be too disputatious . " so then they separate for the second time ; and presently it be Dick who be run after Matcham . 

 " here , " he say , " take my cross - bow ; shalt not go unarmed . " 

 " a cross - bow ! " say Matcham . " Nay , boy , I have neither the strength to bend nor yet the skill to aim with it . it be no help to I , good boy . but yet I thank you . " 

 the night have now fall , and under the tree they could no long read each other s face . 

 " I will go some little way with you , " say Dick . " the night be dark . I would fain leave you on a path , at least . my mind misgiveth I , y be likely to be lose . " 

 without any more word , he begin to walk forward , and the other once more follow he . the blackness grow thick and thick . only here and there , in open place , they see the sky , dot with small star . in the distance , the noise of the rout of the lancastrian army still continue to be faintly audible ; but with every step they leave it far in the rear . 

 at the end of half an hour of silent progress they come forth upon a broad patch of heathy open . it glimmer in the light of the star , shaggy with fern and islande with clump of yew . and here they pause and look upon each other . 

 " Y be weary ? " Dick say . 

 " Nay , I be so weary , " answer Matcham , " that methink I could lie down and die . " 

 " I hear the chiding of a river , " return Dick . " let we go so far forth , for I be sore athirst . " 

 the ground slop down gently ; and , sure enough , in the bottom , they find a little murmuring river , run among willow . here they throw themselves down together by the brink ; and put their mouth to the level of a starry pool , they drink their fill . 

 " Dick , " say Matcham , " it may not be . I can no more . " 

 " I see a pit as we come down , " say Dick . " let we lie down therein and sleep . " 

 " Nay , but with all my heart ! " cry Matcham . 

 the pit be sandy and dry ; a shock of bramble hang upon one hedge , and make a partial shelter ; and there the two lad lie down , keep close together for the sake of warmth , their quarrel all forget . and soon sleep fall upon they like a cloud , and under the dew and star they rest peacefully . 

 CHAPTER VII the HOODED FACE 

 they awake in the grey of the morning ; the bird be not yet in full song , but twitter here and there among the wood ; the sun be not yet up , but the eastern sky be bar with solemn colour . half starve and over - weary as they be , they lie without move , sink in a delightful lassitude . and as they thus lay , the clang of a bell fall suddenly upon their ear . 

 " a bell ! " say Dick , sit up . " can we be , then , so near to Holywood ? " 

 a little after , the bell clang again , but this time somewhat nearer hand ; and from that time forth , and still draw nearer and nearer , it continue to sound brokenly abroad in the silence of the morning . 

 " Nay , what should this betoken ? " say Dick , who be now broad awake . 

 " it be some one walk , " return Matcham , and " the bell tolleth ever as he move . " 

 " I see that well , " say Dick . " but wherefore ? what maketh he in Tunstall Woods ? Jack , " he add , " laugh at I an ye will , but I like not the hollow sound of it . " 

 " Nay , " say Matcham , with a shiver , " it hath a doleful note . an the day be not come " 

 but just then the bell , quicken its pace , begin to ring thick and hurry , and then it give a single hammer jangle , and be silent for a space . 

 " it be as though the bearer have run for a pater - noster while , and then leap the river , " Dick observe . 

 " and now beginneth he again to pace soberly forward , " add Matcham . 

 " Nay , " return Dick " nay , not so soberly , Jack . tis a man that walketh you right speedily . tis a man in some fear of his life , or about some hurried business . see ye not how swift the beat draweth near ? " 

 " it be now close by , " say Matcham . 

 they be now on the edge of the pit ; and as the pit itself be on a certain eminence , they command a view over the great proportion of the clearing , up to the thick wood that close it in . 

 the daylight , which be very clear and grey , show they a riband of white footpath wander among the gorse . it pass some hundred yard from the pit , and run the whole length of the clearing , east and west . by the line of its course , Dick judge it should lead more or less directly to the Moat House . 

 upon this path , step forth from the margin of the wood , a white figure now appear . it pause a little , and seem to look about ; and then , at a slow pace , and bent almost double , it begin to draw near across the heath . at every step the bell clank . face , it have none ; a white hood , not even pierce with eye - hole , veil the head ; and as the creature move , it seem to feel its way with the tapping of a stick . fear fall upon the lad , as cold as death . 

 " a leper ! " say Dick , hoarsely . 

 " his touch be death , " say Matcham . " let we run . " 

 " not so , " return Dick . " see ye not ? he be stone blind . he guideth he with a staff . let we lie still ; the wind bloweth towards the path , and he will go by and hurt we not . alas , poor soul , and we should rather pity he ! " 

 " I will pity he when he be by , " reply Matcham . 

 the blind leper be now about halfway towards they , and just then the sun rise and shine full on his veiled face . he have be a tall man before he be bow by his disgusting sickness , and even now he walk with a vigorous step . the dismal beating of his bell , the pattering of the stick , the eyeless screen before his countenance , and the knowledge that he be not only doom to death and suffering , but shut out for ever from the touch of his fellow - man , fill the lad bosom with dismay ; and at every step that bring he nearer , their courage and strength seem to desert they . 

 as he come about level with the pit , he pause , and turn his face full upon the lad . 

 " Mary be my shield ! he see we ! " say Matcham , faintly . 

 " hush ! " whisper Dick . " he doth but hearken . he be blind , fool ! " 

 the leper look or listen , whichever he be really do , for some second . then he begin to move on again , but presently pause once more , and again turn and seem to gaze upon the lad . even Dick become dead - white and close his eye , as if by the mere sight he might become infected . but soon the bell sound , and this time , without any farth hesitation , the leper cross the remainder of the little heath and disappear into the covert of the wood . 

 " he see we , " say Matcham . " I could swear it ! " 

 " Tut ! " return Dick , recover some spark of courage . " he but hear we . he be in fear , poor soul ! an ye be blind , and walk in a perpetual night , ye would start yourself , if ever a twig rustle or a bird cry Peep . " 

 " Dick , good Dick , he see we , " repeat Matcham . " when a man hearkeneth , he doth not as this man ; he doth otherwise , Dick . this be see ; it be not hear . he mean foully . Hark , else , if his bell be not stop ! " 

 such be the case . the bell ring no long . 

 " Nay , " say Dick , " I like not that . Nay , " he cry again , " I like that little . what may this betoken ? let we go , by the mass ! " 

 " he hath go east , " add Matcham . " Good Dick , let we go westward straight ; I shall not breathe till I have my back turn upon that leper . " 

 " Jack , y be too cowardly , " reply Dick . " we shall go fair for Holywood , or as fair , at least , as I can guide you , and that will be due north . " 

 they be afoot at once , pass the stream upon some stepping - stone , and begin to mount on the other side , which be steeper , towards the margin of the wood . the ground become very uneven , full of knoll and hollow ; tree grow scatter or in clump ; it become difficult to choose a path , and the lad somewhat wander . they be weary , besides , with yesterday s exertion and the lack of food , and they move but heavily and drag their foot among the sand . 

 presently , come to the top of a knoll , they be aware of the leper , some hundred foot in front of they , cross the line of their march by a hollow . his bell be silent , his staff no long tap the ground , and he go before he with the swift and assure footstep of a man who see . next moment he have disappear into a little thicket . 

 the lad , at the first glimpse , have crouch behind a tuft of gorse ; there they lay , horror - strike . 

 " certain , he pursueth we , " say Dick " certain ! he hold the clapper of his bell in one hand , see ye ? that it should not sound . now may the saint aid and guide we , for I have no strength to combat pestilence ! " 

 " what maketh he ? " cry Matcham . " what doth he want ? who ever hear the like , that a leper , out of mere malice , should pursue unfortunate ? hath he not his bell to that very end , that people may avoid he ? Dick , there be below this something deep . " 

 " Nay , I care not , " moan Dick ; " the strength be go out of I ; my leg be like water . the saint be mine assistance ! " 

 " would ye lie there idle ? " cry Matcham . " let we back into the open . we have the well chance ; he can not steal upon us unawares . " 

 " not I , " say Dick . " my time be come , and peradventure he may pass we by . " 

 " bend I , then , your bow ! " cry the other . " what ! will ye be a man ? " 

 Dick cross himself . " would ye have I shoot upon a leper ? " he cry . " the hand would fail I . Nay , now , " he add " nay , now , let be ! with sound man I will fight , but not with ghost and leper . which this be , I wot not . one or other , Heaven be our protection ! " 

 " now , " say Matcham , " if this be man s courage , what a poor thing be man ! but sith ye will do naught , let we lie close . " 

 then come a single , broken jangle on the bell . 

 " he hath miss his hold upon the clapper , " whisper Matcham . " saint ! how near he be ! " 

 but Dick answer never a word ; his tooth be near chatter . 

 soon they see a piece of the white robe between some bush ; then the leper s head be thrust forth from behind a trunk , and he seem narrowly to scan the neighbourhood before he once again withdraw . to their stretched sens , the whole bush appear alive with rustling and the creak of twig ; and they hear the beating of each other s heart . 

 suddenly , with a cry , the leper spring into the open close by , and run straight upon the lad . they , shriek aloud , separate and begin to run different way . but their horrible enemy fasten upon Matcham , run he swiftly down , and have he almost instantly a prisoner . the lad give one scream that echo high and far over the forest , he have one spasm of struggle , and then all his limb relax , and he fall limp into his captor s arm . 

 Dick hear the cry and turn . he see Matcham fall ; and on the instant his spirit and his strength revive ; with a cry of pity and anger , he unsling and bend his arblast . but ere he have time to shoot , the leper hold up his hand . 

 " hold your shot , Dickon ! " cry a familiar voice . " hold your shot , mad wag ! know ye not a friend ? " 

 and then lay down Matcham on the turf , he undo the hood from off his face , and disclose the feature of Sir Daniel Brackley . 

 " Sir Daniel ! " cry Dick . 

 " ay , by the mass , Sir Daniel ! " return the knight . " would ye shoot upon your guardian , rogue ? but here be this " and there he break off , and point to Matcham , ask : " how call ye he , Dick ? " 

 " Nay , " say Dick , " I call he Master Matcham . know ye he not ? he say ye know he ! " 

 " ay , " reply Sir Daniel , " I know the lad ; " and he chuckle . " but he have faint ; and , by my sooth , he might have have less to faint for ! hey , Dick ? do I put the fear of death upon you ? " 

 " indeed , Sir Daniel , ye do that , " say Dick , and sigh again at the mere recollection . " Nay , sir , save your respect , I have as lief a meet the devil in person ; and to speak truth , I be yet all a - quake . but what make ye , sir , in such a guise ? " 

 Sir Daniel s brow grow suddenly black with anger . 

 " what make I ? " he say . " ye do well to mind I of it ! what ? I skulk for my poor life in my own wood of Tunstall , Dick . we be ill speed at the battle ; we but get there to be sweep among the rout . where be all my good man - at - arm ? Dick , by the mass , I know not ! we be sweep down ; the shot fall thick among we ; I have not see one man in my own colour since I see three fall . for myself , I come sound to Shoreby , and be mindful of the Black Arrow , get I this gown and bell , and come softly by the path for the Moat House . there be no disguise to be compare with it ; the jingle of this bell would scare I the stout outlaw in the forest ; they would all turn pale to hear it . at length I come by you and Matcham . I could see but evilly through this same hood , and be not sure of you , be chiefly , and for many a good cause , astonish at the finding you together . moreover , in the open , where I have to go slowly and tap with my staff , I fear to disclose myself . but see , " he add , " this poor shrew begin a little to revive . a little good canary will comfort I the heart of it . " 

 the knight , from under his long dress , produce a stout bottle , and begin to rub the temple and wet the lip of the patient , who return gradually to consciousness , and begin to roll dim eye from one to another . 

 " what cheer , Jack ! " say Dick . " it be no leper , after all ; it be Sir Daniel ! see ! " 

 " swallow I a good draught of this , " say the knight . " this will give you manhood . thereafter , I will give you both a meal , and we shall all three on to Tunstall . for , Dick , " he continue , lay forth bread and meat upon the grass , " I will avow to you , in all good conscience , it irk I sorely to be safe between four wall . not since I back a horse have I be press so hard ; peril of life , jeopardy of land and livelihood , and to sum up , all these losel in the wood to hunt I down . but I be not yet shent . some of my lad will pick I their way home . Hatch hath ten fellow ; Selden , he have six . Nay , we shall soon be strong again ; and if I can but buy my peace with my right fortunate and undeserve Lord of York , why , Dick , we ll be a man again and go a - horseback ! " 

 and so say , the knight fill himself a horn of canary , and pledge his ward in dumb show . 

 " Selden , " Dick falter " Selden " and he pause again . 

 Sir Daniel put down the wine untasted . 

 " how ! " he cry , in a change voice . " Selden ? speak ! what of Selden ? " 

 Dick stammer forth the tale of the ambush and the massacre . 

 the knight hear in silence ; but as he listen , his countenance become convulse with rage and grief . 

 " now here , " he cry , " on my right hand , I swear to avenge it ! if that I fail , if that I spill not ten man s soul for each , may this hand wither from my body ! I break this Duckworth like a rush ; I beggar he to his door ; I burn the thatch above his head ; I drive he from this country ; and now , cometh he back to beard I ? nay , but , Duckworth , this time it shall go bitter hard ! " 

 he be silent for some time , his face work . 

 " eat ! " he cry , suddenly . " and you here , " he add to Matcham , " swear I an oath to follow straight to the Moat House . " 

 " I will pledge mine honour , " reply Matcham . 

 " what make I with your honour ? " cry the knight . " swear I upon your mother s welfare ! " 

 Matcham give the required oath ; and Sir Daniel re - adjust the hood over his face , and prepare his bell and staff . to see he once more in that appalling travesty somewhat revive the horror of his two companion . but the knight be soon upon his foot . 

 " eat with despatch , " he say , " and follow I yarely to mine house . " 

 and with that he set forth again into the wood ; and presently after the bell begin to sound , number his step , and the two lad sit by their untasted meal , and hear it die slowly away up hill into the distance . 

 " and so ye go to Tunstall ? " Dick inquire . 

 " yea , verily , " say Matcham , " when need must ! I be braver behind Sir Daniel s back than to his face . " 

 they eat hastily , and set forth along the path through the airy upper level of the forest , where great beech stand apart among green lawn , and the bird and squirrel make merry on the bough . two hour later , they begin to descend upon the other side , and already , among the tree - top , see before they the red wall and roof of Tunstall House . 

 " here , " say Matcham , pausing , " ye shall take your leave of your friend Jack , whom y be to see no more . Come , Dick , forgive he what he do amiss , as he , for his part , cheerfully and lovingly forgiveth you . " 

 " and wherefore so ? " ask Dick . " an we both go to Tunstall , I shall see you yet again , I trow , and that right often . " 

 " ye ll never again see poor Jack Matcham , " reply the other , " that be so fearful and burthensome , and yet pluck you from the river ; ye ll not see he more , Dick , by mine honour ! " he hold his arm open , and the lad embrace and kiss . " and , Dick , " continue Matcham , " my spirit bodeth ill . Y be now to see a new Sir Daniel ; for heretofore hath all prosper in his hand exceedingly , and fortune follow he ; but now , methink , when his fate hath come upon he , and he run the adventure of his life , he will prove but a foul lord to both of we . he may be brave in battle , but he hath the liar s eye ; there be fear in his eye , Dick , and fear be as cruel as the wolf ! we go down into that house , Saint Mary guide we forth again ! " 

 and so they continue their descent in silence , and come out at last before Sir Daniel s forest stronghold , where it stand , low and shady , flank with round tower and stain with moss and lichen , in the lilied water of the moat . even as they appear , the door be open , the bridge lower , and Sir Daniel himself , with Hatch and the parson at his side , stand ready to receive they . 

 BOOK II the MOAT HOUSE 

 CHAPTER I DICK ASKS question 

 the Moat House stand not far from the rough forest road . externally , it be a compact rectangle of red stone , flank at each corner by a round tower , pierce for archery and battlemente at the top . within , it enclose a narrow court . the moat be perhaps twelve foot wide , cross by a single drawbridge . it be supply with water by a trench , lead to a forest pool and command , through its whole length , from the battlement of the two southern tower . except that one or two tall and thick tree have be suffer to remain within half a bowshot of the wall , the house be in a good posture for defence . 

 in the court , Dick find a part of the garrison , busy with preparation for defence , and gloomily discuss the chance of a siege . some be make arrow , some sharpen sword that have long be disuse ; but even as they work , they shake their head . 

 twelve of Sir Daniel s party have escape the battle , run the gauntlet through the wood , and come alive to the Moat House . but out of this dozen , three have be gravely wound : two at Risingham in the disorder of the rout , one by John Amend - All s marksman as he cross the forest . this raise the force of the garrison , count Hatch , Sir Daniel , and young Shelton , to twenty - two effective man . and more might be continually expect to arrive . the danger lie not therefore in the lack of man . 

 it be the terror of the Black Arrow that oppress the spirit of the garrison . for their open foe of the party of York , in these most change time , they feel but a far - away concern . " the world , " as people say in those day , " might change again " before harm come . but for their neighbour in the wood , they tremble . it be not Sir Daniel alone who be a mark for hatred . his man , conscious of impunity , have carry themselves cruelly through all the country . harsh command have be harshly execute ; and of the little band that now sit talk in the court , there be not one but have be guilty of some act of oppression or barbarity . and now , by the fortune of war , Sir Daniel have become powerless to protect his instrument ; now , by the issue of some hour of battle , at which many of they have not be present , they have all become punishable traitor to the State , outside the buckler of the law , a shrunken company in a poor fortress that be hardly tenable , and expose upon all side to the just resentment of their victim . nor have there be lack grisly advertisement of what they might expect . 

 at different period of the evening and the night , no few than seven riderless horse have come neigh in terror to the gate . two be from Selden s troop ; five belong to man who have ride with Sir Daniel to the field . lastly , a little before dawn , a spearman have come staggering to the moat side , pierce by three arrow ; even as they carry he in , his spirit have depart ; but by the word that he utter in his agony , he must have be the last survivor of a considerable company of man . 

 Hatch himself show , under his sun - brown , the pallour of anxiety ; and when he have take Dick aside and learn the fate of Selden , he fall on a stone bench and fairly wept . the other , from where they sit on stool or doorstep in the sunny angle of the court , look at he with wonder and alarm , but none venture to inquire the cause of his emotion . 

 " Nay , Master Shelton , " say Hatch , at last " nay , but what say I ? we shall all go . Selden be a man of his hand ; he be like a brother to I . well , he have go second ; well , we shall all follow ! for what say their knave rhyme ?   a black arrow in each black heart . be it not so it go ? appleyard , Selden , Smith , old Humphrey go ; and there lieth poor John Carter , crying , poor sinner , for the priest . " 

 Dick give ear . out of a low window , hard by where they be talk , groan and murmur come to his ear . 

 " Lieth he there ? " he ask . 

 " ay , in the second porter s chamber , " answer Hatch . " we could not bear he far , soul and body be so bitterly at odd . at every step we lift he , he think to wend . but now , methink , it be the soul that suffereth . ever for the priest he crieth , and Sir Oliver , I wot not why , still cometh not . twill be a long shrift ; but poor Appleyard and poor Selden , they have none . " 

 Dick stoop to the window and look in . the little cell be low and dark , but he could make out the wounded soldier lie moan on his pallet . 

 " Carter , poor friend , how goeth it ? " he ask . 

 " Master Shelton , " return the man , in an excited whisper , " for the dear light of heaven , bring the priest . Alack , I be speed ; I be bring very low down ; my hurt be to the death . ye may do I no more service ; this shall be the last . now , for my poor soul s interest , and as a loyal gentleman , bestir you ; for I have that matter on my conscience that shall drag I deep . " 

 he groan , and Dick hear the grating of his tooth , whether in pain or terror . 

 just then Sir Daniel appear upon the threshold of the hall . he have a letter in one hand . 

 " lad , " he say , " we have have a shog , we have have a tumble ; wherefore , then , deny it ? rather it imputeth to get speedily again to saddle . this old Harry the Sixt have have the undermost . wash we , then , our hand of he . I have a good friend that rideth next the duke , the Lord of Wensleydale . well , I have writ a letter to my friend , pray his good lordship , and offer large satisfaction for the past and reasonable surety for the future . doubt not but he will lend a favourable ear . a prayer without gift be like a song without music : I surfeit he with promise , boy I spare not to promise . what , then , be lack ? Nay , a great thing wherefore should I deceive you ? a great thing and a difficult : a messenger to bear it . the wood y be not ignorant of that lie thick with our ill - willer . Haste be most needful ; but without sleight and caution all be naught . which , then , of this company will take I this letter , bear I it to my Lord of Wensleydale , and bring I the answer back ? " 

 one man instantly arise . 

 " I will , an t like you , " say he . " I will even risk my carcase . " 

 " Nay , Dicky Bowyer , not so , " return the knight . " it like I not . Y be sly indeed , but not speedy . Ye be a laggard ever . " 

 " an t be so , Sir Daniel , here be I , " cry another . 

 " the saint forfend ! " say the knight . " Y be speedy , but not sly . Ye would blunder I headforemost into John Amend - All s camp . I thank you both for your good courage ; but , in sooth , it may not be . " 

 then Hatch offer himself , and he also be refuse . 

 " I want you here , good Bennet ; y be my right hand , indeed , " return the knight ; and then several come forward in a group , Sir Daniel at length select one and give he the letter . 

 " now , " he say , " upon your good speed and well discretion we do all depend . bring I a good answer back , and before three week , I will have purge my forest of these vagabond that brave we to our face . but mark it well , Throgmorton : the matter be not easy . ye must steal forth under night , and go like a fox ; and how ye be to cross till I know not , neither by the bridge nor ferry . " 

 " I can swim , " return Throgmorton . " I will come soundly , fear not . " 

 " well , friend , get ye to the buttery , " reply Sir Daniel . " ye shall swim first of all in nut - brown ale . " and with that he turn back into the hall . 

 " Sir Daniel hath a wise tongue , " say Hatch , aside , to Dick . " see , now , where many a less man have gloss the matter over , he speaketh it out plainly to his company . here be a danger , a saith , and here difficulty ; and jesteth in the very saying . Nay , by Saint Barbary , he be a bear captain ! not a man but he be some deal hearten up ! see how they fall again to work . " 

 this praise of Sir Daniel put a thought in the lad s head . 

 " Bennet , " he say , " how come my father by his end ? " 

 " ask I not that , " reply Hatch . " I have no hand nor knowledge in it ; furthermore , I will even be silent , Master Dick . for look you , in a man s own business there he may speak ; but of hearsay matter and of common talk , not so . ask I Sir Oliver ay , or Carter , if ye will ; not I . " 

 and Hatch set off to make the round , leave Dick in a muse . 

 " wherefore would he not tell I ? " think the lad . " and wherefore name he Carter ? Carter nay , then Carter have a hand in it , perchance . " 

 he enter the house , and pass some little way along a flagged and vaulted passage , come to the door of the cell where the hurt man lie groan . at his entrance Carter start eagerly . 

 " have ye bring the priest ? " he cry . 

 " not yet awhile , " return Dick . " Y ave a word to tell I first . how come my father , Harry Shelton , by his death ? " 

 the man s face alter instantly . 

 " I know not , " he reply , doggedly . 

 " Nay , ye know well , " return Dick . " seek not to put I by . " 

 " I tell you I know not , " repeat Carter . 

 " then , " say Dick , " ye shall die unshriven . here be I , and here shall stay . there shall no priest come near you , rest assure . for of what avail be penitence , an ye have no mind to right those wrong ye have a hand in ? and without penitence , confession be but mockery . " 

 " ye say what ye mean not , Master Dick , " say Carter , composedly . " it be ill threaten the dying , and becometh you   to speak truth   little . and for as little as it commend you , it shall serve you less . Stay , an ye please . Ye will condemn my soul ye shall learn nothing ! there be my last word to you . " and the wounded man turn upon the other side . 

 now , Dick , to say truth , have speak hastily , and be ashamed of his threat . but he make one more effort . 

 " Carter , " he say , " mistake I not . I know ye be but an instrument in the hand of other ; a churl must obey his lord ; I would not bear heavily on such an one . but I begin to learn upon many side that this great duty lieth on my youth and ignorance , to avenge my father . Prithee , then , good Carter , set aside the memory of my threatening , and in pure goodwill and honest penitence give I a word of help . " 

 the wounded man lie silent ; nor , say what Dick please , could he extract another word from he . 

 " well , " say Dick , " I will go call the priest to you as ye desire ; for howsoever ye be in fault to I or mine , I would not be willingly in fault to any , least of all to one upon the last change . " 

 again the old soldier hear he without speech or motion ; even his groan he have suppress ; and as Dick turn and leave the room , he be fill with admiration for that rugged fortitude . 

 " and yet , " he think , " of what use be courage without wit ? have his hand be clean , he would have speak ; his silence do confess the secret louder than word . Nay , upon all side , proof floweth on I . Sir Daniel , he or his man , hath do this thing . " 

 Dick pause in the stone passage with a heavy heart . at that hour , in the ebb of Sir Daniel s fortune , when he be beleaguer by the archer of the Black Arrow and proscribe by the victorious Yorkists , be Dick , also , to turn upon the man who have nourish and teach he , who have severely punish , indeed , but yet unwearyingly protect his youth ? the necessity , if it should prove to be one , be cruel . 

 " pray Heaven he be innocent ! " he say . 

 and then step sound on the flagging , and Sir Oliver come gravely towards the lad . 

 " one seeketh you earnestly , " say Dick . 

 " I be upon the way , good Richard , " say the priest . " it be this poor Carter . alack , he be beyond cure . " 

 " and yet his soul be sicker than his body , " answer Dick . 

 " have ye see he ? " ask Sir Oliver , with a manifest start . 

 " I do but come from he , " reply Dick . 

 " what say he ? what say he ? " snap the priest , with extraordinary eagerness . 

 " he but cry for you the more piteously , Sir Oliver . it be well do to go the fast , for his hurt be grievous , " return the lad . 

 " I be straight for he , " be the reply . " well , we have all our sin . we must all come to our latter day , good Richard . " 

 " ay , sir ; and it be well if we all come fairly , " answer Dick . 

 the priest drop his eye , and with an inaudible benediction hurry on . 

 " he , too ! " think Dick " he , that teach I in piety ! Nay , then , what a world be this , if all that care for I be blood - guilty of my father s death ? Vengeance ! alas ! what a sore fate be mine , if I must be avenge upon my friend ! " 

 the thought put Matcham in his head . he smile at the remembrance of his strange companion , and then wonder where he be . ever since they have come together to the door of the Moat House the young lad have disappear , and Dick begin to weary for a word with he . 

 about an hour after , mass be somewhat hastily run through by Sir Oliver , the company gather in the hall for dinner . it be a long , low apartment , strew with green rush , and the wall hang with arra in a design of savage man and quest bloodhound ; here and there hang spear and bow and buckler ; a fire blaze in the big chimney ; there be arras - cover bench round the wall , and in the midst the table , fairly spread , await the arrival of the diner . neither Sir Daniel nor his lady make their appearance . Sir Oliver himself be absent , and here again there be no word of Matcham . Dick begin to grow alarmed , to recall his companion s melancholy foreboding , and to wonder to himself if any foul play have befall he in that house . 

 after dinner he find Goody Hatch , who be hurry to my Lady Brackley . 

 " Goody , " he say , " where be Master Matcham , I prithee ? I see ye go in with he when we arrive . " 

 the old woman laugh aloud . 

 " ah , Master Dick , " she say , " y have a famous bright eye in your head , to be sure ! " and laugh again . 

 " Nay , but where be he , indeed ? " persist Dick . 

 " Ye will never see he more , " she return " never . it be sure . " 

 " An I do not , " return the lad , " I will know the reason why . he come not hither of his full free will ; such as I be , I be his good protector , and I will see he justly use . there be too many mystery ; I do begin to weary of the game ! " 

 but as Dick be speak , a heavy hand fall on his shoulder . it be Bennet Hatch that have come unperceive behind he . with a jerk of his thumb , the retainer dismiss his wife . 

 " Friend Dick , " he say , as soon as they be alone , " be ye a moon - strike natural ? an ye leave not certain thing in peace , ye be well in the salt sea than here in Tunstall Moat House . Y have question I ; y have bait Carter ; y have fright the Jack - priest with hint . bear ye more wisely , fool ; and even now , when Sir Daniel calleth you , show I a smooth face for the love of wisdom . Y be to be sharply question . look to your answer . " 

 " Hatch , " return Dick , " in all this I smell a guilty conscience . " 

 " an ye go not the wiser , ye will soon smell blood , " reply Bennet . " I do but warn you . and here cometh one to call you . " 

 and indeed , at that very moment , a messenger come across the court to summon Dick into the presence of Sir Daniel . 

 CHAPTER II the two OATHS 

 Sir Daniel be in the hall ; there he pace angrily before the fire , await Dick s arrival . none be by except Sir Oliver , and he sit discreetly backward , thumb and mutter over his breviary . 

 " Y have send for I , Sir Daniel ? " say young Shelton . 

 " I have send for you , indeed , " reply the knight . " for what cometh to mine ear ? have I be to you so heavy a guardian that ye make haste to credit ill of I ? or sith that ye see I , for the nonce , some worst , do ye think to quit my party ? by the mass , your father be not so ! those he be near , those he stand by , come wind or weather . but you , Dick , y be a fair - day friend , it seemeth , and now seek to clear yourself of your allegiance . " 

 " an t please you , Sir Daniel , not so , " return Dick , firmly . " I be grateful and faithful , where gratitude and faith be due . and before more be say , I thank you , and I thank Sir Oliver ; y have great claim upon I both none can have more ; I be a hound if I forget they . " 

 " it be well , " say Sir Daniel ; and then , rise into anger : " gratitude and faith be word , Dick Shelton , " he continue ; " but I look to deed . in this hour of my peril , when my name be attaint , when my land be forfeit , when this wood be full of man that hunger and thirst for my destruction , what doth gratitude ? what doth faith ? I have but a little company remain ; be it grateful or faithful to poison I their heart with your insidious whispering ? save I from such gratitude ! but , come , now , what be it ye wish ? speak ; we be here to answer . if ye have aught against I , stand forth and say it . " 

 " Sir , " reply Dick , " my father fall when I be yet a child . it hath come to mine ear that he be foully do by . it hath come to mine ear for I will not dissemble that ye have a hand in his undoing . and in all verity , I shall not be at peace in mine own mind , nor very clear to help you , till I have certain resolution of these doubt . " 

 Sir Daniel sit down in a deep settle . he take his chin in his hand and look at Dick fixedly . 

 " and ye think I would be guardian to the man s son that I have murder ? " he ask . 

 " Nay , " say Dick , " pardon I if I answer churlishly ; but indeed ye know right well a wardship be most profitable . all these year have ye not enjoy my revenue , and lead my man ? have ye not still my marriage ? I wot not what it may be worth it be worth something . pardon I again ; but if ye be base enough to slay a man under trust , here be , perhaps , reason enough to move you to the less baseness . " 

 " when I be lad of your year , " return Sir Daniel , sternly , " my mind have not so turn upon suspicion . and Sir Oliver here , " he add , " why should he , a priest , be guilty of this act ? " 

 " Nay , Sir Daniel , " say Dick , " but where the master biddeth there will the dog go . it be well know this priest be but your instrument . I speak very freely ; the time be not for courtesy . even as I speak , so would I be answer . and answer get I none ! ye but put more question . I rede ye be ware , Sir Daniel ; for in this way ye will but nourish and not satisfy my doubt . " 

 " I will answer you fairly , Master Richard , " say the knight . " be I to pretend ye have not stir my wrath , I be no honest man . but I will be just even in anger . come to I with these word when y be grow and come to man s estate , and I be no long your guardian , and so helpless to resent they . come to I then , and I will answer you as ye merit , with a buffet in the mouth . till then ye have two course : either swallow I down these insult , keep a silent tongue , and fight in the meanwhile for the man that feed and fight for your infancy ; or else the door standeth open , the wood be full of mine enemy go . " 

 the spirit with which these word be utter , the look with which they be accompany , stagger Dick ; and yet he could not but observe that he have get no answer . 

 " I desire nothing more earnestly , Sir Daniel , than to believe you , " he reply . " assure I ye be free from this . " 

 " will ye take my word of honour , Dick ? " inquire the knight . 

 " that would I , " answer the lad . 

 " I give it you , " return Sir Daniel . " upon my word of honour , upon the eternal welfare of my spirit , and as I shall answer for my deed hereafter , I have no hand nor portion in your father s death . " 

 he extend his hand , and Dick take it eagerly . neither of they observe the priest , who , at the pronunciation of that solemn and false oath , have half arise from his seat in an agony of horror and remorse . 

 " ah , " cry Dick , " ye must find it in your great - heartedness to pardon I ! I be a churl , indeed , to doubt of you . but ye have my hand upon it ; I will doubt no more . " 

 " Nay , Dick , " reply Sir Daniel , " y be forgive . ye know not the world and its calumnious nature . " 

 " I be the more to blame , " add Dick , " in that the rogue point , not directly at yourself , but at Sir Oliver . " 

 as he speak , he turn towards the priest , and pause in the middle of the last word . this tall , ruddy , corpulent , high - step man have fall , you might say , to piece ; his colour be go , his limb be relaxed , his lip stammer prayer ; and now , when Dick s eye be fix upon he suddenly , he cry out aloud , like some wild animal , and bury his face in his hand . 

 Sir Daniel be by he in two stride , and shake he fiercely by the shoulder . at the same moment Dick s suspicion reawaken . 

 " Nay , " he say , " Sir Oliver may swear also . twa he they accuse . " 

 " he shall swear , " say the knight . 

 Sir Oliver speechlessly wave his arm . 

 " ay , by the mass ! but ye shall swear , " cry Sir Daniel , beside himself with fury . " here , upon this book , ye shall swear , " he continue , pick up the breviary , which have fall to the ground . " what ! ye make I doubt you ! Swear , I say ; swear ! " 

 but the priest be still incapable of speech . his terror of Sir Daniel , his terror of perjury , rise to about an equal height , strangle he . 

 and just then , through the high , stain - glass window of the hall , a black arrow crash , and strike , and stick quivering , in the midst of the long table . 

 Sir Oliver , with a loud scream , fall faint on the rush ; while the knight , follow by Dick , dash into the court and up the near corkscrew stair to the battlement . the sentry be all on the alert . the sun shine quietly on green lawn dot with tree , and on the woode hill of the forest which enclose the view . there be no sign of a besieger . 

 " Whence come that shot ? " ask the knight . 

 " from yonder clump , Sir Daniel , " return a sentinel . 

 the knight stand a little , musing . then he turn to Dick . " Dick , " he say , " keep I an eye upon these man ; I leave you in charge here . as for the priest , he shall clear himself , or I will know the reason why . I do almost begin to share in your suspicion . he shall swear , trust I , or we shall prove he guilty . " 

 Dick answer somewhat coldly , and the knight , give he a pierce glance , hurriedly return to the hall . his first glance be for the arrow . it be the first of these missile he have see , and as he turn it to and fro , the dark hue of it touch he with some fear . again there be some writing : one word " earthed . " 

 " ay , " he break out , " they know I be home , then . earth ! ay , but there be not a dog among they fit to dig I out . " 

 Sir Oliver have come to himself , and now scramble to his foot . 

 " Alack , Sir Daniel ! " he moan , " y ave swear a dread oath ; y be doom to the end of time . " 

 " ay , " return the knight , " I have swear an oath , indeed , thou chucklehead ; but thyself shalt swear a great . it shall be on the blessed cross of Holywood . look to it ; get the word ready . it shall be swear to - night . " 

 " now , may Heaven lighten you ! " reply the priest ; " may Heaven incline your heart from this iniquity ! " 

 " look you , my good father , " say Sir Daniel , " if y be for piety , I say no more ; ye begin late , that be all . but if y be in any sense bent upon wisdom , hear I . this lad beginneth to irk I like a wasp . I have a need for he , for I would sell his marriage . but I tell you , in all plainness , if that he continue to weary I , he shall go join his father . I give order now to change he to the chamber above the chapel . if that ye can swear your innocency with a good , solid oath and an assured countenance , it be well ; the lad will be at peace a little , and I will spare he . if that ye stammer or blench , or anyways boggle at the swearing , he will not believe you ; and by the mass , he shall die . there be for your thinking on . " 

 " the chamber above the chapel ! " gasp the priest . 

 " that same , " reply the knight . " so if ye desire to save he , save he ; and if ye desire not , prithee , go to , and let I be at peace ! for an I have be a hasty man , I would already have put my sword through you , for your intolerable cowardice and folly . have ye choose ? say ! " 

 " I have choose , " say the priest . " Heaven pardon I , I will do evil for good . I will swear for the lad s sake . " 

 " so be it good ! " say Sir Daniel . " send for he , then , speedily . ye shall see he alone . yet I shall have an eye on you . I shall be here in the panel room . " 

 the knight raise the arra and let it fall again behind he . there be the sound of a spring opening ; then follow the creaking of trod stair . 

 Sir Oliver , leave alone , cast a timorous glance upward at the arra - cover wall , and cross himself with every appearance of terror and contrition . 

 " Nay , if he be in the chapel room , " the priest murmur , " be it at my soul s cost , I must save he . " 

 three minute later , Dick , who have be summon by another messenger , find Sir Oliver stand by the hall table , resolute and pale . 

 " Richard Shelton , " he say , " ye have require an oath from I . I might complain , I might deny you ; but my heart be move toward you for the past , and I will even content you as ye choose . by the true cross of Holywood , I do not slay your father . " 

 " Sir Oliver , " return Dick , " when first we read John Amend - All s paper , I be convince of so much . but suffer I to put two question . Ye do not slay he ; grant . but have ye no hand in it ? " 

 " none , " say Sir Oliver . and at the same time he begin to contort his face , and signal with his mouth and eyebrow , like one who desire to convey a warning , yet dare not utter a sound . 

 Dick regard he in wonder ; then he turn and look all about he at the empty hall . 

 " what make ye ? " he inquire . 

 " why , naught , " return the priest , hastily smooth his countenance . " I make naught ; I do but suffer ; I be sick . I I prithee , Dick , I must begone . on the true cross of Holywood , I be clean innocent alike of violence or treachery . content ye , good lad . farewell ! " 

 and he make his escape from the apartment with unusual alacrity . 

 Dick remain rooted to the spot , his eye wander about the room , his face a change picture of various emotion , wonder , doubt , suspicion , and amusement . gradually , as his mind grow clear , suspicion take the upper hand , and be succeed by certainty of the bad . he raise his head , and , as he do so , violently start . high upon the wall there be the figure of a savage hunter weave in the tapestry . with one hand he hold a horn to his mouth ; in the other he brandish a stout spear . his face be dark , for he be mean to represent an African . 

 now , here be what have startle Richard Shelton . the sun have move away from the hall window , and at the same time the fire have blaze up high on the wide hearth , and shed a changeful glow upon the roof and hanging . in this light the figure of the black hunter have wink at he with a white eyelid . 

 he continue star at the eye . the light shine upon it like a gem ; it be liquid , it be alive . again the white eyelid close upon it for a fraction of a second , and the next moment it be go . 

 there could be no mistake . the live eye that have be watch he through a hole in the tapestry be go . the firelight no long shine on a reflect surface . 

 and instantly Dick awake to the terror of his position . Hatch s warning , the mute signal of the priest , this eye that have observe he from the wall , run together in his mind . he see he have be put upon his trial , that he have once more betray his suspicion , and that , short of some miracle , he be lose . 

 " if I can not get I forth out of this house , " he think , " I be a dead man ! and this poor Matcham , too to what a cockatrice s nest have I not lead he ! " 

 he be still so think , when there come one in haste , to bid he help in change his arm , his clothing , and his two or three book , to a new chamber . 

 " a new chamber ? " he repeat . " wherefore so ? what chamber ? " 

 " tis one above the chapel , " answer the messenger . 

 " it hath stand long empty , " say Dick , musing . " what manner of room be it ? " 

 " Nay , a brave room , " return the man . " but yet " lower his voice " they call it haunt . " 

 " haunted ? " repeat Dick , with a chill . " I have not hear of it . Nay , then , and by whom ? " 

 the messenger look about he ; and then , in a low whisper , " by the sacrist of St. John s , " he say . " they have he there to sleep one night , and in the morning whew ! he be go . the devil have take he , they say ; the more betoken , he have drunk late the night before . " 

 Dick follow the man with black foreboding . 

 CHAPTER III the room over the chapel 

 from the battlement nothing far be observe . the sun journey westward , and at last go down ; but , to the eye of all these eager sentinel , no live thing appear in the neighbourhood of Tunstall House . 

 when the night be at length fairly come , Throgmorton be lead to a room overlook an angle of the moat . thence he be lower with every precaution ; the ripple of his swimming be audible for a brief period ; then a black figure be observe to land by the branch of a willow and crawl away among the grass . for some half hour Sir Daniel and Hatch stand eagerly give ear ; but all remain quiet . the messenger have get away in safety . 

 Sir Daniel s brow grow clear . he turn to Hatch . 

 " Bennet , " he say , " this John Amend - all be no more than a man , ye see . he sleepeth . we will make a good end of he , go to ! " 

 all the afternoon and evening , Dick have be order hither and thither , one command follow another , till he be bewilder with the number and the hurry of commission . all that time he have see no more of Sir Oliver , and nothing of Matcham ; and yet both the priest and the young lad run continually in his mind . it be now his chief purpose to escape from Tunstall Moat House as speedily as might be ; and yet , before he go , he desire a word with both of these . 

 at length , with a lamp in one hand , he mount to his new apartment . it be large , low , and somewhat dark . the window look upon the moat , and although it be so high up , it be heavily bar . the bed be luxurious , with one pillow of down and one of lavender , and a red coverlet work in a pattern of rose . all about the wall be cupboard , lock and padlock , and conceal from view by hanging of dark - colour arra . Dick make the round , lift the arra , sound the panel , seek vainly to open the cupboard . he assure himself that the door be strong and the bolt solid ; then he set down his lamp upon a bracket , and once more look all around . 

 for what reason have he be give this chamber ? it be large and fine than his own . could it conceal a snare ? be there a secret entrance ? be it , indeed , haunt ? his blood run a little chilly in his vein . 

 immediately over he the heavy foot of a sentry trod the lead . below he , he know , be the arched roof of the chapel ; and next to the chapel be the hall . certainly there be a secret passage in the hall ; the eye that have watch he from the arra give he proof of that . be it not more than probable that the passage extend to the chapel , and , if so , that it have an opening in his room ? 

 to sleep in such a place , he feel , would be foolhardy . he make his weapon ready , and take his position in a corner of the room behind the door . if ill be intend , he would sell his life dear . 

 the sound of many foot , the challenge , and the password , sound overhead along the battlement ; the watch be be change . 

 and just then there come a scratching at the door of the chamber ; it grow a little louder ; then a whisper : 

 " Dick , Dick , it be I ! " 

 Dick run to the door , draw the bolt , and admit Matcham . he be very pale , and carry a lamp in one hand and a draw dagger in the other . 

 " shut I the door , " he whisper . " Swift , Dick ! this house be full of spy ; I hear their foot follow I in the corridor ; I hear they breathe behind the arra . " 

 " well , content you , " return Dick , " it be closed . we be safe for this while , if there be safety anywhere within these wall . but my heart be glad to see you . by the mass , lad , I think ye be speed ! where hide ye ? " 

 " it matter not , " return Matcham . " since we be meet , it matter not . but , Dick , be your eye open ? have they tell you of to - morrow s doing ? " 

 " not they , " reply Dick . " what make they to - morrow ? " 

 " to - morrow , or to - night , I know not , " say the other , " but one time or other , Dick , they do intend upon your life . I have the proof of it ; I have hear they whisper ; nay , they as good as tell I . " 

 " ay , " return Dick , " be it so ? I have think as much . " 

 and he tell he the day s occurrence at length . 

 when it be do , Matcham arise and begin , in turn , to examine the apartment . 

 " no , " he say , " there be no entrance visible . yet tis a pure certainty there be one . Dick , I will stay by you . an y be to die , I will die with you . and I can help look ! I have steal a dagger I will do my good ! and meanwhile , an ye know of any issue , any sally - port we could get open , or any window that we might descend by , I will most joyfully face any jeopardy to flee with you . " 

 " Jack , " say Dick , " by the mass , Jack , y be the good soul , and the true , and the brave in all England ! give I your hand , Jack . " 

 and he grasp the other s hand in silence . 

 " I will tell you , " he resume . " there be a window , out of which the messenger descend ; the rope should still be in the chamber . tis a hope . " 

 " Hist ! " say Matcham . 

 both give ear . there be a sound below the floor ; then it pause , and then begin again . 

 " some one walketh in the room below , " whisper Matcham . 

 " Nay , " return Dick , " there be no room below ; we be above the chapel . it be my murderer in the secret passage . well , let he come ; it shall go hard with he ; " and he grind his tooth . 

 " blow I the light out , " say the other . " perchance he will betray himself . " 

 they blow out both the lamp and lie still as death . the footfall underneath be very soft , but they be clearly audible . several time they come and go ; and then there be a loud jar of a key turning in a lock , follow by a considerable silence . 

 presently the step begin again , and then , all of a sudden , a chink of light appear in the planking of the room in a far corner . it widen ; a trap - door be be open , let in a gush of light . they could see the strong hand push it up ; and Dick raise his cross - bow , wait for the head to follow . 

 but now there come an interruption . from a distant corner of the Moat House shout begin to be hear , and first one voice , and then several , cry aloud upon a name . this noise have plainly disconcert the murderer , for the trap - door be silently lower to its place , and the step hurriedly return , pass once more close below the lad , and die away in the distance . 

 here be a moment s respite . Dick breathe deep , and then , and not till then , he give ear to the disturbance which have interrupt the attack , and which be now rather increase than diminish . all about the Moat House foot be run , door be open and slamming , and still the voice of Sir Daniel tower above all this bustle , shout for " Joanna . " 

 " Joanna ! " repeat Dick . " why , who the murrain should this be ? here be no Joanna , nor ever hath be . what meaneth it ? " 

 Matcham be silent . he seem to have draw far away . but only a little faint starlight enter by the window , and at the far end of the apartment , where the pair be , the darkness be complete . 

 " Jack , " say Dick , " I wot not where ye be all day . see ye this Joanna ? " 

 " Nay , " return Matcham , " I see she not . " 

 " nor hear tell of she ? " he pursue . 

 the step draw nearer . Sir Daniel be still roar the name of Joanna from the courtyard . 

 " do ye hear of she ? " repeat Dick . 

 " I hear of she , " say Matcham . 

 " how your voice twitter ! what aileth you ? " say Dick . " tis a most excellent good fortune , this Joanna ; it will take their mind from we . " 

 " Dick , " cry Matcham , " I be lose ; we be both lose . let we flee if there be yet time . they will not rest till they have find I . or , see ! let I go forth ; when they have find I , ye may flee . let I forth , Dick good Dick , let I away ! " 

 she be grope for the bolt , when Dick at last comprehend . 

 " by the mass ! " he cry , " y be no Jack ; y be Joanna Sedley ; y be the maid that would not marry I ! " 

 the girl pause , and stand silent and motionless . Dick , too , be silent for a little ; then he speak again . 

 " Joanna , " he say , " y ave save my life , and I have save your ; and we have see blood flow , and be friend and enemy ay , and I take my belt to thrash you ; and all that time I think ye be a boy . but now death have I , and my time s out , and before I die I must say this : Y be the well maid and the brave under heaven , and , if only I could live , I would marry you blithely ; and , live or die , I love you . " 

 she answer nothing . 

 " come , " he say , " speak up , Jack . come , be a good maid , and say ye love I ! " 

 " why , Dick , " she cry , " would I be here ? " 

 " well , see ye here , " continue Dick , " an we but escape whole we ll marry ; and an we re to die , we die , and there s an end on t. but now that I think , how find ye my chamber ? " 

 " I ask it of Dame Hatch , " she answer . 

 " well , the dame s staunch , " he answer ; " she ll not tell upon you . we have time before we . " 

 and just then , as if to contradict his word , foot come down the corridor , and a fist beat roughly on the door . 

 " here ! " cry a voice . " open , Master Dick ; open ! " Dick neither move nor answer . 

 " it be all over , " say the girl ; and she put her arm about Dick s neck . 

 one after another , man come troop to the door . then Sir Daniel arrive himself , and there be a sudden cessation of the noise . 

 " Dick , " cry the knight , " be not an ass . the Seven Sleepers have be awake ere now . we know she be within there . open , then , the door , man . " 

 Dick be again silent . 

 " down with it , " say Sir Daniel . and immediately his follower fall savagely upon the door with foot and fist . solid as it be , and strongly bolt , it would soon have give way ; but once more fortune interfere . over the thunderstorm of blow the cry of a sentinel be hear ; it be follow by another ; shout run along the battlement , shout answer out of the wood . in the first moment of alarm it sound as if the forester be carry the Moat House by assault . and Sir Daniel and his man , desist instantly from their attack upon Dick s chamber , hurry to defend the wall . 

 " now , " cry Dick , " we be save . " 

 he seize the great old bedstead with both hand , and bent himself in vain to move it . 

 " help I , Jack . for your life s sake , help I stoutly ! " he cry . 

 between they , with a huge effort , they drag the big frame of oak across the room , and thrust it endwise to the chamber door . 

 " ye do but make thing bad , " say Joanna , sadly . " he will then enter by the trap . " 

 " not so , " reply Dick . " he durst not tell his secret to so many . it be by the trap that we shall flee . Hark ! the attack be over . Nay , it be none ! " 

 it have , indeed , be no attack ; it be the arrival of another party of straggler from the defeat of Risingham that have disturb Sir Daniel . they have run the gauntlet under cover of the darkness ; they have be admit by the great gate ; and now , with a great stamping of hoof and jingle of accoutrement and arm , they be dismount in the court . 

 " he will return anon , " say Dick . " to the trap ! " 

 he light a lamp , and they go together into the corner of the room . the open chink through which some light still glitter be easily discover , and , take a stout sword from his small armoury , Dick thrust it deep into the seam , and weigh strenuously on the hilt . the trap move , gap a little , and at length come widely open . seize it with their hand , the two young folk throw it back . it disclose a few step descend , and at the foot of they , where the would - be murderer have leave it , a burn lamp . 

 " now , " say Dick , " go first and take the lamp . I will follow to close the trap . " 

 so they descend one after the other , and as Dick lower the trap , the blow begin once again to thunder on the panel of the door . 

 CHAPTER IV the passage 

 the passage in which Dick and Joanna now find themselves be narrow , dirty , and short . at the other end of it , a door stand partly open ; the same door , without doubt , that they have hear the man unlocking . heavy cobwebs hang from the roof ; and the paved flooring echo hollow under the light tread . 

 beyond the door there be two branch , at right angle . Dick choose one of they at random , and the pair hurry , with echo footstep , along the hollow of the chapel roof . the top of the arched ceiling rise like a whale s back in the dim glimmer of the lamp . here and there be spyhole , conceal , on the other side , by the carving of the cornice ; and look down through one of these , Dick see the paved floor of the chapel the altar , with its burn taper and stretch before it on the step , the figure of Sir Oliver pray with uplifted hand . 

 at the other end , they descend a few step . the passage grow narrower ; the wall upon one hand be now of wood ; the noise of people talk , and a faint flickering of light , come through the interstice ; and presently they come to a round hole about the size of a man s eye , and Dick , look down through it , beheld the interior of the hall , and some half a dozen man sit , in their jack , about the table , drink deep and demolish a venison pie . these be certainly some of the late arrival . 

 " here be no help , " say Dick . " let we try back . " 

 " Nay , " say Joanna ; " maybe the passage goeth far . " 

 and she push on . but a few yard far the passage end at the top of a short flight of step ; and it become plain that , as long as the soldier occupy the hall , escape be impossible upon that side . 

 they retrace their step with all imaginable speed , and set forward to explore the other branch . it be exceedingly narrow , scarce wide enough for a large man ; and it lead they continually up and down by little break - neck stair , until even Dick have lose all notion of his whereabouts . 

 at length it grow both narrower and low ; the stair continue to descend ; the wall on either hand become damp and slimy to the touch ; and far in front of they they hear the squeaking and scuttling of the rat . 

 " we must be in the dungeon , " Dick remark . 

 " and still there be no outlet , " add Joanna . 

 " Nay , but an outlet there must be ! " Dick answer . presently , sure enough , they come to a sharp angle , and then the passage end in a flight of step . on the top of that there be a solid flag of stone by way of trap , and to this they both set their back . it be immovable . " some one holdeth it , " suggest Joanna . 

 " not so , " say Dick ; " for be a man strong as ten , he must still yield a little . but this resisteth like dead rock . there be a weight upon the trap . here be no issue ; and , by my sooth , good Jack , we be here as fairly prisoner as though the gyve be on our ankle bone . sit ye then down , and let we talk . after a while we shall return , when perchance they shall be less carefully upon their guard ; and , who knoweth ? we may break out and stand a chance . but , in my poor opinion , we be as good as shent . " 

 " Dick ! " she cry , " alas the day that ever ye should have see I ! for like a most unhappy and unthankful maid , it be I have lead you hither . " 

 " what cheer ! " return Dick . " it be all write , and that which be write , willy nilly , cometh still to pass . but tell I a little what manner of a maid ye be , and how ye come into Sir Daniel s hand ; that will do well than to bemoan yourself , whether for your sake or mine . " 

 " I be an orphan , like yourself , of father and mother , " say Joanna ; " and for my great misfortune , Dick , and hitherto for your , I be a rich marriage . my Lord Foxham have I to ward ; yet it appear Sir Daniel buy the marriage of I from the king , and a right dear price he pay for it . so here be I , poor babe , with two great and rich man fight which should marry I , and I still at nurse ! well , then the world change , and there be a new chancellor , and Sir Daniel buy the warding of I over the Lord Foxham s head . and then the world change again , and Lord Foxham buy my marriage over Sir Daniel s ; and from then to now it go on ill betwixt the two of they . but still Lord Foxham keep I in his hand , and be a good lord to I . and at last I be to be marry or sell , if ye like it well . five hundred pound Lord Foxham be to get for I . Hamley be the groom s name , and to - morrow , Dick , of all day in the year , be I to be betroth . have it not come to Sir Daniel , I have be wed , sure and never see thee , Dick dear Dick ! " 

 and here she take his hand , and kiss it , with the prettiest grace ; and Dick draw her hand to he and do the like . 

 " well , " she go on , " Sir Daniel take I unawares in the garden , and make I dress in these man s clothe , which be a deadly sin for a woman ; and , besides , they fit I not . he ride with I to Kettley , as ye see , tell I I be to marry you ; but I , in my heart , make sure I would marry Hamley in his tooth . " 

 " ay ! " cry Dick , " and so ye love this Hamley ! " 

 " Nay , " reply Joanna , " not I. I do but hate Sir Daniel . and then , Dick , ye help I , and ye be right kind , and very bold , and my heart turn towards you in mine own despite ; and now , if we can in any way compass it , I would marry you with right goodwill . and if , by cruel destiny , it may not be , still ye ll be dear to I . while my heart beat , it ll be true to you . " 

 " and I , " say Dick , " that never care a straw for any manner of woman until now , I take to you when I think ye be a boy . I have a pity to you , and know not why . when I would have belt you , the hand fail I . but when ye own ye be a maid , Jack for still I will call you Jack I make sure ye be the maid for I . Hark ! " he say , break off " one cometh . " 

 and indeed a heavy tread be now audible in the echo passage , and the rat again flee in army . 

 Dick reconnoitre his position . the sudden turn give he a post of vantage . he could thus shoot in safety from the cover of the wall . but it be plain the light be too near he , and , run some way forward , he set down the lamp in the middle of the passage , and then return to watch . 

 presently , at the far end of the passage , Bennet hove in sight . he seem to be alone , and he carry in his hand a burn torch , which make he the well mark . 

 " Stand , Bennet ! " cry Dick . " another step , and y be dead . " 

 " so here ye be , " return Hatch , peer forward into the darkness . " I see you not . aha ! y ave do wisely , Dick ; y ave put your lamp before you . by my sooth , but , though it be do to shoot my own knave body , I do rejoice to see ye profit of my lesson ! and now , what make ye ? what seek ye here ? why would ye shoot upon an old , kind friend ? and have ye the young gentlewoman there ? " 

 " Nay , Bennet , it be I should question and you answer , " reply Dick . " why be I in this jeopardy of my life ? why do man come privily to slay I in my bed ? why be I now flee in mine own guardian s strong house , and from the friend that I have live among and never injure ? " 

 " Master Dick , Master Dick , " say Bennet , " what tell I you ? Y be brave , but the most uncrafty lad that I can think upon ! " 

 " well , " return Dick , " I see ye know all , and that I be doom indeed . it be well . here , where I be , I stay . let Sir Daniel get I out if he be able ! " 

 Hatch be silent for a space . 

 " Hark ye , " he begin , " return to Sir Daniel , to tell he where ye be , and how post ; for , in truth , it be to that end he send I . but you , if ye be no fool , have well be go ere I return . " 

 " begone ! " repeat Dick . " I would be go already , an I wist how . I can not move the trap . " 

 " put I your hand into the corner , and see what ye find there , " reply Bennet . " Throgmorton s rope be still in the brown chamber . fare ye well . " 

 and Hatch , turn upon his heel , disappear again into the winding of the passage . 

 Dick instantly return for his lamp , and proceed to act upon the hint . at one corner of the trap there be a deep cavity in the wall . push his arm into the aperture , Dick find an iron bar , which he thrust vigorously upwards . there follow a snap noise , and the slab of stone instantly start in its bed . 

 they be free of the passage . a little exercise of strength easily raise the trap ; and they come forth into a vaulted chamber , open on one hand upon the court , where one or two fellow , with bare arm , be rub down the horse of the last arrival . a torch or two , each stick in an iron ring against the wall , changefully light up the scene . 

 CHAPTER V how DICK change SIDES 

 Dick , blow out his lamp lest it should attract attention , lead the way up - stair and along the corridor . in the brown chamber the rope have be make fast to the frame of an exceed heavy and ancient bed . it have not be detach , and Dick , take the coil to the window , begin to lower it slowly and cautiously into the darkness of the night . Joan stand by ; but as the rope lengthen , and still Dick continue to pay it out , extreme fear begin to conquer her resolution . 

 " Dick , " she say , " be it so deep ? I may not essay it . I should infallibly fall , good Dick . " 

 it be just at the delicate moment of the operation that she speak . Dick start ; the remainder of the coil slip from his grasp , and the end fall with a splash into the moat . instantly , from the battlement above , the voice of a sentinel cry , " who go ? " 

 " a murrain ! " cry Dick . " we be pay now ! down with you take the rope . " 

 " I can not , " she cry , recoil . 

 " an ye can not , no more can I , " say Shelton . " how can I swim the moat without you ? do you desert I , then ? " 

 " Dick , " she gasp , " I can not . the strength be go from I . " 

 " by the mass , then , we be all shent ! " he shout , stamp with his foot ; and then , hear step , he run to the room door and seek to close it . 

 before he could shoot the bolt , strong arm be thrust it back upon he from the other side . he struggle for a second ; then , feel himself overpower , run back to the window . the girl have fall against the wall in the embrasure of the window ; she be more than half insensible ; and when he try to raise she in his arm , her body be limp and unresponsive . 

 at the same moment the man who have force the door against he lay hold upon he . the first he poinarde at a blow , and the other fall back for a second in some disorder , he profit by the chance , bestrode the window - sill , seize the cord in both hand , and let his body slip . 

 the cord be knot , which make it the easy to descend ; but so furious be Dick s hurry , and so small his experience of such gymnastic , that he span round and round in mid - air like a criminal upon a gibbet , and now beat his head , and now bruise his hand , against the rugged stonework of the wall . the air roar in his ear ; he see the star overhead , and the reflect star below he in the moat , whirl like dead leaf before the temp . and then he lose hold , and fall , and souse head over ear into the icy water . 

 when he come to the surface his hand encounter the rope , which , newly lightened of his weight , be swing wildly to and fro . there be a red glow overhead , and look up , he see , by the light of several torch and a cresset full of burn coal , the battlement line with face . he see the man s eye turn hither and thither in quest of he ; but he be too far below , the light reach he not , and they look in vain . 

 and now he perceive that the rope be considerably too long , and he begin to struggle as well as he could towards the other side of the moat , still keep his head above water . in this way he get much more than halfway over ; indeed the bank be almost within reach , before the rope begin to draw he back by its own weight . take his courage in both hand , he leave go and make a leap for the trail spray of willow that have already , that same evening , help Sir Daniel s messenger to land . he go down , rise again , sink a second time , and then his hand catch a branch , and with the speed of thought he have drag himself into the thick of the tree and clung there , dripping and panting , and still half uncertain of his escape . 

 but all this have not be do without a considerable splashing , which have so far indicate his position to the man along the battlement . arrow and quarrel fall thick around he in the darkness , thick like drive hail ; and suddenly a torch be throw down flare through the air in its swift passage stick for a moment on the edge of the bank , where it burn high and light up its whole surrounding like a bonfire and then , in a good hour for Dick , slip off , plump into the moat , and be instantly extinguish . 

 it have serve its purpose . the marksman have have time to see the willow , and Dick ensconce among its bough ; and though the lad instantly spring higher up the bank , and run for his life , he be yet not quick enough to escape a shot . an arrow strike he in the shoulder , another graze his head . 

 the pain of his wound lend he wing ; and he have no soon get upon the level than he take to his heel and run straight before he in the dark , without a thought for the direction of his flight . 

 for a few step missile follow he , but these soon cease ; and when at length he come to a halt and look behind , he be already a good way from the Moat House , though he could still see the torch move to and fro along its battlement . 

 he lean against a tree , stream with blood and water , bruise , wound , alone , and unarmed . for all that , he have save his life for that bout ; and though Joanna remain behind in the power of Sir Daniel , he neither blame himself for an accident that it have be beyond his power to prevent , nor do he augur any fatal consequence to the girl herself . Sir Daniel be cruel , but he be not likely to be cruel to a young gentlewoman who have other protector , willing and able to bring he to account . it be more probable he would make haste to marry she to some friend of his own . 

 " well , " think Dick , " between then and now I will find I the mean to bring that traitor under ; for I think , by the mass , that I be now absolve from any gratitude or obligation ; and when war be open , there be a fair chance for all . " 

 in the meanwhile , here he be in a sore plight . 

 for some little way far he struggle forward through the forest ; but what with the pain of his wound , the darkness of the night , and the extreme uneasiness and confusion of his mind , he soon become equally unable to guide himself or to continue to push through the close undergrowth , and he be fain at length to sit down and lean his back against a tree . 

 when he awake from something betwixt sleep and swoon , the grey of the morning have begin to take the place of night . a little chilly breeze be bustle among the tree , and as he still sit star before he , only half awake , he become aware of something dark that swing to and fro among the branch , some hundred yard in front of he . the progressive brightening of the day and the return of his own sens at last enable he to recognise the object . it be a man hang from the bough of a tall oak . his head have fall forward on his breast ; but at every strong puff of wind his body span round and round , and his leg and arm toss , like some ridiculous plaything . 

 Dick clamber to his foot , and , staggering and lean on the tree - trunk as he go , draw near to this grim object . 

 the bough be perhaps twenty foot above the ground , and the poor fellow have be draw up so high by his executioner that his boot swing clear above Dick s reach ; and as his hood have be draw over his face , it be impossible to recognise the man . 

 Dick look about he right and leave ; and at last he perceive that the other end of the cord have be make fast to the trunk of a little hawthorn which grow , thick with blossom , under the lofty arcade of the oak . with his dagger , which alone remain to he of all his arm , young Shelton sever the rope , and instantly , with a dead thump , the corpse fall in a heap upon the ground . 

 Dick raise the hood ; it be Throgmorton , Sir Daniel s messenger . he have not go far upon his errand . a paper , which have apparently escape the notice of the man of the Black Arrow , stick from the bosom of his doublet , and Dick , pull it forth , find it be Sir Daniel s letter to Lord Wensleydale . 

 " come , " think he , " if the world change yet again , I may have here the wherewithal to shame Sir Daniel nay , and perchance to bring he to the block . " 

 and he put the paper in his own bosom , say a prayer over the dead man , and set forth again through the wood . 

 his fatigue and weakness increase ; his ear sing , his step falter , his mind at interval fail he , so low have he be bring by loss of blood . Doubtless he make many deviation from his true path , but at last he come out upon the high - road , not very far from Tunstall hamlet . 

 a rough voice bid he stand . 

 " stand ? " repeat Dick . " by the mass , but I be near fall . " 

 and he suit the action to the word , and fall all his length upon the road . 

 two man come forth out of the thicket , each in green forest jerkin , each with long - bow and quiver and short sword . 

 " why , Lawless , " say the young of the two , " it be young Shelton . " 

 " ay , this will be as good as bread to John Amend - All , " return the other . " though , faith , he hath be to the war . here be a tear in his scalp that must a cost he many a good ounce of blood . " 

 " and here , " add Greensheve , " be a hole in his shoulder that must have prick he well . who hath do this , think ye ? if it be one of ours , he may all to prayer ; Ellis will give he a short shrift and a long rope . " 

 " up with the cub , " say lawless . " clap he on my back . " 

 and then , when Dick have be hoist to his shoulder , and he have take the lad s arm about his neck , and get a firm hold of he , the ex - Grey Friar add : 

 " keep ye the post , brother Greensheve . I will on with he by myself . " 

 so Greensheve return to his ambush on the wayside , and Lawless trudge down the hill , whistle as he go , with Dick , still in a dead faint , comfortably settle on his shoulder . 

 the sun rise as he come out of the skirt of the wood and see Tunstall hamlet straggle up the opposite hill . all seem quiet , but a strong post of some half a score of archer lie close by the bridge on either side of the road , and , as soon as they perceive Lawless with his burthen , begin to bestir themselves and set arrow to string like vigilant sentry . 

 " who go ? " cry the man in command . 

 " will Lawless , by the rood ye know I as well as your own hand , " return the outlaw , contemptuously . 

 " give the word , lawless , " return the other . 

 " now , Heaven lighten thee , thou great fool , " reply Lawless . " do I not tell it thee myself ? but ye be all mad for this playing at soldier . when I be in the greenwood , give I greenwood way ; and my word for this tide be : a fig for all mock soldiery ! " 

 " lawless , ye but show an ill example ; give we the word , fool jester , " say the commander of the post . 

 " and if I have forget it ? " ask the other . 

 " an ye have forget it as I know y ave not by the mass , I would clap an arrow into your big body , " return the first . 

 " Nay , an y be so ill a jester , " say lawless , " ye shall have your word for I . Duckworth and Shelton be the word ; and here , to the illustration , be Shelton on my shoulder , and to Duckworth do I carry he . " 

 " pass , Lawless , " say the sentry . 

 " and where be John ? " ask the Grey Friar . 

 " he holdeth a court , by the mass , and taketh rent as to the manner bear ! " cry another of the company . 

 so it prove . when Lawless get as far up the village as the little inn , he find Ellis Duckworth surround by Sir Daniel s tenant , and , by the right of his good company of archer , coolly take rent , and give write receipt in return for they . by the face of the tenant , it be plain how little this proceeding please they ; for they argue very rightly that they would simply have to pay they twice . 

 as soon as he know what have bring Lawless , Ellis dismiss the remainder of the tenant , and , with every mark of interest and apprehension , conduct Dick into an inner chamber of the inn . there the lad s hurt be look to ; and he be recall , by simple remedy , to consciousness . 

 " dear lad , " say Ellis , press his hand , " y be in a friend s hand that love your father , and love you for his sake . rest ye a little quietly , for ye be somewhat out of case . then shall ye tell I your story , and betwixt the two of we we shall find a remedy for all . " 

 a little later in the day , and after Dick have awaken from a comfortable slumber to find himself still very weak , but clear in mind and easy in body , Ellis return , and sit down by the bedside , beg he , in the name of his father , to relate the circumstance of his escape from Tunstall Moat House . there be something in the strength of Duckworth s frame , in the honesty of his brown face , in the clearness and shrewdness of his eye , that move Dick to obey he ; and from first to last the lad tell he the story of his two day adventure . 

 " well , " say Ellis , when he have do , " see what the kind saint have do for you , Dick Shelton , not alone to save your body in so numerous and deadly peril , but to bring you into my hand that have no dearer wish than to assist your father s son . be but true to I and I see y be true and betwixt you and I , we shall bring that false - heart traitor to the death . " 

 " will ye assault the house ? " ask Dick . 

 " I be mad , indeed , to think of it , " return Ellis . " he hath too much power ; his man gather to he ; those that give I the slip last night , and by the mass come in so handily for you those have make he safe . Nay , Dick , to the contrary , thou and I and my brave bowman , we must all slip from this forest speedily , and leave Sir Daniel free . " 

 " my mind misgiveth I for Jack , " say the lad . 

 " for Jack ! " repeat Duckworth . " o , I see , for the wench ! Nay , Dick , I promise you , if there come talk of any marriage we shall act at once ; till then , or till the time be ripe , we shall all disappear , even like shadow at morning ; Sir Daniel shall look east and west , and see none enemy ; he shall think , by the mass , that he hath dream awhile , and hath now awaken in his bed . but our four eye , Dick , shall follow he right close , and our four hand so help we all the army of the saint ! shall bring that traitor low ! " 

 two day later Sir Daniel s garrison have grow to such a strength that he venture on a sally , and at the head of some two score horseman , push without opposition as far as Tunstall hamlet . not an arrow flew , not a man stir in the thicket ; the bridge be no long guard , but stand open to all corner ; and as Sir Daniel cross it , he see the villager look timidly from their door . 

 presently one of they , take heart of grace , come forward , and with the lowly salutation , present a letter to the knight . 

 his face darken as he read the content . it run thus : 

 to the most untrue and cruel gentylman , Sir Daniel Brackley , Knyght , these : 

 I fynde ye be untrue and unkynd fro the first . ye have my father s blood upon your hand ; let be , it will not wasshe . some day ye shall perish by my procurement , so much I let you to wytte ; and I let you to wytte far , that if ye seek to we d to any other the gentylwoman , Mistresse Joan Sedley , whom that I be bind upon a great oath to we d myself , the blow will be very swift . the first step therinne will be thy first step to the grave . 

 Ric . Shelton . 

 BOOK III MY LORD foxham 

 CHAPTER I the HOUSE by THE SHORE 

 month have pass away since Richard Shelton make his escape from the hand of his guardian . these month have be eventful for England . the party of Lancaster , which be then in the very article of death , have once more raise its head . the Yorkists defeat and disperse , their leader butcher on the field , it seem , for a very brief season in the winter follow upon the event already record , as if the House of Lancaster have finally triumph over its foe . 

 the small town of Shoreby - on - the - Till be full of the lancastrian noble of the neighbourhood . Earl Risingham be there , with three hundred man - at - arm ; Lord Shoreby , with two hundred ; Sir Daniel himself , high in favour and once more grow rich on confiscation , lie in a house of his own , on the main street , with three - score man . the world have change indeed . 

 it be a black , bitter cold evening in the first week of January , with a hard frost , a high wind , and every likelihood of snow before the morning . 

 in an obscure alehouse in a by - street near the harbour , three or four man sit drink ale and eat a hasty mess of egg . they be all likely , lusty , weather - beat fellow , hard of hand , bold of eye ; and though they wear plain tabard , like country plowman , even a drunken soldier might have look twice before he seek a quarrel in such company . 

 a little apart before the huge fire sit a young man , almost a boy , dress in much the same fashion , though it be easy to see by his look that he be well bear , and might have wear a sword , have the time suit . 

 " Nay , " say one of the man at the table , " I like it not . Ill will come of it . this be no place for jolly fellow . a jolly fellow loveth open country , good cover , and scarce foe ; but here we be shut in a town , girt about with enemy ; and , for the bull s - eye of misfortune , see if it snow not ere the morning . " 

 " tis for Master Shelton there , " say another , nod his head towards the lad before the fire . 

 " I will do much for Master Shelton , " return the first ; " but to come to the gallow for any man nay , brother , not that ! " 

 the door of the inn open , and another man enter hastily and approach the youth before the fire . 

 " Master Shelton , " he say , " Sir Daniel goeth forth with a pair of link and four archer . " 

 Dick   for this be our young friend   rise instantly to his foot . 

 " lawless , " he say , " ye will take John Capper s watch . greensheve , follow with I . Capper , lead forward . we will follow he this time , an he go to York . " 

 the next moment they be outside in the dark street , and Capper , the man who have just come , point to where two torch flare in the wind at a little distance . 

 the town be already sound asleep ; no one move upon the street , and there be nothing easy than to follow the party without observation . the two link - bearer go first ; next follow a single man , whose long cloak blow about he in the wind ; and the rear be bring up by the four archer , each with his bow upon his arm . they move at a brisk walk , thread the intricate lane and draw nearer to the shore . 

 " he hath go each night in this direction ? " ask Dick , in a whisper . 

 " this be the third night run , Master Shelton , " return Capper , " and still at the same hour and with the same small following , as though his end be secret . " 

 Sir Daniel and his six man be now come to the outskirt of the country . Shoreby be an open town , and though the lancastrian lord who lie there keep a strong guard on the main road , it be still possible to enter or depart unseen by any of the less street or across the open country . 

 the lane which Sir Daniel have be follow come to an abrupt end . before he there be a stretch of rough down , and the noise of the sea - surf be audible upon one hand . there be no guard in the neighbourhood , nor any light in that quarter of the town . 

 Dick and his two outlaws draw a little close to the object of their chase , and presently , as they come forth from between the house and could see a little far upon either hand , they be aware of another torch draw near from another direction . 

 " hey , " say Dick , " I smell treason . " 

 meanwhile , Sir Daniel have come to a full halt . the torch be stick into the sand , and the man lie down , as if to await the arrival of the other party . 

 this draw near at a good rate . it consist of four man only a pair of archer , a varlet with a link , and a cloak gentleman walk in their midst . 

 " be it you , my lord ? " cry Sir Daniel . 

 " it be I , indeed ; and if ever true knight give proof I be that man , " reply the leader of the second troop ; " for who would not rather face giant , sorcerer , or pagan , than this pinch cold ? " 

 " my lord , " return Sir Daniel , " beauty will be the more beholden , misdoubt it not . but shall we forth ? for the soon ye have see my merchandise , the soon shall we both get home . " 

 " but why keep ye she here , good knight ? " inquire the other . " an she be so young , and so fair , and so wealthy , why do ye not bring she forth among her mate ? Ye would soon make she a good marriage , and no need to freeze your finger and risk arrow - shot by go abroad at such untimely season in the dark . " 

 " I have tell you , my lord , " reply Sir Daniel , " the reason thereof concerneth I only . neither do I purpose to explain it far . suffice it , that if ye be weary of your old gossip , Daniel Brackley , publish it abroad that y be to we d Joanna Sedley , and I give you my word ye will be quit of he right soon . Ye will find he with an arrow in his back . " 

 meantime the two gentleman be walk briskly forward over the down ; the three torch go before they , stoop against the wind and scatter cloud of smoke and tuft of flame , and the rear bring up by the six archer . 

 close upon the heel of these , Dick follow . he have , of course , hear no word of this conversation ; but he have recognise in the second of the speaker old Lord Shoreby himself , a man of an infamous reputation , whom even Sir Daniel affect , in public , to condemn . 

 presently they come close down upon the beach . the air smell salt ; the noise of the surf increase ; and here , in a large walled garden , there stand a small house of two storey , with stable and other office . 

 the foremost torch - bearer unlock a door in the wall , and after the whole party have pass into the garden , again close and lock it on the other side . 

 Dick and his man be thus exclude from any far following , unless they should scale the wall and thus put their neck in a trap . 

 they sit down in a tuft of furze and wait . the red glow of the torch move up and down and to and fro within the enclosure , as if the link bearer steadily patrol the garden . 

 twenty minute pass , and then the whole party issue forth again upon the down ; and Sir Daniel and the baron , after an elaborate salutation , separate and turn severally homeward , each with his own following of man and light . 

 as soon as the sound of their step have be swallow by the wind , Dick get to his foot as briskly as he be able , for he be stiff and ache with the cold . 

 " Capper , ye will give I a back up , " he say . 

 they advance , all three , to the wall ; Capper stoop , and Dick , get upon his shoulder , clamber on to the cope - stone . 

 " now , Greensheve , " whisper Dick , " follow I up here ; lie flat upon your face , that ye may be the less see ; and be ever ready to give I a hand if I fall foully on the other side . " 

 and so say he drop into the garden . 

 it be all pitch dark ; there be no light in the house . the wind whistle shrill among the poor shrub , and the surf beat upon the beach ; there be no other sound . cautiously Dick foot it forth , stumble among bush , and grope with his hand ; and presently the crisp noise of gravel underfoot tell he that he have strike upon an alley . 

 here he pause , and take his crossbow from where he keep it conceal under his long tabard , he prepare it for instant action , and go forward once more with great resolution and assurance . the path lead he straight to the group of building . 

 all seem to be sorely dilapidate : the window of the house be secure by crazy shutter ; the stable be open and empty ; there be no hay in the hay - loft , no corn in the corn - box . any one would have suppose the place to be desert . but Dick have good reason to think otherwise . he continue his inspection , visit the office , try all the window . at length he come round to the sea - side of the house , and there , sure enough , there burn a pale light in one of the upper window . 

 he step back a little way , till he think he could see the movement of a shadow on the wall of the apartment . then he remember that , in the stable , his groping hand have rest for a moment on a ladder , and he return with all despatch to bring it . the ladder be very short , but yet , by stand on the topmost round , he could bring his hand as high as the iron bar of the window ; and seize these , he raise his body by main force until his eye command the interior of the room . 

 two person be within ; the first he readily know to be Dame Hatch ; the second , a tall and beautiful and grave young lady , in a long , embroider dress could that be Joanna Sedley ? his old wood - companion , Jack , whom he have think to punish with a belt ? 

 he drop back again to the top round of the ladder in a kind of amazement . he have never think of his sweetheart as of so superior a being , and he be instantly take with a feeling of diffidence . but he have little opportunity for thought . a low " Hist ! " sound from close by , and he hasten to descend the ladder . 

 " who go ? " he whisper . 

 " Greensheve , " come the reply , in tone similarly guard . 

 " what want ye ? " ask Dick . 

 " the house be watch , Master Shelton , " return the outlaw . " we be not alone to watch it ; for even as I lay on my belly on the wall I see man prowl in the dark , and hear they whistle softly one to the other . " 

 " by my sooth , " say Dick , " but this be pass strange ! be they not man of Sir Daniel s ? " 

 " Nay , sir , that they be not , " return Greensheve ; " for if I have eye in my head , every man - jack of they weareth I a white badge in his bonnet , something chequer with dark . " 

 " White , chequer with dark , " repeat Dick . " Faith , tis a badge I know not . it be none of this country s badge . well , an that be so , let we slip as quietly forth from this garden as we may ; for here we be in an evil posture for defence . beyond all question there be man of Sir Daniel s in that house , and to be take between two shot be a beggarman s position . take I this ladder ; I must leave it where I find it . " 

 they return the ladder to the stable , and grope their way to the place where they have enter . 

 Capper have take Greensheve s position on the cope , and now he lean down his hand , and , first one and then the other , pull they up . 

 cautiously and silently , they drop again upon the other side ; nor do they dare to speak until they have return to their old ambush in the gorse . 

 " now , John Capper , " say Dick , " back with you to Shoreby , even as for your life . bring I instantly what man ye can collect . here shall be the rendezvous ; or if the man be scatter and the day be near at hand before they muster , let the place be something far back , and by the entering in of the town . Greensheve and I lie here to watch . speed ye , John Capper , and the saint aid you to despatch . and now , Greensheve , " he continue , as soon as Capper have depart , " let thou and I go round about the garden in a wide circuit . I would fain see whether thine eye betray thee . " 

 keep well outward from the wall , and profit by every height and hollow , they pass about two side , behold nothing . on the third side the garden wall be build close upon the beach , and to preserve the distance necessary to their purpose , they have to go some way down upon the sand . although the tide be still pretty far out , the surf be so high , and the sand so flat , that at each breaker a great sheet of froth and water come career over the expanse , and Dick and Greensheve make this part of their inspection wading , now to the ankle , and now as deep as to the knee , in the salt and icy water of the German Ocean . 

 suddenly , against the comparative whiteness of the garden wall , the figure of a man be see , like a faint chinese shadow , violently signal with both arm . as he drop again to the earth , another arise a little far on and repeat the same performance . and so , like a silent watch word , these gesticulation make the round of the beleaguered garden . 

 " they keep good watch , " Dick whisper . 

 " let we back to land , good master , " answer Greensheve . " we stand here too open ; for , look ye , when the sea break heavy and white out there behind we , they shall see we plainly against the foam . " 

 " ye speak sooth , " return Dick . " ashore with we , right speedily . " 

 CHAPTER II a SKIRMISH in the dark 

 thoroughly drench and chill , the two adventurer return to their position in the gorse . 

 " I pray Heaven that Capper make good speed ! " say Dick . " I vow a candle to St. Mary of Shoreby if he come before the hour ! " 

 " Y be in a hurry , Master Dick ? " ask Greensheve . 

 " ay , good fellow , " answer Dick ; " for in that house lieth my lady , whom I love , and who should these be that lie about she secretly by night ? Unfriends , for sure ! " 

 " well , " return Greensheve , " an John come speedily , we shall give a good account of they . they be not two score at the outside I judge so by the spacing of their sentry and , take where they be , lie so widely , one score would scatter they like sparrow . and yet , Master Dick , an she be in Sir Daniel s power already , it will little hurt that she should change into another s. who should these be ? " 

 " I do suspect the Lord of Shoreby , " Dick reply . " when come they ? " 

 " they begin to come , Master Dick , " say Greensheve , " about the time ye cross the wall . I have not lain there the space of a minute ere I mark the first of the knave crawl round the corner . " 

 the last light have be already extinguish in the little house when they be wad in the wash of the breaker , and it be impossible to predict at what moment the lurk man about the garden wall might make their onslaught . of two evil , Dick prefer the least . he prefer that Joanna should remain under the guardianship of Sir Daniel rather than pass into the clutch of Lord Shoreby ; and his mind be make up , if the house should be assault , to come at once to the relief of the besieged . 

 but the time pass , and still there be no movement . from quarter of an hour to quarter of an hour the same signal pass about the garden wall , as if the leader desire to assure himself of the vigilance of his scattered follower ; but in every other particular the neighbourhood of the little house lie undisturbed . 

 presently Dick s reinforcement begin to arrive . the night be not yet old before nearly a score of man crouch beside he in the gorse . 

 separate these into two body , he take the command of the small himself , and entrust the large to the leadership of Greensheve . 

 " now , Kit , " say he to this last , " take I your man to the near angle of the garden wall upon the beach . post they strongly , and wait till that ye hear I fall on upon the other side . it be those upon the sea front that I would fain make certain of , for there will be the leader . the rest will run ; even let they . and now , lad , let no man draw an arrow ; ye will but hurt friend . take to the steel , and keep to the steel ; and if we have the uppermost , I promise every man of you a gold noble when I come to mine estate . " 

 out of the odd collection of broken man , thief , murderer , and ruin peasantry , whom Duckworth have gather together to serve the purpose of his revenge , some of the bold and the most experienced in war have volunteer to follow Richard Shelton . the service of watch Sir Daniel s movement in the town of Shoreby have from the first be irksome to their temper , and they have of late begin to grumble loudly and threaten to disperse . the prospect of a sharp encounter and possible spoil restore they to good humour , and they joyfully prepare for battle . 

 their long tabard throw aside , they appear , some in plain green jerkin , and some in stout leathern jack ; under their hood many wear bonnet strengthen by iron plate ; and , for offensive armour , sword , dagger , a few stout boar - spear , and a dozen of bright bill , put they in a posture to engage even regular feudal troop . the bow , quiver , and tabard be conceal among the gorse , and the two band set resolutely forward . 

 Dick , when he have reach the other side of the house , post his six man in a line , about twenty yard from the garden wall , and take position himself a few pace in front . then they all shout with one voice , and close upon the enemy . 

 these , lie widely scatter , stiff with cold , and take at unawares , spring stupidly to their foot , and stand undecided . before they have time to get their courage about they , or even to form an idea of the number and mettle of their assailant , a similar shout of onslaught sound in their ear from the far side of the enclosure . thereupon they give themselves up for lose and run . 

 in this way the two small troop of the man of the Black Arrow close upon the sea front of the garden wall , and take a part of the stranger , as it be , between two fire ; while the whole of the remainder run for their life in different direction , and be soon scatter in the darkness . 

 for all that , the fight be but begin . Dick s outlaw , although they have the advantage of the surprise , be still considerably outnumber by the man they have surround . the tide have flow , in the meanwhile ; the beach be narrow to a strip ; and on this wet field , between the surf and the garden wall , there begin , in the darkness , a doubtful , furious , and deadly contest . 

 the stranger be well armed ; they fall in silence upon their assailant ; and the affray become a series of single combat . Dick , who have come first into the mellay , be engage by three ; the first he cut down at the first blow , but the other two come upon he , hotly , he be fain to give ground before their onset . one of these two be a huge fellow , almost a giant for stature , and arm with a two - handed sword , which he brandish like a switch . against this opponent , with his reach of arm and the length and weight of his weapon , Dick and his bill be quite defenceless ; and have the other continue to join vigorously in the attack , the lad must have indubitably fall . this second man , however , less in stature and slow in his movement , pause for a moment to peer about he in the darkness , and to give ear to the sound of the battle . 

 the giant still pursue his advantage , and still Dick flee before he , spy for his chance . then the huge blade flash and descend , and the lad , leap on one side and run in , slash sideway and upwards with his bill . a roar of agony respond , and , before the wounded man could raise his formidable weapon , Dick , twice repeat his blow , have bring he to the ground . 

 the next moment he be engage , upon more equal term , with his second pursuer . here there be no great difference in size , and though the man , fight with sword and dagger against a bill , and be wary and quick of fence , have a certain superiority of arm , Dick more than make it up by his great agility on foot . neither at first gain any obvious advantage ; but the old man be still insensibly profiting by the ardour of the young to lead he where he would ; and presently Dick find that they have cross the whole width of the beach , and be now fight above the knee in the spume and bubble of the breaker . here his own superior activity be render useless ; he find himself more or less at the discretion of his foe ; yet a little , and he have his back turn upon his own man , and see that this adroit and skilful adversary be bent upon draw he far and far away . 

 Dick grind his tooth . he determine to decide the combat instantly ; and when the wash of the next wave have ebb and leave they dry , he rush in , catch a blow upon his bill , and leap right at the throat of his opponent . the man go down backwards , with Dick still upon the top of he ; and the next wave , speedily succeed to the last , bury he below a rush of water . 

 while he be still submerge , Dick force his dagger from his grasp , and rise to his foot , victorious . 

 " yield ye ! " he say . " I give you life . " 

 " I yield I , " say the other , get to his knee . " ye fight , like a young man , ignorantly and foolhardily ; but , by the array of the saint , ye fight bravely ! " 

 Dick turn to the beach . the combat be still rag doubtfully in the night ; over the hoarse roar of the breaker steel clang upon steel , and cry of pain and the shout of battle resound . 

 " lead I to your captain , youth , " say the conquer knight . " it be fit this butchery should cease . " 

 " Sir , " reply Dick , " so far as these brave fellow have a captain , the poor gentleman who here address you be he . " 

 " call off your dog , then , and I will bid my villain hold , " return the other . 

 there be something noble both in the voice and manner of his late opponent , and Dick instantly dismiss all fear of treachery . 

 " lay down your arm , man ! " cry the stranger knight . " I have yield I , upon promise of life . " 

 the tone of the stranger be one of absolute command , and almost instantly the din and confusion of the mellay cease . 

 " lawless , " cry Dick , " be ye safe ? " 

 " ay , " cry lawless , " safe and hearty . " 

 " light I the lantern , " say Dick . 

 " be not Sir Daniel here ? " inquire the knight . 

 " Sir Daniel ? " echo Dick . " now , by the rood , I pray not . it would go ill with I if he be . " 

 " Ill with you , fair sir ? " inquire the other . " Nay , then , if ye be not of Sir Daniel s party , I profess I comprehend no long . wherefore , then , fall ye upon mine ambush ? in what quarrel , my young and very fiery friend ? to what earthly purpose ? and , to make a clear end of questioning , to what good gentleman have I surrender ? " 

 but before Dick could answer , a voice speak in the darkness from close by . Dick could see the speaker s black and white badge , and the respectful salute which he address to his superior . 

 " my lord , " say he , " if these gentleman be unfriend to Sir Daniel , it be pity , indeed , we should have be at blow with they ; but it be tenfold great that either they or we should linger here . the watcher in the house unless they be all dead or deaf have hear our hammer this quarter - hour agone ; instantly they will have signal to the town ; and unless we be the lively in our departure , we be like to be take , both of we , by a fresh foe . " 

 " Hawksley be in the right , " add the lord . " how please ye , sir ? whither shall we march ? " 

 " Nay , my lord , " say Dick , " go where ye will for I . I do begin to suspect we have some ground of friendship , and if , indeed , I begin our acquaintance somewhat ruggedly , I would not churlishly continue . let we , then , separate , my lord , you lay your right hand in mine ; and at the hour and place that ye shall name , let we encounter and agree . " 

 " Y be too trustful , boy , " say the other ; " but this time your trust be not misplace . I will meet you at the point of day at St. Bride s Cross . come , lad , follow ! " 

 the stranger disappear from the scene with a rapidity that seem suspicious ; and , while the outlaws fall to the congenial task of rifle the dead body , Dick make once more the circuit of the garden wall to examine the front of the house . in a little upper loophole of the roof he behold a light set ; and as it would certainly be visible in town from the back window of Sir Daniel s mansion , he doubt not that this be the signal fear by Hawksley , and that ere long the lance of the Knight of Tunstall would arrive upon the scene . 

 he put his ear to the ground , and it seem to he as if he hear a jarring and hollow noise from townward . back to the beach he go hurry . but the work be already do ; the last body be disarm and strip to the skin , and four fellow be already wad seaward to commit it to the mercy of the deep . 

 a few minute later , when there debauch out of the near lane of Shoreby some two score horseman , hastily array and move at the gallop of their steed , the neighbourhood of the house beside the sea be entirely silent and deserted . 

 meanwhile , Dick and his man have return to the ale - house of the Goat and Bagpipes to snatch some hour of sleep before the morning tryst . 

 CHAPTER III ST . BRIDE S CROSS 

 St. Bride s cross stand a little way back from Shoreby , on the skirt of Tunstall Forest . two road meet : one , from Holywood across the forest ; one , that road from Risingham down which we see the wreck of a lancastrian army flee in disorder . here the two joined issue , and go on together down the hill to Shoreby ; and a little back from the point of junction , the summit of a little knoll be crown by the ancient and weather - beat cross . 

 here , then , about seven in the morning , Dick arrive . it be as cold as ever ; the earth be all grey and silver with the hoarfrost , and the day begin to break in the east with many colour of purple and orange . 

 Dick set he down upon the low step of the cross , wrap himself well in his tabard , and look vigilantly upon all side . he have not long to wait . down the road from Holywood a gentleman in very rich and bright armour , and wear over that a surcoat of the rare fur , come pace on a splendid charger . twenty yard behind he follow a clump of lance ; but these halt as soon as they come in view of the trysting - place , while the gentleman in the fur surcoat continue to advance alone . 

 his visor be raise , and show a countenance of great command and dignity , answerable to the richness of his attire and arm . and it be with some confusion of manner that Dick arise from the cross and step down the bank to meet his prisoner . 

 " I thank you , my lord , for your exactitude , " he say , loute very low . " will it please your lordship to set foot to earth ? " 

 " be ye here alone , young man ? " inquire the other . 

 " I be not so simple , " answer Dick ; " and , to be plain with your lordship , the wood upon either hand of this cross lie full of mine honest fellow lie on their weapon . " 

 " Y ave do wisely , " say the lord . " it pleaseth I the rather , since last night ye fight foolhardily , and more like a salvage saracen lunatic than any christian warrior . but it become not I to complain that have the undermost . " 

 " Ye have the undermost indeed , my lord , since ye so fall , " return Dick ; " but have the wave not holpen I , it be I that should have have the bad . Ye be pleased to make I yours with several dagger mark , which I still carry . and in fine , my lord , methink I have all the danger , as well as all the profit , of that little blind - man s mellay on the beach . " 

 " Y be shrewd enough to make light of it , I see , " return the stranger . 

 " Nay , my lord , not shrewd , " reply Dick , " in that I shoot at no advantage to myself . but when , by the light of this new day , I see how stout a knight hath yield , not to my arm alone , but to fortune , and the darkness , and the surf and how easily the battle have go otherwise , with a soldier so untried and rustic as myself think it not strange , my lord , if I feel confound with my victory . " 

 " ye speak well , " say the stranger . " your name ? " 

 " my name , an t like you , be Shelton , " answer Dick . 

 " man call I the Lord Foxham , " add the other . 

 " then , my lord , and under your good favour , ye be guardian to the sweetest maid in England , " reply Dick ; " and for your ransom , and the ransom of such as be take with you on the beach , there will be no uncertainty of term . I pray you , my lord , of your goodwill and charity , yield I the hand of my mistress , Joan Sedley ; and take ye , upon the other part , your liberty , the liberty of these your follower , and   if ye will have it   my gratitude and service till I die . " 

 " but be ye not ward to Sir Daniel ? Methought , if y be Harry Shelton s son , that I have hear it so report , " say Lord Foxham . 

 " will it please you , my lord , to alight ? I would fain tell you fully who I be , how situate , and why so bold in my demand . beseech you , my lord , take place upon these step , hear I to a full end , and judge I with allowance . " 

 and so say , Dick lend a hand to Lord Foxham to dismount ; lead he up the knoll to the cross ; instal he in the place where he have himself be sit ; and stand respectfully before his noble prisoner , relate the story of his fortune up to the event of the evening before . 

 Lord Foxham listen gravely , and when Dick have do , " Master Shelton , " he say , " ye be a most fortunate - unfortunate young gentleman ; but what fortune y ave have , that ye have amply merit ; and what unfortune , ye have noway deserve . be of a good cheer ; for ye have make a friend who be devoid neither of power nor favour . for yourself , although it fit not for a person of your birth to herd with outlaw , I must own ye be both brave and honourable ; very dangerous in battle , right courteous in peace ; a youth of excellent disposition and brave bearing . for your estate , ye will never see they till the world shall change again ; so long as Lancaster hath the strong hand , so long shall Sir Daniel enjoy they for his own . for my ward , it be another matter ; I have promise she before to a gentleman , a kinsman of my house , one Hamley ; the promise be old " 

 " ay , my lord , and now Sir Daniel hath promise she to my Lord Shoreby , " interrupt Dick . " and his promise , for all it be but young , be still the likeli to be make good . " 

 " tis the plain truth , " return his lordship . " and consider , moreover , that I be your prisoner , upon no well composition than my bare life , and over and above that , that the maiden be unhappily in other hand , I will so far consent . aid I with your good fellow " 

 " my lord , " cry Dick , " they be these same outlaw that ye blame I for consort with . " 

 " let they be what they will , they can fight , " return Lord Foxham . " help I , then ; and if between we we regain the maid , upon my knightly honour , she shall marry you ! " 

 Dick bend his knee before his prisoner ; but he , leap up lightly from the cross , catch the lad up and embrace he like a son . 

 " come , " he say , " an y be to marry Joan , we must be early friend . " 

 CHAPTER IV the good HOPE 

 an hour thereafter , Dick be back at the Goat and Bagpipes , break his fast , and receive the report of his messenger and sentry . Duckworth be still absent from Shoreby ; and this be frequently the case , for he play many part in the world , share many different interest , and conduct many various affair . he have found that fellowship of the Black Arrow , as a ruined man long for vengeance and money ; and yet among those who know he well , he be think to be the agent and emissary of the great king - maker of England , Richard , Earl of Warwick . 

 in his absence , at any rate , it fall upon Richard Shelton to command affair in Shoreby ; and , as he sit at meat , his mind be full of care , and his face heavy with consideration . it have be determine , between he and the Lord Foxham , to make one bold stroke that evening , and , by brute force , to set Joanna free . the obstacle , however , be many ; and as one after another of his scout arrive , each bring he more discomfortable news . 

 Sir Daniel be alarm by the skirmish of the night before . he have increase the garrison of the house in the garden ; but not content with that , he have station horseman in all the neighbouring lane , so that he might have instant word of any movement . meanwhile , in the court of his mansion , steed stand saddle , and the rider , arm at every point , await but the signal to ride . 

 the adventure of the night appear more and more difficult of execution , till suddenly Dick s countenance lighten . 

 " lawless ! " he cry , " you that be a shipman , can ye steal I a ship ? " 

 " Master Dick , " reply Lawless , " if ye would back I , I would agree to steal York Minster . " 

 presently after , these two set forth and descend to the harbour . it be a considerable basin , lie among sand hill , and surround with patch of down , ancient ruinous lumber , and tumble - down slum of the town . many deck ship and many open boat either lie there at anchor , or have be draw up on the beach . a long duration of bad weather have drive they from the high sea into the shelter of the port ; and the great trooping of black cloud , and the cold squall that follow one another , now with a sprinkling of dry snow , now in a mere swoop of wind , promise no improvement but rather threaten a more serious storm in the immediate future . 

 the seaman , in view of the cold and the wind , have for the most part slunk ashore , and be now roar and sing in the shoreside tavern . many of the ship already ride unguarde at their anchor ; and as the day wear on , and the weather offer no appearance of improvement , the number be continually be augment . it be to these deserted ship , and , above all , to those of they that lie far out , that Lawless direct his attention ; while Dick , seat upon an anchor that be half embed in the sand , and give ear , now to the rude , potent , and bode voice of the gale , and now to the hoarse singing of the shipman in a neighbour tavern , soon forget his immediate surrounding and concern in the agreeable recollection of Lord Foxham s promise . 

 he be disturb by a touch upon his shoulder . it be lawless , point to a small ship that lie somewhat by itself , and within but a little of the harbour mouth , where it heave regularly and smoothly on the enter swell . a pale gleam of winter sunshine fall , at that moment , on the vessel s deck , relieve she against a bank of scowl cloud ; and in this momentary glitter Dick could see a couple of man haul the skiff alongside . 

 " there , sir , " say lawless , " mark ye it well ! there be the ship for to - night . " 

 presently the skiff put out from the vessel s side , and the two man , keep her head well to the wind , pull lustily for shore . Lawless turn to a loiterer . 

 " how call ye she ? " he ask , point to the little vessel . 

 " they call she the Good Hope , of Dartmouth , " reply the loiterer . " her captain , Arblaster by name . he pulleth the bow oar in yon skiff . " 

 this be all that lawless want . hurriedly thank the man , he move round the shore to a certain sandy creek , for which the skiff be head . there he take up his position , and as soon as they be within earshot , open fire on the sailor of the Good Hope . 

 " what ! Gossip Arblaster ! " he cry . " why , ye be well meet ; nay , gossip , ye be right well meet , upon the rood ! and be that the Good Hope ? ay , I would know she among ten thousand ! a sweet shear , a sweet boat ! but marry come up , my gossip , will ye drink ? I have come into mine estate which doubtless ye remember to have hear on . I be now rich ; I have leave to sail upon the sea ; I do sail now , for the most part , upon spiced ale . come , fellow ; thy hand upon t ! come , drink with an old shipfellow ! " 

 Skipper Arblaster , a long - face , elderly , weather - beat man , with a knife hang about his neck by a plait cord , and for all the world like any modern seaman in his gait and bearing , have hang back in obvious amazement and distrust . but the name of an estate , and a certain air of tipsifie simplicity and good - fellowship which Lawless very well affect , combine to conquer his suspicious jealousy ; his countenance relaxed , and he at once extend his open hand and squeeze that of the outlaw in a formidable grasp . 

 " Nay , " he say , " I can not mind you . but what o that ? I would drink with any man , gossip , and so would my man Tom . Man Tom , " he add , address his follower , " here be my gossip , whose name I can not mind , but no doubt a very good seaman . let s go drink with he and his shore friend . " 

 Lawless lead the way , and they be soon seat in an alehouse , which , as it be very new , and stand in an exposed and solitary station , be less crowded than those near to the centre of the port . it be but a shed of timber , much like a blockhouse in the backwood of to - day , and be coarsely furnish with a press or two , a number of naked bench , and board set upon barrel to play the part of table . in the middle , and besiege by half a hundred violent draught , a fire of wreck - wood blaze and vomit thick smoke . 

 " ay , now , " say Lawless , " here be a shipman s joy a good fire and a good stiff cup ashore , with foul weather without and an off - sea gale a - snoring in the roof ! here s to the Good Hope ! may she ride easy ! " 

 " ay , " say Skipper Arblaster , " tis good weather to be ashore in , that be sooth . Man Tom , how say ye to that ? Gossip , ye speak well , though I can never think upon your name ; but ye speak very well . may the Good Hope ride easy ! amen ! " 

 " Friend Dickon , " resume Lawless , address his commander , " ye have certain matter on hand , unless I err ? well , prithee be about they incontinently . for here I be with the choice of all good company , two tough old shipman ; and till that ye return I will go warrant these brave fellow will bide here and drink I cup for cup . we be not like shore - man , we old , tough tarry - Johns ! " 

 " it be well mean , " return the skipper . " Ye can go , boy ; for I will keep your good friend and my good gossip company till curfew ay , and by St. Mary , till the sun get up again ! for , look ye , when a man hath be long enough at sea , the salt getteth I into the clay upon his bone ; and let he drink a draw - well , he will never be quench . " 

 thus encourage upon all hand , Dick rise , salute his company , and go forth again into the gusty afternoon , get he as speedily as he might to the Goat and bagpipe . thence he send word to my Lord Foxham that , so soon as ever the evening close , they would have a stout boat to keep the sea in . and then lead along with he a couple of outlaw who have some experience of the sea , he return himself to the harbour and the little sandy creek . 

 the skiff of the Good Hope lie among many other , from which it be easily distinguish by its extreme smallness and fragility . indeed , when Dick and his two man have take their place , and begin to put forth out of the creek into the open harbour , the little cockle dip into the swell and stagger under every gust of wind , like a thing upon the point of sink . 

 the Good Hope , as we have say , be anchor far out , where the swell be heavy . no other vessel lie near than several cable length ; those that be the near be themselves entirely desert ; and as the skiff approach , a thick flurry of snow and a sudden darkening of the weather far conceal the movement of the outlaws from all possible espial . in a trice they have leap upon the heaving deck , and the skiff be dance at the stern . the Good Hope be capture . 

 she be a good stout boat , deck in the bow and amidship , but open in the stern . she carry one mast , and be rig between a felucca and a lugger . it would seem that Skipper Arblaster have make an excellent venture , for the hold be full of piece of french wine ; and in the little cabin , besides the Virgin Mary in the bulkhead which prove the captain s piety , there be many lockfast chest and cupboard , which show he to be rich and careful . 

 a dog , who be the sole occupant of the vessel , furiously bark and bit the heel of the boarder ; but he be soon kick into the cabin , and the door shut upon his just resentment . a lamp be light and fix in the shroud to mark the vessel clearly from the shore ; one of the wine piece in the hold be broach , and a cup of excellent Gascony empty to the adventure of the evening ; and then , while one of the outlaws begin to get ready his bow and arrow and prepare to hold the ship against all comer , the other haul in the skiff and get overboard , where he hold on , wait for Dick . 

 " well , Jack , keep I a good watch , " say the young commander , prepare to follow his subordinate . " Ye will do right well . " 

 " why , " return Jack , " I shall do excellent well indeed , so long as we lie here ; but once we put the nose of this poor ship outside the harbour see , there she tremble ! Nay , the poor shrew hear the word , and the heart misgave she in her oak - tree rib . but look , Master Dick ! how black the weather gather ! " 

 the darkness ahead be , indeed , astonish . great billow heave up out of the blackness , one after another ; and one after another the Good Hope buoyantly climb , and giddily plunge upon the further side . a thin sprinkle of snow and thin flake of foam come fly , and powder the deck ; and the wind harp dismally among the rigging . 

 " in sooth , it looketh evilly , " say Dick . " but what cheer ! tis but a squall , and presently it will blow over . " but , in spite of his word , he be depressingly affect by the bleak disorder of the sky and the wail and fluting of the wind ; and as he get over the side of the Good Hope and make once more for the landing - creek with the good speed of oar , he cross himself devoutly , and recommend to Heaven the life of all who should adventure on the sea . 

 at the landing - creek there have already gather about a dozen of the outlaw . to these the skiff be leave , and they be bid embark without delay . 

 a little far up the beach Dick find Lord Foxham hurry in quest of he , his face conceal with a dark hood , and his bright armour cover by a long russet mantle of a poor appearance . 

 " Young Shelton , " he say , " be ye for sea , then , truly ? " 

 " my lord , " reply Richard , " they lie about the house with horseman ; it may not be reach from the land side without alarum ; and Sir Daniel once advertise of our adventure , we can no more carry it to a good end than , save your presence , we could ride upon the wind . now , in go round by sea , we do run some peril by the element ; but , what much outweighteth all , we have a chance to make good our purpose and bear off the maid . " 

 " well , " return Lord Foxham , " lead on . I will , in some sort , follow you for shame s sake ; but I own I would I be in bed . " 

 " here , then , " say Dick . " hither we go to fetch our pilot . " 

 and he lead the way to the rude alehouse where he have give rendezvous to a portion of his man . some of these he find linger round the door outside ; other have push more boldly in , and , choose place as near as possible to where they see their comrade , gather close about Lawless and the two shipman . these , to judge by the distempered countenance and cloudy eye , have long since go beyond the boundary of moderation ; and as Richard enter , closely follow by Lord Foxham , they be all three tune up an old , pitiful sea - ditty , to the chorus of the wailing of the gale . 

 the young leader cast a rapid glance about the shed . the fire have just be replenish , and give forth volume of black smoke , so that it be difficult to see clearly in the further corner . it be plain , however , that the outlaws very largely outnumber the remainder of the guest . satisfy upon this point , in case of any failure in the operation of his plan , Dick stride up to the table and resume his place upon the bench . 

 " Hey ? " cry the skipper , tipsily , " who be ye , hey ? " 

 " I want a word with you without , Master Arblaster , " return Dick ; " and here be what we shall talk of . " and he show he a gold noble in the glimmer of the firelight . 

 the shipman s eye burn , although he still fail to recognise our hero . 

 " ay , boy , " he say , " I be with you . Gossip , I will be back anon . drink fair , gossip ; " and , take Dick s arm to steady his uneven step , he walk to the door of the alehouse . 

 as soon as he be over the threshold , ten strong arm have seize and bind he ; and in two minute more , with his limb truss one to another , and a good gag in his mouth , he have be tumble neck and crop into a neighbour hay - barn . presently , his man Tom , similarly secure , be toss beside he , and the pair be leave to their uncouth reflection for the night . 

 and now , as the time for concealment have go by , Lord Foxham s follower be summon by a preconcerte signal , and the party , boldly take possession of as many boat as their number require , pull in a flotilla for the light in the rigging of the ship . long before the last man have climb to the deck of the Good Hope , the sound of furious shouting from the shore show that a part , at least , of the seaman have discover the loss of their skiff . 

 but it be now too late , whether for recovery or revenge . out of some forty fight man now muster in the steal ship , eight have be to sea , and could play the part of mariner . with the aid of these , a slice of sail be get upon she . the cable be cut . lawless , vacillate on his foot , and still shout the chorus of sea - ballad , take the long tiller in his hand : and the Good Hope begin to flit forward into the darkness of the night , and to face the great wave beyond the harbour bar . 

 Richard take his place beside the weather rigging . except for the ship s own lantern , and for some light in Shoreby town , that be already fade to leeward , the whole world of air be as black as in a pit . only from time to time , as the Good Hope swoop dizzily down into the valley of the roller , a crest would break a great cataract of snowy foam would leap in one instant into be and , in an instant more , would stream into the wake and vanish . 

 many of the man lie hold on and pray aloud ; many more be sick , and have creep into the bottom , where they sprawl among the cargo . and what with the extreme violence of the motion , and the continue drunken bravado of Lawless , still shout and sing at the helm , the stout heart on board may have nourish a shrewd misgive as to the result . 

 but Lawless , as if guide by an instinct , steer the ship across the breaker , strike the lee of a great sandbank , where they sail for awhile in smooth water , and presently after lay she alongside a rude , stone pier , where she be hastily make fast , and lie duck and grind in the dark . 

 CHAPTER V the good HOPE   continue 

 the pier be not far distant from the house in which Joanna lay ; it now only remain to get the man on shore , to surround the house with a strong party , burst in the door and carry off the captive . they might then regard themselves as do with the Good Hope ; it have place they on the rear of their enemy ; and the retreat , whether they should succeed or fail in the main enterprise , would be direct with a great measure of hope in the direction of the forest and my Lord Foxham s reserve . 

 to get the man on shore , however , be no easy task ; many have be sick , all be pierce with cold ; the promiscuity and disorder on board have shake their discipline ; the movement of the ship and the darkness of the night have cow their spirit . they make a rush upon the pier ; my lord , with his sword draw on his own retainer , must throw himself in front ; and this impulse of rabblement be not restrain without a certain clamour of voice , highly to be regret in the case . 

 when some degree of order have be restore , Dick , with a few choose man , set forth in advance . the darkness on shore , by contrast with the flashing of the surf , appear before he like a solid body ; and the howling and whistling of the gale drown any less noise . 

 he have scarce reach the end of the pier , however , when there fall a lull of the wind ; and in this he seem to hear on shore the hollow footing of horse and the clash of arm . check his immediate follower , he pass forward a step or two alone , even set foot upon the down ; and here he make sure he could detect the shape of man and horse move . a strong discouragement assail he . if their enemy be really on the watch , if they have beleaguer the shoreward end of the pier , he and Lord Foxham be take in a posture of very poor defence , the sea behind , the man jostle in the dark upon a narrow causeway . he give a cautious whistle , the signal previously agree upon . 

 it prove to be a signal far more than he desire . instantly there fall , through the black night , a shower of arrow send at a venture ; and so close be the man huddle on the pier that more than one be hit , and the arrow be answer with cry of both fear and pain . in this first discharge , Lord Foxham be strike down ; Hawksley have he carry on board again at once ; and his man , during the brief remainder of the skirmish , fight   when they fight at all   without guidance . that be perhaps the chief cause of the disaster which make haste to follow . 

 at the shore end of the pier , for perhaps a minute , Dick hold his own with a handful ; one or two be wound upon either side ; steel cross steel ; nor have there be the least signal of advantage , when in the twinkling of an eye the tide turn against the party from the ship . someone cry out that all be lose ; the man be in the very humour to lend an ear to a discomfortable counsel ; the cry be take up . " on board , lad , for your life ! " cry another . a third , with the true instinct of the coward , raise that inevitable report on all retreat : " we be betray ! " and in a moment the whole mass of man go surge and jostle backward down the pier , turn their defenceless back on their pursuer and pierce the night with craven outcry . 

 one coward thrust off the ship s stern , while another still hold she by the bow . the fugitive leap , scream , and be haul on board , or fall back and perish in the sea . some be cut down upon the pier by the pursuer . many be injure on the ship s deck in the blind haste and terror of the moment , one man leap upon another , and a third on both . at last , and whether by design or accident , the bow of the Good Hope be liberate ; and the ever - ready Lawless , who have maintain his place at the helm through all the hurly - burly by sheer strength of body and a liberal use of the cold steel , instantly clap she on the proper tack . the ship begin to move once more forward on the stormy sea , its scupper run blood , its deck heap with fall man , sprawl and struggle in the dark . 

 thereupon , Lawless sheathe his dagger , and turn to his next neighbour , " I have leave my mark on they , gossip , " say he , " the yelp , coward hound . " 

 now , while they be all leap and struggle for their life , the man have not appear to observe the rough shove and cut stab with which Lawless have hold his post in the confusion . but perhaps they have already begin to understand somewhat more clearly , or perhaps another ear have overhear , the helmsman s speech . 

 Panic - stricken troop recover slowly , and man who have just disgrace themselves by cowardice , as if to wipe out the memory of their fault , will sometimes run straight into the opposite extreme of insubordination . so it be now ; and the same man who have throw away their weapon and be haul , foot foremost , into the Good Hope , begin to cry out upon their leader , and demand that someone should be punish . 

 this grow ill - feeling turn upon lawless . 

 in order to get a proper offing , the old outlaw have put the head of the Good Hope to seaward . 

 " what ! " bawl one of the grumbler , " he carrieth we to seaward ! " 

 " Tis sooth , " cry another . " Nay , we be betray for sure . " 

 and they all begin to cry out in chorus that they be betray , and in shrill tone and with abominable oath bade Lawless go about - ship and bring they speedily ashore . lawless , grind his tooth , continue in silence to steer the true course , guide the Good Hope among the formidable billow . to their empty terror , as to their dishonourable threat , between drink and dignity he scorn to make reply . the malcontent draw together a little abaft the mast , and it be plain they be like barnyard cock , " crow for courage . " presently they would be fit for any extremity of injustice or ingratitude . Dick begin to mount by the ladder , eager to interpose ; but one of the outlaws , who be also something of a seaman , get beforehand . 

 " lad , " he begin , " y be right wooden head , I think . for to get back , by the mass , we must have an offing , must we not ? and this old lawless " 

 someone strike the speaker on the mouth , and the next moment , as a fire spring among dry straw , he be fell upon the deck , trample under the foot , and despatch by the dagger of his cowardly companion . at this the wrath of lawless rise and break . 

 " steer yourself , " he bellow , with a curse ; and , careless of the result , he leave the helm . 

 the Good Hope be , at that moment , tremble on the summit of a swell . she subside , with sicken velocity , upon the farth side . a wave , like a great black bulwark , hove immediately in front of she ; and , with a staggering blow , she plunge headforemost through that liquid hill . the green water pass right over she from stem to stern , as high as a man s knee ; the spray run high than the mast ; and she rise again upon the other side , with an appalling , tremulous indecision , like a beast that have be deadly wound . 

 six or seven of the malcontent have be carry bodily overboard ; and as for the remainder , when they find their tongue again , it be to bellow to the saint and wail upon lawless to come back and take the tiller . 

 nor do Lawless wait to be twice bid . the terrible result of his fling of just resentment sober he completely . he know , well than any one on board , how nearly the Good Hope have go bodily down below their foot ; and he could tell , by the laziness with which she meet the sea , that the peril be by no mean over . 

 Dick , who have be throw down by the concussion and half drown , rise wad to his knee in the swamp well of the stern , and creep to the old helmsman s side . 

 " lawless , " he say , " we do all depend on you ; y be a brave , steady man , indeed , and crafty in the management of ship ; I shall put three sure man to watch upon your safety . " 

 " Bootless , my master , bootless , " say the steersman , peer forward through the dark . " we come every moment somewhat clear of these sandbank ; with every moment , then , the sea packeth upon we heavy , and for all these whimperer , they will presently be on their back . for , my master , tis a right mystery , but true , there never yet be a bad man that be a good shipman . none but the honest and the bold can endure I this tossing of a ship . " 

 " Nay , Lawless , " say Dick , laugh , " that be a right shipman s byword , and hath no more of sense than the whistle of the wind . but , prithee , how go we ? do we lie well ? be we in good case ? " 

 " Master Shelton , " reply Lawless , " I have be a Grey Friar I praise fortune an archer , a thief , and a shipman . of all these coat , I have the good fancy to die in the Grey Friar s , as ye may readily conceive , and the least fancy to die in John Shipman s tarry jacket ; and that for two excellent good reason : first , that the death might take a man suddenly ; and second , for the horror of that great , salt smother and welter under my foot here " and Lawless stamp with his foot . " Howbeit , " he go on , " an I die not a sailor s death , and that this night , I shall owe a tall candle to our Lady . " 

 " be it so ? " ask Dick . 

 " it be right so , " reply the outlaw . " do ye not feel how heavy and dull she move upon the wave ? do ye not hear the water washing in her hold ? she will scarce mind the rudder even now . bide till she have settle a bit lower ; and she will either go down below your boot like a stone image , or drive ashore here , under our lee , and come all to piece like a twist of string . " 

 " ye speak with a good courage , " return Dick . " Ye be not then appal ? " 

 " why , master , " answer Lawless , " if ever a man have an ill crew to come to port with , it be I a renegade friar , a thief , and all the rest on t. Well , ye may wonder , but I keep a good hope in my wallet ; and if that I be to drown , I will drown with a bright eye , Master Shelton , and a steady hand . " 

 Dick return no answer ; but he be surprised to find the old vagabond of so resolute a temper , and fear some fresh violence or treachery , set forth upon his quest for three sure man . the great bulk of the man have now desert the deck , which be continually wet with the fly spray , and where they lie expose to the shrewdness of the winter wind . they have gather , instead , into the hold of the merchandise , among the butt of wine , and light by two swing lantern . 

 here a few keep up the form of revelry , and toast each other deep in Arblaster s Gascony wine . but as the Good Hope continue to tear through the smoking wave , and toss her stem and stern alternately high in air and deep into white foam , the number of these jolly companion diminish with every moment and with every lurch . many sit apart , tend their hurt , but the majority be already prostrate with sickness , and lie moaning in the bilge . 

 Greensheve , Cuckow , and a young fellow of Lord Foxham s whom Dick have already remark for his intelligence and spirit , be still , however , both fit to understand and willing to obey . these Dick set , as a body - guard , about the person of the steersman , and then , with a last look at the black sky and sea , he turn and go below into the cabin , whither Lord Foxham have be carry by his servant . 

 CHAPTER VI the good HOPE   conclude 

 the moan of the wounded baron blend with the wailing of the ship s dog . the poor animal , whether he be merely sick at heart to be separate from his friend , or whether he indeed recognise some peril in the labouring of the ship , raise his cry , like minute - gun , above the roar of wave and weather ; and the more superstitious of the man hear , in these sound , the knell of the Good Hope . 

 Lord Foxham have be lay in a berth upon a fur cloak . a little lamp burn dim before the Virgin in the bulkhead , and by its glimmer Dick could see the pale countenance and hollow eye of the hurt man . 

 " I be sore hurt , " say he . " come near to my side , young Shelton ; let there be one by I who , at least , be gentle bear ; for after have live nobly and richly all the day of my life , this be a sad pass that I should get my hurt in a little ferreting skirmish , and die here , in a foul , cold ship upon the sea , among broken man and churl . " 

 " Nay , my lord , " say Dick , " I pray rather to the saint that ye will recover you of your hurt , and come soon and sound ashore . " 

 " how ! " demand his lordship . " come sound ashore ? there be , then , a question of it ? " 

 " the ship laboureth the sea be grievous and contrary , " reply the lad ; " and by what I can learn of my fellow that steereth we , we shall do well , indeed , if we come dryshod to land . " 

 " ha ! " say the baron , gloomily , " thus shall every terror attend upon the passage of my soul ! Sir , pray rather to live hard , that ye may die easy , than to be fool and flute all through life , as to the pipe and tabor , and , in the last hour , be plunge among misfortune ! Howbeit , I have that upon my mind that must not be delay . we have no priest aboard ? " 

 " none , " reply Dick . 

 " here , then , to my secular interest , " resume Lord Foxham : " ye must be as good a friend to I dead , as I find you a gallant enemy when I be live . I fall in an evil hour for I , for England , and for they that trust I . my man be be bring by Hamley he that be your rival ; they will rendezvous in the long holm at Holywood ; this ring from off my finger will accredit you to represent mine order ; and I shall write , besides , two word upon this paper , bid Hamley yield to you the damsel . will he obey ? I know not . " 

 " but , my lord , what order ? " inquire Dick . 

 " ay , " quoth the baron , " ay the order ; " and he look upon Dick with hesitation . " be ye Lancaster or York ? " he ask , at length . 

 " I shame to say it , " answer Dick , " I can scarce clearly answer . but so much I think be certain : since I serve with Ellis Duckworth , I serve the house of York . well , if that be so , I declare for York . " 

 " it be well , " return the other ; " it be exceed well . for , truly , have ye say Lancaster , I wot not for the world what I have do . but sith ye be for York , follow I . I come hither but to watch these lord at Shoreby , while mine excellent young lord , Richard of Gloucester ,   1   prepareth a sufficient force to fall upon and scatter they . I have make I note of their strength , what watch they keep , and how they lie ; and these I be to deliver to my young lord on Sunday , an hour before noon , at St. Bride s Cross beside the forest . this tryst I be not like to keep , but I pray you , of courtesy , to keep it in my stead ; and see that not pleasure , nor pain , tempest , wound , nor pestilence withhold you from the hour and place , for the welfare of England lieth upon this cast . " 

 " I do soberly take this up on I , " say Dick . " in so far as in I lieth , your purpose shall be do . " 

 " it be good , " say the wound man . " my lord duke shall order you far , and if ye obey he with spirit and good will , then be your fortune make . give I the lamp a little near to mine eye , till that I write these word for you . " 

 he write a note " to his worshipful kinsman , Sir John Hamley ; " and then a second , which he - leave without external superscripture . 

 " this be for the duke , " he say . " the word be England and Edward , and the counter , England and York . " 

 " and Joanna , my lord ? " ask Dick . 

 " Nay , ye must get Joanna how ye can , " reply the baron . " I have name you for my choice in both these letter ; but ye must get she for yourself , boy . I have try , as ye see here before you , and have lose my life . More could no man do . " 

 by this time the wounded man begin to be very weary ; and Dick , put the precious paper in his bosom , bid he be of good cheer , and leave he to repose . 

 the day be begin to break , cold and blue , with fly squall of snow . close under the lee of the Good Hope , the coast lie in alternate rocky headland and sandy bay ; and far inland the woode hill - top of Tunstall show along the sky . both the wind and the sea have go down ; but the vessel wallow deep , and scarce rise upon the wave . 

 Lawless be still fix at the rudder ; and by this time nearly all the man have crawl on deck , and be now gaze , with blank face , upon the inhospitable coast . 

 " be we go ashore ? " ask Dick . 

 " ay , " say Lawless , " unless we get first to the bottom . " 

 and just then the ship rise so languidly to meet a sea , and the water welter so loudly in her hold , that Dick involuntarily seize the steersman by the arm . 

 " by the mass ! " cry Dick , as the bow of the Good Hope reappear above the foam , " I think we have founder , indeed ; my heart be at my throat . " 

 in the waist , Greensheve , Hawksley , and the well man of both company be busy break up the deck to build a raft ; and to these Dick join himself , work the hard to drown the memory of his predicament . but , even as he work , every sea that strike the poor ship , and every one of her dull lurch , as she tumble wallow among the wave , recall he with a horrid pang to the immediate proximity of death . 

 presently , look up from his work , he see that they be close in below a promontory ; a piece of ruinous cliff , against the base of which the sea break white and heavy , almost overplumbe the deck ; and , above that , again , a house appear , crown a down . 

 inside the bay the sea run gayly , raise the Good Hope upon their foam - fleck shoulder , carry she beyond the control of the steersman , and in a moment drop she , with a great concussion , on the sand , and begin to break over her half - mast high , and roll she to and fro . another great wave follow , raise she again , and carry she yet far in ; and then a third succeed , and leave she far inshore of the more dangerous breaker , wedge upon a bank . 

 " now , boy , " cry lawless , " the saint have have a care of we , indeed . the tide ebb ; let we but sit down and drink a cup of wine , and before half an hour ye may all march I ashore as safe as on a bridge . " 

 a barrel be broach , and , sit in what shelter they could find from the fly snow and spray , the shipwreck company hand the cup around , and seek to warm their body and restore their spirit . 

 Dick , meanwhile , return to Lord Foxham , who lie in great perplexity and fear , the floor of his cabin wash knee - deep in water , and the lamp , which have be his only light , break and extinguish by the violence of the blow . 

 " my lord , " say young Shelton , " fear not at all ; the saint be plainly for we ; the sea have cast we high upon a shoal , and as soon as the tide hath somewhat ebb , we may walk ashore upon our foot . " 

 it be nearly an hour before the vessel be sufficiently desert by the ebbing sea ; and they could set forth for the land , which appear dimly before they through a veil of drive snow . 

 upon a hillock on one side of their way a party of man lay huddle together , suspiciously observe the movement of the new arrival . 

 " they might draw near and offer we some comfort , " Dick remark . 

 " well , an they come not to we , let we even turn aside to they , " say Hawksley . " the soon we come to a good fire and a dry bed the well for my poor lord . " 

 but they have not move far in the direction of the hillock , before the man , with one consent , rise suddenly to their foot , and pour a flight of well - direct arrow on the shipwreck company . 

 " back ! back ! " cry his lordship . " Beware , in Heaven s name , that ye reply not . " 

 " Nay , " cry Greensheve , pull an arrow from his leather jack . " we be in no posture to fight , it be certain , be drench wet , dog - weary , and three - part frozen ; but , for the love of old England , what aileth they to shoot thus cruelly on their poor country people in distress ? " 

 " they take we to be french pirate , " answer Lord Foxham . " in these most troublesome and degenerate day we can not keep our own shore of England ; but our old enemy , whom we once chase on sea and land , do now range at pleasure , rob and slaughter and burn . it be the pity and reproach of this poor land . " 

 the man upon the hillock lay , closely observe they , while they trail upward from the beach and wound inland among desolate sand - hill ; for a mile or so they even hang upon the rear of the march , ready , at a sign , to pour another volley on the weary and dispirited fugitive ; and it be only when , strike at length upon a firm high - road , Dick begin to call his man to some more martial order , that these jealous guardian of the coast of England silently disappear among the snow . they have do what they desire ; they have protect their own home and farm , their own family and cattle ; and their private interest be thus secure , it matter not the weight of a straw to any one of they , although the frenchman should carry blood and fire to every other parish in the realm of England . 

 BOOK IV the DISGUISE 

 CHAPTER I the DEN 

 the place where Dick have strike the line of a high - road be not far from Holywood , and within nine or ten mile of Shoreby - on - the - Till ; and here , after make sure that they be pursue no long , the two body separate . Lord Foxham s follower depart , carry their wound master towards the comfort and security of the great abbey ; and Dick , as he see they wind away and disappear in the thick curtain of the fall snow , be leave alone with near upon a dozen outlaw , the last remainder of his troop of volunteer . 

 some be wound ; one and all be furious at their ill - success and long exposure ; and though they be now too cold and hungry to do more , they grumble and cast sullen look upon their leader . Dick empty his purse among they , leave himself nothing ; thank they for the courage they have display , though he could have find it more readily in his heart to rate they for poltroonery ; and have thus somewhat soften the effect of his prolonged misfortune , despatch they to find their way , either severally or in pair , to Shoreby and the Goat and Bagpipes . 

 for his own part , influence by what he have see on board of the Good Hope , he choose Lawless to be his companion on the walk . the snow be fall , without pause or variation , in one even , blind cloud ; the wind have be strangle , and now blow no long ; and the whole world be blot out and sheet down below that silent inundation . there be great danger of wander by the way and perish in drift ; and Lawless , keep half a step in front of his companion , and hold his head forward like a hunting dog upon the scent , inquire his way of every tree , and study out their path as though he be con a ship among danger . 

 about a mile into the forest they come to a place where several way meet , under a grove of lofty and contorted oak . even in the narrow horizon of the fall snow , it be a spot that could not fail to be recognise ; and lawless evidently recognise it with particular delight . 

 " now , Master Richard , " say he , " an y be not too proud to be the guest of a man who be neither a gentleman by birth nor so much as a good Christian , I can offer you a cup of wine and a good fire to melt the marrow in your frozen bone . " 

 " lead on , will , " answer Dick . " a cup of wine and a good fire ! Nay , I would go a far way round to see they . " 

 Lawless turn aside under the bare branch of the grove , and , walk resolutely forward for some time , come to a steepish hollow or den , that have now drift a quarter full of snow . on the verge , a great beech - tree hung , precariously rooted ; and here the old outlaw , pull aside some bushy underwood , bodily disappear into the earth . 

 the beech have , in some violent gale , be half - uproot , and have tear up a considerable stretch of turf and it be under this that old Lawless have dig out his forest hiding - place . the root serve he for rafter , the turf be his thatch ; for wall and floor he have his mother the earth . rude as it be , the hearth in one corner , blacken by fire , and the presence in another of a large oaken chest well fortify with iron , show it at one glance to be the den of a man , and not the burrow of a dig beast . 

 though the snow have drift at the mouth and sift in upon the floor of this earth cavern , yet be the air much warm than without ; and when Lawless have strike a spark , and the dry furze bush have begin to blaze and crackle on the hearth , the place assume , even to the eye , an air of comfort and of home . 

 with a sigh of great contentment , Lawless spread his broad hand before the fire , and seem to breathe the smoke . 

 " here , then , " he say , " be this old Lawless s rabbit - hole ; pray Heaven there come no terri ! far I have roll hither and thither , and here and about , since that I be fourteen year of mine age and first run away from mine abbey , with the sacrist s gold chain and a mass - book that I sell for four mark . I have be in England and France and Burgundy , and in Spain , too , on a pilgrimage for my poor soul ; and upon the sea , which be no man s country . but here be my place , Master Shelton . this be my native land , this burrow in the earth ! come rain or wind and whether it s April , and the bird all sing , and the blossom fall about my bed or whether it s winter , and I sit alone with my good gossip the fire , and robin red breast twitter in the wood here , be my church and market , and my wife and child . it s here I come back to , and it s here , so please the saint , that I would like to die . " 

 " tis a warm corner , to be sure , " reply Dick , " and a pleasant , and a well hid . " 

 " it have need to be , " return Lawless , " for an they find it , Master Shelton , it would break my heart . but here , " he add , burrow with his stout finger in the sandy floor , " here be my wine cellar ; and ye shall have a flask of excellent strong stingo . " 

 sure enough , after but a little digging , he produce a big leathern bottle of about a gallon , nearly three - part full of a very heady and sweet wine ; and when they have drunk to each other comradely , and the fire have be replenish and blaze up again , the pair lie at full length , thaw and steaming , and divinely warm . 

 " Master Shelton , " observe the outlaw , " y ave have two mischance this last while , and y be like to lose the maid do I take it aright ? " 

 " Aright ! " return Dick , nod his head . 

 " well , now , " continue lawless , " hear an old fool that hath be nigh - hand everything , and see nigh - hand all ! ye go too much on other people s errand , Master Dick . ye go on Ellis s ; but he desireth rather the death of Sir Daniel . ye go on Lord Foxham s ; well the saint preserve he ! doubtless he meaneth well . but go ye upon your own , good Dick . come right to the maid s side . court she , lest that she forget you . be ready ; and when the chance shall come , off with she at the saddle - bow . " 

 " ay , but , Lawless , beyond doubt she be now in Sir Daniel s own mansion . " answer Dick . 

 " Thither , then , go we , " reply the outlaw . 

 Dick star at he . 

 " Nay , I mean it , " nod Lawless . " and if y be of so little faith , and stumble at a word , see here ! " 

 and the outlaw , take a key from about his neck , open the oak chest , and dipping and groping deep among its content , produce first a friar s robe , and next a girdle of rope ; and then a huge rosary of wood , heavy enough to be count as a weapon . 

 " here , " he say , " be for you . on with they ! " 

 and then , when Dick have clothe himself in this clerical disguise , Lawless produce some colour and a pencil , and proceed , with the great cunning , to disguise his face . the eyebrow he thicken and produce ; to the moustache , which be yet hardly visible , he render a like service ; while , by a few line around the eye , he change the expression and increase the apparent age of this young monk . 

 " now , " he resume , " when I have do the like , we shall make as bonny a pair of friar as the eye could wish . boldly to Sir Daniel s we shall go , and there be hospitably welcome for the love of Mother Church . " 

 " and how , dear Lawless , " cry the lad , " shall I repay you ? " 

 " Tut , brother , " reply the outlaw , " I do naught but for my pleasure . mind not for I . I be one , by the mass , that mindeth for himself . when that I lack , I have a long tongue and a voice like the monastery bell I do ask , my son ; and where ask faileth , I do most usually take . " 

 the old rogue make a humorous grimace ; and although Dick be displeased to lie under so great favour to so equivocal a personage , he be yet unable to restrain his mirth . 

 with that , Lawless return to the big chest , and be soon similarly disguised ; but , below his gown , Dick wonder to observe he conceal a sheaf of black arrow . 

 " wherefore do ye that ? " ask the lad . " wherefore arrow , when ye take no bow ? " 

 " Nay , " reply lawless , lightly , " tis like there will be head break not to say back ere you and I win sound from where we re go to ; and if any fall , I would our fellowship should come by the credit on t. a black arrow , Master Dick , be the seal of our abbey ; it showeth you who writ the bill . " 

 " an ye prepare so carefully , " say Dick , " I have here some paper that , for mine own sake , and the interest of those that trust I , be well leave behind than find upon my body . where shall I conceal they , will ? " 

 " Nay , " reply Lawless , " I will go forth into the wood and whistle I three verse of a song ; meanwhile , do you bury they where ye please , and smooth the sand upon the place . " 

 " never ! " cry Richard . " I trust you , man . I be base indeed if I not trust you . " 

 " Brother , y be but a child , " reply the old outlaw , pause and turn his face upon Dick from the threshold of the den . " I be a kind old Christian , and no traitor to man s blood , and no sparer of mine own in a friend s jeopardy . but , fool , child , I be a thief by trade and birth and habit . if my bottle be empty and my mouth dry , I would rob you , dear child , as sure as I love , honour , and admire your part and person ! can it be clear speak ? no . " 

 and he stump forth through the bush with a snap of his big finger . 

 Dick , thus leave alone , after a wonder thought upon the inconsistency of his companion s character , hastily produce , review , and bury his paper . one only he reserve to carry along with he , since it in nowise compromise his friend , and yet might serve he , in a pinch , against Sir Daniel . that be the knight s own letter to Lord Wensleydale , send by Throgmorton , on the morrow of the defeat at Risingham , and find next day by Dick upon the body of the messenger . 

 then , tread down the ember of the fire , Dick leave the den , and rejoin the old outlaw , who stand await he under the leafless oak , and be already begin to be powder by the fall snow . each look upon the other , and each laugh , so thorough and so droll be the disguise . 

 " yet I would it be but summer and a clear day , " grumble the outlaw , " that I might see myself in the mirror of a pool . there be many of Sir Daniel s man that know I ; and if we fall to be recognise , there might be two word for you , brother , but as for I , in a paternoster while , I should be kick in a rope s - end . " 

 thus they set forth together along the road to Shoreby , which , in this part of its course , keep near along the margin or the forest , come forth , from time to time , in the open country , and pass beside poor folk house and small farm . 

 presently at sight of one of these , Lawless pull up . 

 " Brother Martin , " he say , in a voice capitally disguise , and suit to his monkish robe , " let we enter and seek alm from these poor sinner . pax vobiscum ! ay , " he add , in his own voice , " tis as I fear ; I have somewhat lose the whine of it ; and by your leave , good Master Shelton , ye must suffer I to practise in these country place , before that I risk my fat neck by enter Sir Daniel s. but look ye a little , what an excellent thing it be to be a Jack - of - all - trade ! an I have not be a shipman , ye have infallibly go down in the Good Hope ; an I have not be a thief , I could not have paint I your face ; and but that I have be a Grey Friar , and sing loud in the choir , and eat hearty at the board , I could not have carry this disguise , but the very dog would have spy we out and bark at we for sham . " 

 he be by this time close to the window of the farm , and he rise on his tip - toe and peep in . 

 " Nay , " he cry , " well and well . we shall here try our false face with a vengeance , and have a merry jest on Brother Capper to boot . " 

 and so say , he open the door and lead the way into the house . 

 three of their own company sit at the table , greedily eat . their dagger , stick beside they in the board , and the black and menacing look which they continue to shower upon the people of the house , prove that they owe their entertainment rather to force than favour . on the two monk , who now , with a sort of humble dignity , enter the kitchen of the farm , they seem to turn with a particular resentment ; and one it be John Capper in person who seem to play the lead part , instantly and rudely order they away . 

 " we want no beggar here ! " he cry . 

 but another although he be as far from recognise Dick and Lawless inclined to more moderate counsel . 

 " not so , " he cry . " we be strong man , and take ; these be weak , and crave ; but in the latter end these shall be uppermost and we below . mind he not , my father ; but come , drink of my cup , and give I a benediction . " 

 " Y be man of a light mind , carnal , and accurse , " say the monk . " now , may the saint forbid that ever I should drink with such companion ! but here , for the pity I bear to sinner , here I do leave you a blessed relic , the which , for your soul s interest , I bid you kiss and cherish . " 

 so far Lawless thunder upon they like a preaching friar ; but with these word he draw from under his robe a black arrow , toss it on the board in front of the three startled outlaw , turn in the same instant , and , take Dick along with he , be out of the room and out of sight among the fall snow before they have time to utter a word or move a finger . 

 " so , " he say , " we have prove our false face , Master Shelton . I will now adventure my poor carcase where ye please . " 

 " good ! " return Richard . " it irk I to be do . set we on for Shoreby ! " 

 CHAPTER II " in mine ENEMIES HOUSE " 

 Sir Daniel s residence in Shoreby be a tall , commodious , plastered mansion , frame in carven oak , and cover by a low - pitch roof of thatch . to the back there stretch a garden , full of fruit - tree , alley , and thick arbour , and overlook from the far end by the tower of the abbey church . 

 the house might contain , upon a pinch , the retinue of a great person than Sir Daniel ; but even now it be fill with hubbub . the court ring with arm and horseshoe - iron ; the kitchen roar with cookery like a bee -hive ; minstrel , and the player of instrument , and the cry of tumbler , sound from the hall . Sir Daniel , in his profusion , in the gaiety and gallantry of his establishment , rival with Lord Shoreby , and eclipse Lord Risingham . 

 all guest be make welcome . minstrel , tumbler , player of chess , the seller of relic , medicine , perfume , and enchantment , and along with these every sort of priest , friar , or pilgrim , be make welcome to the low table , and sleep together in the ample loft , or on the bare board of the long dining - hall . 

 on the afternoon follow the wreck of the Good Hope , the buttery , the kitchen , the stable , the cover cartshe that surround two side of the court , be all crowd by idle people , partly belong to Sir Daniel s establishment , and attire in his livery of murrey and blue , partly nondescript stranger attract to the town by greed , and receive by the knight through policy , and because it be the fashion of the time . 

 the snow , which still fall without interruption , the extreme chill of the air , and the approach of night , combine to keep they under shelter . wine , ale , and money be all plentiful ; many sprawled gambling in the straw of the barn , many be still drunken from the noontide meal . to the eye of a modern it would have look like the sack of a city ; to the eye of a contemporary it be like any other rich and noble household at a festive season . 

 two monk a young and an old have arrive late , and be now warm themselves at a bonfire in a corner of the shed . a mixed crowd surround they juggler , mountebank , and soldier ; and with these the elder of the two have soon engage so brisk a conversation , and exchange so many loud guffaw and country witticism , that the group momentarily increase in number . 

 the young companion , in whom the reader have already recognise Dick Shelton , sit from the first somewhat backward , and gradually draw himself away . he listen , indeed , closely , but he open not his mouth ; and by the grave expression of his countenance , he make but little account of his companion s pleasantry . 

 at last his eye , which travel continually to and fro , and keep a guard upon all the entrance of the house , light upon a little procession enter by the main gate and cross the court in an oblique direction . two lady , muffle in thick fur , lead the way , and be follow by a pair of waiting - woman and four stout man - at - arm . the next moment they have disappear within the house ; and Dick , slip through the crowd of loiterer in the shed , be already give hot pursuit . 

 " the taller of these twain be Lady Brackley , " he think ; " and where Lady Brackley be , Joan will not be far . " 

 at the door of the house the four man - at - arm have cease to follow , and the lady be now mount the stairway of polished oak , under no well escort than that of the two waiting - woman . Dick follow close behind . it be already the dusk of the day ; and in the house the darkness of the night have almost come . on the stair - landing , torch flare in iron holder ; down the long , tapestried corridor , a lamp burn by every door . and where the door stand open , Dick could look in upon arras - cover wall and rush - bescattere floor , glow in the light of the wood fire . 

 two floor be pass , and at every landing the young and short of the two lady have look back keenly at the monk . he , keep his eye lower , and affect the demure manner that suit his disguise , have but see she once , and be unaware that he have attract her attention . and now , on the third floor , the party separate , the young lady continue to ascend alone , the other , follow by the waiting - maid , descend the corridor to the right . 

 Dick mount with a swift foot , and hold to the corner , thrust forth his head and follow the three woman with his eye . without turn or look behind they , they continue to descend the corridor . 

 " it be right well , " think Dick . " let I but know my Lady Brackley s chamber , and it will go hard an I find not Dame Hatch upon an errand . " 

 and just then a hand be lay upon his shoulder , and , with a bound and a choke cry , he turn to grapple his assailant . 

 he be somewhat abash to find , in the person whom he have so roughly seize , the short young lady in the fur . she , on her part , be shock and terrify beyond expression , and hung tremble in his grasp . 

 " Madam , " say Dick , release she , " I cry you a thousand pardon ; but I have no eye behind , and , by the mass , I could not tell ye be a maid . " 

 the girl continue to look at he , but , by this time , terror begin to be succeed by surprise , and surprise by suspicion . Dick , who could read these change on her face , become alarmed for his own safety in that hostile house . 

 " fair maid , " he say , affect easiness , " suffer I to kiss your hand , in token ye forgive my roughness , and I will even go . " 

 " Y be a strange monk , young sir , " return the young lady , look he both boldly and shrewdly in the face ; " and now that my first astonishment hath somewhat pass away , I can spy the layman in each word you utter . what do ye here ? why be ye thus sacrilegiously trick out ? come ye in peace or war ? and why spy ye after Lady Brackley like a thief ? " 

 " Madam , " quoth Dick , " of one thing I pray you to be very sure : I be no thief . and even if I come here in war , as in some degree I do , I make no war upon fair maid , and I hereby entreat they to copy I so far , and to leave I be . for , indeed , fair mistress , cry out if such be your pleasure cry but once , and say what ye have see , and the poor gentleman before you be merely a dead man . I can not think ye would be cruel , " add Dick ; and take the girl s hand gently in both of his , he look at she with courteous admiration . 

 " be ye , then , a spy a Yorkist ? " ask the maid . 

 " Madam , " he reply , " I be indeed a Yorkist , and , in some sort , a spy . but that which bringeth I into this house , the same which will win for I the pity and interest of your kind heart , be neither of York nor Lancaster . I will wholly put my life in your discretion . I be a lover , and my name " 

 but here the young lady clap her hand suddenly upon Dick s mouth , look hastily up and down and east and west , and , see the coast clear , begin to drag the young man , with great strength and vehemence , up - stair . 

 " hush ! " she say , " and come ! shalt talk hereafter . " 

 somewhat bewilder , Dick suffer himself to be pull up - stair , bustle along a corridor , and thrust suddenly into a chamber , light , like so many of the other , by a blaze log upon the hearth . 

 " now , " say the young lady , force he down upon a stool , " sit ye there and attend my sovereign good pleasure . I have life and death over you , and I will not scruple to abuse my power . look to yourself ; y ave cruelly maul my arm . he know not I be a maid , quoth he ! have he know I be a maid , he have ta en his belt to I , forsooth ! " 

 and with these word , she whip out of the room and leave Dick gap with wonder , and not very sure if he be dream or awake . 

 " Ta en my belt to she ! " he repeat . " Ta en my belt to she ! " and the recollection of that evening in the forest flow back upon his mind , and he once more see Matcham s wince body and beseech eye . 

 and then he be recall to the danger of the present . in the next room he hear a stir , as of a person move ; then follow a sigh , which sound strangely near ; and then the rustle of skirt and tap of foot once more begin . as he stand hearken , he see the arra wave along the wall ; there be the sound of a door be open , the hanging divide , and , lamp in hand , Joanna Sedley enter the apartment . 

 she be attire in costly stuff of deep and warm colour , such as befit the winter and the snow . upon her head , her hair have be gather together and become she as a crown . and she , who have seem so little and so awkward in the attire of Matcham , be now tall like a young willow , and swam across the floor as though she scorn the drudgery of walk . 

 without a start , without a tremor , she raise her lamp and look at the young monk . 

 " what make ye here , good brother ? " she inquire . " Ye be doubtless ill - direct . whom do ye require ? and she set she lamp upon the bracket . 

 " Joanna , " say Dick ; and then his voice fail he . " Joanna , " he begin again , " ye say ye love I ; and the more fool I , but I believe it ! " 

 " Dick ! " she cry . " Dick ! " 

 and then , to the wonder of the lad , this beautiful and tall young lady make but one step of it , and throw her arm about his neck and give he a hundred kiss all in one . 

 " oh , the fool fellow ! " she cry . " oh , dear Dick ! oh , if ye could see yourself ! alack ! " she add , pause . " I have spoil you , Dick ! I have knock some of the paint off . but that can be mend . what can not be mend , Dick or I much fear it can not ! be my marriage with Lord Shoreby . " 

 " be it decide , then ? " ask the lad . 

 " to - morrow , before noon , Dick , in the abbey church , " she answer , " John Matcham and Joanna Sedley both shall come to a right miserable end . there be no help in tear , or I could weep mine eye out . I have not spar myself to pray , but Heaven frown on my petition . and , dear Dick good Dick but that ye can get I forth of this house before the morning , we must even kiss and say good - bye . " 

 " Nay , " say Dick , " not I ; I will never say that word . tis like despair ; but while there s life , Joanna , there be hope . yet will I hope . ay , by the mass , and triumph ! look ye , now , when ye be but a name to I , do I not follow do I not rouse good man do I not stake my life upon the quarrel ? and now that I have see you for what ye be the fair maid and stateliest of England think ye I would turn ? if the deep sea be there , I would straight through it ; if the way be full of lion , I would scatter they like mouse . " 

 " ay , " she say , dryly , " ye make a great ado about a sky - blue robe ! " 

 " Nay , Joan , " protest Dick , " tis not alone the robe . but , lass , ye be disguise . here be I disguised ; and , to the proof , do I not cut a figure of fun a right fool s figure ? " 

 " ay , Dick , an that ye do ! " she answer , smile . 

 " well , then ! " he return , triumphant . " so be it with you , poor Matcham , in the forest . in sooth , ye be a wench to laugh at . but now ! " 

 so they run on , hold each other by both hand , exchange smile and lovely look , and melt minute into second ; and so they might have continue all night long . but presently there be a noise behind they ; and they be aware of the short young lady , with her finger on her lip . 

 " saint ! " she cry , " but what a noise ye keep ! can ye not speak in compass ? and now , Joanna , my fair maid of the wood , what will ye give your gossip for bring you your sweetheart ? " 

 Joanna run to she , by way of answer , and embrace she fierily . 

 " and you , sir , " add the young lady , " what do ye give I ? " 

 " Madam , " say Dick , " I would fain offer to pay you in the same money . " 

 " come , then , " say the lady , " it be permit you . " 

 but Dick , blush like a peony , only kiss her hand . 

 " what ail ye at my face , fair sir ? " she inquire , curtsey to the very ground ; and then , when Dick have at length and most tepidly embrace she , " Joanna , " she add , " your sweetheart be very backward under your eye ; but I warrant you , when first we meet he be more ready . I be all black and blue , wench ; trust I never , if I be not black and blue ! and now , " she continue , " have ye say your saying ? for I must speedily dismiss the paladin . " 

 but at this they both cry out that they have say nothing , that the night be still very young , and that they would not be separate so early . 

 " and supper ? " ask the young lady . " must we not go down to supper ? " 

 " Nay , to be sure ! " cry Joan . " I have forget . " 

 " hide I , then , " say Dick , " put I behind the arra , shut I in a chest , or what ye will , so that I may be here on your return . indeed , fair lady , " he add , " bear this in mind , that we be sore best , and may never look upon each other s face from this night forward till we die . " 

 at this the young lady melt ; and when , a little after , the bell summon Sir Daniel s household to the board , Dick be plant very stiffly against the wall , at a place where a division in the tapestry permit he to breathe the more freely , and even to see into the room . 

 he have not be long in this position , when he be somewhat strangely disturbed . the silence , in that upper storey of the house , be only break by the flickering of the flame and the hiss of a green log in the chimney ; but presently , to Dick s strained hearing , there come the sound of some one walk with extreme precaution ; and soon after the door open , and a little black - faced , dwarfish fellow , in Lord Shoreby s colour , push first his head , and then his crooked body , into the chamber . his mouth be open , as though to hear the well ; and his eye , which be very bright , flit restlessly and swiftly to and fro . he go round and round the room , strike here and there upon the hanging ; but Dick , by a miracle , escape his notice . then he look below the furniture , and examine the lamp ; and , at last , with an air of cruel disappointment , be prepare to go away as silently as he have come , when down he drop upon his knee , pick up something from among the rush on the floor , examine it , and , with every signal of delight , conceal it in the wallet at his belt . 

 Dick s heart sink , for the object in question be a tassel from his own girdle ; and it be plain to he that this dwarfish spy , who take a malign delight in his employment , would lose no time in bear it to his master , the baron . he be half - tempt to throw aside the arra , fall upon the scoundrel , and , at the risk of his life , remove the telltale token . and while he be still hesitate , a new cause of concern be add . a voice , hoarse and break by drink , begin to be audible from the stair ; and presently after , uneven , wandering , and heavy footstep sound without along the passage . 

 " what make ye here , my merry man , among the greenwood shaw ? " sing the voice . " what make ye here ? hey ! sot , what make ye here ? " it add , with a rattle of drunken laughter ; and then , once more break into song : 

 " if ye should drink the clary wine , 
 Fat Friar John , ye friend o mine 
 if I should eat , and ye should drink , 
 who shall sing the mass , d ye think ? " 

 lawless , alas ! roll drunk , be wander the house , seek for a corner wherein to slumber off the effect of his potation . Dick inwardly rag . the spy , at first terrify , have grow reassure as he find he have to deal with an intoxicated man , and now , with a movement of cat - like rapidity , slip from the chamber , and be go from Richard s eye . 

 what be to be do ? if he lose touch of Lawless for the night , he be leave impotent , whether to plan or carry forth Joanna s rescue . if , on the other hand , he dare to address the drunken outlaw , the spy might still be linger within sight , and the most fatal consequence ensue . 

 it be , nevertheless , upon this last hazard that Dick decide . slip from behind the tapestry , he stand ready in the doorway of the chamber , with a warn hand upraise . lawless , flushed crimson , with his eye inject , vacillate on his foot , draw still unsteadily nearer . at last he hazily catch sight of his commander , and , in despite of Dick s imperious signal , hail he instantly and loudly by his name . 

 Dick leap upon and shake the drunkard furiously . 

 " Beast ! " he hiss " beast and no man ! it be bad than treachery to be so witless . we may all be shent for thy sotting . " 

 but Lawless only laugh and stagger , and try to clap young Shelton on the back . 

 and just then Dick s quick ear catch a rapid brushing in the arra . he leap towards the sound , and the next moment a piece of the wall - hanging have be tear down , and Dick and the spy be sprawl together in its fold . over and over they roll , grapple for each other s throat , and still baffle by the arra , and still silent in their deadly fury . but Dick be by much the strong , and soon the spy lie prostrate under his knee , and , with a single stroke of the long poniard , cease to breathe . 

 CHAPTER III the dead spy 

 throughout this furious and rapid passage , Lawless have look on helplessly , and even when all be over , and Dick , already re - arisen to his foot , be listen with the most passionate attention to the distant bustle in the low storey of the house , the old outlaw be still waver on his leg like a shrub in a breeze of wind , and still stupidly star on the face of the dead man . 

 " it be well , " say Dick , at length ; " they have not hear we , praise the saint ! but , now , what shall I do with this poor spy ? at least , I will take my tassel from his wallet . " 

 so say , Dick open the wallet ; within he find a few piece of money , the tassel , and a letter address to Lord Wensleydale , and seal with my Lord Shoreby s seal . the name awake Dick s recollection ; and he instantly break the wax and read the content of the letter . it be short , but , to Dick s delight , it give evident proof that Lord Shoreby be treacherously correspond with the House of York . 

 the young fellow usually carry his ink - horn and implement about he , and so now , bend a knee beside the body of the dead spy , he be able to write these word upon a corner of the paper : 

 my Lord of Shoreby , ye that writt the letter , wot ye why your man be de ? but let I rede you , marry not . 

 Jon Amend - All . 

 he lay this paper on the breast of the corpse ; and then Lawless , who have be look on upon these last manoeuvre with some flicker return of intelligence , suddenly draw a black arrow from below his robe , and therewith pin the paper in its place . the sight of this disrespect , or , as it almost seem , cruelty to the dead , draw a cry of horror from young Shelton ; but the old outlaw only laugh . 

 " Nay , I will have the credit for mine order , " he hiccup . " my jolly boy must have the credit on t the credit , brother ; " and then , shut his eye tight and open his mouth like a precentor , he begin to thunder , in a formidable voice : 

 " if ye should drink the clary wine " 

 " peace , sot ! " cry Dick , and thrust he hard against the wall . " in two word if so be that such a man can understand I who hath more wine than wit in he in two word , and , a - Mary s name , begone out of this house , where , if ye continue to abide , ye will not only hang yourself , but I also ! faith , then , up foot ! be yare , or , by the mass , I may forget that I be in some sort your captain and in some your debtor ! go ! " 

 the sham monk be now , in some degree , recover the use of his intelligence ; and the ring in Dick s voice , and the glitter in Dick s eye , stamp home the meaning of his word . 

 " by the mass , " cry lawless , " an I be not want , I can go ; " and he turn tipsily along the corridor and proceed to flounder down - stair , lurch against the wall . 

 so soon as he be out of sight , Dick return to his hiding - place , resolutely fix to see the matter out . Wisdom , indeed , move he to be go ; but love and curiosity be strong . 

 Time pass slowly for the young man , bolt upright behind the arra . the fire in the room begin to die down , and the lamp to burn low and to smoke . and still there be no word of the return of any one to these upper quarter of the house ; still the faint hum and clatter of the supper party sound from far below ; and still , under the thick fall of the snow , Shoreby town lie silent upon every side . 

 at length , however , foot and voice begin to draw near upon the stair ; and presently after several of Sir Daniel s guest arrive upon the landing , and , turn down the corridor , beheld the tear arra and the body of the spy . 

 some run forward and some back , and all together begin to cry aloud . 

 at the sound of their cry , guest , man - at - arm , lady , servant , and , in a word , all the inhabitant of that great house , come fly from every direction , and begin to join their voice to the tumult . 

 soon a way be clear , and Sir Daniel come forth in person , follow by the bridegroom of the morrow , my Lord Shoreby . 

 " my lord , " say Sir Daniel , " have I not tell you of this knave Black Arrow ? to the proof , behold it ! there it stand , and , by the rood , my gossip , in a man of your , or one that steal your colour ! " 

 " in good sooth , it be a man of mine , " reply Lord Shoreby , hang back . " I would I have more such . he be keen as a beagle and secret as a mole . " 

 " ay , gossip , truly ? " ask Sir Daniel , keenly . " and what come he smell up so many stair in my poor mansion ? but he will smell no more . " 

 " an t please you , Sir Daniel , " say one , " here be a paper write upon with some matter , pin upon his breast . " 

 " give it I , arrow and all , " say the knight . and when he have take into his hand the shaft , he continue for some time to gaze upon it in a sullen musing . " ay , " he say , address Lord Shoreby , " here be a hate that followeth hard and close upon my heel . this black stick , or its just likeness , shall yet bring I down . and , gossip , suffer a plain knight to counsel you ; and if these hound begin to wind you , flee ! tis like a sickness it still hangeth , hangeth upon the limb . but let we see what they have write . it be as I think , my lord ; y be mark , like an old oak , by the woodman ; to - morrow or next day , by will come the axe . but what write ye in a letter ? " 

 Lord Shoreby snatch the paper from the arrow , read it , crumple it between his hand , and , overcome the reluctance which have hitherto withhold he from approach , throw himself on his knee beside the body and eagerly grope in the wallet . 

 he rise to his foot with a somewhat unsettled countenance . 

 " Gossip , " he say , " I have indeed lose a letter here that much import ; and could I lay my hand upon the knave that take it , he should incontinently grace a halter . but let we , first of all , secure the issue of the house . here be enough harm already , by St. George ! " 

 sentinel be post close around the house and garden ; a sentinel on every landing of the stair , a whole troop in the main entrance - hall ; and yet another about the bonfire in the shed . Sir Daniel s follower be supplement by Lord Shoreby s ; there be thus no lack of man or weapon to make the house secure , or to entrap a lurk enemy , should one be there . 

 meanwhile , the body of the spy be carry out through the fall snow and deposit in the abbey church . 

 it be not until these disposition have be take , and all have return to a decorous silence , that the two girl draw Richard Shelton from his place of concealment , and make a full report to he of what have pass . he , upon his side , recount the visit of the spy , his dangerous discovery , and speedy end . 

 Joanna lean back very faint against the curtain wall . 

 " it will avail but little , " she say . " I shall be we d to - morrow , in the morning , after all ! " 

 " what ! " cry her friend . " and here be our paladin that driveth lion like mouse ! ye have little faith , of a surety . but come , friend lion - driver , give we some comfort ; speak , and let we hear bold counsel . " 

 Dick be confound to be thus outface with his own exaggerated word ; but though he colour , he still speak stoutly . 

 " truly , " say he , " we be in strait . yet , could I but win out of this house for half an hour , I do honestly tell myself that all might still go well ; and for the marriage , it should be prevent . " 

 " and for the lion , " mimic the girl , " they shall be drive . " 

 " I crave your excuse , " say Dick . " I speak not now in any boasting humour , but rather as one inquire after help or counsel ; for if I get not forth of this house and through these sentinel , I can do less than naught . take I , I pray you , rightly . " 

 " why say ye he be rustic , Joan ? " the girl inquire . " I warrant he hath a tongue in his head ; ready , soft , and bold be his speech at pleasure . what would ye more ? " 

 " Nay , " sigh Joanna , with a smile , " they have change I my friend Dick , tis sure enough . when I behold he , he be rough indeed . but it matter little ; there be no help for my hard case , and I must still be Lady Shoreby ! " 

 " Nay , then , " say Dick , " I will even make the adventure . a friar be not much regard ; and if I find a good fairy to lead I up , I may find another belike to carry I down . how call they the name of this spy ? " 

 " rutter , " say the young lady ; " and an excellent good name to call he by . but how mean ye , lion - driver ? what be in your mind to do ? " 

 " to offer boldly to go forth , " return Dick ; " and if any stop I , to keep an unchanged countenance , and say I go to pray for Rutter . they will be pray over his poor clay even now . " 

 " the device be somewhat simple , " reply the girl , " yet it may hold . " 

 " Nay , " say young Shelton , " it be no device , but mere boldness , which serveth often well in great strait . " 

 " ye say true , " she say . " well , go , a - Mary s name , and may Heaven speed you ! ye leave here a poor maid that love you entirely , and another that be most heartily your friend . be wary , for their sake , and make not shipwreck of your safety . " 

 " ay , " add Joanna , " go , Dick . ye run no more peril , whether ye go or stay . go ; ye take my heart with you ; the saint defend you ! " 

 Dick pass the first sentry with so assure a countenance that the fellow merely figeted and stared ; but at the second landing the man carry his spear across and bid he name his business . 

 " pax vobiscum , " answer Dick . " I go to pray over the body of this poor rutter . " 

 " like enough , " return the sentry ; " but to go alone be not permit you . " he lean over the oaken baluster and whistle shrill . " one cometh ! " he cry ; and then motion Dick to pass . 

 at the foot of the stair he find the guard afoot and await his arrival ; and when he have once more repeat his story , the commander of the post order four man out to accompany he to the church . 

 " let he not slip , my lad , " he say . " bring he to Sir Oliver , on your life ! " 

 the door be then open ; one of the man take Dick by either arm , another march ahead with a link , and the fourth , with bent bow and the arrow on the string , bring up the rear . in this order they proceed through the garden , under the thick darkness of the night and the scatter snow , and draw near to the dimly - illuminate window of the abbey church . 

 at the western portal a picket of archer stand , take what shelter they could find in the hollow of the arched doorway , and all powder with the snow ; and it be not until Dick s conductor have exchange a word with these , that they be suffer to pass forth and enter the nave of the sacred edifice . 

 the church be doubtfully light by the taper upon the great altar , and by a lamp or two that swing from the arched roof before the private chapel of illustrious family . in the midst of the choir the dead spy lay , his limb piously compose , upon a bi . 

 a hurried mutter of prayer sound along the arch ; cowl figure kneel in the stall of the choir , and on the step of the high altar a priest in pontifical vestment celebrate mass . 

 upon this fresh entrance , one of the cowl figure arise , and , come down the step which elevate the level of the choir above that of the nave , demand from the leader of the four man what business bring he to the church . out of respect for the service and the dead , they speak in guard tone ; but the echo of that huge , empty building catch up their word , and hollowly repeat and repeat they along the aisle . 

 " a monk ! " return Sir Oliver   for he it be , when he have hear the report of the archer . " my brother , I look not for your coming , " he add , turn to young Shelton . " in all civility , who be ye ? and at whose instance do ye join your supplication to our ? " 

 Dick , keep his cowl about his face , sign to Sir Oliver to move a pace or two aside from the archer ; and , so soon as the priest have do so , " I can not hope to deceive you , sir , " he say . " my life be in your hand . " 

 Sir Oliver violently start ; his stout cheek grow pale , and for a space he be silent . 

 " Richard , " he say , " what bring you here , I know not ; but I much misdoubt it to be evil . nevertheless , for the kindness that be , I would not willingly deliver you to harm . ye shall sit all night beside I in the stall : ye shall sit there till my Lord of Shoreby be marry , and the party go safe home ; and if all goeth well , and ye have plan no evil , in the end ye shall go whither ye will . but if your purpose be bloody , it shall return upon your head . amen ! " 

 and the priest devoutly cross himself , and turn and loute to the altar . 

 with that , he speak a few word more to the soldier , and take Dick by the hand , lead he up to the choir , and place he in the stall beside his own , where , for mere decency , the lad have instantly to kneel and appear to be busy with his devotion . 

 his mind and his eye , however , be continually wandering . three of the soldier , he observe , instead of return to the house , have get they quietly into a point of vantage in the aisle ; and he could not doubt that they have do so by Sir Oliver s command . here , then , he be trap . here he must spend the night in the ghostly glimmer and shadow of the church , and look on the pale face of he he slay ; and here , in the morning , he must see his sweetheart marry to another man before his eye . 

 but , for all that , he obtain a command upon his mind , and build himself up in patience to await the issue . 

 CHAPTER IV in the ABBEY CHURCH 

 in Shoreby Abbey Church the prayer be keep up all night without cessation , now with the singing of psalm , now with a note or two upon the bell . 

 Rutter , the spy , be nobly wake . there he lay , meanwhile , as they have arrange he , his dead hand cross upon his bosom , his dead eye star on the roof ; and hard by , in the stall , the lad who have slay he wait , in sore disquietude , the coming of the morning . 

 once only , in the course of the hour , Sir Oliver lean across to his captive . 

 " Richard , " he whisper , " my son , if ye mean I evil , I will certify , on my soul s welfare , ye design upon an innocent man . sinful in the eye of Heaven I do declare myself ; but sinful as against you I be not , neither have be ever . " 

 " my father , " return Dick , in the same tone of voice , " trust I , I design nothing ; but as for your innocence , I may not forget that ye clear yourself but lamely . " 

 " a man may be innocently guilty , " reply the priest . " he may be set blindfold upon a mission , ignorant of its true scope . so it be with I . I do decoy your father to his death ; but as Heaven see we in this sacred place , I know not what I do . " 

 " it may be , " return Dick . " but see what a strange web ye have weave , that I should be , at this hour , at once your prisoner and your judge ; that ye should both threaten my day and deprecate my anger . methink , if ye have be all your life a true man and good priest , ye would neither thus fear nor thus det I . and now to your prayer . I do obey you , since need must ; but I will not be burthen with your company . " 

 the priest utter a sigh so heavy that it have almost touch the lad into some sentiment of pity , and he bow his head upon his hand like a man bear down below a weight of care . he join no long in the psalm ; but Dick could hear the bead rattle through his finger and the prayer a - pattering between his tooth . 

 yet a little , and the grey of the morning begin to struggle through the paint casement of the church , and to put to shame the glimmer of the taper . the light slowly broaden and brighten , and presently through the south - eastern clerestory a flush of rosy sunlight flicker on the wall . the storm be over ; the great cloud have disburden their snow and flee far on , and the new day be break on a merry winter landscape sheathe in white . 

 a bustle of church officer follow ; the bi be carry forth to the deadhouse , and the stain of blood be cleanse from off the tile , that no such ill - omen spectacle should disgrace the marriage of Lord Shoreby . at the same time , the very ecclesiastic who have be so dismally engage all night begin to put on morning face , to do honour to the merry ceremony which be about to follow . and far to announce the coming of the day , the pious of the town begin to assemble and fall to prayer before their favourite shrine , or wait their turn at the confessional . 

 favour by this stir , it be of course easily possible for any man to avoid the vigilance of Sir Daniel s sentry at the door ; and presently Dick , look about he wearily , catch the eye of no less a person than will Lawless , still in his monk s habit . 

 the outlaw , at the same moment , recognise his leader , and privily sign to he with hand and eye . 

 now , Dick be far from have forgive the old rogue his most untimely drunkenness , but he have no desire to involve he in his own predicament ; and he signal back to he , as plain as he be able , to begone . 

 lawless , as though he have understand , disappear at once behind a pillar , and Dick breathe again . 

 what , then , be his dismay to feel himself pluck by the sleeve and to find the old robber instal beside he , upon the next seat , and , to all appearance , plunge in his devotion ! 

 instantly Sir Oliver arise from his place , and , glide behind the stall , make for the soldier in the aisle . if the priest s suspicion have be so lightly waken , the harm be already do , and Lawless a prisoner in the church . 

 " move not , " whisper Dick . " we be in the plagui pass , thank , before all thing , to thy swinishness of yestereven . when ye see I here , so strangely seat where I have neither right nor interest , what a murrain I could ye not smell harm and get ye go from evil ? " 

 " Nay , " return Lawless , " I think ye have hear from Ellis , and be here on duty . " 

 " Ellis ! " echo Dick . " be Ellis , then , return ? 

 " for sure , " reply the outlaw . " he come last night , and belt I sore for be in wine so there ye be avenge , my master . a furious man be Ellis Duckworth ! he hath ride I hot - spur from Craven to prevent this marriage ; and , Master Dick , ye know the way of he do so he will ! " 

 " Nay , then , " return Dick , with composure , " you and I , my poor brother , be dead man ; for I sit here a prisoner upon suspicion , and my neck be to answer for this very marriage that he purposeth to mar . I have a fair choice , by the rood ! to lose my sweetheart or else lose my life ! well , the cast be throw it be to be my life . " 

 " by the mass , " cry lawless , half arise , " I be go ! " 

 but Dick have his hand at once upon his shoulder . 

 " Friend Lawless , sit ye still , " he say . " an ye have eye , look yonder at the corner by the chancel arch ; see ye not that , even upon the motion of your rise , yon armed man be up and ready to intercept you ? yield ye , friend . Ye be bold aboard ship , when ye think to die a sea - death ; be bold again , now that y be to die presently upon the gallow . " 

 " Master Dick , " gasp Lawless , " the thing hath come upon I somewhat of the suddenest . but give I a moment till I fetch my breath again ; and , by the mass , I will be as stout - hearted as yourself . " 

 " here be my bold fellow ! " return Dick . " and yet , Lawless , it go hard against the grain with I to die ; but where whine mendeth nothing , wherefore whine ? " 

 " Nay , that indeed ! " chime Lawless . " and a fig for death , at bad ! it have to be do , my master , soon or late . and hang in a good quarrel be an easy death , they say , though I could never hear of any that come back to say so . " 

 and so say , the stout old rascal lean back in his stall , fold his arm , and begin to look about he with the great air of insolence and unconcern . 

 " and for the matter of that , " Dick add , " it be yet our good chance to keep quiet . we wot not yet what Duckworth purpose ; and when all be say , and if the bad befall , we may yet clear our foot of it . " 

 now that they cease talk , they be aware of a very distant and thin strain of mirthful music which steadily draw nearer , louder , and merry . the bell in the tower begin to break forth into a doubling peal , and a great and great concourse of people to crowd into the church , shuffle the snow from off their foot , and clapping and blow in their hand . the western door be fling wide open , show a glimpse of sunlit , snowy street , and admit in a great gust the shrewd air of the morning ; and in short , it become plain by every sign that Lord Shoreby desire to be marry very early in the day , and that the wedding - train be draw near . 

 some of Lord Shoreby s man now clear a passage down the middle aisle , force the people back with lance - stock ; and just then , outside the portal , the secular musician could be descry draw near over the frozen snow , the fifer and trumpeter scarlet in the face with lusty blowing , the drummer and the cymbalist beat as for a wager . 

 these , as they draw near the door of the sacred building , file off on either side , and , mark time to their own vigorous music , stand stamp in the snow . as they thus open their rank , the leader of this noble bridal train appear behind and between they ; and such be the variety and gaiety of their attire , such the display of silk and velvet , fur and satin , embroidery and lace , that the procession show forth upon the snow like a flower - bed in a path or a paint window in a wall . 

 first come the bride , a sorry sight , as pale as winter , cling to Sir Daniel s arm , and attend , as bride - maid , by the short young lady who have befriend Dick the night before . close behind , in the most radiant toilet , follow the bridegroom , halt on a gouty foot ; and as he pass the threshold of the sacred building and doff his hat , his bald head be see to be rosy with emotion . 

 and now come the hour of Ellis Duckworth . 

 Dick , who sit stunned among contrary emotion , grasp the desk in front of he , behold a movement in the crowd , people jostle backward , and eye and arm uplifted . follow these sign , he behold three or four man with bent bow lean from the clerestory gallery . at the same instant they deliver their discharge , and before the clamour and cry of the astound populace have time to swell fully upon the ear , they have flit from their perch and disappear . 

 the nave be full of sway head and voice scream ; the ecclesiastic throng in terror from their place ; the music cease , and though the bell overhead continue for some second to clang upon the air , some wind of the disaster seem to find its way at last even to the chamber where the ringer be leap on their rope , and they also desist from their merry labour . 

 right in the midst of the nave the bridegroom lie stone - dead , pierce by two black arrow . the bride have faint . Sir Daniel stand , tower above the crowd in his surprise and anger , a clothyard shaft quiver in his left forearm , and his face stream blood from another which have graze his brow . 

 long before any search could be make for they , the author of this tragic interruption have clatter down a turnpike stair and decamp by a postern door . 

 but Dick and Lawless still remain in pawn ; they have , indeed , arise on the first alarm , and push manfully to gain the door ; but what with the narrowness of the stall and the crowding of terrified priest and chorister , the attempt have be in vain , and they have stoically resume their place . 

 and now , pale with horror , Sir Oliver rise to his foot and call upon Sir Daniel , point with one hand to Dick . 

 " here , " he cry , " be Richard Shelton alas the hour ! blood guilty ! seize he ! bid he be seize ! for all our life sake , take he and bind he surely ! he hath swear our fall . " 

 Sir Daniel be blind by anger blind by the hot blood that still stream across his face . 

 " where ? " he bellow . " Hale he forth ! by the cross of Holywood , but he shall rue this hour ! " 

 the crowd fall back , and a party of archer invade the choir , lay rough hand on Dick , drag he head - foremost from the stall , and thrust he by the shoulder down the chancel step . lawless , on his part , sit as still as a mouse . 

 Sir Daniel , brush the blood out of his eye , star blinkingly upon his captive . 

 " ay , " he say , " treacherous and insolent , I have thee fast ; and by all potent oath , for every drop of blood that now trickle in mine eye , I will wring a groan out of thy carcase . away with he ! " he add . " here be no place ! off with he to my house . I will number every joint of thy body with a torture . " 

 but Dick , put off his captor , uplift his voice . 

 " Sanctuary ! " he shout . " Sanctuary ! Ho , there , my father ! they would drag I from the church ! " 

 " from the church thou hast defile with murder , boy , " add a tall man , magnificently dress . 

 " on what probation ? " cry Dick . " they do accuse I , indeed , of some complicity , but have not prove one tittle . I be , in truth , a suitor for this damsel s hand ; and she , I will be bold to say it , repay my suit with favour . but what then ? to love a maid be no offence , I trow nay , nor to gain her love . in all else , I stand here free from guiltiness . " 

 there be a murmur of approval among the bystander , so boldly Dick declare his innocence ; but at the same time a throng of accuser arise upon the other side , cry how he have be find last night in Sir Daniel s house , how he wear a sacrilegious disguise ; and in the midst of the babel , Sir Oliver indicate Lawless , both by voice and gesture , as accomplice to the fact . he , in his turn , be drag from his seat and set beside his leader . the feeling of the crowd rise high on either side , and while some drag the prisoner to and fro to favour their escape , other curse and strike they with their fist . Dick s ear ring and his brain swam dizzily , like a man struggle in the eddy of a furious river . 

 but the tall man who have already answer Dick , by a prodigious exercise of voice restore silence and order in the mob . 

 " search they , " he say , " for arm . we may so judge of their intention . " 

 upon Dick they find no weapon but his poniard , and this tell in his favour , until one man officiously draw it from its sheath , and find it still uncleansed of the blood of rutter . at this there be a great shout among Sir Daniel s follower , which the tall man suppress by a gesture and an imperious glance . but when it come to the turn of Lawless , there be find under his gown a sheaf of arrow identical with those that have be shoot . 

 " how say ye now ? " ask the tall man , frowningly , of Dick . 

 " Sir , " reply Dick , " I be here in sanctuary , be it not so ? well , sir , I see by your bearing that ye be high in station , and I read in your countenance the mark of piety and justice . to you , then , I will yield I prisoner , and that blithely , forego the advantage of this holy place . but rather than to be yield into the discretion of that man whom I do here accuse with a loud voice to be the murderer of my natural father and the unjust retainer of my land and revenue rather than that , I would beseech you , under favour , with your own gentle hand , to despatch I on the spot . your own ear have hear he , how before that I be prove guilty he do threaten I with torment . it standeth not with your own honour to deliver I to my sworn enemy and old oppressor , but to try I fairly by the way of law , and , if that I be guilty indeed , to slay I mercifully . " 

 " my lord , " cry Sir Daniel , " ye will not hearken to this wolf ? his bloody dagger reek he the lie into his face . " 

 " Nay , but suffer I , good knight , " return the tall stranger ; " your own vehemence doth somewhat tell against yourself . " 

 and here the bride , who have come to herself some minute past and look wildly on upon this scene , break loose from those that hold she , and fall upon her knee before the last speaker . 

 " my Lord of Risingham , " she cry , " hear I , in justice . I be here in this man s custody by mere force , reft from mine own people . since that day I have never pity , countenance , nor comfort from the face of man but from he only Richard Shelton whom they now accuse and labour to undo . my lord , if he be yesternight in Sir Daniel s mansion , it be I that bring he there ; he come but at my prayer , and think to do no hurt . while yet Sir Daniel be a good lord to he , he fight with they of the Black Arrow loyally ; but when his foul guardian seek his life by practice , and he flee by night , for his soul s sake , out of that bloody house , whither be he to turn he , helpless and penniless ? or if he be fall among ill company , whom should ye blame the lad that be unjustly handle , or the guardian that do abuse his trust ? " 

 and then the short young lady fall on her knee by Joanna s side . 

 " and I , my good lord and natural uncle , " she add , " I can bear testimony , on my conscience and before the face of all , that what this maiden saith be true . it be I , unworthy , that do lead the young man in . " 

 Earl Risingham have hear in silence , and when the voice cease , he still stand silent for a space . then he give Joanna his hand to arise , though it be to be observe that he do not offer the like courtesy to she who have call herself his niece . 

 " Sir Daniel , " he say , " here be a right intricate affair , the which , with your good leave , it shall be mine to examine and adjust . content ye , then ; your business be in careful hand ; justice shall be do you ; and in the meanwhile , get ye incontinently home , and have your hurt attend . the air be shrewd , and I would not ye take cold upon these scratch . " 

 he make a sign with his hand ; it be pass down the nave by obsequious servant , who wait there upon his small gesture . instantly , without the church , a tucket sound shrill , and through the open portal archer and man - at - arm , uniformly array in the colour and wear the badge of Lord Risingham , begin to file into the church , take Dick and Lawless from those who still detain they , and , close their file about the prisoner , march forth again and disappear . 

 as they be pass , Joanna hold both her hand to Dick and cry he her farewell ; and the bridesmaid , nothing downcast by her uncle s evident displeasure , blow he a kiss , with a " keep your heart up , lion - driver ! " that for the first time since the accident call up a smile to the face of the crowd . 

 CHAPTER V EARL risingham 

 Earl Risingham , although by far the most important person then in Shoreby , be poorly lodge in the house of a private gentleman upon the extreme outskirt of the town . nothing but the armed man at the door , and the mount messenger that keep arrive and depart , announce the temporary residence of a great lord . 

 thus it be that , from lack of space , Dick and Lawless be clap into the same apartment . 

 " well speak , Master Richard , " say the outlaw ; " it be excellently well speak , and , for my part , I thank you cordially . here we be in good hand ; we shall be justly try , and , some time this evening , decently hang on the same tree . " 

 " indeed , my poor friend , I do believe it , " answer Dick . 

 " yet have we a string to our bow , " return lawless . " Ellis Duckworth be a man out of ten thousand ; he holdeth you right near his heart , both for your own and for your father s sake ; and know you guiltless of this fact , he will stir earth and heaven to bear you clear . " 

 " it may not be , " say Dick . " what can he do ? he hath but a handful . alack , if it be but to - morrow could I but keep a certain tryst an hour before noon to - morrow all be , I think , otherwise . but now there be no help . " 

 " well , " conclude Lawless , " an ye will stand to it for my innocence , I will stand to it for your , and that stoutly . it shall naught avail we ; but an I be to hang , it shall not be for lack of swearing . " 

 and then , while Dick give himself over to his reflection , the old rogue curl himself down into a corner , pull his monkish hood about his face , and compose himself to sleep . soon he be loudly snore , so utterly have his long life of hardship and adventure blunt the sense of apprehension . 

 it be long after noon , and the day be already fail , before the door be open and Dick take forth and lead up - stair to where , in a warm cabinet , Earl Risingham sit muse over the fire . 

 on his captive s entrance he look up . 

 " Sir , " he say , " I know your father , who be a man of honour , and this inclineth I to be the more lenient ; but I may not hide from you that heavy charge lie against your character . ye do consort with murderer and robber ; upon a clear probation ye have carry war against the king s peace ; ye be suspect to have piratically seize upon a ship ; ye be find skulk with a counterfeit presentment in your enemy s house ; a man be slay that very evening " 

 " an it like you , my lord , " Dick interpose , " I will at once avow my guilt , such as it be . I slay this fellow rutter ; and to the proof " search in his bosom " here be a letter from his wallet . " 

 Lord Risingham take the letter , and open and read it twice . 

 " Ye have read this ? " he inquire . 

 " I have read it , " answer Dick . 

 " be ye for York or Lancaster ? " the earl demand . 

 " my lord , it be but a little while back that I be ask that question , and know not how to answer it , " say Dick ; " but have answer once , I will not vary . my lord , I be for York . " 

 the earl nod approvingly . 

 " honestly reply , " he say . " but wherefore , then , deliver I this letter ? " 

 " Nay , but against traitor , my lord , be not all side array ? " cry Dick . 

 " I would they be , young gentleman , " return the earl ; " and I do at least approve your saying . there be more youth than guile in you , I do perceive ; and be not Sir Daniel a mighty man upon our side , I be half - tempt to espouse your quarrel . for I have inquire , and it appear ye have be hardly deal with , and have much excuse . but look ye , sir , I be , before all else , a leader in the queen s interest ; and though by nature a just man , as I believe , and lean even to the excess of mercy , yet must I order my going for my party s interest , and , to keep Sir Daniel , I would go far about . " 

 " my lord , " return Dick , " ye will think I very bold to counsel you ; but do ye count upon Sir Daniel s faith ? methought he have change side intolerably often . " 

 " Nay , it be the way of England . what would ye have ? " the earl demand . " but ye be unjust to the knight of Tunstall ; and as faith go , in this unfaithful generation , he hath of late be honourably true to we of Lancaster . even in our last revers he stand firm . " 

 " an it please you , then , " say Dick , " to cast your eye upon this letter , ye might somewhat change your thought of he ; " and he hand to the earl Sir Daniel s letter to Lord Wensleydale . 

 the effect upon the earl s countenance be instant ; he lower like an angry lion , and his hand , with a sudden movement , clutch at his dagger . 

 " Ye have read this also ? " he ask . 

 " even so , " say Dick . " it be your lordship s own estate he offer to Lord Wensleydale ? " 

 " it be my own estate , even as ye say ! " return the earl . " I be your bedesman for this letter . it hath show I a fox s hole . command I , Master Shelton ; I will not be backward in gratitude , and to begin with , York or Lancaster , true man or thief , I do now set you at freedom . go , a Mary s name ! but judge it right that I retain and hang your fellow , lawless . the crime hath be most open , and it be fitting that some open punishment should follow . " 

 " my lord , I make it my first suit to you to spare he also , " plead Dick . 

 " it be an old , condemn rogue , thief , and vagabond , Master Shelton , " say the earl . " he hath be gallow - ripe this score of year . and , whether for one thing or another , whether to - morrow or the day after , where be the great choice ? " 

 " yet , my lord , it be through love to I that he come hither , " answer Dick , " and I be churlish and thankless to desert he . " 

 " Master Shelton , ye be troublesome , " reply the earl , severely . " it be an evil way to prosper in this world . Howbeit , and to be quit of your importunity , I will once more humour you . go , then , together ; but go warily , and get swiftly out of Shoreby town . for this Sir Daniel   whom may the saint confound !   thirsteth most greedily to have your blood . " 

 " my lord , I do now offer you in word my gratitude , trust at some brief date to pay you some of it in service , " reply Dick , as he turn from the apartment . 

 CHAPTER VI ARBLASTER again 

 when Dick and Lawless be suffer to steal , by a back way , out of the house where Lord Risingham hold his garrison , the evening have already come . 

 they pause in shelter of the garden wall to consult on their good course . the danger be extreme . if one of Sir Daniel s man catch sight of they and raise the view - hallo , they would be run down and butcher instantly . and not only be the town of Shoreby a mere net of peril for their life , but to make for the open country be to run the risk of the patrol . 

 a little way off , upon some open ground , they spy a windmill standing ; and hard by that , a very large granary with open door . 

 " how if we lay there until the night fall ? " Dick propose . 

 and lawless have no well suggestion to offer , they make a straight push for the granary at a run , and conceal themselves behind the door among some straw . the daylight rapidly depart ; and presently the moon be silver the frozen snow . now or never be their opportunity to gain the Goat and Bagpipes unobserve and change their tell - tale garment . yet even then it be advisable to go round by the outskirt , and not run the gauntlet of the market - place , where , in the concourse of people , they stand the more imminent peril to be recognise and slay . 

 this course be a long one . it take they not far from the house by the beach , now lie dark and silent , and bring they forth at last by the margin of the harbour . many of the ship , as they could see by the clear moonshine , have weigh anchor , and , profit by the calm sky , proceed for more distant part ; answerably to this , the rude alehouse along the beach   although in defiance of the curfew law , they still shine with fire and candle   be no long throng with customer , and no long echo to the chorus of sea - song . 

 hastily , half - run , with their monkish raiment kilte to the knee , they plunge through the deep snow and thread the labyrinth of marine lumber ; and they be already more than half way round the harbour when , as they be pass close before an alehouse , the door suddenly open and let out a gush of light upon their fleeting figure . 

 instantly they stop , and make believe to be engage in earnest conversation . 

 three man , one after another , come out of the ale - house , and the last close the door behind he . all three be unsteady upon their foot , as if they have pass the day in deep potation , and they now stand waver in the moonlight , like man who know not what they would be after . the tall of the three be talk in a loud , lamentable voice . 

 " seven piece of as good Gascony as ever a tapster broach , " he be say , " the good ship out o the port o Dartmouth , a Virgin Mary parcel - gild , thirteen pound of good gold money " 

 " I have bad loss , too , " interrupt one of the other . " I have have loss of mine own , gossip Arblaster . I be rob at martinma of five shilling and a leather wallet well worth ninepence farthe . " 

 Dick s heart smite he at what he hear . until that moment he have not perhaps think twice of the poor skipper who have be ruin by the loss of the Good Hope ; so careless , in those day , be man who wear arm of the good and interest of their inferior . but this sudden encounter remind he sharply of the high - handed manner and ill - ending of his enterprise ; and both he and Lawless turn their head the other way , to avoid the chance of recognition . 

 the ship s dog have , however , make his escape from the wreck and find his way back again to Shoreby . he be now at Arblaster s heel , and suddenly sniff and prick his ear , he dart forward and begin to bark furiously at the two sham friar . 

 his master unsteadily follow he . 

 " hey , shipmate ! " he cry . " have ye ever a penny pie for a poor old shipman , clean destroy by pirate ? I be a man that would have pay for you both o Thursday morning ; and now here I be , o Saturday night , beg for a flagon of ale ! ask my man Tom , if ye misdoubt I . seven piece of good Gascon wine , a ship that be mine own , and be my father s before I , a bless Mary of plane - tree wood and parcel - gilt , and thirteen pound in gold and silver . hey ! what say ye ? a man that fight the French , too ; for I have fight the French ; I have cut more french throat upon the high sea than ever a man that sail out of Dartmouth . come , a penny piece . " 

 neither Dick nor lawless durst answer he a word , lest he should recognise their voice ; and they stand there as helpless as a ship ashore , not know where to turn nor what to hope . 

 " be ye dumb , boy ? " inquire the skipper . " mate , " he add , with a hiccup , " they be dumb . I like not this manner of discourtesy ; for an a man be dumb , so be as he s courteous , he will still speak when he be speak to , methink . " 

 by this time the sailor , Tom , who be a man of great personal strength , seem to have conceive some suspicion of these two speechless figure ; and be soberer than his captain , step suddenly before he , take lawless roughly by the shoulder , and ask he , with an oath , what ail he that he hold his tongue . to this the outlaw , think all be over , make answer by a wrestling feint that stretch the sailor on the sand , and , call upon Dick to follow he , take to his heel among the lumber . 

 the affair pass in a second . before Dick could run at all , Arblaster have he in his arm ; Tom , crawl on his face , have catch he by one foot , and the third man have a draw cutlass brandish above his head . 

 it be not so much the danger , it be not so much the annoyance , that now bow down the spirit of young Shelton ; it be the profound humiliation to have escape Sir Daniel , convince Lord Risingham , and now fall helpless in the hand of this old , drunken sailor ; and not merely helpless , but , as his conscience loudly tell he when it be too late , actually guilty actually the bankrupt debtor of the man whose ship he have steal and lose . 

 " bring I he back into the alehouse , till I see his face , " say Arblaster . 

 " Nay , nay , " return Tom ; " but let we first unload his wallet , lest the other lad cry share . " 

 but though he be search from head to foot , not a penny be find upon he ; nothing but Lord Foxham s signet , which they pluck savagely from his finger . 

 " turn I he to the moon , " say the skipper ; and take Dick by the chin , he cruelly jerk his head into the air . " Blessed Virgin ! " he cry , " it be the pirate ! " 

 " hey ! " cry Tom . 

 " by the Virgin of Bordeaux , it be the man himself ! " repeat Arblaster . " what , sea - thief , do I hold you ? " he cry . " where be my ship ? where be my wine ? hey ! have I you in my hand ? Tom , give I one end of a cord here ; I will so truss I this sea - thief , hand and foot together , like a baste turkey marry , I will so bind he up and thereafter I will so beat so beat he ! " 

 and so he run on , wind the cord meanwhile about Dick s limb with the dexterity peculiar to seaman , and at every turn and cross secure it with a knot , and tighten the whole fabric with a savage pull . 

 when he have do , the lad be a mere package in his hand as helpless as the dead . the skipper hold he at arm s length , and laugh aloud . then he fetch he a stunning buffet on the ear ; and then turn he about , and furiously kick and kick he . anger rise up in Dick s bosom like a storm ; anger strangle he , and he think to have die ; but when the sailor , tired of this cruel play , drop he all his length upon the sand and turn to consult with his companion , he instantly regain command of his temper . here be a momentary respite ; ere they begin again to torture he , he might have find some method to escape from this degrading and fatal misadventure . 

 presently , sure enough , and while his captor be still discuss what to do with he , he take heart of grace , and , with a pretty steady voice , address they . 

 " my master , " he begin , " be ye go clean foolish ? here hath Heaven put into your hand as pretty an occasion to grow rich as ever shipman have such as ye might make thirty over - sea adventure and not find again and , by the mass I what do ye ? beat I ? nay ; so would an angry child ! but for long - head tarry - Johns , that fear not fire nor water , and that love gold as they love beef , methink ye be not wise . " 

 " ay , " say Tom , " now y be truss ye would cozen we . " 

 " Cozen you ! " repeat Dick . " Nay , if ye be fool , it would be easy . but if ye be shrewd fellow , as I trow ye be , ye can see plainly where your interest lie . when I take your ship from you , we be many , we be well clad and armed ; but now , bethink you a little , who muster that array ? one incontestably that hath much gold . and if he , be already rich , continueth to hunt after more even in the face of storm bethink you once more shall there not be a treasure somewhere hide ? " 

 " what meaneth he ? " ask one of the man . 

 " why , if ye have lose an old skiff and a few jug of vinegary wine , " continue Dick , " forget they , for the trash they be ; and do ye rather buckle to an adventure worth the name , that shall , in twelve hour , make or mar you for ever . but take I up from where I lie , and let we go somewhere near at hand and talk across a flagon , for I be sore and frozen , and my mouth be half among the snow . " 

 " he seek but to cozen we , " say Tom , contemptuously . 

 " Cozen ! cozen ! " cry the third man . " I would I could see the man that could cozen I ! he be a cozener indeed ! Nay , I be not bear yesterday . I can see a church when it hath a steeple on it ; and for my part , gossip Arblaster , methink there be some sense in this young man . shall we go hear he , indeed ? say , shall we go hear he ? " 

 " I would look gladly on a pottle of strong ale , good Master Pirret , " return Arblaster . " how say ye , Tom ? but then the wallet be empty . " 

 " I will pay , " say the other " I will pay . I would fain see this matter out ; I do believe , upon my conscience , there be gold in it . " 

 " Nay , if ye get again to drink , all be lose ! " cry Tom . 

 " Gossip Arblaster , ye suffer your fellow to have too much liberty , " return Master Pirret . " would ye be lead by a hire man ? Fy , fy ! " 

 " peace , fellow ! " say Arblaster , address Tom . " will ye put your oar in ? truly a fine pass , when the crew be to correct the skipper ! " 

 " well , then , go your way , " say Tom ; " I wash my hand of you . " 

 " set he , then , upon his foot , " say Master Pirret . " I know a privy place where we may drink and discourse . " 

 " if I be to walk , my friend , ye must set my foot at liberty , " say Dick , when he have be once more plant upright like a post . 

 " he saith true , " laugh Pirret . " truly , he could not walk accoutred as he be . give it a slit out with your knife and slit it , gossip . " 

 even Arblaster pause at this proposal ; but as his companion continue to insist , and Dick have the sense to keep the mere wooden indifference of expression , and only shrug his shoulder over the delay , the skipper consent at last , and cut the cord which tie his prisoner s foot and leg . not only do this enable Dick to walk ; but the whole network of his bond be proportionately loosen , he feel the arm behind his back begin to move more freely , and could hope , with time and trouble , to entirely disengage it . so much he owe already to the owlish silliness and greed of Master Pirret . 

 that worthy now assume the lead , and conduct they to the very same rude alehouse where Lawless have take Arblaster on the day of the gale . it be now quite deserted ; the fire be a pile of red ember , radiate the most ardent heat ; and when they have choose their place , and the landlord have set before they a measure of mulled ale , both Pirret and Arblaster stretch forth their leg and square their elbow like man bent upon a pleasant hour . 

 the table at which they sit , like all the other in the alehouse , consist of a heavy , square board , set on a pair of barrel ; and each of the four curiously - assorted crony sit at one side of the square , Pirret face Arblaster , and Dick opposite to the common sailor . 

 " and now , young man , " say Pirret , " to your tale . it doth appear , indeed , that ye have somewhat abuse our gossip Arblaster ; but what then ? make it up to he show he but this chance to become wealthy and I will go pledge he will forgive you . " 

 so far Dick have speak pretty much at random ; but it be now necessary , under the supervision of six eye , to invent and tell some marvellous story , and , if it be possible , get back into his hand the all - important signet . to squander time be the first necessity . the long his stay last , the more would his captor drink , and the surer should he be when he attempt his escape . 

 well , Dick be not much of an inventor , and what he tell be pretty much the tale of Ali Baba , with Shoreby and Tunstall Forest substitute for the East , and the treasure of the cavern rather exaggerated than diminish . as the reader be aware , it be an excellent story , and have but one drawback that it be not true ; and so , as these three simple shipman now hear it for the first time , their eye stand out of their face , and their mouth gap like codfish at a fishmonger s. 

 pretty soon a second measure of mulled ale be call for ; and while Dick be still artfully spin out the incident a third follow the second . 

 here be the position of the party towards the end : Arblaster , three - part drunk and one - half asleep , hang helpless on his stool . even Tom have be much delighted with the tale , and his vigilance have abate in proportion . meanwhile , Dick have gradually worm his right arm clear of its bond , and be ready to risk all . 

 " and so , " say Pirret , " y be one of these ? " 

 " I be make so , " reply Dick , " against my will ; but an I could but get a sack or two of gold coin to my share , I should be a fool indeed to continue dwell in a filthy cave , and standing shot and buffet like a soldier . here be we four ; good ! let we , then , go forth into the forest to - morrow ere the sun be up . could we come honestly by a donkey , it be well ; but an we can not , we have our four strong back , and I warrant I we shall come home staggering . " 

 Pirret lick his lip . 

 " and this magic , " he say " this password , whereby the cave be open how call ye it , friend ? " 

 " Nay , none know the word but the three chief , " return Dick ; " but here be your great good fortune , that , on this very evening , I should be the bearer of a spell to open it . it be a thing not trust twice a year beyond the captain s wallet . " 

 " a spell ! " say Arblaster , half awakening , and squint upon Dick with one eye . " aroint thee ! no spell ! I be a good Christian . ask my man Tom , else . " 

 " Nay , but this be white magic , " say Dick . " it doth naught with the devil ; only the power of number , herb , and planet . " 

 " ay , ay , " say Pirret ; " tis but white magic , gossip . there be no sin therein , I do assure you . but proceed , good youth . this spell in what should it consist ? " 

 " Nay , that I will incontinently show you , " answer Dick . " have ye there the ring ye take from my finger ? good ! now hold it forth before you by the extreme finger - end , at the arm s - length , and over against the shining of these ember . tis so exactly . thus , then , be the spell . " 

 with a haggard glance , Dick see the coast be clear between he and the door . he put up an internal prayer . then whip forth his arm , he make but one snatch of the ring , and at the same instant , lever up the table , he send it bodily over upon the seaman Tom . he , poor soul , go down bawl under the ruin ; and before Arblaster understand that anything be wrong , or Pirret could collect his dazzle wit , Dick have run to the door and escape into the moonlit night . 

 the moon , which now ride in the mid - heaven , and the extreme whiteness of the snow , make the open ground about the harbour bright as day ; and young Shelton leaping , with kilte robe , among the lumber , be a conspicuous figure from afar . 

 Tom and Pirret follow he with shout ; from every drinking - shop they be join by other whom their cry arouse ; and presently a whole fleet of sailor be in full pursuit . but Jack ashore be a bad runner , even in the fifteenth century , and Dick , besides , have a start , which he rapidly improve , until , as he draw near the entrance of a narrow lane , he even pause and look laughingly behind he . 

 upon the white floor of snow , all the shipman of Shoreby come cluster in an inky mass , and tail out rearward in isolated clump . every man be shout or scream ; every man be gesticulate with both arm in air ; some one be continually fall ; and to complete the picture , when one fall , a dozen would fall upon the top of he . 

 the confused mass of sound which they roll up as high as to the moon be partly comical and partly terrify to the fugitive whom they be hunt . in itself , it be impotent , for he make sure no seaman in the port could run he down . but the mere volume of noise , in so far as it must awake all the sleeper in Shoreby and bring all the skulk sentry to the street , do really threaten he with danger in the front . so , spy a dark doorway at a corner , he whip briskly into it , and let the uncouth hunt go by he , still shout and gesticulate , and all red with hurry and white with tumble in the snow . 

 it be a long while , indeed , before this great invasion of the town by the harbour come to an end , and it be long before silence be restore . for long , lost sailor be still to be hear pound and shout through the street in all direction and in every quarter of the town . quarrel follow , sometimes among themselves , sometimes with the man of the patrol ; knife be draw , blow give and receive , and more than one dead body remain behind upon the snow . 

 when , a full hour later , the last seaman return grumblingly to the harbour side and his particular tavern , it may fairly be question if he have ever know what manner of man he be pursue , but it be absolutely sure that he have now forget . by next morning there be many strange story fly ; and a little while after , the legend of the devil s nocturnal visit be an article of faith with all the lad of Shoreby . 

 but the return of the last seaman do not , even yet , set free young Shelton from his cold imprisonment in the doorway . 

 for some time after , there be a great activity of patrol ; and special party come forth to make the round of the place and report to one or other of the great lord , whose slumber have be thus unusually break . 

 the night be already well spend before Dick venture from his hiding - place and come , safe and sound , but ache with cold and bruise , to the door of the Goat and bagpipe . as the law require , there be neither fire nor candle in the house ; but he grope his way into a corner of the icy guest - room , find an end of a blanket , which he hitch around his shoulder , and creep close to the near sleeper , be soon lose in slumber . 

 BOOK V crookback 

 chapter I the SHRILL TRUMPET 

 very early the next morning , before the first peep of the day , Dick arise , change his garment , arm himself once more like a gentleman , and set forth for Lawless s den in the forest . there , it will be remember , he have leave Lord Foxham s paper ; and to get these and be back in time for the tryst with the young Duke of Gloucester could only be manage by an early start and the most vigorous walking . 

 the frost be more rigorous than ever ; the air windless and dry , and sting to the nostril . the moon have go down , but the star be still bright and numerous , and the reflection from the snow be clear and cheerful . there be no need for a lamp to walk by ; nor , in that still but ring air , the least temptation to delay . 

 Dick have cross the great part of the open ground between Shoreby and the forest , and have reach the bottom of the little hill , some hundred yard below the Cross of St. Bride , when , through the stillness of the black morn , there ring forth the note of a trumpet , so shrill , clear , and pierce , that he think he have never hear the match of it for audibility . it be blow once , and then hurriedly a second time ; and then the clash of steel succeed . 

 at this young Shelton prick his ear , and draw his sword , run forward up the hill . 

 presently he come in sight of the cross , and be aware of a most fierce encounter rag on the road before it . there be seven or eight assailant , and but one to keep head against they ; but so active and dexterous be this one , so desperately do he charge and scatter his opponent , so deftly keep his footing on the ice , that already , before Dick could intervene , he have slay one , wound another , and keep the whole in check . 

 still , it be by a miracle that he continue his defence , and at any moment , any accident , the least slip of foot or error of hand , his life would be a forfeit . 

 " hold ye well , sir ! here be help ! " cry Richard ; and forget that he be alone , and that the cry be somewhat irregular , " to the Arrow ! to the Arrow ! " he shout , as he fall upon the rear of the assailant . 

 these be stout fellow also , for they give not an inch at this surprise , but face about , and fall with astonishing fury upon Dick . four against one , the steel flash about he in the starlight ; the spark fly fiercely ; one of the man oppose to he fall in the stir of the fight he hardly know why ; then he himself be strike across the head , and though the steel cap below his hood protect he , the blow beat he down upon one knee , with a brain whirling like a windmill sail . 

 meanwhile the man whom he have come to rescue , instead of join in the conflict , have , on the first sign of intervention , leap aback and blow again , and yet more urgently and loudly , on that same shrill - voice trumpet that begin the alarm . next moment , indeed , his foe be on he , and he be once more charge and flee , leaping , stab , drop to his knee , and use indifferently sword and dagger , foot and hand , with the same unshaken courage and feverish energy and speed . 

 but that ear - pierce summon have be hear at last . there be a muffle rush in the snow ; and in a good hour for Dick , who see the sword - point glitter already at his throat , there pour forth out of the wood upon both side a disorderly torrent of mount man - at - arm , each case in iron , and with visor lower , each bear his lance in rest , or his sword bar and raise , and each carry , so to speak , a passenger , in the shape of an archer or page , who leap one after another from their perch , and have presently double the array . 

 the original assailant ; see themselves outnumber and surround , throw down their arm without a word . 

 " seize I these fellow ! " say the hero of the trumpet ; and when his order have be obey , he draw near to Dick and look he in the face . 

 Dick , return this scrutiny , be surprised to find in one who have display such strength , skill and energy , a lad no old than himself slightly deform , with one shoulder high than the other , and of a pale , painful , and distort countenance .   2   the eye , however , be very clear and bold . 

 " Sir , " say this lad , " ye come in good time for I , and none too early . " 

 " my lord , " return Dick , with a faint sense that he be in the presence of a great personage , " ye be yourself so marvellous a good swordsman that I believe ye have manage they single - handed . Howbeit , it be certainly well for I that your man delay no long than they do . " 

 " how know ye who I be ? " demand the stranger . 

 " even now , my lord , " Dick answer , " I be ignorant of whom I speak with . " 

 " be it so ? " ask the other . " and yet ye throw yourself head first into this unequal battle . " 

 " I see one man valiantly contend against many , " reply Dick , " and I have think myself dishonour not to bear he aid . " 

 a singular sneer play about the young nobleman s mouth as he make answer : 

 " these be very brave word . but to the more essential be ye Lancaster or York ? " 

 " my lord , I make no secret ; I be clear for York , " Dick answer . 

 " by the mass ! " reply the other , " it be well for you . " 

 and so say , he turn towards one of his follower . 

 " let I see , " he continue , in the same sneering and cruel tone " let I see a clean end of these brave gentleman . truss I they up . " 

 there be but five survivor of the attack party . archer seize they by the arm ; they be hurry to the border of the wood , and each place below a tree of suitable dimension ; the rope be adjust ; an archer , carry the end of it , hastily clamber overhead ; and before a minute be over , and without a word pass upon either hand , the five man be swing by the neck . 

 " and now , " cry the deformed leader , " back to your post , and when I summon you next , be readier to attend . " 

 " my lord duke , " say one man , " beseech you , tarry not here alone . keep but a handful of lance at your hand . " 

 " Fellow , " say the duke , " I have forbear to chide you for your slowness . cross I not , therefore . I trust my hand and arm , for all that I be crook . Ye be backward when the trumpet sound ; and ye be now too forward with your counsel . but it be ever so ; last with the lance and first with tongue . let it be reverse . " 

 and with a gesture that be not without a sort of dangerous nobility , he wave they off . 

 the footman climb again to their seat behind the man - at - arm , and the whole party move slowly away and disappear in twenty different direction , under the cover of the forest . 

 the day be by this time begin to break , and the star to fade . the first grey glimmer of dawn shine upon the countenance of the two young man , who now turn once more to face each other . 

 " here , " say the duke , " ye have see my vengeance , which be , like my blade , both sharp and ready . but I would not have you , for all Christendom , suppose I thankless . you that come to my aid with a good sword and a well courage unless that ye recoil from my misshapenness come to my heart . " 

 and so say , the young leader hold out his arm for an embrace . 

 in the bottom of his heart Dick already entertain a great terror and some hatred for the man whom he have rescue ; but the invitation be so word that it would not have be merely discourteous , but cruel , to refuse or hesitate ; and he hasten to comply . 

 " and now , my lord duke , " he say , when he have regain his freedom , " do I suppose aright ? be ye my Lord Duke of Gloucester ? " 

 " I be Richard of Gloucester , " return the other . " and you how call they you ? " 

 Dick tell he his name , and present Lord Foxham s signet , which the duke immediately recognise . 

 " Ye come too soon , " he say ; " but why should I complain ? ye be like I , that be here at watch two hour before the day . but this be the first sally of mine arm ; upon this adventure , Master Shelton , shall I make or mar the quality of my renown . there lie mine enemy , under two old , skilled captain Risingham and Brackley well post for strength , I do believe , but yet upon two side without retreat , enclose betwixt the sea , the harbour , and the river . methink , Shelton , here be a great blow to be stricken , an we could strike it silently and suddenly . " 

 " I do think so , indeed , " cry Dick , warming . 

 " have ye my Lord Foxham s note ? " inquire the duke . 

 and then , Dick , have explain how he be without they for the moment , make himself bold to offer information every jot as good , of his own knowledge . " and for mine own part , my lord duke , " he add , " an ye have man enough , I would fall on even at this present . for , look ye , at the peep of day the watch of the night be over ; but by day they keep neither watch nor ward only scour the outskirt with horseman . now , then , when the night watch be already unarmed , and the rest be at their morning cup now be the time to break they . " 

 " how many do ye count ? " ask Gloucester . 

 " they number not two thousand , " Dick reply . 

 " I have seven hundred in the wood behind we , " say the duke ; " seven hundred follow from Kettley , and will be here anon ; behind these , and far , be four hundred more ; and my Lord Foxham hath five hundred half a day from here , at Holywood . shall we attend their come , or fall on ? " 

 " my lord , " say Dick , " when ye hang these five poor rogue ye do decide the question . churl although they be , in these uneasy , time they will be lack and look for , and the alarm be give . therefore , my lord , if ye do count upon the advantage of a surprise , ye have not , in my poor opinion , one whole hour in front of you . " 

 " I do think so indeed , " return crookback . " well , before an hour , ye shall be in the thick on t , win spur . a swift man to Holywood , carry Lord Foxham s signet ; another along the road to speed my laggard ! Nay , Shelton , by the rood , it may be do ! " 

 Therewith he once more set his trumpet to his lip and blew . 

 this time he be not long keep wait . in a moment the open space about the cross be fill with horse and foot . Richard of Gloucester take his place upon the step , and despatch messenger after messenger to hasten the concentration of the seven hundred man that lie hide in the immediate neighbourhood among the wood ; and before a quarter of an hour have pass , all his disposition be take , he put himself at their head , and begin to move down the hill towards Shoreby . 

 his plan be simple . he be to seize a quarter of the town of Shoreby lie on the right hand of the high road , and make his position good there in the narrow lane until his reinforcement follow . 

 if Lord Risingham choose to retreat , Richard would follow upon his rear , and take he between two fire ; or , if he prefer to hold the town , he would be shut in a trap , there to be gradually overwhelm by force of number . 

 there be but one danger , but that be imminent and great Gloucester s seven hundred might be roll up and cut to piece in the first encounter , and , to avoid this , it be needful to make the surprise of their arrival as complete as possible . 

 the footman , therefore , be all once more take up behind the rider , and Dick have the signal honour mete out to he of mount behind Gloucester himself . for as far as there be any cover the troop move slowly , and when they come near the end of the tree that line the highway , stop to breathe and reconnoitre . 

 the sun be now well up , shin with a frosty brightness out of a yellow halo , and right over against the luminary , Shoreby , a field of snowy roof and ruddy gable , be roll up its column of morning smoke . Gloucester turn round to Dick . 

 " in that poor place , " he say , " where people be cook breakfast , either you shall gain your spur and I begin a life of mighty honour and glory in the world s eye , or both of we , as I conceive it , shall fall dead and be unheard of . two Richards be we . well , then , Richard Shelton , they shall be hear about , these two ! their sword shall not ring more loudly on man s helmet than their name shall ring in people s ear . " 

 Dick be astonish at so great a hunger after fame , express with so great vehemence of voice and language , and he answer very sensibly and quietly , that , for his part , he promise he would do his duty , and doubt not of victory if everyone do the like . 

 by this time the horse be well breathe , and the leader hold up his sword and give rein , the whole troop of charger break into the gallop and thunder , with their double load of fight man , down the remainder of the hill and across the snow - cover plain that still divide they from Shoreby . 

 CHAPTER II the BATTLE of SHOREBY 

 the whole distance to be cross be not above a quarter of a mile . but they have no soon debauch beyond the cover of the tree than they be aware of people flee and scream in the snowy meadow upon either hand . almost at the same moment a great rumour begin to arise , and spread and grow continually louder in the town ; and they be not yet halfway to the near house before the bell begin to ring backward from the steeple . 

 the young duke grind his tooth together . by these so early signal of alarm he fear to find his enemy prepare ; and if he fail to gain a footing in the town , he know that his small party would soon be break and exterminate in the open . 

 in the town , however , the Lancastrians be far from be in so good a posture . it be as Dick have say . the night - guard have already doff their harness ; the rest be still hang unlatched , unbraced , all unprepared for battle about their quarter ; and in the whole of Shoreby there be not , perhaps , fifty man full armed , or fifty charger ready to be mount . 

 the beating of the bell , the terrifying summon of man who run about the street cry and beat upon the door , arouse in an incredibly short space at least two score out of that half hundred . these get speedily to horse , and , the alarm still fly wild and contrary , gallop in different direction . 

 thus it befell that , when Richard of Gloucester reach the first house of Shoreby , he be meet in the mouth of the street by a mere handful of lance , whom he sweep before his onset as the storm chase the bark . 

 a hundred pace into the town , Dick Shelton touch the duke s arm ; the duke , in answer , gather his rein , put the shrill trumpet to his mouth , and blow a concerted point , turn to the right hand out of the direct advance . swerve like a single rider , his whole command turn after he , and , still at the full gallop of the charger , sweep up the narrow bye - street . only the last score of rider draw rein and face about in the entrance ; the footman , whom they carry behind they , leapt at the same instant to the earth , and begin , some to bend their bow , and other to break into and secure the house upon either hand . 

 surprise at this sudden change of direction , and daunt by the firm front of the rear - guard , the few Lancastrians , after a momentary consultation , turn and ride far into town to seek for reinforcement . 

 the quarter of the town upon which , by the advice of Dick , Richard of Gloucester have now seize , consist of five small street of poor and ill - inhabit house , occupy a very gentle eminence , and lie open towards the back . 

 the five street be each secure by a good guard , the reserve would thus occupy the centre , out of shot , and yet ready to carry aid wherever it be need . 

 such be the poorness of the neighbourhood that none of the lancastrian lord , and but few of their retainer , have be lodge therein ; and the inhabitant , with one accord , desert their house and flee , squalling , along the street or over garden wall . 

 in the centre , where the five way all meet , a somewhat ill - favour alehouse display the sign of the Chequers ; and here the Duke of Gloucester choose his headquarters for the day . 

 to Dick he assign the guard of one of the five street . 

 " go , " he say , " win your spur . win glory for I : one Richard for another . I tell you , if I rise , ye shall rise by the same ladder . go , " he add , shake he by the hand . 

 but , as soon as Dick be go , he turn to a little shabby archer at his elbow . 

 " go , Dutton , and that right speedily , " he add . " follow that lad . if ye find he faithful , ye answer for his safety , a head for a head . woe unto you , if ye return without he ! but if he be faithless or , for one instant , ye misdoubt he stab he from behind . " 

 in the meanwhile Dick hasten to secure his post . the street he have to guard be very narrow , and closely line with house , which project and overhang the roadway ; but narrow and dark as it be , since it open upon the market - place of the town , the main issue of the battle would probably fall to be decide on that spot . 

 the market - place be full of townspeople flee in disorder ; but there be as yet no sign of any foeman ready to attack , and Dick judge he have some time before he to make ready his defence . 

 the two house at the end stand desert , with open door , as the inhabitant have leave they in their flight , and from these he have the furniture hastily toss forth and pile into a barrier in the entry of the lane . a hundred man be place at his disposal , and of these he throw the more part into the house , where they might lie in shelter and deliver their arrow from the window . with the rest , under his own immediate eye , he line the barricade . 

 meanwhile the utmost uproar and confusion have continue to prevail throughout the town ; and what with the hurried clashing of bell , the sounding of trumpet , the swift movement of body of horse , the cry of the commander , and the shriek of woman , the noise be almost deafen to the ear . presently , little by little , the tumult begin to subside ; and soon after , file of man in armour and body of archer begin to assemble and form in line of battle in the market - place . 

 a large portion of this body be in murrey and blue , and in the mount knight who order their array Dick recognise Sir Daniel Brackley . 

 then there befall a long pause , which be follow by the almost simultaneous sounding of four trumpet from four different quarter of the town . a fifth rang in answer from the market - place , and at the same moment the file begin to move , and a shower of arrow rattle about the barricade , and sound like blow upon the wall of the two flank house . 

 the attack have begin , by a common signal , on all the five issue of the quarter . Gloucester be beleaguer upon every side ; and Dick judge , if he would make good his post , he must rely entirely on the hundred man of his command . 

 seven volley of arrow follow one upon the other , and in the very thick of the discharge Dick be touch from behind upon the arm , and find a page hold out to he a leathern jack , strengthen with bright plate of mail . 

 " it be from my Lord of Gloucester , " say the page . " he hath observe , Sir Richard , that ye go unarmed . " 

 Dick , with a glow at his heart at be so address , get to his foot and , with the assistance of the page , don the defensive coat . even as he do so , two arrow rattle harmlessly upon the plate , and a third strike down the page , mortally wound , at his foot . 

 meantime the whole body of the enemy have be steadily draw nearer across the market - place ; and by this time be so close at hand that Dick give the order to return their shot . immediately , from behind the barrier and from the window of the house , a counterblast of arrow speed , carry death . but the Lancastrians , as if they have but wait for a signal , shout loudly in answer ; and begin to close at a run upon the barrier , the horseman still hang back , with visor lower . 

 then follow an obstinate and deadly struggle , hand to hand . the assailant , wield their falchion with one hand , strove with the other to drag down the structure of the barricade . on the other side , the part be reverse ; and the defender expose themselves like madman to protect their rampart . so for some minute the contest rag almost in silence , friend and foe fall one upon another . but it be always the easy to destroy ; and when a single note upon the tucket recall the attack party from this desperate service , much of the barricade have be remove piecemeal , and the whole fabric have sink to half its height , and totter to a general fall . 

 and now the footman in the market - place fall back , at a run , on every side . the horseman , who have be stand in a line two deep , wheel suddenly , and make their flank into their front ; and as swift as a striking adder , the long , steel - clothe column be launch upon the ruinous barricade . 

 of the first two horseman , one fall , rider and steed , and be ride down by his companion . the second leap clean upon the summit of the rampart , transpierce an archer with his lance . almost in the same instant he be drag from the saddle and his horse despatch . 

 and then the full weight and impetus of the charge burst upon and scatter the defender . the man - at - arm , surmount their fall comrade , and carry onward by the fury of their onslaught , dash through Dick s broken line and pour thunder up the lane beyond , as a stream bestride and pour across a broken dam . 

 yet be the fight not over . still , in the narrow jaw of the entrance , Dick and a few survivor ply their bill like woodman ; and already , across the width of the passage , there have be form a second , a high , and a more effectual rampart of fallen man and disembowel horse , lash in the agony of death . 

 baffle by this fresh obstacle , the remainder of the cavalry fall back ; and as , at the sight of this movement , the flight of arrow redouble from the casement of the house , their retreat have , for a moment , almost degenerate into flight . 

 almost at the same time , those who have cross the barricade and charge far up the street , be meet before the door of the Chequers by the formidable hunchback and the whole reserve of the Yorkists , begin to come scatter backward , in the excess of disarray and terror . 

 Dick and his fellow face about , fresh man pour out of the house ; a cruel blast of arrow meet the fugitive full in the face , while Gloucester be already rid down their rear ; in the inside of a minute and a half there be no living Lancastrian in the street . 

 then , and not till then , do Dick hold up his reeking blade and give the word to cheer . 

 meanwhile Gloucester dismount from his horse and come forward to inspect the post . his face be as pale as linen ; but his eye shine in his head like some strange jewel , and his voice , when he speak , be hoarse and break with the exultation of battle and success . he look at the rampart , which neither friend nor foe could now approach without precaution , so fiercely do the horse struggle in the throe of death , and at the sight of that great carnage he smile upon one side . 

 " despatch these horse , " he say ; " they keep you from your vantage . Richard Shelton , " he add , " ye have please I . Kneel . " 

 the Lancastrians have already resume their archery , and the shaft fall thick in the mouth of the street ; but the duke , mind they not at all , deliberately draw his sword and dub Richard a knight upon the spot . 

 " and now , Sir Richard , " he continue , " if that ye see Lord Risingham , send I an express upon the instant . be it your last man , let I hear of it incontinently . I have rather venture the post than lose my stroke at he . for mark I , all of ye , " he add , raise his voice , " if Earl Risingham fall by another hand than mine , I shall count this victory a defeat . " 

 " my lord duke , " say one of his attendant , " be your grace not weary of expose his dear life unneedfully ? why tarry we here ? " 

 " Catesby , " return the duke , " here be the battle , not elsewhere . the rest be but feigned onslaught . here must we vanquish . and for the exposure if ye be an ugly hunchback , and the child gecke at you upon the street , ye would count your body cheap , and an hour of glory worth a life . Howbeit , if ye will , let we ride on and visit the other post . Sir Richard here , my namesake , he shall still hold this entry , where he wadeth to the ankle in hot blood . he can we trust . but mark it , Sir Richard , ye be not yet do . the bad be yet to ward . sleep not . " 

 he come right up to young Shelton , look he hard in the eye , and take his hand in both of his , give it so extreme a squeeze that the blood have nearly spurt . Dick quail before his eye . the insane excitement , the courage , and the cruelty that he read therein fill he with dismay about the future . this young duke s be indeed a gallant spirit , to ride foremost in the rank of war ; but after the battle , in the day of peace and in the circle of his trust friend , that mind , it be to be dread , would continue to bring forth the fruit of death . 

 CHAPTER III the battle of SHOREBY   conclude 

 Dick , once more left to his own counsel , begin to look about he . the arrow - shot have somewhat slacken . on all side the enemy be fall back ; and the great part of the market - place be now leave empty , the snow here trample into orange mud , there splash with gore , scatter all over with dead man and horse , and bristle thick with feather arrow . 

 on his own side the loss have be cruel . the jaw of the little street and the ruin of the barricade be heap with the dead and die ; and out of the hundred man with whom he have begin the battle , there be not seventy left who could still stand to arm . 

 at the same time , the day be pass . the first reinforcement might be look for to arrive at any moment ; and the Lancastrians , already shake by the result of their desperate but unsuccessful onslaught , be in an ill temper to support a fresh invader . 

 there be a dial in the wall of one of the two flank house ; and this , in the frosty winter sunshine , indicate ten of the forenoon . 

 Dick turn to the man who be at his elbow , a little insignificant archer , bind a cut in his arm . 

 " it be well fight , " he say , " and , by my sooth , they will not charge we twice . " 

 " Sir , " say the little archer , " ye have fight right well for York , and well for yourself . never hath man in so brief space prevail so greatly on the duke s affection . that he should have entrust such a post to one he know not be a marvel . but look to your head , Sir Richard ! if ye be vanquish ay , if ye give way one foot s breadth axe or cord shall punish it ; and I be set if ye do aught doubtful , I will tell you honestly , here to stab you from behind . " 

 Dick look at the little man in amaze . 

 " you ! " he cry . " and from behind ! " 

 " it be right so , " return the archer ; " and because I like not the affair I tell it you . Ye must make the post good , Sir Richard , at your peril . o , our crookback be a bold blade and a good warrior ; but , whether in cold blood or in hot , he will have all thing do exact to his commandment . if any fail or hinder , they shall die the death . " 

 " now , by the saint ! " cry Richard , " be this so ? and will man follow such a leader ? " 

 " Nay , they follow he gleefully , " reply the other ; " for if he be exact to punish , he be most open - handed to reward . and if he spare not the blood and sweat of other , he be ever liberal of his own , still in the first front of battle , still the last to sleep . he will go far , will crookback Dick o Gloucester ! " 

 the young knight , if he have before be brave and vigilant , be now all the more inclined to watchfulness and courage . his sudden favour , he begin to perceive , have bring peril in its train . and he turn from the archer , and once more scan anxiously the market - place . it lie empty as before . 

 " I like not this quietude , " he say . " doubtless they prepare we some surprise . " 

 and , as if in answer to his remark , the archer begin once more to advance against the barricade , and the arrow to fall thick . but there be something hesitate in the attack . they come not on roundly , but seem rather to await a further signal . 

 Dick look uneasily about he , spy for a hidden danger . and sure enough , about half way up the little street , a door be suddenly open from within , and the house continue , for some second , and both by door and window , to disgorge a torrent of lancastrian archer . these , as they leap down , hurriedly stand to their rank , bent their bow , and proceed to pour upon Dick s rear a flight of arrow . 

 at the same time , the assailant in the market - place redouble their shot , and begin to close in stoutly upon the barricade . 

 Dick call down his whole command out of the house , and face they both way , and encourage their valour both by word and gesture , return as good he could the double shower of shaft that fall about his post . 

 meanwhile house after house be open in the street , and the Lancastrians continue to pour out of the door and leap down from the window , shout victory , until the number of enemy upon Dick s rear be almost equal to the number in his face . it be plain that he could hold the post no long ; what be bad , even if he could have hold it , it have now become useless ; and the whole Yorkist army lie in a posture of helplessness upon the brink of a complete disaster . 

 the man behind he form the vital flaw in the general defence ; and it be upon these that Dick turn , charge at the head of his man . so vigorous be the attack , that the lancastrian archer give ground and stagger , and , at last , break their rank , begin to crowd back into the house from which they have so recently and so vaingloriously sallied . 

 meanwhile the man from the market - place have swarm across the undefended barricade , and fall on hotly upon the other side ; and Dick must once again face about , and proceed to drive they back . once again the spirit of his man prevail ; they clear the street in a triumphant style , but even as they do so the other issue again out of the house , and take they , a third time , upon the rear . 

 the Yorkists begin to be scatter ; several time Dick find himself alone among his foe and ply his bright sword for life ; several time he be conscious of a hurt . and meanwhile the fight sway to and fro in the street without determinate result . 

 suddenly Dick be aware of a great trumpeting about the outskirt of the town . the war - cry of York begin to be roll up to heaven , as by many and triumphant voice . and at the same time the man in front of he begin to give ground rapidly , stream out of the street and back upon the market - place . some one give the word to fly . trumpet be blow distractedly , some for a rally , some to charge . it be plain that a great blow have be strike , and the Lancastrians be throw , at least for the moment , into full disorder , and some degree of panic . 

 and then , like a theatre trick , there follow the last act of Shoreby Battle . the man in front of Richard turn tail , like a dog that have be whistle home , and flee like the wind . at the same moment there come through the market - place a storm of horseman , flee and pursue , the Lancastrians turn back to strike with the sword , the Yorkists rid they down at the point of the lance . 

 conspicuous in the mellay , Dick behold the Crookback . he be already give a foretaste of that furious valour and skill to cut his way across the rank of war , which , year afterwards upon the field of Bosworth , and when he be stain with crime , almost suffice to change the fortune of the day and the destiny of the english throne . evade , striking , rid down , he so forced and so manoeuvre his strong horse , so aptly defend himself , and so liberally scatter death to his opponent , that he be now far ahead of the foremost of his knight , hew his way , with the truncheon of a bloody sword , to where Lord Risingham be rally the brave . a moment more and they have meet ; the tall , splendid , and famous warrior against the deformed and sickly boy . 

 yet Shelton have never a doubt of the result ; and when the fight next open for a moment , the figure of the earl have disappear ; but still , in the first of the danger , Crookback Dick be launch his big horse and ply the truncheon of his sword . 

 thus , by Shelton s courage in hold the mouth of the street against the first attack , and by the opportune arrival of his seven hundred reinforcement , the lad , who be afterwards to be hand down to the execration of posterity under the name of Richard III . , have win his first considerable fight . 

 CHAPTER IV the sack of SHOREBY 

 there be not a foe leave within striking distance ; and Dick , as he look ruefully about he on the remainder of his gallant force , begin to count the cost of victory . he be himself , now that the danger be end , so stiff and sore , so bruised and cut and break , and , above all , so utterly exhaust by his desperate and unremitting labour in the fight , that he seem incapable of any fresh exertion . 

 but this be not yet the hour for repose . Shoreby have be take by assault ; and though an open town , and not in any manner to be charge with the resistance , it be plain that these rough fighter would be not less rough now that the fight be over , and that the more horrid part of war would fall to be enact . Richard of Gloucester be not the captain to protect the citizen from his infuriated soldiery ; and even if he have the will , it might be question if he have the power . 

 it be , therefore , Dick s business to find and to protect Joanna ; and with that end he look about he at the face of his man . the three or four who seem likeli to be obedient and to keep sober he draw aside ; and promise they a rich reward and a special recommendation to the duke , lead they across the market - place , now empty of horseman , and into the street upon the further side . 

 every here and there small combat of from two to a dozen still rag upon the open street ; here and there a house be be besiege , the defender throw out stool and table on the head of the assailant . the snow be strew with arm and corps ; but except for these partial combat the street be desert , and the house , some stand open , and some shutter and barricade , have for the most part cease to give out smoke . 

 Dick , thread the skirt of these skirmisher , lead his follower briskly in the direction of the abbey church ; but when he come the length of the main street , a cry of horror break from his lip . Sir Daniel s great house have be carry by assault . the gate hang in splinter from the hinge , and a double throng keep pour in and out through the entrance , seek and carry booty . meanwhile , in the upper storey , some resistance be still be offer to the pillager ; for just as Dick come within eyeshot of the building , a casement be burst open from within , and a poor wretch in murrey and blue , scream and resist , be force through the embrasure and toss into the street below . 

 the most sickening apprehension fall upon Dick . he run forward like one possess , force his way into the house among the foremost , and mount without pause to the chamber on the third floor where he have last part from Joanna . it be a mere wreck ; the furniture have be overthrow , the cupboard break open , and in one place a trail corner of the arra lie smoulder on the ember of the fire . 

 Dick , almost without thinking , trod out the incipient conflagration , and then stand bewilder . Sir Daniel , Sir Oliver , Joanna , all be go ; but whether butcher in the rout or safe escape from Shoreby , who should say ? 

 he catch a pass archer by the tabard . 

 " Fellow , " he ask , " be ye here when this house be take ? " 

 " let be , " say the archer . " a murrain ! let be , or I strike . " 

 " Hark ye , " return Richard , " two can play at that . stand and be plain . " 

 but the man , flush with drink and battle , strike Dick upon the shoulder with one hand , while with the other he twitch away his garment . thereupon the full wrath of the young leader burst from his control . he seize the fellow in his strong embrace , and crush he on the plate of his mailed bosom like a child ; then , hold he at arm s length , he bid he speak as he value life . 

 " I pray you mercy ! " gasp the archer . " an I have think ye be so angry I would a be charier of cross you . I be here indeed . " 

 " know ye Sir Daniel ? " pursue Dick . 

 " well do I know he , " return the man . 

 " be he in the mansion ? " 

 " ay , sir , he be , " answer the archer ; " but even as we enter by the yard gate he ride forth by the garden . " 

 " alone ? " cry Dick . 

 " he may a have a score of lance with he , " say the man . 

 " lance ! no woman , then ? " ask Shelton . 

 " Troth , I see not , " say the archer . " but there be none in the house , if that be your quest . " 

 " I thank you , " say Dick . " here be a piece for your pain . " but grope in his wallet , Dick find nothing . " inquire for I to - morrow , " he add " Richard Shelt Sir Richard Shelton , " he correct , " and I will see you handsomely reward . " 

 and then an idea strike Dick . he hastily descend to the courtyard , run with all his might across the garden , and come to the great door of the church . it stand wide open ; within , every corner of the pavement be crowd with fugitive burgher , surround by their family and laden with the most precious of their possession , while , at the high altar , priest in full canonical be implore the mercy of God . even as Dick enter , the loud chorus begin to thunder in the vaulted roof . 

 he hurry through the group of refugee , and come to the door of the stair that lead into the steeple . and here a tall churchman step before he and arrest his advance . 

 " Whither , my son ? " he ask , severely . 

 " my father , " answer Dick , " I be here upon an errand of expedition . stay I not . I command here for my Lord of Gloucester . " 

 " for my Lord of Gloucester ? " repeat the priest . " Hath , then , the battle go so sore ? " 

 " the battle , father , be at an end , Lancaster clean speed , my Lord of Risingham Heaven rest he ! leave upon the field . and now , with your good leave , I follow mine affair . " and thrust on one side the priest , who seem stupefied at the news , Dick push open the door and rattle up the stair four at a bound , and without pause or stumble , till he step upon the open platform at the top . 

 Shoreby Church tower not only command the town , as in a map , but look far , on both side , over sea and land . it be now near upon noon ; the day exceed bright , the snow dazzling . and as Dick look around he , he could measure the consequence of the battle . 

 a confused , growl uproar reach he from the street , and now and then , but very rarely , the clash of steel . not a ship , not so much as a skiff remain in harbour ; but the sea be dot with sail and row - boat laden with fugitive . on shore , too , the surface of the snowy meadow be break up with band of horseman , some cut their way towards the border of the forest , other , who be doubtless of the Yorkist side , stoutly interpose and beat they back upon the town . over all the open ground there lie a prodigious quantity of fallen man and horse , clearly define upon the snow . 

 to complete the picture , those of the foot soldier as have not find place upon a ship still keep up an archery combat on the border of the port , and from the cover of the shoreside tavern . in that quarter , also , one or two house have be fire , and the smoke tower high in the frosty sunlight , and blow off to sea in voluminous fold . 

 already close upon the margin of the wood , and somewhat in the line of Holywood , one particular clump of flee horseman rivet the attention of the young watcher on the tower . it be fairly numerous ; in no other quarter of the field do so many Lancastrians still hold together ; thus they have leave a wide , discolour wake upon the snow , and Dick be able to trace they step by step from where they have leave the town . 

 while Dick stand watch they , they have gain , unopposed , the first fringe of the leafless forest , and , turn a little from their direction , the sun fall for a moment full on their array , as it be relieve against the dusky wood . 

 " Murrey and blue ! " cry Dick . " I swear it murrey and blue ! " 

 the next moment he be descend the stairway . 

 it be now his business to seek out the Duke of Gloucester , who alone , in the disorder of the force , might be able to supply he with a sufficiency of man . the fighting in the main town be now practically at an end ; and as Dick run hither and thither , seek the commander , the street be thick with wander soldier , some laden with more booty than they could well stagger under , other shout drunk . none of they , when question , have the least notion of the duke s whereabouts ; and , at last , it be by sheer good fortune that Dick find he , where he sit in the saddle direct operation to dislodge the archer from the harbour side . 

 " Sir Richard Shelton , ye be well find , " he say . " I owe you one thing that I value little , my life ; and one that I can never pay you for , this victory . Catesby , if I have ten such captain as Sir Richard , I would march forthright on London . but now , sir , claim your reward . " 

 " freely , my lord , " say Dick , " freely and loudly . one hath escape to whom I owe some grudge , and take with he one whom I owe love and service . give I , then , fifty lance , that I may pursue ; and for any obligation that your graciousness be pleased to allow , it shall be clean discharge . " 

 " how call ye he ? " inquire the duke . 

 " Sir Daniel Brackley , " answer Richard . 

 " out upon he , double - face ! " cry Gloucester . " here be no reward , Sir Richard ; here be fresh service offer , and , if that ye bring his head to I , a fresh debt upon my conscience . Catesby , get he these lance ; and you , sir , bethink ye , in the meanwhile , what pleasure , honour , or profit it shall be mine to give you . " 

 just then the Yorkist skirmisher carry one of the shoreside tavern , swarm in upon it on three side , and drive out or take its defender . Crookback Dick be pleased to cheer the exploit , and push his horse a little nearer , call to see the prisoner . 

 there be four or five of they two man of my Lord Shoreby s and one of Lord Risingham s among the number , and last , but in Dick s eye not least , a tall , shambling , grizzle old shipman , between drunk and sober , and with a dog whimpering and jump at his heel . 

 the young duke pass they for a moment under a severe review . 

 " good , " he say . " hang they . " 

 and he turn the other way to watch the progress of the fight . 

 " my lord , " say Dick , " so please you , I have find my reward . grant I the life and liberty of yon old shipman . " 

 Gloucester turn and look the speaker in the face . 

 " Sir Richard , " he say , " I make not war with peacock s feather , but steel shaft . those that be mine enemy I slay , and that without excuse or favour . for , bethink ye , in this realm of England , that be so torn in piece , there be not a man of mine but hath a brother or a friend upon the other party . if , then , I do begin to grant these pardon , I might sheathe my sword . " 

 " it may be so , my lord ; and yet I will be overbold , and at the risk of your disfavour , recall your lordship s promise , " reply Dick . 

 Richard of Gloucester flush . 

 " mark it right well , " he say , harshly . " I love not mercy , nor yet mercymonger . Ye have this day lay the foundation of high fortune . if ye oppose to I my word , which I have plight , I will yield . but , by the glory of heaven , there your favour die ! 

 " mine be the loss , " say Dick . 

 " give he his sailor , " say the duke ; and wheel his horse , he turn his back upon young Shelton . 

 Dick be nor glad nor sorry . he have see too much of the young duke to set great store on his affection ; and the origin and growth of his own favour have be too flimsy and too rapid to inspire much confidence . one thing alone he fear that the vindictive leader might revoke the offer of the lance . but here he do justice neither to Gloucester s honour   such as it be   nor , above all , to his decision . if he have once judge Dick to be the right man to pursue Sir Daniel , he be not one to change ; and he soon prove it by shout after Catesby to be speedy , for the paladin be wait . 

 in the meanwhile , Dick turn to the old shipman , who have seem equally indifferent to his condemnation and to his subsequent release . 

 " Arblaster , " say Dick , " I have do you ill ; but now , by the rood , I think I have clear the score . " 

 but the old skipper only look upon he dully and hold his peace . 

 " come , " continue Dick , " a life be a life , old shrew , and it be more than ship or liquor . say ye forgive I ; for if your life be worth nothing to you , it hath cost I the beginning of my fortune . come , I have pay for it dearly ; be not so churlish . " 

 " An I have have my ship , " say Arblaster , " I would a be forth and safe on the high sea I and my man Tom . but ye take my ship , gossip , and I m a beggar ; and for my man Tom , a knave fellow in russet shoot he down . Murrain ! quoth he , and spake never again . Murrain be the last of his word , and the poor spirit of he pass . a will never sail no more , will my Tom . " 

 Dick be seize with unavaile penitence and pity ; he seek to take the skipper s hand , but Arblaster avoid his touch . 

 " Nay , " say he , " let be . Y have play the devil with I , and let that content you . " 

 the word die in Richard s throat . he see , through tear , the poor old man , bemuse with liquor and sorrow , go shamble away , with bow head , across the snow , and the unnoticed dog whimpering at his heel , and for the first time begin to understand the desperate game that we play in life ; and how a thing once do be not to be change or remedie , by any penitence . 

 but there be no time leave to he for vain regret . 

 Catesby have now collect the horseman , and rid up to Dick he dismount , and offer he his own horse . 

 " this morning , " he say , " I be somewhat jealous of your favour ; it hath not be of a long growth ; and now , Sir Richard , it be with a very good heart that I offer you this horse to ride away with . " 

 " suffer I yet a moment , " reply Dick . " this favour of mine whereupon be it found ? " 

 " upon your name , " answer Catesby . " it be my lord s chief superstition . be my name Richard , I should be an earl to - morrow . " 

 " well , sir , I thank you , " return Dick ; " and since I be little likely to follow these great fortune , I will even say farewell . I will not pretend I be displeased to think myself upon the road to fortune ; but I will not pretend , neither , that I be over - sorry to be do with it . command and rich , they be brave thing , to be sure ; but a word in your ear yon duke of your , he be a fearsome lad . " 

 Catesby laugh . 

 " Nay , " say he , " of a verity he that rid with Crooked Dick will ride deep . well , God keep we all from evil ! speed ye well . " 

 Thereupon Dick put himself at the head of his man , and give the word of command , ride off . 

 he make straight across the town , follow what he suppose to be the route of Sir Daniel , and spy around for any sign that might decide if he be right . 

 the street be strew with the dead and the wound , whose fate , in the bitter frost , be far the more pitiable . gang of the victor go from house to house , pillaging and stabbing , and sometimes sing together as they go . 

 from different quarter , as he ride on , the sound of violence and outrage come to young Shelton s ear ; now the blow of the sledge - hammer on some barricaded door , and now the miserable shriek of woman . 

 Dick s heart have just be awaken . he have just see the cruel consequence of his own behaviour ; and the thought of the sum of misery that be now act in the whole of Shoreby fill he with despair . 

 at length he reach the outskirt , and there , sure enough , he see straight before he the same broad , beat track across the snow that he have mark from the summit of the church . here , then , he go the fast on ; but still , as he ride , he keep a bright eye upon the fall man and horse that lie beside the track . many of these , he be relieve to see , wear Sir Daniel s colour , and the face of some , who lie upon their back , he even recognise . 

 about half - way between the town and the forest , those whom he be follow have plainly be assail by archer ; for the corps lie pretty closely scatter , each pierce by an arrow . and here Dick spy among the rest the body of a very young lad , whose face be somehow hauntingly familiar to he . 

 he halt his troop , dismount , and raise the lad s head . as he do so , the hood fall back , and a profusion of long brown hair unroll itself . at the same time the eye open . 

 " Ah ! lion driver ! " say a feeble voice . " she be far on . ride ride fast ! " 

 and then the poor young lady faint once again . 

 one of Dick s man carry a flask of some strong cordial , and with this Dick succeed in revive consciousness . then he take Joanna s friend upon his saddlebow , and once more push toward the forest . 

 " why do ye take I ? " say the girl . " ye but delay your speed . " 

 " Nay , Mistress Risingham , " reply Dick . " Shoreby be full of blood and drunkenness and riot . here ye be safe ; content ye . " 

 " I will not be beholden to any of your faction , " she cry ; " set I down . " 

 " Madam , ye know not what ye say , " return Dick . " Y be hurt " 

 " I be not , " she say . " it be my horse be slay . " 

 " it matter not one jot , " reply Richard . " Ye be here in the midst of open snow , and compass about with enemy . whether ye will or not , I carry you with I . Glad be I to have the occasion ; for thus shall I repay some portion of our debt . " 

 for a little while she be silent . then , very suddenly , she ask : 

 " my uncle ? " 

 " my Lord Risingham ? " return Dick . " I would I have good news to give you , madam ; but I have none . I see he once in the battle , and once only . let we hope the good . " 

 CHAPTER V NIGHT in the WOODS : ALICIA risingham 

 it be almost certain that Sir Daniel have make for the Moat House ; but , consider the heavy snow , the lateness of the hour , and the necessity under which he would lie of avoid the few road and strike across the wood , it be equally certain that he could not hope to reach it ere the morrow . 

 there be two course open to Dick ; either to continue to follow in the knight s trail , and , if he be able , to fall upon he that very night in camp , or to strike out a path of his own , and seek to place himself between Sir Daniel and his destination . 

 either scheme be open to serious objection , and Dick , who fear to expose Joanna to the hazard of a fight , have not yet decide between they when he reach the border of the wood . 

 at this point Sir Daniel have turn a little to his left , and then plunge straight under a grove of very lofty timber . his party have then form to a narrow front , in order to pass between the tree , and the track be trod proportionally deeply in the snow . the eye follow it under the leafless tracery of the oak , run direct and narrow ; the tree stand over it , with knotty joint and the great , uplifted forest of their bough ; there be no sound , whether of man or beast not so much as the stirring of a robin ; and over the field of snow the winter sun lie golden among netted shadow . 

 " how say ye , " ask Dick of one of the man , " to follow straight on , or strike across for Tunstall ? " 

 " Sir Richard , " reply the man - at - arm , " I would follow the line until they scatter . " 

 " Ye be , doubtless , right , " return Dick ; " but we come right hastily upon the errand , even as the time command . here be no house , neither for food nor shelter , and by the morrow s dawn we shall know both cold finger and an empty belly . how say ye , lad ? will ye stand a pinch for expedition s sake , or shall we turn by Holywood and sup with Mother Church ? the case be somewhat doubtful , I will drive no man ; yet if ye would suffer I to lead you , ye would choose the first . " 

 the man answer , almost with one voice , that they would follow Sir Richard where he would . 

 and Dick , set spur to his horse , begin once more to go forward . 

 the snow in the trail have be tread very hard , and the pursuer have thus a great advantage over the pursued . they push on , indeed , at a round trot , two hundred hoof beat alternately on the dull pavement of the snow , and the jingle of weapon and the snorting of horse raise a warlike noise along the arch of the silent wood . 

 presently , the wide slot of the pursued come out upon the high road from Holywood ; it be there , for a moment , indistinguishable ; and , where it once more plunge into the unbeaten snow upon the farth side , Dick be surprised to see it narrow and light trod . plainly , profit by the road , Sir Daniel have begin already to scatter his command . 

 at all hazard , one chance be equal to another , Dick continue to pursue the straight trail ; and that , after an hour s riding , in which it lead into the very depth of the forest , suddenly split , like a burst shell , into two dozen other , lead to every point of the compass . 

 Dick draw bridle in despair . the short winter s day be near an end ; the sun , a dull red orange , shorn of ray , swam low among the leafless thicket ; the shadow be a mile long upon the snow ; the frost bit cruelly at the finger - nail ; and the breath and steam of the horse mount in a cloud . 

 " well , we be outwit , " Dick confess . " strike we for Holywood , after all . it be still near we than Tunstall or should be by the station of the sun . " 

 so they wheel to their left , turn their back on the red shield of sun , and make across country for the abbey . but now time be change with they ; they could no long spank forth briskly on a path beat firm by the passage of their foe , and for a goal to which that path itself conduct they . now they must plough at a dull pace through the encumbering snow , continually pause to decide their course , continually flounder in drift . the sun soon leave they ; the glow of the west decay ; and presently they be wander in a shadow of blackness , under frosty star . 

 presently , indeed , the moon would clear the hilltop , and they might resume their march . but till then , every random step might carry they wider of their march . there be nothing for it but to camp and wait . 

 sentry be post ; a spot of ground be clear of snow , and , after some failure , a good fire blaze in the midst . the man - at - arm sit close about this forest hearth , share such provision as they have , and pass about the flask ; and Dick , have collect the most delicate of the rough and scanty fare , bring it to Lord Risingham s niece , where she sit apart from the soldiery against a tree . 

 she sit upon one horse - cloth , wrap in another , and star straight before she at the firelit scene . at the offer of food she start , like one waken from a dream , and then silently refuse . 

 " Madam , " say Dick , " let I beseech you , punish I not so cruelly . wherein I have offend you , I know not ; I have , indeed , carry you away , but with a friendly violence ; I have , indeed , expose you to the inclemency of night , but the hurry that lie upon I hath for its end the preservation of another , who be no less frail and no less unfriended than yourself . at least , madam , punish not yourself ; and eat , if not for hunger , then for strength . " 

 " I will eat nothing at the hand that slay my kinsman , " she reply . 

 " dear madam , " Dick cry , " I swear to you upon the rood I touch he not . " 

 " swear to I that he still live , " she return . 

 " I will not palter with you , " answer Dick . " pity bid I to wound you . in my heart I do believe he dead . " 

 " and ye ask I to eat ! " she cry . " ay , and they call you sir ! Y have win your spur by my good kinsman s murder . and have I not be fool and traitor both , and save you in your enemy s house , ye should have die the death , and he he that be worth twelve of you be live . " 

 " I do but my man s good , even as your kinsman do upon the other party , " answer Dick . " be he still live as I vow to Heaven I wish it ! he would praise , not blame I . " 

 " Sir Daniel hath tell I , " she reply . " he mark you at the barricade . upon you , he saith , their party founder ; it be you that win the battle . well , then , it be you that kill my good Lord Risingham , as sure as though ye have strangle he . and ye would have I eat with you and your hand not wash from kill ? but Sir Daniel hath swear your downfall . he ti that will avenge I ! " 

 the unfortunate Dick be plunge in gloom . Old Arblaster return upon his mind , and he groan aloud . 

 " do ye hold I so guilty ? " he say ; " you that defend I you that be Joanna s friend ? " 

 " what make ye in the battle ? " she retort . " Y be of no party ; y be but a lad but leg and body , without government of wit or counsel ! wherefore do ye fight ? for the love of hurt , pardy ! " 

 " Nay , " cry Dick , " I know not . but as the realm of England go , if that a poor gentleman fight not upon the one side , perforce he must fight upon the other . he may not stand alone ; tis not in nature . " 

 " they that have no judgment should not draw the sword , " reply the young lady . " ye that fight but for a hazard , what be ye but a butcher ? War be but noble by the cause , and y have disgrace it . " 

 " Madam , " say the miserable Dick , " I do partly see mine error . I have make too much haste ; I have be busy before my time . already I steal a ship thinking , I do swear it , to do well and thereby bring about the death of many innocent , and the grief and ruin of a poor old man whose face this very day hath stab I like a dagger . and for this morning , I do but design to do myself credit , and get fame to marry with , and , behold ! I have bring about the death of your dear kinsman that be good to I . and what besides , I know not . for , alas ! I may have set York upon the throne , and that may be the worse cause , and may do hurt to England . o , madam , I do see my sin . I be unfit for life . I will , for penance sake and to avoid bad evil , once I have finish this adventure , get I to a cloister . I will forswear Joanna and the trade of arm . I will be a friar , and pray for your good kinsman s spirit all my day . " 

 it appear to Dick , in this extremity of his humiliation and repentance , that the young lady have laugh . 

 raise his countenance , he find she look down upon he , in the fire - light , with a somewhat peculiar but not unkind expression . 

 " Madam , " he cry , think the laughter to have be an illusion of his hearing , but still , from her change look , hop to have touch her heart , " madam , will not this content you ? I give up all to undo what I have do amiss ; I make heaven certain for Lord Risingham . and all this upon the very day that I have win my spur , and think myself the happy young gentleman on ground . " 

 " o boy , " she say " good boy ! " 

 and then , to the extreme surprise of Dick , she first very tenderly wipe the tear away from his cheek , and then , as if yield to a sudden impulse , throw both her arm about his neck , draw up his face , and kiss he . a pitiful bewilderment come over simple - minded Dick . 

 " but come , " she say , with great cheerfulness , " you that be a captain , ye must eat . why sup ye not ? " 

 " Dear Mistress Risingham , " reply Dick , " I do but wait first upon my prisoner ; but , to say truth , penitence will no long suffer I to endure the sight of food . I be well to fast , dear lady , and to pray . " 

 " call I Alicia , " she say ; " be we not old friend ? and now , come , I will eat with you , bit for bit and sup for sup ; so if ye eat not , neither will I ; but if ye eat hearty , I will dine like a ploughman . " 

 so there and then she fall to ; and Dick , who have an excellent stomach , proceed to bear her company , at first with great reluctance , but gradually , as he enter into the spirit , with more and more vigour and devotion : until , at last , he forget even to watch his model , and most heartily repair the expense of his day of labour and excitement . 

 " Lion - driver , " she say , at length , " ye do not admire a maid in a man s jerkin ? " 

 the moon be now up ; and they be only wait to repose the weary horse . by the moon s light , the still penitent but now well - feed Richard behold her look somewhat coquettishly down upon he . 

 " Madam " he stammer , surprised at this new turn in her manner . 

 " Nay , " she interrupt , " it skill not to deny ; Joanna hath tell I , but come , Sir Lion - driver , look at I be I so homely come ! " 

 and she make bright eye at he . 

 " Ye be something smallish , indeed " begin Dick . 

 and here again she interrupt he , this time with a ringing peal of laughter that complete his confusion and surprise . 

 " smallish ! " she cry . " Nay , now , be honest as ye be bold ; I be a dwarf , or little well ; but for all that come , tell I ! for all that , passably fair to look upon ; be t not so ? " 

 " Nay , madam , exceedingly fair , " say the distressed knight , pitifully try to seem easy . 

 " and a man would be right glad to we d I ? " she pursue . 

 " o , madam , right glad ! " agree Dick . 

 " call I Alicia , " say she . 

 " Alicia , " quoth Sir Richard . 

 " well , then , lion - driver , " she continue , " sith that ye slay my kinsman , and leave I without stay , ye owe I , in honour , every reparation ; do ye not ? " 

 " I do , madam , " say Dick . " although , upon my heart , I do hold I but partially guilty of that brave knight s blood . " 

 " would ye evade I ? " she cry . 

 " Madam , not so . I have tell you ; at your bidding , I will even turn I a monk , " say Richard . 

 " then , in honour , ye belong to I ? " she conclude . 

 " in honour , madam , I suppose " begin the young man . 

 " go to ! " she interrupt ; " ye be too full of catch . in honour do ye belong to I , till ye have pay the evil ? " 

 " in honour , I do , " say Dick . 

 " hear , then , " she continue ; " Ye would make but a sad friar , methink ; and since I be to dispose of you at pleasure , I will even take you for my husband . Nay , now , no word ! " cry she . " they will avail you nothing . for see how just it be , that you who deprive I of one home , should supply I with another . and as for Joanna , she will be the first , believe I , to commend the change ; for , after all , as we be dear friend , what matter it with which of we ye we d ? not one whit ! " 

 " Madam , " say Dick , " I will go into a cloister , an ye please to bid I ; but to we d with anyone in this big world besides Joanna Sedley be what I will consent to neither for man s force nor yet for lady s pleasure . pardon I if I speak my plain thought plainly ; but where a maid be very bold , a poor man must even be the bolder . " 

 " Dick , " she say , " ye sweet boy , ye must come and kiss I for that word . Nay , fear not , ye shall kiss I for Joanna ; and when we meet , I shall give it back to she , and say I steal it . and as for what ye owe I , why , dear simpleton , methink ye be not alone in that great battle ; and even if York be on the throne , it be not you that set he there . but for a good , sweet , honest heart , Dick , y be all that ; and if I could find it in my soul to envy your Joanna anything , I would even envy she your love . " 

 CHAPTER VI NIGHT in the WOODS   conclude : DICK and JOAN 

 the horse have by this time finish the small store of provender , and fully breathe from their fatigue . at Dick s command , the fire be smother in snow ; and while his man get once more wearily to saddle , he himself , remembering , somewhat late , true woodland caution , choose a tall oak and nimbly clamber to the topmost fork . hence he could look far abroad on the moonlit and snow - paven forest . on the south - west , dark against the horizon , stand those upland , heathy quarter where he and Joanna have meet with the terrifying misadventure of the leper . and there his eye be catch by a spot of ruddy brightness no big than a needle s eye . 

 he blame himself sharply for his previous neglect . be that , as it appear to be , the shining of Sir Daniel s camp - fire , he should long ago have see and march for it ; above all , he should , for no consideration , have announce his neighbourhood by light a fire of his own . but now he must no long squander valuable hour . the direct way to the upland be about two mile in length ; but it be cross by a very deep , precipitous dingle , impassable to mount man ; and for the sake of speed , it seem to Dick advisable to desert the horse and attempt the adventure on foot . 

 ten man be leave to guard the horse ; signal be agree upon by which they could communicate in case of need ; and Dick set forth at the head of the remainder , Alicia Risingham walk stoutly by his side . 

 the man have free themselves of heavy armour , and leave behind their lance ; and they now march with a very good spirit in the frozen snow , and under the exhilarate lustre of the moon . the descent into the dingle , where a stream strain sob through the snow and ice , be effect with silence and order ; and on the further side , be then within a short half mile of where Dick have see the glimmer of the fire , the party halt to breathe before the attack . 

 in the vast silence of the wood , the light sound be audible from far ; and Alicia , who be keen of hearing , hold up her finger warningly and stoop to listen . all follow her example ; but besides the groan of the choke brook in the dingle close behind , and the barking of a fox at a distance of many mile among the forest , to Dick s acute hearkening , not a breath be audible . 

 " but yet , for sure , I hear the clash of harness , " whisper Alicia . 

 " Madam , " return Dick , who be more afraid of that young lady than of ten stout warrior , " I would not hint ye be mistaken ; but it might well have come from either of the camp . " 

 " it come not thence . it come from westward , " she declare . 

 " it may be what it will , " return Dick ; " and it must be as heaven please . reck we not a jot , but push on the livelier , and put it to the touch . up , friend enough breathe . " 

 as they advance , the snow become more and more trample with hoof - mark , and it be plain that they be draw near to the encampment of a considerable force of mount man . presently they could see the smoke pour from among the tree , ruddily colour on its low edge and scatter bright spark . 

 and here , pursuant to Dick s order , his man begin to open out , creep stealthily in the covert , to surround on every side the camp of their opponent . he himself , place Alicia in the shelter of a bulky oak , steal straight forth in the direction of the fire . 

 at last , through an opening of the wood , his eye embrace the scene of the encampment . the fire have be build upon a heathy hummock of the ground , surround on three side by thicket , and it now burn very strong , roar aloud and brandish flame . around it there sit not quite a dozen people , warmly cloak ; but though the neighbouring snow be trample down as by a regiment , Dick look in vain for any horse . he begin to have a terrible misgiving that he be out - manoeuvre . at the same time , in a tall man with a steel salet , who be spread his hand before the blaze , he recognise his old friend and still kindly enemy , Bennet Hatch ; and in two other , sit a little back , he make out , even in their male disguise , Joanna Sedley and Sir Daniel s wife . 

 " well , " think he to himself , " even if I lose my horse , let I get my Joanna , and why should I complain ? " 

 and then , from the further side of the encampment , there come a little whistle , announce that his man have join , and the investment be complete . 

 Bennet , at the sound , start to his foot ; but ere he have time to spring upon his arm , Dick hail he . 

 " Bennet , " he say " Bennet , old friend , yield ye . ye will but spill man s life in vain , if ye resist . " 

 " Tis Master Shelton , by St. Barbary ! " cry Hatch . " yield I ? ye ask much . what force have ye ? " 

 " I tell you , Bennet , ye be both outnumber and begirt , " say Dick . " Casar and Charlemagne would cry for quarter . I have two score man at my whistle , and with one shoot of arrow I could answer for you all . " 

 " Master Dick , " say Bennet , " it go against my heart ; but I must do my duty . the saint help you ! " and therewith he raise a little tucket to his mouth and wound a rouse call . 

 then follow a moment of confusion ; for while Dick , fear for the lady , still hesitate to give the word to shoot , Hatch s little band spring to their weapon and form back to back as for a fierce resistance . in the hurry of their change of place , Joanna spring from her seat and run like an arrow to her lover s side . 

 " here , Dick ! " she cry , as she clasp his hand in her . 

 but Dick still stand irresolute ; he be yet young to the more deplorable necessity of war , and the thought of old Lady Brackley check the command upon his tongue . his own man become restive . some of they cry on he by name ; other , of their own accord , begin to shoot ; and at the first discharge poor Bennet bit the dust . then Dick awake . 

 " on ! " he cry . " Shoot , boy , and keep to cover . England and York ! " 

 but just then the dull beat of many horse on the snow suddenly arise in the hollow ear of the night , and , with incredible swiftness , draw near and swell louder . at the same time , answer tucket repeat and repeat Hatch s call . 

 " Rally , rally ! " cry Dick . " rally upon I ! rally for your life ! " 

 but his man afoot , scatter , take in the hour when they have count on an easy triumph begin instead to give ground severally , and either stand waver or disperse into the thicket . and when the first of the horseman come charge through the open avenue and fiercely rid their steed into the underwood , a few straggler be overthrow or spear among the brush , but the bulk of Dick s command have simply melt at the rumour of their come . 

 Dick stand for a moment , bitterly recognise the fruit of his precipitate and unwise valour . Sir Daniel have see the fire ; he have move out with his main force , whether to attack his pursuer or to take they in the rear if they should venture the assault . his have be throughout the part of a sagacious captain ; Dick s the conduct of an eager boy . and here be the young knight , his sweetheart , indeed , hold he tightly by the hand , but otherwise alone , his whole command of man and horse disperse in the night and the wide forest , like a paper of pin in a bay barn . 

 " the saint enlighten I ! " he think . " it be well I be knight for this morning s matter ; this doth I little honour . " 

 and thereupon , still hold Joanna , he begin to run . 

 the silence of the night be now shatter by the shout of the man of Tunstall , as they gallop hither and thither , hunt fugitive ; and Dick break boldly through the underwood and run straight before he like a deer . the silver clearness of the moon upon the open snow increase , by contrast , the obscurity of the thicket ; and the extreme dispersion of the vanquished lead the pursuer into wildly divergent path . hence , in but a little while , Dick and Joanna pause , in a close covert , and hear the sound of the pursuit , scatter abroad , indeed , in all direction , but yet faint already in the distance . 

 " An I have but keep a reserve of they together , " Dick cry , bitterly , " I could have turn the table yet ! well , we live and learn ; next time it shall go well , by the rood . " 

 " Nay , Dick , " say Joanna , " what matter it ? here we be together once again . " 

 he look at she , and there she be John Matcham , as of yore , in hose and doublet . but now he know she ; now , even in that ungainly dress , she smile upon he , bright with love ; and his heart be transport with joy . 

 " Sweetheart , " he say , " if ye forgive this blunderer , what care I ? make we direct for Holywood ; there lieth your good guardian and my well friend , Lord Foxham . there shall we be we d ; and whether poor or wealthy , famous or unknown , what , matter it ? this day , dear love , I win my spur ; I be commend by great man for my valour ; I think myself the goodly man of war in all broad England . then , first , I fall out of my favour with the great ; and now have I be well thrash , and clean lose my soldier . there be a downfall for conceit ! but , dear , I care not dear , if ye still love I and will we d , I would have my knighthood do away , and mind it not a jot . " 

 " my Dick ! " she cry . " and do they knight you ? " 

 " ay , dear , ye be my lady now , " he answer , fondly ; " or ye shall , ere noon to - morrow will ye not ? " 

 " that will I , Dick , with a glad heart , " she answer . 

 " ay , sir ? methought ye be to be a monk ! " say a voice in their ear . 

 " Alicia ! " cry Joanna . 

 " even so , " reply the young lady , come forward . " Alicia , whom ye leave for dead , and whom your lion - driver find , and bring to life again , and , by my sooth , make love to , if ye want to know ! " 

 " I ll not believe it , " cry Joanna . " Dick ! " 

 " Dick ! " mimicked Alicia . " Dick , indeed ! ay , fair sir , and ye desert poor damsel in distress , " she continue , turn to the young knight . " ye leave they plant behind oak . but they say true the age of chivalry be dead . " 

 " Madam , " cry Dick , in despair , " upon my soul I have forget you outright . Madam , ye must try to pardon I . ye see , I have new find Joanna ! " 

 " I do not suppose that ye have do it o purpose , " she retort . " but I will be cruelly avenge . I will tell a secret to my Lady Shelton she that be to be , " she add , curtsey . " Joanna , " she continue , " I believe , upon my soul , your sweetheart be a bold fellow in a fight , but he be , let I tell you plainly , the softest - hearte simpleton in England . go to ye may do your pleasure with he ! and now , fool child , first kiss I , either one of you , for luck and kindness ; and then kiss each other just one minute by the glass , and not one second long ; and then let we all three set forth for Holywood as fast as we can stir ; for these wood , methink , be full of peril and exceed cold . " 

 " but do my Dick make love to you ? " ask Joanna , cling to her sweetheart s side . 

 " Nay , fool girl , " return Alicia ; " it be I make love to he . I offer to marry he , indeed ; but he bid I go marry with my like . these be his word . Nay , that I will say : he be more plain than pleasant . but now , child , for the sake of sense , set forward . shall we go once more over the dingle , or push straight for Holywood ? " 

 " why , " say Dick , " I would like dearly to get upon a horse ; for I have be sore maul and beat , one way and another , these last day , and my poor body be one bruise . but how think ye ? if the man , upon the alarm of the fighting , have flee away , we should have go about for nothing . tis but some three short mile to Holywood direct ; the bell hath not beat nine ; the snow be pretty firm to walk upon , the moon clear ; how if we go even as we be ? " 

 " agree , " cry Alicia ; but Joanna only press upon Dick s arm . 

 forth , then , they go , through open leafless grove and down snow - clothe alley , under the white face of the winter moon ; Dick and Joanna walk hand in hand and in a heaven of pleasure ; and their light - minded companion , her own bereavement heartily forget , follow a pace or two behind , now rally they upon their silence , and now draw happy picture of their future and united life . 

 still , indeed , in the distance of the wood , the rider of Tunstall might be hear urge their pursuit ; and from time to time cry or the clash of steel announce the shock of enemy . but in these young folk , breed among the alarm of war , and fresh from such a multiplicity of danger , neither fear nor pity could be lightly waken . content to find the sound still draw far and far away , they give up their heart to the enjoyment of the hour , walk already , as Alicia put it , in a wedding procession ; and neither the rude solitude of the forest , nor the cold of the freezing night , have any force to shadow or distract their happiness . 

 at length , from a rise hill , they look below they on the dell of Holywood . the great window of the forest abbey shine with torch and candle ; its high pinnacle and spire arise very clear and silent , and the gold rood upon the topmost summit glitter brightly in the moon . all about it , in the open glade , camp - fire be burn , and the ground be thick with hut ; and across the midst of the picture the frozen river curve . 

 " by the mass , " say Richard , " there be Lord Foxham s fellow still encamp . the messenger hath certainly miscarry . well , then , so well . we have power at hand to face Sir Daniel . " 

 but if Lord Foxham s man still lie encamped in the long holm at Holywood , it be from a different reason from the one suppose by Dick . they have march , indeed , for Shoreby ; but ere they be half way thither , a second messenger meet they , and bid they return to their morning s camp , to bar the road against lancastrian fugitive , and to be so much near to the main army of York . for Richard of Gloucester , have finish the battle and stamp out his foe in that district , be already on the march to rejoin his brother ; and not long after the return of my Lord Foxham s retainer , Crookback himself draw rein before the abbey door . it be in honour of this august visitor that the window shine with light ; and at the hour of Dick s arrival with his sweetheart and her friend , the whole ducal party be be entertain in the refectory with the splendour of that powerful and luxurious monastery . 

 Dick , not quite with his good will , be bring before they . Gloucester , sick with fatigue , sit lean upon one hand his white and terrifying countenance ; Lord Foxham , half recover from his wound , be in a place of honour on his left . 

 " how , sir ? " ask Richard . " have ye bring I Sir Daniel s head ? " 

 " my lord duke , " reply Dick , stoutly enough , but with a qualm at heart , " I have not even the good fortune to return with my command . I have be , so please your grace , well beat . " 

 Gloucester look upon he with a formidable frown . 

 " I give you fifty lance ,   3   sir , " he say . 

 " my lord duke , I have but fifty man - at - arm , " reply the young knight . 

 " how be this ? " say Gloucester . " he do ask I fifty lance . " 

 " may it please your grace , " reply Catesby , smoothly , " for a pursuit we give he but the horseman . " 

 " it be well , " reply Richard , add , " Shelton , ye may go . " 

 " Stay ! " say Lord Foxham . " this young man likewise have a charge from I . it may be he hath well speed . Say , Master Shelton , have ye find the maid ? " 

 " I praise the saint , my lord , " say Dick , " she be in this house . " 

 " be it even so ? well , then , my lord the duke , " resume Lord Foxham , " with your good will , to - morrow , before the army march , I do propose a marriage . this young squire " 

 " young knight , " interrupt Catesby . 

 " say ye so , Sir William ? " cry Lord Foxham . 

 " I do myself , and for good service , dub he knight , " say Gloucester . " he hath twice manfully serve I . it be not valour of hand , it be a man s mind of iron , that he lack . he will not rise , Lord Foxham . tis a fellow that will fight indeed bravely in a mellay , but hath a capon s heart . Howbeit , if he be to marry , marry he in the name of Mary , and be do ! " 

 " Nay , he be a brave lad I know it , " say Lord Foxham . " content ye , then , Sir Richard . I have compound this affair with Master Hamley , and to - morrow ye shall we d. " 

 Whereupon Dick judge it prudent to withdraw ; but he be not yet clear of the refectory , when a man , but newly alight at the gate , come run four stair at a bound , and , brush through the abbey servant , throw himself on one knee before the duke . 

 " Victory , my lord , " he cry . 

 and before Dick have get to the chamber set apart for he as Lord Foxham s guest , the troop in the holm be cheer around their fire ; for upon that same day , not twenty mile away , a second crush blow have be deal to the power of Lancaster . 

 CHAPTER VII DICK S revenge 

 the next morning Dick be afoot before the sun , and have dress himself to the good advantage with the aid of the Lord Foxham s baggage , and get good report of Joan , he set forth on foot to walk away his impatience . 

 for some while he make round among the soldiery , who be get to arm in the wintry twilight of the dawn and by the red glow of torch ; but gradually he stroll far afield , and at length pass clean beyond the outpost , and walk alone in the frozen forest , wait for the sun . 

 his thought be both quiet and happy . his brief favour with the Duke he could not find it in his heart to mourn ; with Joan to wife , and my Lord Foxham for a faithful patron , he look most happily upon the future ; and in the past he find but little to regret . 

 as he thus stroll and ponder , the solemn light of the morning grow more clear , the east be already colour by the sun , and a little scathing wind blow up the frozen snow . he turn to go home ; but even as he turn , his eye light upon a figure behind , a tree . 

 " stand ! " he cry . " who go ? " 

 the figure step forth and wave its hand like a dumb person . it be array like a pilgrim , the hood lower over the face , but Dick , in an instant , recognise Sir Daniel . 

 he stride up to he , draw his sword ; and the knight , put his hand in his bosom , as if to seize a hide weapon , steadfastly await his approach . 

 " well , Dickon , " say Sir Daniel , " how be it to be ? do ye make war upon the fall ? " 

 " I make no war upon your life , " reply the lad ; " I be your true friend until ye seek for mine ; but ye have seek for it greedily . " 

 " Nay self - defence , " reply the knight . " and now , boy , the news of this battle , and the presence of yon crooked devil here in mine own wood , have break I beyond all help . I go to Holywood for sanctuary ; thence overseas , with what I can carry , and to begin life again in Burgundy or France . " 

 " Ye may not go to Holywood , " say Dick . 

 " how ! may not ? " ask the knight . 

 " look ye , Sir Daniel , this be my marriage morn , " say Dick ; " and yon sun that be to rise will make the bright day that ever shine for I . your life be forfeit doubly forfeit , for my father s death and your own practice to meward . but I myself have do amiss ; I have bring about man s death ; and upon this glad day I will be neither judge nor hangman . an ye be the devil , I would not lay a hand on you . an ye be the devil , ye might go where ye will for I . seek God s forgiveness ; mine ye have freely . but to go on to Holywood be different . I carry arm for York , and I will suffer no spy within their line . hold it , then , for certain , if ye set one foot before another , I will uplift my voice and call the near post to seize you . " 

 " ye mock I , " say Sir Daniel . " I have no safety out of Holywood . " 

 " I care no more , " return Richard . " I let you go east , west , or south ; north I will not . Holywood be shut against you . go , and seek not to return . for , once ye be go , I will warn every post about this army , and there will be so shrewd a watch upon all pilgrim that , once again , be ye the very devil , ye would find it ruin to make the essay . " 

 " ye doom I , " say Sir Daniel , gloomily . 

 " I doom you not , " return Richard . " if it so please you to set your valour against mine , come on ; and though I fear it be disloyal to my party , I will take the challenge openly and fully , fight you with mine own single strength , and call for none to help I . so shall I avenge my father , with a perfect conscience . " 

 " ay , " say Sir Daniel , " y have a long sword against my dagger . " 

 " I rely upon Heaven only , " answer Dick , cast his sword some way behind he on the snow . " now , if your ill - fate bid you , come ; and , under the pleasure of the Almighty , I make myself bold to feed your bone to fox . " 

 " I do but try you , Dickon , " return the knight , with an uneasy semblance of a laugh . " I would not spill your blood . " 

 " go , then , ere it be too late , " reply Shelton . " in five minute I will call the post . I do perceive that I be too long - suffering . have but our place be reverse , I should have be bind hand and foot some minute past . " 

 " well , Dickon , I will go , " reply Sir Daniel . " when we next meet , it shall repent you that ye be so harsh . " 

 and with these word , the knight turn and begin to move off under the tree . Dick watch he with strangely - mingle feeling , as he go , swiftly and warily , and ever and again turn a wicked eye upon the lad who have spar he , and whom he still suspect . 

 there be upon one side of where he go a thicket , strongly matted with green ivy , and , even in its winter state , impervious to the eye . Herein , all of a sudden , a bow sound like a note of music . an arrow fly , and with a great , choke cry of agony and anger , the Knight of Tunstall throw up his hand and fall forward in the snow . 

 Dick bound to his side and raise he . his face desperately work ; his whole body be shake by contort spasm . 

 " be the arrow black ? " he gasp . 

 " it be black , " reply Dick , gravely . 

 and then , before he could add one word , a desperate seizure of pain shake the wounded man from head to foot , so that his body leap in Dick s support arm , and with the extremity of that pang his spirit flee in silence . 

 the young man lay he back gently on the snow and pray for that unprepared and guilty spirit , and as he pray the sun come up at a bound , and the robin begin chirp in the ivy . 

 when he rise to his foot , he find another man upon his knee but a few step behind he , and , still with uncovered head , he wait until that prayer also should be over . it take long ; the man , with his head bow and his face cover with his hand , pray like one in a great disorder or distress of mind ; and by the bow that lie beside he , Dick judge that he be no other than the archer who have lay Sir Daniel low . 

 at length he , also , rise , and show the countenance of Ellis Duckworth . 

 " Richard , " he say , very gravely , " I hear you . Ye take the well part and pardon ; I take the bad , and there lie the clay of mine enemy . pray for I . " 

 and he wring he by the hand . 

 " Sir , " say Richard , " I will pray for you , indeed ; though how I may prevail I wot not . but if ye have so long pursue revenge , and find it now of such a sorry flavour , bethink ye , be it not well to pardon other ? Hatch he be dead , poor shrew ! I would have spar a well ; and for Sir Daniel , here lie his body . but for the priest , if I might anywise prevail , I would have you let he go . " 

 a flash come into the eye of Ellis Duckworth . 

 " Nay , " he say , " the devil be still strong within I . but be at rest ; the Black Arrow flieth nevermore the fellowship be break . they that still live shall come to their quiet and ripe end , in Heaven s good time , for I ; and for yourself , go where your well fortune call you , and think no more of Ellis . " 

 CHAPTER VIII CONCLUSION 

 about nine in the morning , Lord Foxham be lead his ward , once more dressed as befit her sex , and follow by Alicia Risingham , to the church of Holywood , when Richard Crookback , his brow already heavy with care , cross their path and pause . 

 " be this the maid ? " he ask ; and when Lord Foxham have reply in the affirmative , " Minion , " he add , " hold up your face until I see its favour . " 

 he look upon she sourly for a little . 

 " Ye be fair , " he say at last , " and , as they tell I , dower . how if I offer you a brave marriage , as become your face and parentage ? " 

 " my lord duke , " reply Joanna , " may it please your grace , I have rather we d with Sir Richard . " 

 " how so ? " he ask , harshly . " Marry but the man I name to you , and he shall be my lord , and you my lady , before night . for Sir Richard , let I tell you plainly , he will die Sir Richard . " 

 " I ask no more of Heaven , my lord , than but to die Sir Richard s wife , " return Joanna . 

 " look ye at that , my lord , " say Gloucester , turn to Lord Foxham . " here be a pair for you . the lad , when for good service I give he his choice of my favour , choose but the grace of an old , drunken shipman . I do warn he freely , but he be stout in his besottedness . here dieth your favour , say I ; and he , my lord , with a most assured impertinence , Mine be the loss , quoth he . it shall be so , by the rood ! " 

 " say he so ? " cry Alicia . " then well say , lion - driver ! " 

 " who be this ? " ask the duke . 

 " a prisoner of Sir Richard s , " answer Lord Foxham ; " Mistress Alicia Risingham . " 

 " see that she be married to a sure man , " say the duke . 

 " I have think of my kinsman , Hamley , an it like your grace , " return Lord Foxham . " he hath well serve the cause . " 

 " it like I well , " say Richard . " let they be wed speedily . say , fair maid , will you we d ? " 

 " my lord duke , " say Alicia , " so as the man be straight " and there , in a perfect consternation , the voice die on her tongue . 

 " he be straight , my mistress , " reply Richard , calmly . " I be the only crookback of my party ; we be else passably well shapen . lady , and you , my lord , " he add , with a sudden change to grave courtesy , " judge I not too churlish if I leave you . a captain , in the time of war , hath not the ordering of his hour . " 

 and with a very handsome salutation he pass on , follow by his officer . 

 " alack , " cry Alicia , " I be shent ! " 

 " ye know he not , " reply Lord Foxham . " it be but a trifle ; he hath already clean forget your word . " 

 " he be , then , the very flower of knighthood , " say Alicia . 

 " Nay , he but mindeth other thing , " return Lord Foxham . " tarry we no more . " 

 in the chancel they find Dick waiting , attend by a few young man ; and there be he and Joan unite . when they come forth again , happy and yet serious , into the frosty air and sunlight , the long file of the army be already wind forward up the road ; already the Duke of Gloucester s banner be unfold and begin to move from before the abbey in a clump of spear ; and behind it , girt by steel - clothe knight , the bold , black - hearted , and ambitious hunchback move on towards his brief kingdom and his last infamy . but the wedding party turn upon the other side , and sit down , with sober merriment , to breakfast . the father cellarer attend on their want , and sit with they at table . Hamley , all jealousy forget , begin to ply the nowise loth Alicia with courtship . and there , amid the sounding of tucket and the clash of armoured soldiery and horse continually move forth , Dick and Joan sit side by side , tenderly hold hand , and look , with ever grow affection , in each other s eye . 

 Thenceforth the dust and blood of that unruly epoch pass they by . they dwelt apart from alarm in the green forest where their love begin . 

 two old man in the meanwhile enjoy pension in great prosperity and peace , and with perhaps a superfluity of ale and wine , in Tunstall hamlet . one have be all his life a shipman , and continue to the last to lament his man Tom . the other , who have be a bit of everything , turn in the end towards piety , and make a most religious death under the name of Brother Honestus in the neighbouring abbey . so Lawless have his will , and die a friar .