CATRIONA 

 DEDICATION . 

 to 
 CHARLES BAXTER , Writer to the Signet . 

 my Dear Charles , 

 it be the fate of sequel to disappoint those who have wait for they ; and my David , have be leave to kick his heel for more than a lustre in the British Linen Company s office , must expect his late re - appearance to be greet with hoot , if not with missile . yet , when I remember the day of our exploration , I be not without hope . there should be leave in our native city some seed of the elect ; some long - legged , hot - head youth must repeat to - day our dream and wandering of so many year ago ; he will relish the pleasure , which should have be ours , to follow among name street and number house the country walk of David Balfour , to identify Dean , and Silvermills , and Broughton , and Hope Park , and Pilrig , and poor old Lochend if it still be stand , and the Figgate Whins if there be any of they leave ; or to push   on a long holiday   so far afield as Gillane or the Bass . so , perhaps , his eye shall be open to behold the series of the generation , and he shall weigh with surprise his momentous and nugatory gift of life . 

 you be still as when first I see , as when I last address you in the venerable city which I must always think of as my home . and I have come so far ; and the sight and thought of my youth pursue I ; and I see like a vision the youth of my father , and of his father , and the whole stream of life flow down there far in the north , with the sound of laughter and tear , to cast I out in the end , as by a sudden freshet , on these ultimate island . and I admire and bow my head before the romance of destiny . 

 R. L. S. 

 Vailima , Upolu , 
 Samoa , 1892 . 

 CATRIONA Part I the LORD ADVOCATE 

 CHAPTER I a BEGGAR on HORSEBACK 

 the 25th day of August , 1751 , about two in the afternoon , I , David Balfour , come forth of the British Linen Company , a porter attend I with a bag of money , and some of the chief of these merchant bow I from their door . two day before , and even so late as yestermorning , I be like a beggar - man by the wayside , clothe in rag , bring down to my last shilling , my companion a condemn traitor , a price set on my own head for a crime with the news of which the country ring . to - day I be serve heir to my position in life , a land laird , a bank porter by I carry my gold , recommendation in my pocket , and   in the word of the saying   the ball directly at my foot . 

 there be two circumstance that serve I as ballast to so much sail . the first be the very difficult and deadly business I have still to handle ; the second , the place that I be in . the tall , black city , and the number and movement and noise of so many folk , make a new world for I , after the moorland braes , the sea - sand and the still country - side that I have frequent up to then . the throng of the citizen in particular abash I . Rankeillor s son be short and small in the girth ; his clothe scarce hold on I ; and it be plain I be ill qualified to strut in the front of a bank - porter . it be plain , if I do so , I should but set folk laughing , and   what be bad in my case   set they ask question . so that I behoove to come by some clothe of my own , and in the meanwhile to walk by the porter s side , and put my hand on his arm as though we be a pair of friend . 

 at a merchant s in the luckenbooth I have myself fit out : none too fine , for I have no idea to appear like a beggar on horseback ; but comely and responsible , so that servant should respect I . thence to an armour s , where I get a plain sword , to suit with my degree in life . I feel safe with the weapon , though   for one so ignorant of defence   it might be call an add danger . the porter , who be naturally a man of some experience , judge my accoutrement to be well choose . 

 " naethe kenspeckle , "   1   say he ; " plain , dacent clae . as for the rapier , nae doubt it sit wi your degree ; but an I have be you , I would have waire my sill well - gate than that . " and he propose I should buy winter - hosen from a wife in the cowgate - back , that be a cousin of his own , and make they " extraordinar endurable . " 

 but I have other matter on my hand more pressing . here I be in this old , black city , which be for all the world like a rabbit - warren , not only by the number of its indweller , but the complication of its passage and hole . it be , indeed , a place where no strange have a chance to find a friend , let be another stranger . suppose he even to hit on the right close , people dwelt so thronged in these tall house , he might very well seek a day before he chance on the right door . the ordinary course be to hire a lad they call a caddie , who be like a guide or pilot , lead you where you have occasion , and   your errand be do   bring you again where you be lodge . but these caddy , be always employ in the same sort of service , and have it for obligation to be well informed of every house and person in the city , have grow to form a brotherhood of spy ; and I know from tale of Mr. Campbell s how they communicate one with another , what a rage of curiosity they conceive as to their employer s business , and how they be like eye and finger to the police . it would be a piece of little wisdom , the way I be now place , to take such a ferret to my tail . I have three visit to make , all immediately needful : to my kinsman Mr. Balfour of Pilrig , to Stewart the writer that be Appin s agent , and to William Grant Esquire of Prestongrange , Lord Advocate of Scotland . Mr. Balfour s be a non - committal visit ; and besides   Pilrig be in the country   I make bold to find the way to it myself , with the help of my two leg and a Scots tongue . but the rest be in a different case . not only be the visit to appin s agent , in the midst of the cry about the Appin murder , dangerous in itself , but it be highly inconsistent with the other . I be like to have a bad enough time of it with my Lord Advocate Grant , the good of way ; but to go to he hot - foot from Appin s agent , be little likely to mend my own affair , and might prove the mere ruin of friend Alan s. the whole thing , besides , give I a look of run with the hare and hunting with the hound that be little to my fancy . I determine , therefore , to be do at once with Mr. Stewart and the whole Jacobitical side of my business , and to profit for that purpose by the guidance of the porter at my side . but it chance I have scarce give he the address , when there come a sprinkle of rain nothing to hurt , only for my new clothe and we take shelter under a pend at the head of a close or alley . 

 be strange to what I see , I step a little far in . the narrow paved way descend swiftly . prodigious tall house spring upon each side and bulge out , one storey beyond another , as they rise . at the top only a ribbon of sky show in . by what I could spy in the window , and by the respectable person that pass out and in , I see the house to be very well occupy ; and the whole appearance of the place interested I like a tale . 

 I be still gaze , when there come a sudden brisk tramp of foot in time and clash of steel behind I . turn quickly , I be aware of a party of armed soldier , and , in their midst , a tall man in a great coat . he walk with a stoop that be like a piece of courtesy , genteel and insinuating : he wave his hand plausibly as he go , and his face be sly and handsome . I think his eye take I in , but could not meet it . this procession go by to a door in the close , which a serve - man in a fine livery set open ; and two of the soldier - lad carry the prisoner within , the rest linger with their firelock by the door . 

 there can nothing pass in the street of a city without some following of idle folk and child . it be so now ; but the more part melt away incontinent until but three be leave . one be a girl ; she be dress like a lady , and have a screen of the Drummond colour on her head ; but her comrade or   I should say   follower be ragged gillie , such as I have see the match of by the dozen in my Highland journey . they all speak together earnestly in Gaelic , the sound of which be pleasant in my ear for the sake of Alan ; and , though the rain be by again , and my porter pluck at I to be go , I even draw nearer where they be , to listen . the lady scold sharply , the other make apology and cringe before she , so that I make sure she be come of a chief s house . all the while the three of they seek in their pocket , and by what I could make out , they have the matter of half a farthing among the party ; which make I smile a little to see all Highland folk alike for fine obeisance and empty sporran . 

 it chance the girl turn suddenly about , so that I see her face for the first time . there be no great wonder than the way the face of a young woman fit in a man s mind , and stay there , and he could never tell you why ; it just seem it be the thing he want . she have wonderful bright eye like star , and I daresay the eye have a part in it ; but what I remember the most clearly be the way her lip be a trifle open as she turn . and , whatever be the cause , I stand there star like a fool . on her side , as she have not know there be anyone so near , she look at I a little long , and perhaps with more surprise , than be entirely civil . 

 it go through my country head she might be wonder at my new clothe ; with that , I blush to my hair , and at the sight of my colouring it be to be suppose she draw her own conclusion , for she move her gillie far down the close , and they fall again to this dispute , where I could hear no more of it . 

 I have often admire a lassie before then , if scarce so sudden and strong ; and it be rather my disposition to withdraw than to come forward , for I be much in fear of mockery from the womenkind . you would have think I have now all the more reason to pursue my common practice , since I have meet this young lady in the city street , seemingly follow a prisoner , and accompany with two very ragged indecent - like highlandman . but there be here a different ingredient ; it be plain the girl think I have be pry in her secret ; and with my new clothe and sword , and at the top of my new fortune , this be more than I could swallow . the beggar on horseback could not bear to be thrust down so low , or , at least of it , not by this young lady . 

 I follow , accordingly , and take off my new hat to she the good that I be able . 

 " Madam , " say I , " I think it only fair to myself to let you understand I have no Gaelic . it be true I be listen , for I have friend of my own across the Highland line , and the sound of that tongue come friendly ; but for your private affair , if you have speak Greek , I might have have more guess at they . " 

 she make I a little , distant curtsey . " there be no harm do , " say she , with a pretty accent , most like the English   but more agreeable . " a cat may look at a king . " 

 " I do not mean to offend , " say I. " I have no skill of city manner ; I never before this day set foot inside the door of Edinburgh . take I for a country lad it s what I be ; and I would rather I tell you than you find it out . " 

 " indeed , it will be a very unusual thing for stranger to be speak to each other on the causeway , " she reply . " but if you be landward   2   breed it will be different . I be as landward as yourself ; I be Highland , as you see , and think myself the far from my home . " 

 " it be not yet a week since I pass the line , " say I. " Less than a week ago I be on the braes of Balwhidder . " 

 " Balwhither ? " she cry . " come ye from Balwhither ! the name of it make all there be of I rejoice . you will not have be long there , and not know some of our friend or family ? " 

 " I live with a very honest , kind man call Duncan Dhu Maclaren , " I reply . 

 " well , I know Duncan , and you give he the true name ! " she say ; " and if he be an honest man , his wife be honest indeed . " 

 " ay , " say I , " they be fine people , and the place be a bonny place . " 

 " where in the great world be such another ! " she cry ; " I be love the smell of that place and the root that grow there . " 

 I be infinitely take with the spirit of the maid . " I could be wish I have bring you a spray of that heather , " say I. " and , though I do ill to speak with you at the first , now it seem we have common acquaintance , I make it my petition you will not forget I . David Balfour be the name I be know by . this be my lucky day , when I have just come into a land estate , and be not very long out of a deadly peril . I wish you would keep my name in mind for the sake of Balwhidder , " say I , " and I will yours for the sake of my lucky day . " 

 " my name be not speak , " she reply , with a great deal of haughtiness . " More than a hundred year it have not go upon man s tongue , save for a blink . I be nameless , like the Folk of Peace .   3   Catriona Drummond be the one I use . " 

 now indeed I know where I be stand . in all broad Scotland there be but the one name proscribe , and that be the name of the Macgregors . yet so far from flee this undesirable acquaintancy , I plunge the deep in . 

 " I have be sit with one who be in the same case with yourself , " say I , " and I think he will be one of your friend . they call he Robin Oig . " 

 " do ye so ? " cry she . " Ye meet Rob ? " 

 " I pass the night with he , " say I. 

 " he be a fowl of the night , " say she . 

 " there be a set of pipe there , " I go on , " so you may judge if the time pass . " 

 " you should be no enemy , at all event , " say she . " that be his brother there a moment since , with the red soldier round he . it be he that I call father . " 

 " be it so ? " cry I. " be you a daughter of James More s ? " 

 " all the daughter that he have , " say she : " the daughter of a prisoner ; that I should forget it so , even for one hour , to talk with stranger ! " 

 here one of the gillie address she in what he have of English , to know what " she "   meaning by that himself   be to do about " ta sneeshin . " I take some note of he for a short , bandy - legged , red - haired , big - headed man , that I be to know more of to my cost . 

 " there can be none the day , Neil , " she reply . " how will you get sneeshin , want siller ! it will teach you another time to be more careful ; and I think James More will not be very well pleased with Neil of the Tom . " 

 " Miss Drummond , " I say , " I tell you I be in my lucky day . here I be , and a bank - porter at my tail . and remember I have have the hospitality of your own country of Balwhidder . " 

 " it be not one of my people give it , " say she . 

 " ah , well , " say I , " but I be owe your uncle at least for some spring upon the pipe . besides which , I have offer myself to be your friend , and you have be so forgetful that you do not refuse I in the proper time . " 

 " if it have be a great sum , it might have do you honour , " say she ; " but I will tell you what this be . James More lie shackle in prison ; but this time past they will be bring he down here daily to the Advocate s. . . . " 

 " the Advocate s ! " I cry . " be that . . . ? " 

 " it be the house of the Lord Advocate Grant of Prestongrange , " say she . " there they bring my father one time and another , for what purpose I have no thought in my mind ; but it seem there be some hope dawn for he . all this same time they will not let I be see he , nor yet he write ; and we wait upon the King s street to catch he ; and now we give he his snuff as he go by , and now something else . and here be this son of trouble , Neil , son of Duncan , have lose my four - penny piece that be to buy that snuff , and James More must go want , and will think his daughter have forget he . " 

 I take sixpence from my pocket , give it to Neil , and bid he go about his errand . then to she , " that sixpence come with I by Balwhidder , " say I. 

 " ah ! " she say , " you be a friend to the Gregara ! " 

 " I would not like to deceive you , either , " say I. " I know very little of the Gregara and less of James More and his doing , but since the while I have be stand in this close , I seem to know something of yourself ; and if you will just say a friend to Miss Catriona I will see you be the less cheated . " 

 " the one can not be without the other , " say she . 

 " I will even try , " say I. 

 " and what will you be think of myself ! " she cry , " to be hold my hand to the first stranger ! " 

 " I be think nothing but that you be a good daughter , " say I. 

 " I must not be without repay it , " she say ; " where be it you stop ! " 

 " to tell the truth , I be stop nowhere yet , " say I , " be not full three hour in the city ; but if you will give I your direction , I will be so bold as come seek my sixpence for myself . " 

 " will I can trust you for that ? " she ask . 

 " you need have little fear , " say I. 

 " James More could not bear it else , " say she . " I stop beyond the village of Dean , on the north side of the water , with Mrs. Drummond - Ogilvy of Allardyce , who be my near friend and will be glad to thank you . " 

 " you be to see I , then , so soon as what I have to do permit , " say I ; and , the remembrance of Alan roll in again upon my mind , I make haste to say farewell . 

 I could not but think , even as I do so , that we have make extraordinary free upon short acquaintance , and that a really wise young lady would have show herself more backward . I think it be the bank - porter that put I from this ungallant train of thought . 

 " I thoucht ye have be a lad of some kind o sense , " he begin , shoot out his lip . " ye re no likely to gang far this gate . a fule and his sill s shune part . eh , but ye re a green callant ! " he cry , " an a veecious , tae ! Cleikin up wi baubeejoe ! " 

 " if you dare to speak of the young lady . . . " I begin . 

 " Leddy ! " he cry . " haud we and safe us , whatten leddy ? can thon a leddy ? the toun s fu o they . leddie ! man , its weel see ye re no very acquant in Embro ! " 

 a clap of anger take I . 

 " here , " say I , " lead I where I tell you , and keep your foul mouth shut ! " 

 he do not wholly obey I , for , though he no more address I directly , he very impudent sing at I as he go in a manner of innuendo , and with an exceedingly ill voice and ear 

 " as Mally Lee cam doun the street , her capuchin do flee , 
 she cuist a look ahint she to see her negligee . 
 and we re a gaun east and wast , we re a gann ajee , 
 we re a gaun east and wast courtin Mally Lee . " 

 CHAPTER II the HIGHLAND WRITER 

 Mr. Charles Stewart the Writer dwelt at the top of the long stair ever mason set a hand to ; fifteen flight of it , no less ; and when I have come to his door , and a clerk have open it , and tell I his master be within , I have scarce breath enough to send my porter pack . 

 " Awa east and west wi ye ! " say I , take the money bag out of his hand , and follow the clerk in . 

 the outer room be an office with the clerk s chair at a table spread with law paper . in the inner chamber , which open from it , a little brisk man sit pore on a deed , from which he scarce raise his eye on my entrance ; indeed , he still keep his finger in the place , as though prepare to show I out and fall again to his study . this please I little enough ; and what please I less , I think the clerk be in a good posture to overhear what should pass between we . 

 I ask if he be Mr. Charles Stewart the Writer . 

 " the same , " say he ; " and , if the question be equally fair , who may you be yourself ? " 

 " you never hear tell of my name nor of I either , " say I , " but I bring you a token from a friend that you know well . that you know well , " I repeat , lower my voice , " but maybe be not just so keen to hear from at this present being . and the bit of business that I have to propone to you be rather in the nature of be confidential . in short , I would like to think we be quite private . " 

 he rise without more word , cast down his paper like a man ill - pleased , send forth his clerk of an errand , and shut to the house - door behind he . 

 " now , sir , " say he , return , " speak out your mind and fear nothing ; though before you begin , " he cry out , " I tell you mine misgive I ! I tell you beforehand , ye re either a Stewart or a Stewart send ye . a good name it be , and one it would ill - become my father s son to lightly . but I begin to grue at the sound of it . " 

 " my name be call Balfour , " say I , " David Balfour of Shaws . as for he that send I , I will let his token speak . " and I show the silver button . 

 " put it in your pocket , sir ! " cry he . " ye need name no name . the deevil s buckie , I ken the button of he ! and de il hae t ! where be he now ! " 

 I tell he I know not where Alan be , but he have some sure place   or think he have   about the north side , where he be to lie until a ship be find for he ; and how and where he have appoint to be speak with . 

 " it s be always my opinion that I would hang in a tow for this family of mine , " he cry , " and , dod ! I believe the day s come now ! get a ship for he , quot he ! and who s to pay for it ? the man s daft ! " 

 " that be my part of the affair , Mr. Stewart , " say I. " here be a bag of good money , and if more be want , more be to be have where it come from . " 

 " I needn t ask your politic , " say he . 

 " ye need not , " say I , smile , " for I m as big a Whig as grow . " 

 " stop a bit , stop a bit , " say Mr. Stewart . " what s all this ? a Whig ? then why be you here with Alan s button ? and what kind of a black - foot traffic be this that I find ye out in , Mr. Whig ? here be a forfeit rebel and an accuse murderer , with two hundred pound on his life , and ye ask I to meddle in his business , and then tell I ye re a Whig ! I have no mind of any such whig before , though I ve ken plenty of they . " 

 " he s a forfeited rebel , the more s the pity , " say I , " for the man s my friend . I can only wish he have be well guide . and an accuse murderer , that he be too , for his misfortune ; but wrongfully accuse . " 

 " I hear you say so , " say Stewart . 

 " More than you be to hear I say so , before long , " say I. " Alan Breck be innocent , and so be James . " 

 " oh ! " say he , " the two case hang together . if Alan be out , James can never be in . " 

 Hereupon I tell he briefly of my acquaintance with Alan , of the accident that bring I present at the Appin murder , and the various passage of our escape among the heather , and my recovery of my estate . " so , sir , you have now the whole train of these event , " I go on , " and can see for yourself how I come to be so much mingle up with the affair of your family and friend , which   for all of our sake   I wish have be plainer and less bloody . you can see for yourself , too , that I have certain piece of business depending , which be scarcely fit to lay before a lawyer choose at random . no more remain , but to ask if you will undertake my service ? " 

 " I have no great mind to it ; but come as you do with Alan s button , the choice be scarcely leave I , " say he . " what be your instruction ? " he add , and take up his pen . 

 " the first point be to smuggle Alan forth of this country , " say I , " but I need not be repeat that . " 

 " I be little likely to forget it , " say Stewart . 

 " the next thing be the bit money I be owe to Cluny , " I go on . " it would be ill for I to find a conveyance , but that should be no stick to you . it be two pound five shilling and three - halfpence farthe sterling . " 

 he note it . 

 " then , " say I , " there s a Mr. Henderland , a licensed preacher and missionary in Ardgour , that I would like well to get some snuff into the hand of ; and , as I daresay you keep touch with your friend in Appin   so near by , it s a job you could doubtless overtake with the other . " 

 " how much snuff be we to say ? " he ask . 

 " I be think of two pound , " say I. 

 " Two , " say he . 

 " then there s the lass Alison Hastie , in Lime Kilns , " say I. " she that help Alan and I across the Forth . I be think if I could get she a good Sunday gown , such as she could wear with decency in her degree , it would be an ease to my conscience ; for the mere truth be , we owe she our two life . " 

 " I be glad so see you be thrifty , Mr. Balfour , " say he , make his note . 

 " I would think shame to be otherwise the first day of my fortune , " say I. " and now , if you will compute the outlay and your own proper charge , I would be glad to know if I could get some spending - money back . it s not that I grudge the whole of it to get Alan safe ; it s not that I lack more ; but have draw so much the one day , I think it would have a very ill appearance if I be back again seek , the next . only be sure you have enough , " I add , " for I be very undesirous to meet with you again . " 

 " well , and I m pleased to see you re cautious , too , " say the Writer . " but I think ye take a risk to lay so considerable a sum at my discretion . " 

 he say this with a plain sneer . 

 " I ll have to run the hazard , " I reply . " o , and there s another service I would ask , and that s to direct I to a lodging , for I have no roof to my head . but it must be a lodging I may seem to have hit upon by accident , for it would never do if the Lord Advocate be to get any jealousy of our acquaintance . " 

 " Ye may set your weary spirit at rest , " say he . " I will never name your name , sir ; and it s my belief the Advocate be still so much to be sympathise with that he doesnae ken of your existence . " 

 I see I have get to the wrong side of the man . 

 " there s a braw day come for he , then , " say I , " for he ll have to learn of it on the deaf side of his head no later than to - morrow , when I call on he . " 

 " when ye call on he ! " repeat Mr. Stewart . " be I daft , or be you ! what take ye near the Advocate ! " 

 " o , just to give myself up , " say I. 

 " Mr. Balfour , " he cry , " be ye make a mock of I ? " 

 " no , sir , " say I , " though I think you have allow yourself some such freedom with myself . but I give you to understand once and for all that I be in no jesting spirit . " 

 " nor yet I , " say Stewart . " and I give yon to understand   if that s to be the word   that I like the look of your behaviour less and less . you come here to I with all sort of proposition , which will put I in a train of very doubtful act and bring I among very undesirable person this many a day to come . and then you tell I you re go straight out of my office to make your peace with the Advocate ! Alan s button here or Alan s button there , the four quarter of Alan wouldnae bribe I far in . " 

 " I would take it with a little more temper , " say I , " and perhaps we can avoid what you object to . I can see no way for it but to give myself up , but perhaps you can see another ; and if you could , I could never deny but what I would be rather relieve . for I think my traffic with his lordship be little likely to agree with my health . there s just the one thing clear , that I have to give my evidence ; for I hope it ll save Alan s character   what s left of it , and James s neck , which be the more immediate . " 

 he be silent for a breathing - space , and then , " my man , " say he , " you ll never be allow to give such evidence . " 

 " we ll have to see about that , " say I ; " I m stiff - neck when I like . " 

 " Ye muckle ass ! " cry Stewart , " it s James they want ; James have get to hang Alan , too , if they could catch he but James whatever ! go near the Advocate with any such business , and you ll see ! he ll find a way to muzzle , ye . " 

 " I think well of the Advocate than that , " say I. 

 " the Advocate be dam ! " cry he . " it s the Campbells , man ! you ll have the whole clanjamfry of they on your back ; and so will the Advocate too , poor body ! it s extraordinar ye can not see where ye stand ! if there s no fair way to stop your gab , there s a foul one gap . they can put ye in the dock , do ye no see that ? " he cry , and stab I with one finger in the leg . 

 " ay , " say I , " I be tell that same no far back than this morning by another lawyer . " 

 " and who be he ? " ask Stewart , " he speak sense at least . " 

 I tell I must be excuse from name he , for he be a decent stout old Whig , and have little mind to be mix up in such affair . 

 " I think all the world seem to be mix up in it ! " cry Stewart . " but what say you ? " 

 " I tell he what have pass between Rankeillor and myself before the house of Shaws . 

 " well , and so ye will hang ! " say he . " ye ll hang beside James Stewart . there s your fortune tell . " 

 " I hope well of it yet than that , " say I ; " but I could never deny there be a risk . " 

 " risk ! " say he , and then sit silent again . " I ought to thank you for your staunchness to my friend , to whom you show a very good spirit , " he say , " if you have the strength to stand by it . but I warn you that you re wad deep . I wouldn t put myself in your place   I that s a Stewart bear !   for all the Stewarts that ever there be since Noah . risk ? ay , I take over - many ; but to be try in court before a Campbell jury and a Campbell judge , and that in a Campbell country and upon a Campbell quarrel think what you like of I , Balfour , it s beyond I . " 

 " it s a different way of thinking , I suppose , " say I ; " I be bring up to this one by my father before I . " 

 " glory to his bone ! he have leave a decent son to his name , " say he . " yet I would not have you judge I over - sorely . my case be doom hard . see , sir , ye tell I ye re a Whig : I wonder what I be . no Whig to be sure ; I couldnae be just that . but laigh in your ear , man I m maybe no very keen on the other side . " 

 " be that a fact ? " cry I. " it s what I would think of a man of your intelligence . " 

 " Hut ! none of your whillywha ! "   4   cry he . " there s intelligence upon both side . but for my private part I have no particular desire to harm King George ; and as for King James , God bless he ! he do very well for I across the water . I m a lawyer , ye see : fond of my book and my bottle , a good plea , a well - draw deed , a crack in the Parliament House with other lawyer body , and perhaps a turn at the golf on a Saturday at e en . where do ye come in with your Hieland plaid and claymore ? " 

 " well , " say I , " it s a fact ye have little of the wild Highlandman . " 

 " little ? " quoth he . " nothing , man ! and yet I m Hieland bear , and when the clan pipe , who but I have to dance ! the clan and the name , that go by all . it s just what you say yourself ; my father learn it to I , and a bonny trade I have of it . Treason and traitor , and the smuggling of they out and in ; and the french recruiting , weary fall it ! and the smuggling through of the recruit ; and their plea a sorrow of their plea ! here have I be move one for young Ardsheil , my cousin ; claim the estate under the marriage contract a forfeit estate ! I tell they it be nonsense : muckle they care ! and there be I cock behind a yadvocate that like the business as little as myself , for it be fair ruin to the pair of we a black mark , disaffect , brand on our hurdie , like folk s name upon their kye ! and what can I do ? I m a Stewart , ye see , and must fend for my clan and family . then no later by than yesterday there be one of our Stewart lad carry to the Castle . what for ? I ken fine : Act of 1736 : recruit for King Lewie . and you ll see , he ll whistle I in to be his lawyer , and there ll be another black mark on my chara ter ! I tell you fair : if I but ken the heid of a hebrew word from the hurdie of it , be dam but I would fling the whole thing up and turn minister ! " 

 " it s rather a hard position , " say I. 

 " doom hard ! " cry he . " and that s what make I think so much of ye you that s no Stewart to stick your head so deep in Stewart business . and for what , I do not know : unless it be the sense of duty . " 

 " I hope it will be that , " say I. 

 " well , " say he , " it s a grand quality . but here be my clerk back ; and , by your leave , we ll pick a bit of dinner , all the three of we . when that s do , I ll give you the direction of a very decent man , that ll be very fain to have you for a lodger . and I ll fill your pocket to ye , forbye , out of your ain bag . for this business ll not be near as dear as ye suppose not even the ship part of it . " 

 I make he a sign that his clerk be within hearing . 

 " Hoot , ye neednae mind for Robbie , " cry he . " a Stewart , too , puir deevil ! and have smuggle out more french recruit and traffic Papists than what he have hair upon his face . why , it s Robin that manage that branch of my affair . who will we have now , Rob , for across the water ! " 

 " there ll be Andie Scougal , in the Thristle , " reply Rob . " I see Hoseason the other day , but it seem he s want the ship . then there ll be Tam Stobo ; but I m none so sure of Tam . I ve see he collogue with some gey queer acquaintance ; and if be anybody important , I would give Tam the go - by . " 

 " the head s worth two hundred pound , Robin , " say Stewart . 

 " Gosh , that ll no be Alan Breck ! " cry the clerk . 

 " just Alan , " say his master . 

 " weary wind ! that s sayrious , " cry Robin . " I ll try Andie , then ; Andie ll be the good . " 

 " it seem it s quite a big business , " I observe . 

 " Mr. Balfour , there s no end to it , " say Stewart . 

 " there be a name your clerk mention , " I go on : " Hoseason . that must be my man , I think : Hoseason , of the brig Covenant . would you set your trust on he ? " 

 " he didnae behave very well to you and Alan , " say Mr. Stewart ; " but my mind of the man in general be rather otherwise . if he have take Alan on board his ship on an agreement , it s my notion he would have prove a just dealer . how say ye , Rob ? " 

 " no more honest skipper in the trade than Eli , " say the clerk . " I would lippen to   5   Eli s word ay , if it be the Chevalier , or appin himsel , " he add . 

 " and it be he that bring the doctor , wasnae t ? " ask the master . 

 " he be the very man , " say the clerk . 

 " and I think he take the doctor back ? " say Stewart . 

 " ay , with his sporran full ! " cry Robin . " and Eli kent of that ! "   6 

 " well , it seem it s hard to ken folk rightly , " say I. 

 " that be just what I forget when ye come in , Mr. Balfour ! " say the Writer . 

 CHAPTER III I go to PILRIG 

 the next morning , I be no soon awake in my new lodging than I be up and into my new clothe ; and no soon the breakfast swallow , than I be forth on my adventurer . Alan , I could hope , be fend for ; James be like to be a more difficult affair , and I could not but think that enterprise might cost I dear , even as everybody say to whom I have open my opinion . it seem I be come to the top of the mountain only to cast myself down ; that I have clamber up , through so many and hard trial , to be rich , to be recognise , to wear city clothe and a sword to my side , all to commit mere suicide at the last end of it , and the bad kind of suicide , besides , which be to get hang at the King s charge . 

 what be I do it for ? I ask , as I go down the high Street and out north by Leith Wynd . first I say it be to save James Stewart ; and no doubt the memory of his distress , and his wife s cry , and a word or so I have let drop on that occasion work upon I strongly . at the same time I reflect that it be   or ought to be   the most indifferent matter to my father s son , whether James die in his bed or from a scaffold . he be Alan s cousin , to be sure ; but so far as regard Alan , the good thing would be to lie low , and let the king , and his Grace of Argyll , and the corbie crow , pick the bone of his kinsman their own way . nor could I forget that , while we be all in the pot together , James have show no such particular anxiety whether for Alan or I . 

 next it come upon I I be act for the sake of justice : and I think that a fine word , and reason it out that   since we dwelt in polity , at some discomfort to each one of we   the main thing of all must still be justice , and the death of any innocent man a wound upon the whole community . next , again , it be the Accuser of the Brethren that give I a turn of his argument ; bade I think shame for pretend myself concerned in these high matter , and tell I I be but a prating vain child , who have speak big word to Rankeillor and to Stewart , and hold myself bind upon my vanity to make good that boastfulness . Nay , and he hit I with the other end of the stick ; for he accuse I of a kind of artful cowardice , go about at the expense of a little risk to purchase great safety . no doubt , until I have declare and clear myself , I might any day encounter Mungo Campbell or the sheriff s officer , and be recognise , and drag into the Appin murder by the heel ; and , no doubt , in case I could manage my declaration with success , I should breathe more free for ever after . but when I look this argument full in the face I could see nothing to be ashamed of . as for the rest , " here be the two road , " I think , " and both go to the same place . it s unjust that James should hang if I can save he ; and it would be ridiculous in I to have talk so much and then do nothing . it s lucky for James of the Glens that I have boast beforehand ; and none so unlucky for myself , because now I m committed to do right . I have the name of a gentleman and the mean of one ; it would be a poor duty that I be want in the essence . " and then I think this be a Pagan spirit , and say a prayer in to myself , ask for what courage I might lack , and that I might go straight to my duty like a soldier to battle , and come off again scatheless , as so many do . 

 this train of reasoning bring I to a more resolve complexion ; though it be far from close up my sense of the danger that surround I , nor of how very apt I be   if I go on   to stumble on the ladder of the gallow . it be a plain , fair morning , but the wind in the east . the little chill of it sing in my blood , and give I a feeling of the autumn , and the dead leaf , and dead folk body in their graf . it seem the devil be in it , if I be to die in that tide of my fortune and for other folk affair . on the top of the Calton Hill , though it be not the customary time of year for that diversion , some child be cry and run with their kite . these toy appear very plain against the sky ; I remark a great one soar on the wind to a high altitude and then plump among the whin ; and I think to myself at sight of it , " there go Davie . " 

 my way lie over Mouter s Hill , and through an end of a clachan on the braeside among field . there be a whirr of loom in it go from house to house ; bee bum in the garden ; the neighbour that I see at the doorstep talk in a strange tongue ; and I find out later that this be Picardy , a village where the french weaver work for the Linen Company . here I get a fresh direction for Pilrig , my destination ; and a little beyond , on the wayside , come by a gibbet and two man hang in chain . they be dip in tar , as the manner be ; the wind span they , the chain clatter , and the bird hang about the uncanny jumping - jack and cry . the sight come on I suddenly , like an illustration of my fear , I could scarce be do with examine it and drink in discomfort . and , as I thus turn and turn about the gibbet , what should I strike on , but a weird old wife , that sit behind a leg of it , and nod , and talk aloud to herself with beck and courtesy . 

 " who be these two , mother ? " I ask , and point to the corps . 

 " a blessing on your precious face ! " she cry . " twa joe   7   o mine : just two o my old joe , my hinny dear . " 

 " what do they suffer for ? " I ask . 

 " Ou , just for the guid cause , " say she . " aften I spae to they the way that it would end . twa shillin scot : no pickle mair ; and there be twa bonny callant hingin for t ! they take it frae a wean   8   belange to Brouchton . " 

 " ay ! " say I to myself , and not to the daft limmer , " and do they come to such a figure for so poor a business ? this be to lose all indeed . " 

 " Gie s your loof ,   9   hinny , " say she , " and let I spae your weird to ye . " 

 " no , mother , " say I , " I see far enough the way I be . it s an unco thing to see too far in front . " 

 " I read it in your bree , " she say . " there s a bonnie lassie that have bricht een , and there s a wee man in a braw coat , and a big man in a pouthered wig , and there s the shadow of the wuddy ,   10   joe , that lie braid across your path . Gie s your loof , hinny , and let Auld Merren spae it to ye bonny . " 

 the two chance shot that seem to point at Alan and the daughter of James more strike I hard ; and I flee from the eldritch creature , cast she a baubee , which she continue to sit and play with under the move shadow of the hanged . 

 my way down the causeway of Leith Walk would have be more pleasant to I but for this encounter . the old rampart run among field , the like of they I have never see for artfulness of agriculture ; I be pleased , besides , to be so far in the still countryside ; but the shackle of the gibbet clatter in my head ; and the mope and mow of the old witch , and the thought of the dead man , hag - ride my spirit . to hang on a gallow , that seem a hard case ; and whether a man come to hang there for two shilling scot , or   as Mr. Stewart have it   from the sense of duty , once he be tar and shackle and hang up , the difference seem small . there might David Balfour hang , and other lad pass on their errand and think light of he ; and old daft limmer sit at a leg - foot and spae their fortune ; and the clean genty maid go by , and look to the other aide , and hold a nose . I see they plain , and they have grey eye , and their screen upon their head be of the Drummed colour . 

 I be thus in the poor of spirit , though still pretty resolve , when I come in view of Pilrig , a pleasant gable house set by the walkside among some brave young wood . the laird s horse be stand saddle at the door as I come up , but himself be in the study , where he receive I in the midst of learn work and musical instrument , for he be not only a deep philosopher but much of a musician . he greet I at first pretty well , and when he have read Rankeillor s letter , place himself obligingly at my disposal . 

 " and what be it , cousin David ! " say he " since it appear that we be cousin what be this that I can do for you ! a word to prestongrange ! doubtless that be easily give . but what should be the word ? " 

 " Mr. Balfour , " say I , " if I be to tell you my whole story the way it fall out , it s my opinion   and it be Rankeillor s before I   that you would be very little make up with it . " 

 " I be sorry to hear this of you , kinsman , " say he . 

 " I must not take that at your hand , Mr. Balfour , " say I ; " I have nothing to my charge to make I sorry , or you for I , but just the common infirmity of mankind . the guilt of Adam s first sin , the want of original righteousness , and the corruption of my whole nature , so much I must answer for , and I hope I have be teach where to look for help , " I say ; for I judge from the look of the man he would think the well of I if I know my question .   11   " but in the way of worldly honour I have no great stumble to reproach myself with ; and my difficulty have befall I very much against my will and   by all that I can see   without my fault . my trouble be to have become dip in a political complication , which it be judge you would be blythe to avoid a knowledge of . " 

 " why , very well , Mr. David , " he reply , " I be pleased to see you be all that Rankeillor represent . and for what you say of political complication , you do I no more than justice . it be my study to be beyond suspicion , and indeed outside the field of it . the question be , " say he , " how , if I be to know nothing of the matter , I can very well assist you ? " 

 " why sir , " say I , " I propose you should write to his lordship , that I be a young man of reasonable good family and of good mean : both of which I believe to be the case . " 

 " I have Rankeillor s word for it , " say Mr. Balfour , " and I count that a warran - dice against all deadly . " 

 " to which you might add   if you will take my word for so much   that I be a good churchman , loyal to King George , and so bring up , " I go on . 

 " none of which will do you any harm , " say Mr. Balfour . 

 " then you might go on to say that I seek his lordship on a matter of great moment , connect with his Majesty s service and the administration of justice , " I suggest . 

 " as I be not to hear the matter , " say the laird , " I will not take upon myself to qualify its weight . great moment therefore fall , and moment along with it . for the rest I might express myself much as you propose . " 

 " and then , sir , " say I , and rub my neck a little with my thumb , " then I would be very desirous if you could slip in a word that might perhaps tell for my protection . " 

 " protection ? " say he , " for your protection ! here be a phrase that somewhat dampen I . if the matter be so dangerous , I own I would be a little loath to move in it blindfold . " 

 " I believe I could indicate in two word where the thing stick , " say I. 

 " perhaps that would be the good , " say he . 

 " well , it s the Appin murder , " say I. 

 he hold up both his hand . " sir ! sir ! " cry he . 

 I think by the expression of his face and voice that I have lose my helper . 

 " let I explain . . . " I begin . 

 " I thank you kindly , I will hear no more of it , " say he . " I decline in toto to hear more of it . for your name s sake and Rankeillor s , and perhaps a little for your own , I will do what I can to help you ; but I will hear no more upon the fact . and it be my first clear duty to warn you . these be deep water , Mr. David , and you be a young man . be cautious and think twice . " 

 " it be to be suppose I will have think oftener than that , Mr. Balfour , " say I , " and I will direct your attention again to Rankeillor s letter , where   I hope and believe   he have register his approval of that which I design . " 

 " well , well , " say he ; and then again , " well , well ! I will do what I can for you . " there with he take a pen and paper , sit a while in thought , and begin to write with much consideration . " I understand that Rankeillor approve of what you have in mind ? " he ask presently . 

 " after some discussion , sir , he bid I to go forward in God s name , " say I. 

 " that be the name to go in , " say Mr. Balfour , and resume his writing . presently , he sign , re - read what he have write , and address I again . " now here , Mr. David , " say he , " be a letter of introduction , which I will seal without closing , and give into your hand open , as the form require . but , since I be act in the dark , I will just read it to you , so that you may see if it will secure your end 

 " Pilrig , August 26th , 1751 . 

 " my Lord , this be to bring to your notice my namesake and cousin , David Balfour Esquire of Shaws , a young gentleman of unblemished descent and good estate . he have enjoy , besides , the more valuable advantage of a godly training , and his political principle be all that your lordship can desire . I be not in Mr. Balfour s confidence , but I understand he to have a matter to declare , touch his Majesty s service and the administration of justice ; purpose for which your Lordship s zeal be know . I should add that the young gentleman s intention be know to and approve by some of his friend , who will watch with hopeful anxiety the event of his success or failure . 

 " Whereupon , " continue Mr. Balfour , " I have subscribe myself with the usual compliment . you observe I have say some of your friend ; I hope you can justify my plural ? " 

 " perfectly , sir ; my purpose be know and approve by more than one , " say I. " and your letter , which I take a pleasure to thank you for , be all I could have hop . " 

 " it be all I could squeeze out , " say he ; " and from what I know of the matter you design to meddle in , I can only pray God that it may prove sufficient . " 

 CHAPTER IV LORD ADVOCATE PRESTONGRANGE 

 my kinsman keep I to a meal , " for the honour of the roof , " he say ; and I believe I make the well speed on my return . I have no thought but to be do with the next stage , and have myself fully commit ; to a person circumstance as I be , the appearance of close a door on hesitation and temptation be itself extremely tempting ; and I be the more disappointed , when I come to Prestongrange s house , to be inform he be abroad . I believe it be true at the moment , and for some hour after ; and then I have no doubt the Advocate come home again , and enjoy himself in a neighbouring chamber among friend , while perhaps the very fact of my arrival be forget . I would have go away a dozen time , only for this strong drawing to have do with my declaration out of hand and be able to lay I down to sleep with a free conscience . at first I read , for the little cabinet where I be leave contain a variety of book . but I fear I read with little profit ; and the weather fall cloudy , the dusk come up early than usual , and my cabinet be light with but a loophole of a window , I be at last oblige to desist from this diversion   such as it be , and pass the rest of my time of wait in a very burthensome vacuity . the sound of people talk in a near chamber , the pleasant note of a harpsichord , and once the voice of a lady singing , bear I a kind of company . 

 I do not know the hour , but the darkness be long come , when the door of the cabinet open , and I be aware , by the light behind he , of a tall figure of a man upon the threshold . I rise at once . 

 " be anybody there ? " he ask . " who in that ? " 

 " I be bearer of a letter from the laird of Pilrig to the Lord Advocate , " say I. 

 " have you be here long ? " he ask . 

 " I would not like to hazard an estimate of how many hour , " say I. 

 " it be the first I hear of it , " he reply , with a chuckle . " the lad must have forget you . but you be in the bit at last , for I be Prestongrange . " 

 so say , he pass before I into the next room , whither   upon his sign   I follow he , and where he light a candle and take his place before a business - table . it be a long room , of a good proportion , wholly line with book . that small spark of light in a corner strike out the man s handsome person and strong face . he be flushed , his eye water and sparkle , and before he sit down I observe he to sway back and forth . no doubt , he have be sup liberally ; but his mind and tongue be under full control . 

 " well , sir , sit ye down , " say he , " and let we see Pilrig s letter . " 

 he glance it through in the beginning carelessly , look up and bow when he come to my name ; but at the last word I think I observe his attention to redouble , and I make sure he read they twice . all this while you be to suppose my heart be beat , for I have now cross my Rubicon and be come fairly on the field of battle . 

 " I be pleased to make your acquaintance , Mr. Balfour , " he say , when he have do . " let I offer you a glass of claret . " 

 " under your favour , my lord , I think it would scarce be fair on I , " say I. " I have come here , as the letter will have mention , on a business of some gravity to myself ; and , as I be little use with wine , I might be the soon affected . " 

 " you shall be the judge , " say he . " but if you will permit , I believe I will even have the bottle in myself . " 

 he touch a bell , and a footman come , as at a signal , bring wine and glass . 

 " you be sure you will not join I ? " ask the Advocate . " well , here be to our well acquaintance ! in what way can I serve you ? " 

 " I should , perhaps , begin by tell you , my lord , that I be here at your own press invitation , " say I. 

 " you have the advantage of I somewhere , " say he , " for I profess I think I never hear of you before this evening . " 

 " right , my lord ; the name be , indeed , new to you , " say I. " and yet you have be for some time extremely wishful to make my acquaintance , and have declare the same in public . " 

 " I wish you would afford I a clue , " say he . " I be no Daniel . " 

 " it will perhaps serve for such , " say I , " that if I be in a jest humour which be far from the case I believe I might lay a claim on your lordship for two hundred pound . " 

 " in what sense ? " he inquire . 

 " in the sense of reward offer for my person , " say I. 

 he thrust away his glass once and for all , and sit straight up in the chair where he have be previously lolling . " what be I to understand ? " say he . 

 " a tall strong lad of about eighteen , " I quote , " speak like a Lowlander and have no beard . " 

 " I recognise those word , " say he , " which , if you have come here with any ill - judge intention of amuse yourself , be like to prove extremely prejudicial to your safety . " 

 " my purpose in this , " I reply , " be just entirely as serious as life and death , and you have understand I perfectly . I be the boy who be speak with Glenure when he be shoot . " 

 " I can only suppose   see you here   that you claim to be innocent , " say he . 

 " the inference be clear , " I say . " I be a very loyal subject to King George , but if I have anything to reproach myself with , I would have have more discretion than to walk into your den . " 

 " I be glad of that , " say he . " this horrid crime , Mr. Balfour , be of a dye which can not permit any clemency . blood have be barbarously shed . it have be shed in direct opposition to his Majesty and our whole frame of law , by those who be their known and public oppugnant . I take a very high sense of this . I will not deny that I consider the crime as directly personal to his Majesty . " 

 " and unfortunately , my lord , " I add , a little drily , " directly personal to another great personage who may be nameless . " 

 " if you mean anything by those word , I must tell you I consider they unfit for a good subject ; and be they speak publicly I should make it my business to take note of they , " say he . " you do not appear to I to recognise the gravity of your situation , or you would be more careful not to pejorate the same by word which glance upon the purity of justice . Justice , in this country , and in my poor hand , be no respecter of person . " 

 " you give I too great a share in my own speech , my lord , " say I. " I do but repeat the common talk of the country , which I have hear everywhere , and from man of all opinion as I come along . " 

 " when you be come to more discretion you will understand such talk in not to be listen to , how much less repeat , " say the Advocate . " but I acquit you of an ill intention . that nobleman , whom we all honour , and who have indeed be wound in a near place by the late barbarity , sit too high to be reach by these aspersion . the Duke of Argyle you see that I deal plainly with you take it to heart as I do , and as we be both bind to do by our judicial function and the service of his Majesty ; and I could wish that all hand , in this ill age , be equally clean of family rancour . but from the accident that this be a Campbell who have fall martyr to his duty as who else but the Campbells have ever put themselves foremost on that path ? I may say it , who be no Campbell and that the chief of that great house happen   for all our advantage   to be the present head of the College of Justice , small mind and disaffect tongue be set agog in every changehouse in the country ; and I find a young gentleman like Mr. Balfour so ill - advise as to make himself their echo . " so much he speak with a very oratorical delivery , as if in court , and then decline again upon the manner of a gentleman . " all this apart , " say he . " it now remain that I should learn what I be to do with you . " 

 " I have think it be rather I that should learn the same from your lordship , " say I. 

 " ay , true , " say the Advocate . " but , you see , you come to I well recommend . there be a good honest Whig name to this letter , " say he , pick it up a moment from the table . " and extra - judicially , Mr. Balfour there be always the possibility of some arrangement , I tell you , and I tell you beforehand that you may be the more upon your guard , your fate lie with I singly . in such a matter   be it say with reverence   I be more powerful than the King s Majesty ; and should you please I and of course satisfy my conscience in what remain to be hold of our interview , I tell you it may remain between ourselves . " 

 " mean how ? " I ask . 

 " why , I mean it thus , Mr. Balfour , " say he , " that if you give satisfaction , no soul need know so much as that you visit my house ; and you may observe that I do not even call my clerk . " 

 I see what way he be drive . " I suppose it be needless anyone should be inform upon my visit , " say I , " though the precise nature of my gain by that I can not see . I be not at all ashamed of come here . " 

 " and have no cause to be , " say he , encouragingly . " nor yet   if you be careful   to fear the consequence . " 

 " my lord , " say I , " speak under your correction , I be not very easy to be frightened . " 

 " and I be sure I do not seek to frighten you , " say he . " but to the interrogation ; and let I warn you to volunteer nothing beyond the question I shall ask you . it may consist very immediately with your safety . I have a great discretion , it be true , but there be bound to it . " 

 " I shall try to follow your lordship s advice , " say I. 

 he spread a sheet of paper on the table and write a heading . " it appear you be present , by the way , in the wood of Lettermore at the moment of the fatal shot , " he begin . " be this by accident ? " 

 " by accident , " say I. 

 " how come you in speech with Colin Campbell ? " he ask . 

 " I be inquire my way of he to aucharn , " I reply . 

 I observe he do not write this answer down . 

 " H m , true , " say he , " I have forget that . and do you know , Mr. Balfour , I would dwell , if I be you , as little as might be on your relation with these Stewarts . it might be find to complicate our business . I be not yet inclined to regard these matter as essential . " 

 " I have think , my lord , that all point of fact be equally material in such a case , " say I. 

 " you forget we be now try these Stewarts , " he reply , with great significance . " if we should ever come to be try you , it will be very different ; and I shall press these very question that I be now willing to glide upon . but to resume : I have it here in Mr. Mungo Campbell s precognition that you run immediately up the brae . how come that ? " 

 " not immediately , my lord , and the cause be my seeing of the murderer . " 

 " you see he , then ? " 

 " as plain as I see your lordship , though not so near hand . " 

 " you know he ? " 

 " I should know he again . " 

 " in your pursuit you be not so fortunate , then , as to overtake he ? " 

 " I be not . " 

 " be he alone ? " 

 " he be alone . " 

 " there be no one else in that neighbourhood ? " 

 " Alan Breck Stewart be not far off , in a piece of a wood . " 

 the Advocate lay his pen down . " I think we be play at cross purpose , " say he , " which you will find to prove a very ill amusement for yourself . " 

 " I content myself with follow your lordship s advice , and answer what I be ask , " say I. 

 " be so wise as to bethink yourself in time , " say he , " I use you with the most anxious tenderness , which you scarce seem to appreciate , and which   unless you be more careful   may prove to be in vain . " 

 " I do appreciate your tenderness , but conceive it to be mistake , " I reply , with something of a falter , for I see we be come to grip at last . " I be here to lay before you certain information , by which I shall convince you Alan have no hand whatever in the killing of Glenure . " 

 the Advocate appear for a moment at a stick , sit with pursed lip , and blink his eye upon I like an angry cat . " Mr. Balfour , " he say at last , " I tell you pointedly you go an ill way for your own interest . " 

 " my lord , " I say , " I be as free of the charge of consider my own interest in this matter as your lordship . as God judge I , I have but the one design , and that be to see justice execute and the innocent go clear . if in pursuit of that I come to fall under your lordship s displeasure , I must bear it as I may . " 

 at this he rise from his chair , light a second candle , and for a while gaze upon I steadily . I be surprised to see a great change of gravity fall upon his face , and I could have almost think he be a little pale . 

 " you be either very simple , or extremely the reverse , and I see that I must deal with you more confidentially , " say he . " this be a political case ah , yes , Mr. Balfour ! whether we like it or no , the case be political and I tremble when I think what issue may depend from it . to a political case , I need scarce tell a young man of your education , we approach with very different thought from one which be criminal only . salus populi suprema lex be a maxim susceptible of great abuse , but it have that force which we find elsewhere only in the law of nature : I mean it have the force of necessity . I will open this out to you , if you will allow I , at more length . you would have I believe " 

 " under your pardon , my lord , I would have you to believe nothing but that which I can prove , " say I. 

 " Tut ! tut ; young gentleman , " say he , " be not so pragmatical , and suffer a man who might be your father   if it be nothing more   to employ his own imperfect language , and express his own poor thought , even when they have the misfortune not to coincide with Mr. Balfour s. you would have I to believe Breck innocent . I would think this of little account , the more so as we can not catch our man . but the matter of Breck s innocence shoot beyond itself . once admit , it would destroy the whole presumption of our case against another and a very different criminal ; a man grow old in treason , already twice in arm against his king and already twice forgive ; a fomentor of discontent , and   whoever may have fire the shot   the unmistakable original of the deed in question . I need not tell you that I mean James Stewart . " 

 " and I can just say plainly that the innocence of Alan and of James be what I be here to declare in private to your lordship , and what I be prepared to establish at the trial by my testimony , " say I. 

 " to which I can only answer by an equal plainness , Mr. Balfour , " say he , " that   in that case   your testimony will not be call by I , and I desire you to withhold it altogether . " 

 " you be at the head of Justice in this country , " I cry , " and you propose to I a crime ! " 

 " I be a man nurse with both hand the interest of this country , " he reply , " and I press on you a political necessity . patriotism be not always moral in the formal sense . you might be glad of it , I think : it be your own protection ; the fact be heavy against you ; and if I be still try to except you from a very dangerous place , it be in part of course because I be not insensible to your honesty in come here ; in part because of Pilrig s letter ; but in part , and in chief part , because I regard in this matter my political duty first and my judicial duty only second . for the same reason I repeat it to you in the same frank word I do not want your testimony . " 

 " I desire not to be think to make a repartee , when I express only the plain sense of our position , " say I. " but if your lordship have no need of my testimony , I believe the other side would be extremely blythe to get it . " 

 Prestongrange arise and begin to pace to and fro in the room . " you be not so young , " he say , " but what you must remember very clearly the year 45 and the shock that go about the country . I read in Pilrig s letter that you be sound in Kirk and State . who save they in that fatal year ? I do not refer to his Royal Highness and his ramrod , which be extremely useful in their day ; but the country have be save and the field win before ever Cumberland come upon Drummossie . who save it ? I repeat ; who save the protestant religion and the whole frame of our civil institution ? the late Lord President Culloden , for one ; he play a man s part , and small thank he get for it even as I , whom you see before you , strain every nerve in the same service , look for no reward beyond the conscience of my duty do . after the President , who else ? you know the answer as well as I do ; tis partly a scandal , and you glance at it yourself , and I reprove you for it , when you first come in . it be the Duke and the great clan of Campbell . now here be a Campbell foully murder , and that in the King s service . the Duke and I be highlander . but we be Highlanders civilised , and it be not so with the great mass of our clan and family . they have still savage virtue and defect . they be still barbarian , like these Stewarts ; only the Campbells be barbarian on the right side , and the Stewarts be barbarian on the wrong . now be you the judge . the Campbells expect vengeance . if they do not get it if this man James escape there will be trouble with the Campbells . that mean disturbance in the Highlands , which be uneasy and very far from be disarm : the disarm be a farce . . . " 

 " I can bear you out in that , " say I. 

 " disturbance in the Highlands make the hour of our old watchful enemy , " pursue his lordship , hold out a finger as he pace ; " and I give you my word we may have a 45 again with the Campbells on the other side . to protect the life of this man Stewart which be forfeit already on half - a - dozen different count if not on this do you propose to plunge your country in war , to jeopardise the faith of your father , and to expose the life and fortune of how many thousand innocent person ? . . . these be consideration that weigh with I , and that I hope will weigh no less with yourself , Mr. Balfour , as a lover of your country , good government , and religious truth . " 

 " you deal with I very frankly , and I thank you for it , " say I. " I will try on my side to be no less honest . I believe your policy to be sound . I believe these deep duty may lie upon your lordship ; I believe you may have lay they on your conscience when you take the oath of the high office which you hold . but for I , who be just a plain man or scarce a man yet the plain duty must suffice . I can think but of two thing , of a poor soul in the immediate and unjust danger of a shameful death , and of the cry and tear of his wife that still tingle in my head . I can not see beyond , my lord . it s the way that I be make . if the country have to fall , it have to fall . and I pray God , if this be wilful blindness , that he may enlighten I before too late . " 

 he have hear I motionless , and stand so a while long . 

 " this be an unexpected obstacle , " say he , aloud , but to himself . 

 " and how be your lordship to dispose of I ? " I ask . 

 " if I wish , " say he , " you know that you might sleep in gaol ? " 

 " my lord , " say I , " I have sleep in bad place . " 

 " well , my boy , " say he , " there be one thing appear very plainly from our interview , that I may rely on your pledge word . give I your honour that you will be wholly secret , not only on what have pass to - night , but in the matter of the Appin case , and I let you go free . " 

 " I will give it till to - morrow or any other near day that you may please to set , " say I. " I would not be think too wily ; but if I give the promise without qualification your lordship would have attain his end . " 

 " I have no thought to entrap you , " say he . 

 " I be sure of that , " say I. 

 " let I see , " he continue . " to - morrow be the Sabbath . come to I on Monday by eight in the morning , and give I your promise until then . " 

 " freely give , my lord , " say I. " and with regard to what have fall from yourself , I will give it for an long as it shall please God to spare your day . " 

 " you will observe , " he say next , " that I have make no employment of menace . " 

 " it be like your lordship s nobility , " say I. " yet I be not altogether so dull but what I can perceive the nature of those you have not utter . " 

 " well , " say he , " good - night to you . may you sleep well , for I think it be more than I be like to do . " 

 with that he sigh , take up a candle , and give I his conveyance as far as the street door . 

 CHAPTER v in the ADVOCATE S HOUSE 

 the next day , Sabbath , August 27th , I have the occasion I have long look forward to , to hear some of the famous Edinburgh preacher , all well know to I already by the report of Mr Campbell . alas ! and I might just as well have be at Essendean , and sit under Mr. Campbell s worthy self ! the turmoil of my thought , which dwelt continually on the interview with Prestongrange , inhibit I from all attention . I be indeed much less impressed by the reasoning of the divine than by the spectacle of the throng congregation in the church , like what I imagine of a theatre or   in my then disposition   of an assize of trial ; above all at the West Kirk , with its three tier of gallery , where I go in the vain hope that I might see Miss Drummond . 

 on the Monday I betook I for the first time to a barber s , and be very well pleased with the result . thence to the Advocate s , where the red coat of the soldier show again about his door , make a bright place in the close . I look about for the young lady and her gillie : there be never a sign of they . but I be no soon show into the cabinet or antechamber where I have spend so wearyful a time upon the Saturday , than I be aware of the tall figure of James More in a corner . he seem a prey to a painful uneasiness , reach forth his foot and hand , and his eye speed here and there without rest about the wall of the small chamber , which recall to I with a sense of pity the man s wretched situation . I suppose it be partly this , and partly my strong continue interest in his daughter , that move I to accost he . 

 " give you a good - morning , sir , " say I. 

 " and a good - morning to you , sir , " say he . 

 " you bide tryst with Prestongrange ? " I ask . 

 " I do , sir , and I pray your business with that gentleman be more agreeable than mine , " be his reply . 

 " I hope at least that yours will be brief , for I suppose you pass before I , " say I. 

 " all pass before I , " he say , with a shrug and a gesture upward of the open hand . " it be not always so , sir , but time change . it be not so when the sword be in the scale , young gentleman , and the virtue of the soldier might sustain themselves . " 

 there come a kind of Highland snuffle out of the man that raise my dander strangely . 

 " well , Mr. Macgregor , " say I , " I understand the main thing for a soldier be to be silent , and the first of his virtue never to complain . " 

 " you have my name , I perceive " he bow to I with his arm cross " though it s one I must not use myself . well , there be a publicity I have show my face and tell my name too often in the beard of my enemy . I must not wonder if both should be know to many that I know not . " 

 " that you know not in the least , sir , " say I , " nor yet anybody else ; but the name I be call , if you care to hear it , be Balfour . " 

 " it be a good name , " he reply , civilly ; " there be many decent folk that use it . and now that I call to mind , there be a young gentleman , your namesake , that march surgeon in the year 45 with my battalion . " 

 " I believe that would be a brother to Balfour of Baith , " say I , for I be ready for the surgeon now . 

 " the same , sir , " say James More . " and since I have be fellow - soldier with your kinsman , you must suffer I to grasp your hand . " 

 he shake hand with I long and tenderly , beam on I the while as though he have find a brother . 

 " ah ! " say he , " these be change day since your cousin and I hear the ball whistle in our lug . " 

 " I think he be a very far - away cousin , " say I , drily , " and I ought to tell you that I never clap eye upon the man . " 

 " well , well , " say he , " it make no change . and you I do not think you be out yourself , sir I have no clear mind of your face , which be one not probable to be forget . " 

 " in the year you refer to , Mr. Macgregor , I be get skelpe in the parish school , " say I. 

 " so young ! " cry he . " ah , then , you will never be able to think what this meeting be to I . in the hour of my adversity , and here in the house of my enemy , to meet in with the blood of an old brother - in - arm it hearten I , Mr. Balfour , like the skirling of the highland pipe ! Sir , this be a sad look back that many of we have to make : some with fall tear . I have live in my own country like a king ; my sword , my mountain , and the faith of my friend and kinsman suffice for I . now I lie in a stink dungeon ; and do you know , Mr. Balfour , " he go on , take my arm and begin to lead I about , " do you know , sir , that I lack mere necessary ? the malice of my foe have quite sequester my resource . I lie , as you know , sir , on a trump - up charge , of which I be as innocent as yourself . they dare not bring I to my trial , and in the meanwhile I be hold naked in my prison . I could have wish it be your cousin I have meet , or his brother Baith himself . either would , I know , have be rejoice to help I ; while a comparative stranger like yourself " 

 I would be ashamed to set down all he pour out to I in this beggarly vein , or the very short and grudging answer that I make to he . there be time when I be tempt to stop his mouth with some small change ; but whether it be from shame or pride whether it be for my own sake or Catriona s whether it be because I think he no fit father for his daughter , or because I resent that grossness of immediate falsity that clung about the man himself the thing be clean beyond I . and I be still be wheedle and preach to , and still be march to and fro , three step and a turn , in that small chamber , and have already , by some very short reply , highly incense , although not finally discourage , my beggar , when Prestongrange appear in the doorway and bid I eagerly into his big chamber . 

 " I have a moment s engagement , " say he ; " and that you may not sit empty - handed I be go to present you to my three braw daughter , of whom perhaps you may have hear , for I think they be more famous than papa . this way . " 

 he lead I into another long room above , where a dry old lady sit at a frame of embroidery , and the three handsome young woman   I suppose   in Scotland stand together by a window . 

 " this be my new friend , Mr Balfour , " say he , present I by the arm , " David , here be my sister , Miss Grant , who be so good as keep my house for I , and will be very pleased if she can help you . and here , " say he , turn to the three young lady , " here be my three braw dauchter . a fair question to ye , Mr. Davie : which of the three be the well favour ? and I wager he will never have the impudence to propound honest Alan Ramsay s answer ! " 

 Hereupon all three , and the old Miss Grant as well , cry out against this sally , which   as I be acquaint with the verse he refer to   bring shame into my own check . it seem to I a citation unpardonable in a father , and I be amazed that these lady could laugh even while they reprove , or make believe to . 

 under cover of this mirth , Prestongrange get forth of the chamber , and I be leave , like a fish upon dry land , in that very unsuitable society . I could never deny , in look back upon what follow , that I be eminently stockish ; and I must say the lady be well drill to have so long a patience with I . the aunt indeed sit close at her embroidery , only look now and again and smile ; but the miss , and especially the eld , who be besides the most handsome , pay I a score of attention which I be very ill able to repay . it be all in vain to tell myself I be a young follow of some worth as well as a good estate , and have no call to feel abash before these lass , the eld not so much old than myself , and no one of they by any probability half as learn . reasoning would not change the fact ; and there be time when the colour come into my face to think I be shave that day for the first time . 

 the talk go , with all their endeavour , very heavily , the eld take pity on my awkwardness , sit down to her instrument , of which she be a pass mistress , and entertain I for a while with play and singing , both in the Scots and in the italian manner ; this put I more at my ease , and be remind of Alan s air that he have teach I in the hole near Carriden , I make so bold as to whistle a bar or two , and ask if she know that . 

 she shake her head . " I never hear a note of it , " say she . " whistle it all through . and now once again , " she add , after I have do so . 

 then she pick it out upon the keyboard , and   to my surprise   instantly enrich the same with well - sound chord , and sing , as she play , with a very droll expression and broad accent 

 " Haenae I get just the lilt of it ? 
 isnae this the tune that ye whustle ? " 

 " you see , " she say , " I can do the poetry too , only it win t rhyme . and then again : 

 " I be Miss Grant , sib to the Advocate : 
 you , I believe , be Dauvit Balfour . " 

 I tell she how much astonish I be by her genius . 

 " and what do you call the name of it ? " she ask . 

 " I do not know the real name , " say I. " I just call it Alan s air . " 

 she look at I directly in the face . " I shall call it David s air , " say she ; " though if it s the least like what your namesake of Israel play to Saul I would never wonder that the king get little good by it , for it s but melancholy music . your other name I do not like ; so if you be ever wish to hear your tune again you be to ask for it by mine . " 

 this be say with a significance that give my heart a jog . " why that , Miss Grant ? " I ask . 

 " why , " say she , " if ever you should come to get hang , I will set your last die speech and confession to that tune and sing it . " 

 this put it beyond a doubt that she be partly informed of my story and peril . how , or just how much , it be more difficult to guess . it be plain she know there be something of danger in the name of Alan , and thus warn I to leave it out of reference ; and plain she know that I stand under some criminal suspicion . I judge besides that the harshness of her last speech   which besides she have follow up immediately with a very noisy piece of music   be to put an end to the present conversation . I stand beside she , affect to listen and admire , but truly whirl away by my own thought . I have always find this young lady to be a lover of the mysterious ; and certainly this first interview make a mystery that be beyond my plummet . one thing I learn long after , the hour of the Sunday have be well employ , the bank porter have be find and examine , my visit to Charles Stewart be discover , and the deduction make that I be pretty deep with James and Alan , and most likely in a continued correspondence with the last . hence this broad hint that be give I across the harpsichord . 

 in the midst of the piece of music , one of the young miss , who be at a window over the close , cry on her sister to come quick , for there be " grey eye again . " the whole family troop there at once , and crowd one another for a look . the window whither they run be in an odd corner of that room , give above the entrance door , and flank up the close . 

 " come , Mr. Balfour , " they cry , " come and see . she be the most beautiful creature ! she hang round the close - head these last day , always with some wretche - like gillie , and yet seem quite a lady . " 

 I have no need to look ; neither do I look twice , or long . I be afraid she might have see I there , look down upon she from that chamber of music , and she without , and her father in the same house , perhaps beg for his life with tear , and myself come but newly from reject his petition . but even that glance set I in a well conceit of myself and much less awe of the young lady . they be beautiful , that be beyond question , but Catriona be beautiful too , and have a kind of brightness in she like a coal of fire . as much as the other cast I down , she lift I up . I remember I have talk easily with she . if I could make no hand of it with these fine maid , it be perhaps something their own fault . my embarrassment begin to be a little mingled and lighten with a sense of fun ; and when the aunt smile at I from her embroidery , and the three daughter unbent to I like a baby , all with " papa s order " write on their face , there be time when I could have find it in my heart to smile myself . 

 presently papa return , the same kind , happy - like , pleasant - speak man . 

 " now , girl , " say he , " I must take Mr. Balfour away again ; but I hope you have be able to persuade he to return where I shall be always gratified to find he . " 

 so they each make I a little farthing compliment , and I be lead away . 

 if this visit to the family have be mean to soften my resistance , it be the bad of failure . I be no such ass but what I understand how poor a figure I have make , and that the girl would be yawn their jaw off as soon as my stiff back be turn . I feel I have show how little I have in I of what be soft and graceful ; and I long for a chance to prove that I have something of the other stuff , the stern and dangerous . 

 well , I be to be serve to my desire , for the scene to which he be conduct I be of a different character . 

 CHAPTER VI UMQUILE the MASTER of LOVAT 

 there be a man wait we in Prestongrange s study , whom I distaste at the first look , as we distaste a ferret or an earwig . he be bitter ugly , but seem very much of a gentleman ; have still manner , but capable of sudden leap and violence ; and a small voice , which could ring out shrill and dangerous when he so desire . 

 the Advocate present we in a familiar , friendly way . 

 " here , Fraser , " say he , " here be Mr. Balfour whom we talk about . Mr. David , this be Mr. Simon Fraser , whom we use to call by another title , but that be an old song . Mr. Fraser have an errand to you . " 

 with that he step aside to his book - shelf , and make believe to consult a quarto volume in the far end . 

 I be thus leave   in a sense   alone with perhaps the last person in the world I have expect . there be no doubt upon the term of introduction ; this could be no other than the forfeit Master of Lovat and chief of the great clan Fraser . I know he have lead his man in the Rebellion ; I know his father s head my old lord s , that grey fox of the mountain to have fall on the block for that offence , the land of the family to have be seize , and their nobility attaint . I could not conceive what he should be do in Grant s house ; I could not conceive that he have be call to the bar , have eat all his principle , and be now curry favour with the government even to the extent of act Advocate - Depute in the Appin murder . 

 " well , Mr. Balfour , " say he , " what be all this I hear of ye ? " 

 " it would not become I to prejudge , " say I , " but if the Advocate be your authority he be fully possess of my opinion . " 

 " I may tell you I be engage in the Appin case , " he go on ; " I be to appear under Prestongrange ; and from my study of the precognition I can assure you your opinion be erroneous . the guilt of Breck be manif ; and your testimony , in which you admit you see he on the hill at the very moment , will certify his hanging . " 

 " it will be rather ill to hang he till you catch he , " I observe . " and for other matter I very willingly leave you to your own impression . " 

 " the Duke have be inform , " he go on . " I have just come from his grace , and he express himself before I with an honest freedom like the great nobleman he be . he speak of you by name , Mr. Balfour , and declare his gratitude beforehand in case you would be lead by those who understand your own interest and those of the country so much well than yourself . Gratitude be no empty expression in that mouth : experto - crede . I daresay you know something of my name and clan , and the damnable example and lamented end of my late father , to say nothing of my own errata . well , I have make my peace with that good Duke ; he have intervene for I with our friend Prestongrange ; and here I be with my foot in the stirrup again and some of the responsibility share into my hand of prosecute King George s enemy and avenge the late daring and bareface insult to his Majesty . " 

 " Doubtless a proud position for your father s son , " say I. 

 he wag his bald eyebrow at I . " you be pleased to make experiment in the ironical , I think , " say he . " but I be here upon duty , I be here to discharge my errand in good faith , it be in vain you think to divert I . and let I tell you , for a young fellow of spirit and ambition like yourself , a good shove in the beginning will do more than ten year drudgery . the shove be now at your command ; choose what you will to be advance in , the Duke will watch upon you with the affectionate disposition of a father . " 

 " I be think that I lack the docility of the son , " say I. 

 " and do you really suppose , sir , that the whole policy of this country be to be suffer to trip up and tumble down for an ill - mannered colt of a boy ? " he cry . " this have be make a test case , all who would prosper in the future must put a shoulder to the wheel . look at I ! do you suppose it be for my pleasure that I put myself in the highly invidious position of persecute a man that I have draw the sword alongside of ? the choice be not leave I . " 

 " but I think , sir , that you forfeit your choice when you mix in with that unnatural rebellion , " I remark . " my case be happily otherwise ; I be a true man , and can look either the Duke or King George in the face without concern . " 

 " be it so the wind sit ? " say he . " I protest you be fall in the bad sort of error . Prestongrange have be hitherto so civil   he tell I   as not to combat your allegation ; but you must not think they be not look upon with strong suspicion . you say you be innocent . my dear sir , the fact declare you guilty . " 

 " I be wait for you there , " say I. 

 " the evidence of Mungo Campbell ; your flight after the completion of the murder ; your long course of secresy my good young man ! " say Mr. Simon , " here be enough evidence to hang a bullock , let be a David Balfour ! I shall be upon that trial ; my voice shall be raise ; I shall then speak much otherwise from what I do to - day , and far less to your gratification , little as you like it now ! ah , you look white ! " cry he . " I have find the key of your impudent heart . you look pale , your eye waver , Mr. David ! you see the grave and the gallow near by than you have fancy . " 

 " I own to a natural weakness , " say I. " I think no shame for that . Shame . . . " I be go on . 

 " shame wait for you on the gibbet , " he break in . 

 " where I shall but be even d with my lord your father , " say I. 

 " Aha , but not so ! " he cry , " and you do not yet see to the bottom of this business . my father suffer in a great cause , and for deal in the affair of king . you be to hang for a dirty murder about boddle - piece . your personal part in it , the treacherous one of hold the poor wretch in talk , your accomplice a pack of ragged Highland gillie . and it can be show , my great Mr. Balfour it can be show , and it will be show , trust I that have a finger in the pie it can be show , and shall be show , that you be pay to do it . I think I can see the look go round the court when I adduce my evidence , and it shall appear that you , a young man of education , let yourself be corrupt to this shocking act for a suit of cast clothe , a bottle of Highland spirit , and three - and - fivepence - halfpenny in copper money . " 

 there be a touch of the truth in these word that knock I like a blow : clothe , a bottle of usquebaugh , and three - and - fivepence - halfpenny in change make up , indeed , the most of what Alan and I have carry from Auchurn ; and I see that some of James s people have be blab in their dungeon . 

 " you see I know more than you fancy , " he resume in triumph . " and as for give it this turn , great Mr. David , you must not suppose the Government of Great Britain and Ireland will ever be stick for want of evidence . we have man here in prison who will swear out their life as we direct they ; as I direct , if you prefer the phrase . so now you be to guess your part of glory if you choose to die . on the one hand , life , wine , woman , and a duke to be your handgun : on the other , a rope to your craig , and a gibbet to clatter your bone on , and the lousy , low story to hand down to your namesake in the future that be ever tell about a hire assassin . and see here ! " he cry , with a formidable shrill voice , " see this paper that I pull out of my pocket . look at the name there : it be the name of the great David , I believe , the ink scarce dry yet . can you guess its nature ? it be the warrant for your arrest , which I have but to touch this bell beside I to have execute on the spot . once in the Tolbooth upon this paper , may God help you , for the die be cast ! " 

 I must never deny that I be greatly horrify by so much baseness , and much unmanned by the immediacy and ugliness of my danger . Mr. Simon have already glory in the change of my hue ; I make no doubt I be now no ruddier than my shirt ; my speech besides tremble . 

 " there be a gentleman in this room , " cry I. " I appeal to he . I put my life and credit in his hand . " 

 Prestongrange shut his book with a snap . " I tell you so , Simon , " say he ; " you have play your hand for all it be worth , and you have lose . Mr. David , " he go on , " I wish you to believe it be by no choice of mine you be subject to this proof . I wish you could understand how glad I be you should come forth from it with so much credit . you may not quite see how , but it be a little of a service to myself . for have our friend here be more successful than I be last night , it might have appear that he be a well judge of man than I ; it might have appear we be altogether in the wrong situation , Mr. Simon and myself . and I know our friend Simon to be ambitious , " say he , strike lightly on Fraser s shoulder . " as for this stage play , it be over ; my sentiment be very much engage in your behalf ; and whatever issue we can find to this unfortunate affair , I shall make it my business to see it be adopt with tenderness to you . " 

 these be very good word , and I could see besides that there be little love , and perhaps a spice of genuine ill - will , between these two who be oppose to I . for all that , it be unmistakable this interview have be design , perhaps rehearse , with the consent of both ; it be plain my adversary be in earnest to try I by all method ; and now   persuasion , flattery , and menace have be try in vain   I could not but wonder what would be their next expedient . my eye besides be still troubled , and my knee loose under I , with the distress of the late ordeal ; and I could do no more than stammer the same form of word : " I put my life and credit in your hand . " 

 " well , well , " say he , " we must try to save they . and in the meanwhile let we return to gentle method . you must not bear any grudge upon my friend , Mr. Simon , who do but speak by his brief . and even if you do conceive some malice against myself , who stand by and seem rather to hold a candle , I must not let that extend to innocent member of my family . these be greatly engage to see more of you , and I can not consent to have my young womenfolk disappoint . to - morrow they will be go to Hope Park , where I think it very proper you should make your bow . call for I first , when I may possibly have something for your private hearing ; then you shall be turn abroad again under the conduct of my miss ; and until that time repeat to I your promise of secrecy . " 

 I have do well to have instantly refuse , but in truth I be beside the power of reasoning ; do as I be bid ; take my leave I know not how ; and when I be forth again in the close , and the door have shut behind I , be glad to lean on a house wall and wipe my face . that horrid apparition   as I may call it   of Mr. Simon ring in my memory , as a sudden noise ring after it be over in the ear . tale of the man s father , of his falseness , of his manifold perpetual treachery , rise before I from all that I have hear and read , and join on with what I have just experience of himself . each time it occur to I , the ingenious foulness of that calumny he have propose to nail upon my character startle I afresh . the case of the man upon the gibbet by Leith Walk appear scarce distinguishable from that I be now to consider as my own . to rob a child of so little more than nothing be certainly a paltry enterprise for two grow man ; but my own tale , as it be to be represent in a court by Simon Fraser , appear a fair second in every possible point of view of sordidness and cowardice . 

 the voice of two of Prestongrange s liveried man upon his doorstep recall I to myself . 

 " ha e , " say the one , " this billet as fast as ye can link to the captain . " 

 " be that for the cateran back again ? " ask the other . 

 " it would seem sae , " return the first . " he and Simon be seek he . " 

 " I think Prestongrange be gane gyte , " say the second . " he ll have James More in bed with he next . " 

 " Weel , it s neither your affair nor mine s , " say the first . 

 and they part , the one upon his errand , and the other back into the house . 

 this look as ill as possible . I be scarce go and they be send already for James More , to whom I think Mr. Simon must have point when he speak of man in prison and ready to redeem their life by all extremity . my scalp curdle among my hair , and the next moment the blood leap in I to remember Catriona . poor lass ! her father stand to be hang for pretty indefensible misconduct . what be yet more unpalatable , it now seem he be prepared to save his four quarter by the bad of shame and the most foul of cowardly murder murder by the false oath ; and to complete our misfortune , it seem myself be pick out to be the victim . 

 I begin to walk swiftly and at random , conscious only of a desire for movement , air , and the open country . 

 CHAPTER VII I make a fault in HONOUR 

 I come forth , I vow I know not how , on the Lang Dykes   12 . this be a rural road which run on the north side over against the city . thence I could see the whole black length of it tail down , from where the castle stand upon its crag above the loch in a long line of spire and gable end , and smoke chimney , and at the sight my heart swell in my bosom . my youth , as I have tell , be already inure to danger ; but such danger as I have see the face of but that morning , in the midst of what they call the safety of a town , shake I beyond experience . Peril of slavery , peril of shipwreck , peril of sword and shot , I have stand all of these without discredit ; but the peril there be in the sharp voice and the fat face of Simon , properly Lord Lovat , daunt I wholly . 

 I sit by the lake side in a place where the rush go down into the water , and there steep my wrist and lave my temple . if I could have do so with any remain of self - esteem , I would now have flee from my foolhardy enterprise . but   call it courage or cowardice , and I believe it be both the one and the other   I decide I be venture out beyond the possibility of a retreat . I have out - face these man , I would continue to out - face they ; come what might , I would stand by the word speak . 

 the sense of my own constancy somewhat uplifted my spirit , but not much . at the good of it there be an icy place about my heart , and life seem a black business to be at all engage in . for two soul in particular my pity flow . the one be myself , to be so friendless and lose among danger . the other be the girl , the daughter of James More . I have see but little of she ; yet my view be take and my judgment make . I think she a lass of a clean honour , like a man s ; I think her one to die of a disgrace ; and now I believe her father to be at that moment bargain his vile life for mine . it make a bond in my thought betwixt the girl and I . I have see she before only as a wayside appearance , though one that please I strangely ; I see she now in a sudden nearness of relation , as the daughter of my blood foe , and I might say , my murderer . I reflect it be hard I should be so plagued and persecute all my day for other folk affair , and have no manner of pleasure myself . I get meal and a bed to sleep in when my concern would suffer it ; beyond that my wealth be of no help to I . if I be to hang , my day be like to be short ; if I be not to hang but to escape out of this trouble , they might yet seem long to I ere I be do with they . of a sudden her face appear in my memory , the way I have first see it , with the part lip ; at that , weakness come in my bosom and strength into my leg ; and I set resolutely forward on the way to Dean . if I be to hang to - morrow , and it be sure enough I might very likely sleep that night in a dungeon , I determine I should hear and speak once more with Catriona . 

 the exercise of walk and the thought of my destination brace I yet more , so that I begin to pluck up a kind of spirit . in the village of Dean , where it sit in the bottom of a glen beside the river , I inquire my way of a miller s man , who send I up the hill upon the farth side by a plain path , and so to a decent - like small house in a garden of lawn and apple - tree . my heart beat high as I step inside the garden hedge , but it fall low indeed when I come face to face with a grim and fierce old lady , walk there in a white mutch with a man s hat strap upon the top of it . 

 " what do ye come seek here ? " she ask . 

 I tell she I be after Miss Drummond . 

 " and what may be your business with Miss Drummond ? " say she . 

 I tell she I have meet she on Saturday last , have be so fortunate as to render she a trifling service , and be come now on the young lady s invitation . 

 " o , so you re Saxpence ! " she cry , with a very sneer manner . " a braw gift , a bonny gentleman . and hae ye ony ither name and designation , or be ye bapteesed Saxpence ? " she ask . 

 I tell my name . 

 " preserve I ! " she cry . " have Ebenezer get a son ? " 

 " no , ma am , " say I. " I be a son of Alexander s. it s I that be the Laird of Shaws . " 

 " Ye ll find your work cut out for ye to establish that , " quoth she . 

 " I perceive you know my uncle , " say I ; " and I daresay you may be the well pleased to hear that business be arrange . " 

 " and what bring ye here after Miss Drummond ? " she pursue . 

 " I m come after my saxpence , mem , " say I. " it s to be think , be my uncle s nephew , I would be find a careful lad . " 

 " so ye have a spark of sleeness in ye ? " observe the old lady , with some approval . " I think ye have just be a cuif you and your saxpence , and your lucky day and your sake of Balwhidder " from which I be gratified to learn that Catriona have not forget some of our talk . " but all this be by the purpose , " she resume . " be I to understand that ye come here keep company ? " 

 " this be surely rather an early question , " say I. " the maid be young , so be I , bad fortune . I have but see she the once . I ll not deny , " I add , make up my mind to try she with some frankness , " I ll not deny but she have run in my head a good deal since I meet in with she . that be one thing ; but it would be quite another , and I think I would look very like a fool , to commit myself . " 

 " you can speak out of your mouth , I see , " say the old lady . " praise God , and so can I ! I be fool enough to take charge of this rogue s daughter : a fine charge I have get ; but it s mine , and I ll carry it the way I want to . do ye mean to tell I , Mr. Balfour of Shaws , that you would marry James More s daughter , and he hang ! well , then , where there s no possible marriage there shall be no manner of carrying on , and take that for say . lass be bruckle thing , " she add , with a nod ; " and though ye would never think it by my wrunkle chaft , I be a lassie mysel , and a bonny one . " 

 " Lady Allardyce , " say I , " for that I suppose to be your name , you seem to do the two side of the talking , which be a very poor manner to come to an agreement . you give I rather a home thrust when you ask if I would marry , at the gallow s foot , a young lady whom I have see but once . I have tell you already I would never be so untenty as to commit myself . and yet I ll go some way with you . if I continue to like the lass as well as I have reason to expect , it will be something more than her father , or the gallow either , that keep the two of we apart . as for my family , I find it by the wayside like a lost bawbee ! I owe less than nothing to my uncle and if ever I marry , it will be to please one person : that s myself . " 

 " I have hear this kind of talk before ye be bear , " say Mrs. Ogilvy , " which be perhaps the reason that I think of it so little . there s much to be consider . this James More be a kinsman of mine , to my shame be it speak . but the well the family , the mair man hang or head , that s always be poor Scotland s story . and if it be just the hanging ! for my part I think I would be well pleased with James upon the gallow , which would be at least an end to he . catrine s a good lass enough , and a good - hearted , and let herself be deave all day with a runt of an auld wife like I . but , ye see , there s the weak bit . she s daft about that long , false , fleeche beggar of a father of her , and red - mad about the Gregara , and proscribe name , and King James , and a wheen blether . and you might think ye could guide she , ye would find yourself sore mista en . ye say ye ve see she but the once . . . " 

 " speak with she but the once , I should have say , " I interrupt . " I see she again this morning from a window at Prestongrange s. " 

 this I daresay I put in because it sound well ; but I be properly pay for my ostentation on the return . 

 " what s this of it ? " cry the old lady , with a sudden pucker of her face . " I think it be at the Advocate s door - cheek that ye meet she first . " 

 I tell she that be so . 

 " H m , " she say ; and then suddenly , upon rather a scold tone , " I have your bare word for it , " she cry , " as to who and what you be . by your way of it , you re Balfour of the Shaws ; but for what I ken you may be Balfour of the Deevil s oxter . it s possible ye may come here for what ye say , and it s equally possible ye may come here for deil care what ! I m good enough Whig to sit quiet , and to have keepit all my man - folk s head upon their shoulder . but I m not just a good enough Whig to be make a fool of neither . and I tell you fairly , there s too much Advocate s door and Advocate s window here for a man that come taigle after a Macgregor s daughter . Ye can tell that to the Advocate that send ye , with my fond love . and I kiss my loof to ye , Mr. Balfour , " say she , suit the action to the word ; " and a braw journey to ye back to where ye cam frae . " 

 " if you think I a spy , " I break out , and speech stick in my throat . I stand and look murder at the old lady for a space , then bow and turn away . 

 " here ! hoot ! the callant s in a creel ! " she cry . " think ye a spy ? what else would I think ye I that ken naethe by ye ? but I see that I be wrong ; and as I can not fight , I ll have to apologise . a bonny figure I would be with a broadsword . ay ! ay ! " she go on , " you re none such a bad lad in your way ; I think ye ll have some redeem vice . but , o ! Davit Balfour , ye re damn countryfeed . Ye ll have to win over that , lad ; ye ll have to soople your back - bone , and think a wee pickle less of your dainty self ; and ye ll have to try to find out that woman - folk be nae grenadier . but that can never be . to your last day you ll ken no more of woman - folk than what I do of sow - gelding . " 

 I have never be use with such expression from a lady s tongue , the only two lady I have know , Mrs. Campbell and my mother , be most devout and most particular woman ; and I suppose my amazement must have be depict in my countenance , for Mrs. Ogilvy burst forth suddenly in a fit of laughter . 

 " keep I ! " she cry , struggle with her mirth , " you have the fine timber face and you to marry the daughter of a Hieland cateran ! Davie , my dear , I think we ll have to make a match of it if it be just to see the wean . and now , " she go on , " there s no manner of service in your daidling here , for the young woman be from home , and it s my fear that the old woman be no suitable companion for your father s son . forbye that I have nobody but myself to look after my reputation , and have be long enough alone with a sedooctive youth . and come back another day for your saxpence ! " she cry after I as I leave . 

 my skirmish with this disconcert lady give my thought a boldness they have otherwise want . for two day the image of Catriona have mix in all my meditation ; she make their background , so that I scarce enjoy my own company without a glint of she in a corner of my mind . but now she come immediately near ; I seem to touch she , whom I have never touch but the once ; I let myself flow out to she in a happy weakness , and look all about , and before and behind , see the world like an undesirable desert , where man go as soldier on a march , follow their duty with what constancy they have , and Catriona alone there to offer I some pleasure of my day . I wonder at myself that I could dwell on such consideration in that time of my peril and disgrace ; and when I remember my youth I be ashamed . I have my study to complete : I have to be call into some useful business ; I have yet to take my part of service in a place where all must serve ; I have yet to learn , and know , and prove myself a man ; and I have so much sense as blush that I should be already tempt with these far - on and holier delight and duty . my education speak home to I sharply ; I be never bring up on sugar biscuit but on the hard food of the truth . I know that he be quite unfit to be a husband who be not prepared to be a father also ; and for a boy like I to play the father be a mere derision . 

 when I be in the midst of these thought and about half - way back to town I see a figure come to meet I , and the trouble of my heart be heighten . it seem I have everything in the world to say to she , but nothing to say first ; and remember how tongue - tie I have be that morning at the Advocate s I make sure that I would find myself strike dumb . but when she come up my fear flee away ; not even the consciousness of what I have be privately think disconcert I the least ; and I find I could talk with she as easily and rationally as I might with Alan . 

 " o ! " she cry , " you have be seek your sixpence ; do you get it ? " 

 I tell she no ; but now I have meet with she my walk be not in vain . " though I have see you to - day already , " say I , and tell she where and when . 

 " I do not see you , " she say . " my eye be big , but there be well than mine at see far . only I hear sing in the house . " 

 " that be Miss Grant , " say I , " the eld and the bonny . " 

 " they say they be all beautiful , " say she . 

 " they think the same of you , Miss Drummond , " I reply , " and be all crowd to the window to observe you . " 

 " it be a pity about my be so blind , " say she , " or I might have see they too . and you be in the house ? you must have be have the fine time with the fine music and the pretty lady . " 

 " there be just where you be wrong , " say I ; " for I be as uncouth as a sea - fish upon the brae of a mountain . the truth be that I be well fit to go about with ruda man than pretty lady . " 

 " well , I would think so too , at all event ! " say she , at which we both of we laugh . 

 " it be a strange thing , now , " say I. " I be not the least afraid with you , yet I could have run from the Miss Grants . and I be afraid of your cousin too . " 

 " o , I think any man will be afraid of she , " she cry . " my father be afraid of she himself . " 

 the name of her father bring I to a stop . I look at she as she walk by my side ; I recall the man , and the little I know and the much I guess of he ; and compare the one with the other , feel like a traitor to be silent . 

 " speak of which , " say I , " I meet your father no later than this morning . " 

 " do you ? " she cry , with a voice of joy that seem to mock at I . " you see James More ? you will have speak with he then ? " 

 " I do even that , " say I. 

 then I think thing go the bad way for I that be humanly possible . she give I a look of mere gratitude . " ah , thank you for that ! " say she . 

 " you thank I for very little , " say I , and then stop . but it seem when I be hold back so much , something at least have to come out . " I speak rather ill to he , " say I ; " I do no like he very much ; I speak he rather ill , and he be angry . " 

 " I think you have little to do then , and less to tell it to his daughter ! " she cry out . " but those that do not love and cherish he I will not know . " 

 " I will take the freedom of a word yet , " say I , begin to tremble . " perhaps neither your father nor I be in the good of spirit at Prestongrange s. I daresay we both have anxious business there , for it s a dangerous house . I be sorry for he too , and speak to he the first , if I could but have speak the wiser . and for one thing , in my opinion , you will soon find that his affair be mend . " 

 " it will not be through your friendship , I be think , " say she ; " and he be much make up to you for your sorrow . " 

 " Miss Drummond , " cry I , " I be alone in this world . " 

 " and I be not wonder at that , " say she . 

 " o , let I speak ! " say I. " I will speak but the once , and then leave you , if you will , for ever . I come this day in the hope of a kind word that I be sore in want of . I know that what I say must hurt you , and I know it then . it would have be easy to have speak smooth , easy to lie to you ; can you not think how I be tempt to the same ? can not you see the truth of my heart shine out ? " 

 " I think here be a great deal of work , Mr. Balfour , " say she . " I think we will have meet but the once , and will can part like gentle folk . " 

 " o , let I have one to believe in I ! " I plead , " I cannae bear it else . the whole world be clanne against I . how be I to go through with my dreadful fate ? if there s to be none to believe in I I can not do it . the man must just die , for I can not do it . " 

 she have still look straight in front of she , head in air ; but at my word or the tone of my voice she come to a stop . " what be this you say ? " she ask . " what be you talk of ? " 

 " it be my testimony which may save an innocent life , " say I , " and they will not suffer I to bear it . what would you do yourself ? you know what this be , whose father lie in danger . would you desert the poor soul ? they have try all way with I . they have seek to bribe I ; they offer I hill and valley . and to - day that sleuth - hound tell I how I stand , and to what a length he would go to butcher and disgrace I . I be to be bring in a party to the murder ; I be to have hold Glenure in talk for money and old clothe ; I be to be kill and sham . if this be the way I be to fall , and I scarce a man if this be the story to be tell of I in all Scotland if you be to believe it too , and my name be to be nothing but a by - word Catriona , how can I go through with it ? the thing s not possible ; it s more than a man have in his heart . " 

 I pour my word out in a whirl , one upon the other ; and when I stop I find she gaze on I with a startled face . 

 " Glenure ! it be the Appin murder , " she say softly , but with a very deep surprise . 

 I have turn back to bear her company , and we be now come near the head of the brae above Dean village . at this word I step in front of she like one suddenly distract . 

 " for God s sake ! " I cry , " for God s sake , what be this that I have do ? " and carry my fist to my temple . " what make I do it ? sure , I be bewitch to say these thing ! " 

 " in the name of heaven , what ail you now ! " she cry . 

 " I give my honour , " I groan , " I give my honour and now I have break it . o , Catriona ! " 

 " I be ask you what it be , " she say ; " be it these thing you should not have speak ? and do you think I have no honour , then ? or that I be one that would betray a friend ? I hold up my right hand to you and swear . " 

 " o , I know you would be true ! " say I. " it s I it s here . I that stand but this morning and out - face they , that risk rather to die disgrace upon the gallow than do wrong and a few hour after I throw my honour away by the roadside in common talk ! there be one thing clear upon our interview , say he , that I can rely on your pledge word . where be my word now ? who could believe I now ? you could not believe I . I be clean fall down ; I have good die ! " all this I say with a weeping voice , but I have no tear in my body . 

 " my heart be sore for you , " say she , " but be sure you be too nice . I would not believe you , do you say ? I would trust you with anything . and these man ? I would not be think of they ! man who go about to entrap and to destroy you ! Fy ! this be no time to crouch . look up ! do you not think I will be admire you like a great hero of the good and you a boy not much old than myself ? and because you say a word too much in a friend s ear , that would die ere she betray you to make such a matter ! it be one thing that we must both forget . " 

 " Catriona , " say I , look at she , hang - dog , " be this true of it ? would ye trust I yet ? " 

 " will you not believe the tear upon my face ? " she cry . " it be the world I be think of you , Mr. David Balfour . let they hang you ; I will never forget , I will grow old and still remember you . I think it be great to die so : I will envy you that gallow . " 

 " and maybe all this while I be but a child fright with bogle , " say I. " maybe they but make a mock of I . " 

 " it be what I must know , " she say . " I must hear the whole . the harm be do at all event , and I must hear the whole . " 

 I have sit down on the wayside , where she take a place beside I , and I tell she all that matter much as I have write it , my thought about her father s dealing be alone omit . 

 " well , " she say , when I have finish , " you be a hero , surely , and I never would have think that same ! and I think you be in peril , too . o , Simon Fraser ! to think upon that man ! for his life and the dirty money , to be deal in such traffic ! " and just then she call out aloud with a queer word that be common with she , and belong , I believe , to her own language . " my torture ! " say she , " look at the sun ! " 

 indeed , it be already dip towards the mountain . 

 she bid I come again soon , give I her hand , and leave I in a turmoil of glad spirit . I delay to go home to my lodging , for I have a terror of immediate arrest ; but get some supper at a change house , and the well part of that night walk by myself in the barley - field , and have such a sense of Catriona s presence that I seem to bear she in my arm . 

 CHAPTER VIII the BRAVO 

 the next day , August 29th , I keep my appointment at the Advocate s in a coat that I have make to my own measure , and be but newly ready . 

 " aha , " say Prestongrange , " you be very fine to - day ; my miss be to have a fine cavalier . come , I take that kind of you . I take that kind of you , Mr. David . o , we shall do very well yet , and I believe your trouble be nearly at an end . " 

 " you have news for I ? " cry I. 

 " beyond anticipation , " he reply . " your testimony be after all to be receive ; and you may go , if you will , in my company to the trial , which in to be hold at Inverary , Thursday , 21st proximo . " 

 I be too much amazed to find word . 

 " in the meanwhile , " he continue , " though I will not ask you to renew your pledge , I must caution you strictly to be reticent . to - morrow your precognition must be take ; and outside of that , do you know , I think least say will be soon mend . " 

 " I shall try to go discreetly , " say I. " I believe it be yourself that I must thank for this crown mercy , and I do thank you gratefully . after yesterday , my lord , this be like the door of Heaven . I can not find it in my heart to get the thing believe . " 

 " ah , but you must try and manage , you must try and manage to believe it , " say he , soothe - like , " and I be very glad to hear your acknowledgment of obligation , for I think you may be able to repay I very shortly " he cough " or even now . the matter be much change . your testimony , which I shall not trouble you for to - day , will doubtless alter the complexion of the case for all concern , and this make it less delicate for I to enter with you on a side issue . " 

 " my Lord , " I interrupt , " excuse I for interrupt you , but how have this be bring about ? the obstacle you tell I of on Saturday appear even to I to be quite insurmountable ; how have it be contrive ? " 

 " my dear Mr. David , " say he , " it would never do for I to divulge   even to you , as you say   the council of the Government ; and you must content yourself , if you please , with the gross fact . " 

 he smile upon I like a father as he speak , play the while with a new pen ; methought it be impossible there could be any shadow of deception in the man : yet when he draw to he a sheet of paper , dip his pen among the ink , and begin again to address I , I be somehow not so certain , and fall instinctively into an attitude of guard . 

 " there be a point I wish to touch upon , " he begin . " I purposely leave it before upon one side , which need be now no long necessary . this be not , of course , a part of your examination , which be to follow by another hand ; this be a private interest of my own . you say you encounter Alan Breck upon the hill ? " 

 " I do , my lord , " say I. 

 " this be immediately after the murder ? " 

 " it be . " 

 " do you speak to he ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " you have know he before , I think ? " say my lord , carelessly . 

 " I can not guess your reason for so thinking , my lord , " I reply , " but such in the fact . " 

 " and when do you part with he again ? " say he . 

 " I reserve my answer , " say I. " the question will be put to I at the assize . " 

 " Mr. Balfour , " say he , " will you not understand that all this be without prejudice to yourself ? I have promise you life and honour ; and , believe I , I can keep my word . you be therefore clear of all anxiety . Alan , it appear , you suppose you can protect ; and you talk to I of your gratitude , which I think   if you push I   be not ill - deserved . there be a great many different consideration all point the same way ; and I will never be persuade that you could not help we   if you choose   to put salt on Alan s tail . " 

 " my lord , " say I , " I give you my word I do not so much as guess where Alan be . " 

 he pause a breath . " nor how he might be find ? " he ask . 

 I sit before he like a log of wood . 

 " and so much for your gratitude , Mr. David ! " he observe . again there be a piece of silence . " well , " say he , rise , " I be not fortunate , and we be a couple at cross purpose . let we speak of it no more ; you will receive notice when , where , and by whom , we be to take your precognition . and in the meantime , my miss must be wait you . they will never forgive I if I detain their cavalier . " 

 into the hand of these Graces I be accordingly offer up , and find they dress beyond what I have think possible , and look fair as a posy . 

 as we go forth from the door a small circumstance occur which come afterwards to look extremely big . I hear a whistle sound loud and brief like a signal , and look all about , spy for one moment the red head of Neil of the Tom , the son of Duncan . the next moment he be go again , nor could I see so much as the skirt - tail of Catriona , upon whom I naturally suppose he to be then attend . 

 my three keeper lead I out by Bristo and the Bruntsfield Links ; whence a path carry we to Hope Park , a beautiful pleasance , lay with gravel - walk , furnish with seat and summer - shed , and ward by a keeper . the way there be a little longsome ; the two young miss affect an air of genteel weariness that damp I cruelly , the eld consider I with something that at time appear like mirth ; and though I think I do myself more justice than the day before , it be not without some effort . upon our reach the park I be launch on a bevy of eight or ten young gentleman   some of they cockade officer , the rest chiefly advocate   who crowd to attend upon these beauty ; and though I be present to all of they in very good word , it seem I be by all immediately forget . young folk in a company be like to savage animal : they fall upon or scorn a stranger without civility , or I may say , humanity ; and I be sure , if I have be among baboon , they would have show I quite as much of both . some of the advocate set up to be wit , and some of the soldier to be rattle ; and I could not tell which of these extreme annoy I most . all have a manner of handle their sword and coat - skirt , for the which   in mere black envy   I could have kick they from the park . I daresay , upon their side , they grudge I extremely the fine company in which I have arrive ; and altogether I have soon fall behind , and step stiffly in the rear of all that merriment with my own thought . 

 from these I be recall by one of the officer , Lieutenant Hector Duncansby , a gawky , leer Highland boy , ask if my name be not " Palfour . " 

 I tell he it be , not very kindly , for his manner be scant civil . 

 " ha , palfour , " say he , and then , repeat it , " palfour , palfour ! " 

 " I be afraid you do not like my name , sir , " say I , annoy with myself to be annoy with such a rustical fellow . 

 " no , " say he , " but I wass thinking . " 

 " I would not advise you to make a practice of that , sir , " say I. " I feel sure you would not find it to agree with you . " 

 " Tit you effer hear where Alan Grigor fand the tang ? " say he . 

 I ask he what he could possibly mean , and he answer , with a heckle laugh , that he think I must have find the poker in the same place and swallow it . 

 there could be no mistake about this , and my cheek burn . 

 " before I go about to put affront on gentleman , " say I , " I think I would learn the english language first . " 

 he take I by the sleeve with a nod and a wink and lead I quietly outside Hope Park . but no soon be we beyond the view of the promenader , than the fashion of his countenance change . " you tam lowland scoon rel ! " cry he , and hit I a buffet on the jaw with his closed fist . 

 I pay he as good or well on the return ; whereupon he step a little back and take off his hat to I decorously . 

 " enough plow I think , " say he . " I will be the offended shentleman , for who effer hear of such suffeeciency as tell a shentleman that be the king s officer he cannae speak Cot s English ? we have sword at our hurdle , and here be the King s Park at hand . will ye walk first , or let I show ye the way ? " 

 I return his bow , tell he to go first , and follow he . as he go I hear he grumble to himself about Cot s English and the King s coat , so that I might have suppose he to be seriously offend . but his manner at the beginning of our interview be there to belie he . it be manifest he have come prepared to fasten a quarrel on I , right or wrong ; manifest that I be take in a fresh contrivance of my enemy ; and to I   conscious as I be of my deficiency   manifest enough that I should be the one to fall in our encounter . 

 as we come into that rough rocky desert of the King s Park I be tempt half - a - dozen time to take to my heel and run for it , so loath be I to show my ignorance in fencing , and so much averse to die or even to be wound . but I consider if their malice go as far as this , it would likely stick at nothing ; and that to fall by the sword , however ungracefully , be still an improvement on the gallow . I consider besides that by the unguarded pertness of my word and the quickness of my blow I have put myself quite out of court ; and that even if I run , my adversary would probably pursue and catch I , which would add disgrace to my misfortune . so that , take all in all , I continue march behind he , much as a man follow the hangman , and certainly with no more hope . 

 we go about the end of the long craig , and come into the Hunter s bog . here , on a piece of fair turf , my adversary draw . there be nobody there to see we but some bird ; and no resource for I but to follow his example , and stand on guard with the good face I could display . it seem it be not good enough for Mr. Dancansby , who spy some flaw in my manouvre , pause , look upon I sharply , and come off and on , and menace I with his blade in the air . as I have see no such proceeding from Alan , and be besides a good deal affect with the proximity of death , I grow quite bewilder , stand helpless , and could have long to run away . 

 " fat deil ail she ? " cry the lieutenant . 

 and suddenly engage , he twitch the sword out of my grasp and send it fly far among the rush . 

 Twice be this manouvre repeat ; and the third time when I bring back my humiliated weapon , I find he have return his own to the scabbard , and stand await I with a face of some anger , and his hand clasp under his skirt . 

 " Pe tamne if I touch you ! " he cry , and ask I bitterly what right I have to stand up before " shentleman " when I do not know the back of a sword from the front of it . 

 I answer that be the fault of my upbringing ; and would he do I the justice to say I have give he all the satisfaction it be unfortunately in my power to offer , and have stand up like a man ? 

 " and that be the truth , " say he . " I be fery prave myself , and pold as a lion . but to stand up there and you ken naethe of fence ! the way that you do , I declare it be peyond I . and I be sorry for the plow ; though I declare I pelief your own be the eld brother , and my heid still sing with it . and I declare if I have ken what way it wass , I would not put a hand to such a piece of pusiness . " 

 " that be handsomely say , " I reply , " and I be sure you will not stand up a second time to be the actor for my private enemy . " 

 " indeed , no , Palfour , " say he ; " and I think I be use extremely suffeeciently myself to be set up to fecht with an auld wife , or all the same as a bairn whateffer ! and I will tell the Master so , and fecht he , by Cot , himself ! " 

 " and if you know the nature of Mr. Simon s quarrel with I , " say I , " you would be yet the more affronted to be mingle up with such affair . " 

 he swear he could well believe it ; that all the Lovats be make of the same meal and the devil be the miller that grind that ; then suddenly shake I by the hand , he vow I be a pretty enough fellow after all , that it be a thousand pity I have be neglect , and that if he could find the time , he would give an eye himself to have I educate . 

 " you can do I a well service than even what you propose , " say I ; and when he have ask its nature " come with I to the house of one of my enemy , and testify how I have carry myself this day , " I tell he . " that will be the true service . for though he have send I a gallant adversary for the first , the thought in Mr. Simon s mind be merely murder . there will be a second and then a third ; and by what you have see of my cleverness with the cold steel , you can judge for yourself what be like to be the upshot . " 

 " and I would not like it myself , if I be no more of a man than what you wass ! " he cry . " but I will do you right , Palfour . lead on ! " 

 if I have walk slowly on the way into that accurse park my heel be light enough on the way out . they keep time to a very good old air , that be as ancient as the Bible , and the word of it be : " surely the bitterness of death be pass . " I mind that I be extremely thirsty , and have a drink at Saint Margaret s well on the road down , and the sweetness of that water pass belief . we go through the sanctuary , up the Canongate , in by the Netherbow , and straight to Prestongrange s door , talk as we come and arrange the detail of our affair . the footman own his master be at home , but declare he engage with other gentleman on very private business , and his door forbid . 

 " my business be but for three minute , and it can not wait , " say I. " you may say it be by no means private , and I shall be even glad to have some witness . " 

 as the man depart unwillingly enough upon this errand , we make so bold as to follow he to the ante - chamber , whence I could hear for a while the murmuring of several voice in the room within . the truth be , they be three at the one table Prestongrange , Simon Fraser , and Mr. Erskine , Sheriff of Perth ; and as they be meet in consultation on the very business of the Appin murder , they be a little disturbed at my appearance , but decide to receive I . 

 " well , well , Mr. Balfour , and what bring you here again ? and who be this you bring with you ? " say Prestongrange . 

 as for Fraser , he look before he on the table . 

 " he be here to bear a little testimony in my favour , my lord , which I think it very needful you should hear , " say I , and turn to Duncansby . 

 " I have only to say this , " say the lieutenant , " that I stand up this day with Palfour in the Hunter s Pog , which I be now fery sorry for , and he behave himself as pretty as a shentleman could ask it . and I have creat respect for palfour , " he add . 

 " I thank you for your honest expression , " say I. 

 Whereupon Duncansby make his bow to the company , and leave the chamber , as we have agree upon before . 

 " what have I to do with this ? " say Prestongrange . 

 " I will tell your lordship in two word , " say I. " I have bring this gentleman , a King s officer , to do I so much justice . now I think my character be cover , and until a certain date , which your lordship can very well supply , it will be quite in vain to despatch against I any more officer . I will not consent to fight my way through the garrison of the castle . " 

 the vein swell on Prestongrange s brow , and he regard I with fury . 

 " I think the devil uncouple this dog of a lad between my leg ! " he cry ; and then , turn fiercely on his neighbour , " this be some of your work , Simon , " he say . " I spy your hand in the business , and , let I tell you , I resent it . it be disloyal , when we be agree upon one expedient , to follow another in the dark . you be disloyal to I . what ! you let I send this lad to the place with my very daughter ! and because I let drop a word to you ..... fy , sir , keep your dishonour to yourself ! " 

 Simon be deadly pale . " I will be a kick - ball between you and the Duke no long , " he exclaim . " either come to an agreement , or come to a differ , and have it out among yourself . but I will no long fetch and carry , and get your contrary instruction , and be blame by both . for if I be to tell you what I think of all your Hanover business it would make your head sing . " 

 but Sheriff Erskine have preserve his temper , and now intervene smoothly . " and in the meantime , " say he , " I think we should tell Mr. Balfour that his character for valour be quite establish . he may sleep in peace . until the date he be so good as to refer to it shall be put to the proof no more . " 

 his coolness bring the other to their prudence ; and they make haste , with a somewhat distracted civility , to pack I from the house . 

 CHAPTER IX the heather ON FIRE 

 when I leave Prestongrange that afternoon I be for the first time angry . the Advocate have make a mock of I . he have pretend my testimony be to be receive and myself respect ; and in that very hour , not only be Simon practise against my life by the hand of the Highland soldier , but   as appear from his own language   Prestongrange himself have some design in operation . I count my enemy ; prestongrange with all the King s authority behind he ; and the Duke with the power of the West Highlands ; and the Lovat interest by their side to help they with so great a force in the north , and the whole clan of old Jacobite spy and trafficker . and when I remember James More , and the red head of Neil the son of Duncan , I think there be perhaps a fourth in the confederacy , and what remain of Rob Roy s old desperate sept of caterans would be band against I with the other . one thing be requisite some strong friend or wise adviser . the country must be full of such , both able and eager to support I , or Lovat and the Duke and Prestongrange have not be nose for expedient ; and it make I rage to think that I might brush against my champion in the street and be no wiser . 

 and just then   like an answer   a gentleman brush against I go by , give I a meaning look , and turn into a close . I know he with the tail of my eye it be Stewart the writer ; and , bless my good fortune , turn in to follow he . as soon as I have enter the close I see he stand in the mouth of a stair , where he make I a signal and immediately vanish . seven storey up , there he be again in a house door , the which he look behind we after we have enter . the house be quite dismantle , with not a stick of furniture ; indeed , it be one of which Stewart have the letting in his hand . 

 " we ll have to sit upon the floor , " say he ; " but we re safe here for the time being , and I ve be weary to see ye , Mr. Balfour . " 

 " how s it with Alan ? " I ask . 

 " Brawly , " say he . " Andie pick he up at Gillane sand to - morrow , Wednesday . he be keen to say good - bye to ye , but the way that thing be go , I be fear the pair of ye be maybe well apart . and that bring I to the essential : how do your business speed ? " 

 " why , " say I , " I be tell only this morning that my testimony be accept , and I be to travel to Inverary with the Advocate , no less . " 

 " Hout awa ! " cry Stewart . " I ll never believe that . " 

 " I have maybe a suspicion of my own , " say I , " but I would like fine to hear your reason . " 

 " well , I tell ye fairly , I m horn - mad , " cry Stewart . " if my one hand could pull their government down I would pluck it like a rotten apple . I m doer for Appin and for James of the Glens ; and , of course , it s my duty to defend my kinsman for his life . hear how it go with I , and I ll leave the judgment of it to yourself . the first thing they have to do be to get rid of Alan . they cannae bring in James as art and part until they ve bring in Alan first as principal ; that s sound law : they could never put the cart before the horse . " 

 " and how be they to bring in Alan till they can catch he ? " say I. 

 " ah , but there be a way to evite that arrestment , " say he . " sound law , too . it would be a bonny thing if , by the escape of one ill - doer another be to go scatheless , and the remeid be to summon the principal and put he to outlawry for the non - compearance . now there s four place where a person can be summon : at his dwelling - house ; at a place where he have reside forty day ; at the head burgh of the shire where he ordinarily resort ; or lastly   if there be ground to think he forth of Scotland   at the cross of Edinburgh , and the pier and shore of Leith , for sixty day . the purpose of which last provision be evident upon its face : be that outgoing ship may have time to carry news of the transaction , and the summonsing be something other than a form . now take the case of Alan . he have no dwelling - house that ever I could hear of ; I would be oblige if anyone would show I where he have live forty day together since the 45 ; there be no shire where he resort whether ordinarily or extraordinarily ; if he have a domicile at all , which I misdoubt , it must be with his regiment in France ; and if he be not yet forth of Scotland   as we happen to know and they happen to guess   it must be evident to the most dull it s what he s aim for . where , then , and what way should he be summon ? I ask it at yourself , a layman . " 

 " you have give the very word , " say I. " here at the cross , and at the pier and shore of Leith , for sixty day . " 

 " ye re a sounder Scots lawyer than Prestongrange , then ! " cry the Writer . " he have have Alan summon once ; that be on the twenty - fifth , the day that we first meet . once , and do with it . and where ? where , but at the cross of Inverary , the head burgh of the Campbells ? a word in your ear , Mr. Balfour they re not seek Alan . " 

 " what do you mean ? " I cry . " not seek he ? " 

 " by the good that I can make of it , " say he . " not want to find he , in my poor thought . they think perhaps he might set up a fair defence , upon the back of which James , the man they re really after , might climb out . this be not a case , ye see , it s a conspiracy . " 

 " yet I can tell you Prestongrange ask after Alan keenly , " say I ; " though , when I come to think of it , he be something of the easy put by . " 

 " see that ! " say he . " but there ! I may be right or wrong , that s guesswork at the good , and let I get to my fact again . it come to my ear that James and the witness the witness , Mr. Balfour ! lie in close dungeon , and shackle forbye , in the military prison at Fort William ; none allow in to they , nor they to write . the witness , Mr. Balfour ; hear ye ever the match of that ? I assure ye , no old , crooked Stewart of the gang ever out - face the law more impudently . it s clean in the two eye of the Act of Parliament of 1700 , anent wrongous imprisonment . no soon do I get the news than I petition the Lord Justice Clerk . I have his word to - day . there s law for ye ! here s justice ! " 

 he put a paper in my hand , that same mealy - mouthed , false - faced paper that be print since in the pamphlet " by a bystander , " for behoof   as the title say   of James s " poor widow and five child . " 

 " see , " say Stewart , " he couldn t dare to refuse I access to my client , so he recommend the command officer to let I in . recommend ! the Lord Justice Clerk of Scotland recommend . be not the purpose of such language plain ? they hope the officer may be so dull , or so very much the reverse , as to refuse the recommendation . I would have to make the journey back again betwixt here and Fort William . then would follow a fresh delay till I get fresh authority , and they have disavow the officer military man , notoriously ignorant of the law , and that I ken the ca not of it . then the journey a third time ; and there we should be on the immediate heel of the trial before I have receive my first instruction . be I not right to call this a conspiracy ? " 

 " it will bear that colour , " say I. 

 " and I ll go on to prove it you outright , " say he . " they have the right to hold James in prison , yet they can not deny I to visit he . they have no right to hold the witness ; but be I to get a sight of they , that should be as free as the Lord Justice Clerk himself ! see read : for the rest , refuse to give any order to keeper of prison who be not accuse as have do anything contrary to the duty of their office . anything contrary ! sir ! and the Act of seventeen hunner ? Mr. Balfour , this make my heart to burst ; the heather be on fire inside my wame . " 

 " and the plain English of that phrase , " say I , " be that the witness be still to lie in prison and you be not to see they ? " 

 " and I be not to see they until Inverary , when the court be set ! " cry he , " and then to hear Prestongrange upon the anxious responsibility of his office and the great facility afford the defence ! but I ll begowk they there , Mr. David . I have a plan to waylay the witness upon the road , and see if I cannae get I a little harle of justice out of the military man notoriously ignorant of the law that shall command the party . " 

 it be actually so it be actually on the wayside near Tynedrum , and by the connivance of a soldier officer , that Mr. Stewart first see the witness upon the case . 

 " there be nothing that would surprise I in this business , " I remark . 

 " I ll surprise you ere I m do ! " cry he . " do ye see this ? " produce a print still wet from the press . " this be the libel : see , there s Prestongrange s name to the list of witness , and I find no word of any Balfour . but here be not the question . who do ye think pay for the printing of this paper ? " 

 " I suppose it would likely be King George , " say I. 

 " but it happen it be I ! " he cry . " not but it be print by and for themselves , for the Grants and the Erskines , and yon thief of the black midnight , Simon Fraser . but could I win to get a copy ! no ! I be to go blindfold to my defence ; I be to hear the charge for the first time in court alongst the jury . " 

 " be not this against the law ? " I ask . 

 " I can not say so much , " he reply . " it be a favour so natural and so constantly render   till this nonesuch business   that the law have never look to it . and now admire the hand of Providence ! a stranger be in Fleming s printing house , spy a proof on the floor , pick it up , and carry it to I . of all thing , it be just this libel . whereupon I have it set again print at the expense of the defence : sumptibus moesti rei ; hear ever man the like of it ? and here it be for anybody , the muckle secret out all may see it now . but how do you think I would enjoy this , that have the life of my kinsman on my conscience ? " 

 " Troth , I think you would enjoy it ill , " say I. 

 " and now you see how it be , " he conclude , " and why , when you tell I your evidence be to be let in , I laugh aloud in your face . " 

 it be now my turn . I lay before he in brief Mr. Simon s threat and offer , and the whole incident of the bravo , with the subsequent scene at Prestongrange s. of my first talk , accord to promise , I say nothing , nor indeed be it necessary . all the time I be talk Stewart nod his head like a mechanical figure ; and no soon have my voice cease , than he open his mouth and give I his opinion in two word , dwell strong on both of they . 

 " disappear yourself , " say he . 

 " I do not take you , " say I. 

 " then I ll carry you there , " say he . " by my view of it you re to disappear whatever . o , that s outside debate . the Advocate , who be not without some spunk of a remainder decency , have wring your life - safe out of Simon and the Duke . he have refuse to put you on your trial , and refuse to have you kill ; and there be the clue to their ill word together , for Simon and the Duke can keep faith with neither friend nor enemy . ye re not to be try then , and ye re not to be murder ; but I m in bitter error if ye re not to be kidnap and carry away like the Lady Grange . bet I what ye please there be their expedient ! " 

 " you make I think , " say I , and tell he of the whistle and the red - head retainer , Neil . 

 " wherever James More be there s one big rogue , never be deceive on that , " say he . " his father be none so ill a man , though a kenning on the wrong side of the law , and no friend to my family , that I should waste my breath to be defend he ! but as for James he s a brock and a blagyard . I like the appearance of this red - headed Neil as little as yourself . it look uncanny : fiegh ! it smell bad . it be old Lovat that manage the Lady Grange affair ; if young Lovat be to handle your , it ll be all in the family . what s James More in prison for ? the same offence : abduction . his man have have practice in the business . he ll be to lend they to be Simon s instrument ; and the next thing we ll be hear , James will have make his peace , or else he ll have escape ; and you ll be in Benbecula or Applecross . " 

 " ye make a strong case , " I admit . 

 " and what I want , " he resume , " be that you should disappear yourself ere they can get their hand upon ye . lie quiet until just before the trial , and spring upon they at the last of it when they ll be look for you least . this be always suppose Mr. Balfour , that your evidence be worth so very great a measure of both risk and fash . " 

 " I will tell you one thing , " say I. " I see the murderer and it be not Alan . " 

 " then , by God , my cousin s save ! " cry Stewart . " you have his life upon your tongue ; and there s neither time , risk , nor money to be spar to bring you to the trial . " he empty his pocket on the floor . " here be all that I have by I , " he go on , " take it , ye ll want it ere ye re through . go straight down this close , there s a way out by there to the Lang Dykes , and by my will of it ! see no more of Edinburgh till the clash be over . " 

 " where be I to go , then ? " I inquire . 

 " and I wish that I could tell ye ! " say he , " but all the place that I could send ye to , would be just the place they would seek . no , ye must fend for yourself , and God be your guiding ! five day before the trial , September the sixteen , get word to I at the King s arm in Stirling ; and if ye ve manage for yourself as long as that , I ll see that ye reach Inverary . " 

 " one thing more , " say i. " can I no see Alan ? " 

 he seem boggle . " Hech , I would rather you wouldnae , " say he . " but I can never deny that Alan be extremely keen of it , and be to lie this night by Silvermills on purpose . if you re sure that you re not follow , Mr. Balfour but make sure of that lie in a good place and watch your road for a clear hour before ye risk it . it would be a dreadful business if both you and he be to miscarry ! " 

 CHAPTER X the RED - HEADED MAN 

 it be about half - past three when I come forth on the Lang Dykes . Dean be where I want to go . since Catriona dwell there , and her kinsfolk the Glengyle Macgregors appear almost certainly to be employ against I , it be just one of the few place I should have keep away from ; and be a very young man , and begin to be very much in love , I turn my face in that direction without pause . as a slave to my conscience and common sense , however , I take a measure of precaution . come over the crown of a bit of a rise in the road , I clap down suddenly among the barley and lie wait . after a while , a man go by that look to be a Highlandman , but I have never see he till that hour . presently after come Neil of the red head . the next to go past be a miller s cart , and after that nothing but manifest country people . here be enough to have turn the most foolhardy from his purpose , but my inclination run too strong the other way . I argue it out that if Neil be on that road , it be the right road to find he in , lead direct to his chief s daughter ; as for the other Highlandman , if I be to be startle off by every Highlandman I see , I would scarce reach anywhere . and have quite satisfied myself with this disingenuous debate , I make the well speed of it , and come a little after four to Mrs. Drumond - Ogilvy s. 

 both lady be within the house ; and upon my perceive they together by the open door , I pluck off my hat and say , " here be a lad come seek saxpence , " which I think might please the dowager . 

 Catriona run out to greet I heartily , and , to my surprise , the old lady seem scarce less forward than herself . I learn long afterwards that she have despatch a horseman by daylight to Rankeillor at the Queensferry , whom she know to be the doer for Shaws , and have then in her pocket a letter from that good friend of mine , present , in the most favourable view , my character and prospect . but have I read it I could scarce have see more clear in her design . maybe I be countryfeed ; at least , I be not so much so as she think ; and it be even to my homespun wit , that she be bent to hammer up a match between her cousin and a beardless boy that be something of a laird in Lothian . 

 " Saxpence have well take his broth with we , Catrine , " say she . " run and tell the lass . " 

 and for the little while we be alone be at a good deal of pain to flatter I ; always cleverly , always with the appearance of a banter , still call I Saxpence , but with such a turn that should rather uplift I in my own opinion . when Catriona return , the design become if possible more obvious ; and she show off the girl s advantage like a horse - couper with a horse . my face flame that she should think I so obtuse . now I would fancy the girl be be innocently make a show of , and then I could have beat the old carline wife with a cudgel ; and now , that perhaps these two have set their head together to entrap I , and at that I sit and gloome betwixt they like the very image of ill - will . at last the matchmaker have a well device , which be to leave the pair of we alone . when my suspicion be anyway rouse it be sometimes a little the wrong side of easy to allay they . but though I know what breed she be of , and that be a breed of thief , I could never look in Catriona s face and disbelieve she . 

 " I must not ask ? " say she , eagerly , the same moment we be leave alone . 

 " ah , but to - day I can talk with a free conscience , " I reply . " I be lightened of my pledge , and indeed   after what have come and go since morning   I would not have renew it be it ask . " 

 " tell I , " she say . " my cousin will not be so long . " 

 so I tell she the tale of the lieutenant from the first step to the last of it , make it as mirthful as I could , and , indeed , there be matter of mirth in that absurdity . 

 " and I think you will be as little fit for the ruda man as for the pretty lady , after all ! " say she , when I have do . " but what be your father that he could not learn you to draw the sword ! it be most ungentle ; I have not hear the match of that in anyone . " 

 " it be most misconvenient at least , " say I ; " and I think my father   honest man !   must have be wool - gathering to learn I Latin in the place of it . but you see I do the good I can , and just stand up like Lot s wife and let they hammer at I . " 

 " do you know what make I smile ? " say she . " well , it be this . I be make this way , that I should have be a man child . in my own thought it be so I be always ; and I go on tell myself about this thing that be to befall and that . then it come to the place of the fighting , and it come over I that I be only a girl at all event , and can not hold a sword or give one good blow ; and then I have to twist my story round about , so that the fighting be to stop , and yet I have the good of it , just like you and the lieutenant ; and I be the boy that make the fine speech all through , like Mr. David Balfour . " 

 " you be a bloodthirsty maid , " say I. 

 " well , I know it be good to sew and spin , and to make sampler , " she say , " but if you be to do nothing else in the great world , I think you will say yourself it be a driech business ; and it be not that I want to kill , I think . do ever you kill anyone ? " 

 " that I have , as it chance . two , no less , and I still a lad that should be at the college , " say I. " but yet , in the look - back , I take no shame for it . " 

 " but how do you feel , then after it ? " she ask . 

  " Deed , I sit down and grat like a bairn , " say I. 

 " I know that , too , " she cry . " I feel where these tear should come from . and at any rate , I would not wish to kill , only to be Catherine Douglas that put her arm through the staple of the bolt , where it be break . that be my chief hero . would you not love to die so for your king ? " she ask . 

 " Troth , " say I , " my affection for my king , God bless the puggy face of he , be under more control ; and I think I see death so near to I this day already , that I be rather take up with the notion of living . " 

 " right , " she say , " the right mind of a man ! only you must learn arm ; I would not like to have a friend that can not strike . but it will not have be with the sword that you kill these two ? " 

 " indeed , no , " say I , " but with a pair of pistol . and a fortunate thing it be the man be so near - hand to I , for I be about as clever with the pistol as I be with the sword . " 

 so then she draw from I the story of our battle in the brig , which I have omit in my first account of my affair . 

 " yes , " say she , " you be brave . and your friend , I admire and love he . " 

 " well , and I think anyone would ! " say I. " he have his fault like other folk ; but he be brave and staunch and kind , God bless he ! that will be a strange day when I forget Alan . " and the thought of he , and that it be within my choice to speak with he that night , have almost overcome I . 

 " and where will my head be go that I have not tell my news ! " she cry , and speak of a letter from her father , bear that she might visit he to - morrow in the castle whither he be now transfer , and that his affair be mend . " you do not like to hear it , " say she . " will you judge my father and not know he ? " 

 " I be a thousand mile from judge , " I reply . " and I give you my word I do rejoice to know your heart be lightened . if my face fall at all , as I suppose it must , you will allow this be rather an ill day for composition , and the people in power extremely ill person to be compound with . I have Simon Fraser extremely heavy on my stomach still . " 

 " ah ! " she cry , " you will not be evening these two ; and you should bear in mind that Prestongrange and James More , my father , be of the one blood . " 

 " I never hear tell of that , " say I. 

 " it be rather singular how little you be acquaint with , " say she . " one part may call themselves Grant , and one Macgregor , but they be still of the same clan . they be all the son of Alpin , from whom , I think , our country have its name . " 

 " what country be that ? " I ask . 

 " my country and your , " say she . 

 " this be my day for discover I think , " say I , " for I always think the name of it be Scotland . " 

 " Scotland be the name of what you call Ireland , " she reply . " but the old ancient true name of this place that we have our foot - sol on , and that our bone be make of , will be Alban . it be Alban they call it when our forefather will be fight for it against Rome and Alexander ; and it be call so still in your own tongue that you forget . " 

 " Troth , " say I , " and that I never learn ! " for I lack heart to take she up about the Macedonian . 

 " but your father and mother talk it , one generation with another , " say she . " and it be sing about the cradle before you or I be ever dream of ; and your name remember it still . ah , if you could talk that language you would find I another girl . the heart speak in that tongue . " 

 I have a meal with the two lady , all very good , serve in fine old plate , and the wine excellent , for it seem that Mrs. Ogilvy be rich . our talk , too , be pleasant enough ; but as soon as I see the sun decline sharply and the shadow to run out long , I rise to take my leave . for my mind be now make up to say farewell to Alan ; and it be needful I should see the tryste wood , and reconnoitre it , by daylight . Catriona come with I as far as to the garden gate . 

 " it be long till I see you now ? " she ask . 

 " it be beyond my judging , " I reply . " it will be long , it may be never . " 

 " it may be so , " say she . " and you be sorry ? " 

 I bow my head , look upon she . 

 " so be I , at all event , " say she . " I have see you but a small time , but I put you very high . you be true , you be brave ; in time I think you will be more of a man yet . I will be proud to hear of that . if you should speed bad , if it will come to fall as we be afraid o well ! think you have the one friend . long after you be dead and I an old wife , I will be tell the bairn about David Balfour , and my tear run . I will be tell how we part , and what I say to you , and do to you . God go with you and guide you , pray your little friend : so I say I will be tell they and here be what I do . " 

 she take up my hand and kiss it . this so surprise my spirit that I cry out like one hurt . the colour come strong in her face , and she look at I and nod . 

 " o yes , Mr. David , " say she , " that be what I think of you . the head go with the lip . " 

 I could read in her face high spirit , and a chivalry like a brave child s ; not anything besides . she kiss my hand , as she have kiss Prince Charlie s , with a high passion than the common kind of clay have any sense of . nothing before have teach I how deep I be her lover , nor how far I have yet to climb to make she think of I in such a character . yet I could tell myself I have advance some way , and that her heart have beat and her blood flow at thought of I . 

 after that honour she have do I I could offer no more trivial civility . it be even hard for I to speak ; a certain lifting in her voice have knock directly at the door of my own tear . 

 " I praise God for your kindness , dear , " say I. " Farewell , my little friend ! " give she that name which she have give to herself ; with which I bow and leave she . 

 my way be down the glen of the Leith River , towards Stockbridge and Silvermills . a path lead in the foot of it , the water bicker and sing in the midst ; the sunbeam overhead strike out of the west among long shadow and   as the valley turn   make like a new scene and a new world of it at every corner . with Catriona behind and Alan before I , I be like one lift up . the place besides , and the hour , and the talking of the water , infinitely please I ; and I linger in my step and look before and behind I as I go . this be the cause , under Providence , that I spy a little in my rear a red head among some bush . 

 anger spring in my heart , and I turn straight about and walk at a stiff pace to where I come from . the path lie close by the bush where I have remark the head . the cover come to the wayside , and as I pass I be all string up to meet and to resist an onfall . no such thing befell , I go by unmeddled with ; and at that fear increase upon I . it be still day indeed , but the place exceed solitary . if my haunter have let slip that fair occasion I could but judge they aim at something more than David Balfour . the life of Alan and James weigh upon my spirit with the weight of two grow bullock . 

 Catriona be yet in the garden walk by herself . 

 " Catriona , " say I , " you see I back again . " 

 " with a changed face , " say she . 

 " I carry two man s life besides my own , " say I. " it would be a sin and shame not to walk carefully . I be doubtful whether I do right to come here . I would like it ill , if it be by that mean we be bring to harm . " 

 " I could tell you one that would be like it less , and will like little enough to hear you talk at this very same time , " she cry . " what have I do , at all event ? " 

 " o , you I you be not alone , " I reply . " but since I go off I have be dog again , and I can give you the name of he that follow I . it be Neil , son of Duncan , your man or your father s. " 

 " to be sure you be mistaken there , " she say , with a white face . " Neil be in Edinburgh on errand from my father . " 

 " it be what I fear , " say I , " the last of it . but for his be in Edinburgh I think I can show you another of that . for sure you have some signal , a signal of need , such as would bring he to your help , if he be anywhere within the reach of ear and leg ? " 

 " why , how will you know that ? " say she . 

 " by mean of a magical talisman God give to I when I be bear , and the name they call it by be common - sense , " say I. " Oblige I so far as make your signal , and I will show you the red head of Neil . " 

 no doubt but I speak bitter and sharp . my heart be bitter . I blame myself and the girl and hat both of we : she for the vile crew that she be come of , myself for my wanton folly to have stick my head in such a byke of wasp . 

 Catriona set her finger to her lip and whistle once , with an exceed clear , strong , mount note , as full as a ploughman s. a while we stand silent ; and I be about to ask she to repeat the same , when I hear the sound of some one burst through the bush below on the braeside . I point in that direction with a smile , and presently Neil leap into the garden . his eye burn , and he have a black knife   as they call it on the Highland side   naked in his hand ; but , see I beside his mistress , stand like a man strike . 

 " he have come to your call , " say I ; " judge how near he be to Edinburgh , or what be the nature of your father s errand . ask himself . if I be to lose my life , or the life of those that hang by I , through the mean of your clan , let I go where I have to go with my eye open . " 

 she address he tremulously in the Gaelic . Remembering Alan s anxious civility in that particular , I could have laugh out loud for bitterness ; here , sure , in the midst of these suspicion , be the hour she should have stick by English . 

 twice or thrice they speak together , and I could make out that Neil   for all his obsequiousness   be an angry man . 

 then she turn to I . " he swear it be not , " she say . 

 " Catriona , " say I , " do you believe the man yourself ? " 

 she make a gesture like wring the hand . 

 " how will I can know ? " she cry . 

 " but I must find some mean to know , " say I. " I can not continue to go dovere round in the black night with two man s life at my girdle ! Catriona , try to put yourself in my place , as I vow to God I try hard to put myself in your . this be no kind of talk that should ever have fall between I and you ; no kind of talk ; my heart be sick with it . see , keep he here till two of the morning , and I care not . try he with that . " 

 they speak together once more in the Gaelic . 

 " he say he have James more my father s errand , " say she . she be white than ever , and her voice falter as she say it . 

 " it be pretty plain now , " say I , " and may God forgive the wicked ! " 

 she say never anything to that , but continue gaze at I with the same white face . 

 " this be a fine business , " say I again . " be I to fall , then , and those two along with I ? " 

 " o , what be I to do ? " she cry . " could I go against my father s order , he in prison , in the danger of his life ! " 

 " but perhaps we go too fast , " say I. " this may be a lie too . he may have no right order ; all may be contrive by Simon , and your father know nothing . " 

 she burst out weeping between the pair of we ; and my heart smite I hard , for I think this girl be in a dreadful situation . 

 " here , " say I , " keep he but the one hour ; and I ll chance it , and may God bless you . " 

 she put out her hand to I , " I will he need one good word , " she sob . 

 " the full hour , then ? " say I , keep her hand in mine . " three life of it , my lass ! " 

 " the full hour ! " she say , and cry aloud on her Redeemer to forgive she . 

 I think it no fit place for I , and flee . 

 CHAPTER XI the wood by SILVERMILLS 

 I lose no time , but down through the valley and by Stockbridge and Silvermills as hard as I could stave . it be Alan s tryst to be every night between twelve and two " in a bit scrog of wood by east of Silvermills and by south the south mill - lade . " this I find easy enough , where it grow on a steep brae , with the mill - lade flow swift and deep along the foot of it ; and here I begin to walk slow and to reflect more reasonably on my employment . I see I have make but a fool s bargain with Catriona . it be not to be suppose that Neil be send alone upon his errand , but perhaps he be the only man belong to James More ; in which case I should have do all I could to hang Catriona s father , and nothing the least material to help myself . to tell the truth , I fancy neither one of these idea . suppose by hold back Neil , the girl should have help to hang her father , I think she would never forgive herself this side of time . and suppose there be other pursue I that moment , what kind of a gift be I come bring to Alan ? and how would I like that ? 

 I be up with the west end of that wood when these two consideration strike I like a cudgel . my foot stop of themselves and my heart along with they . " what wild game be this that I have be play ? " think I ; and turn instantly upon my heel to go elsewhere . 

 this bring my face to Silvermills ; the path come past the village with a crook , but all plainly visible ; and , Highland or Lowland , there be nobody stir . here be my advantage , here be just such a conjuncture as Stewart have counsel I to profit by , and I run by the side of the mill - lade , fetch about beyond the east corner of the wood , thread through the midst of it , and return to the west selvage , whence I could again command the path , and yet be myself unseen . again it be all empty , and my heart begin to rise . 

 for more than an hour I sit close in the border of the tree , and no hare or eagle could have keep a more particular watch . when that hour begin the sun be already set , but the sky still all golden and the daylight clear ; before the hour be do it have fall to be half mirk , the image and distance of thing be mingle , and observation begin to be difficult . all that time not a foot of man have come east from Silvermills , and the few that have go west be honest countryfolk and their wife upon the road to bed . if I be track by the most cunning spy in Europe , I judge it be beyond the course of nature they could have any jealousy of where I be : and go a little further home into the wood I lie down to wait for Alan . 

 the strain of my attention have be great , for I have watch not the path only , but every bush and field within my vision . that be now at an end . the moon , which be in her first quarter , glint a little in the wood ; all round there be a stillness of the country ; and as I lay there on my back , the next three or four hour , I have a fine occasion to review my conduct . 

 two thing become plain to I first : that I have no right to go that day to Dean , and   have go there   have now no right to be lie where I be . this   where Alan be to come   be just the one wood in all broad Scotland that be , by every proper feeling , close against I ; I admit that , and yet stay on , wonder at myself . I think of the measure with which I have mete to Catriona that same night ; how I have prate of the two life I carry , and have thus force she to enjeopardy her father s ; and how I be here expose they again , it seem in wantonness . a good conscience be eight part of courage . no soon have I lose conceit of my behaviour , than I seem to stand disarm amidst a throng of terror . of a sudden I sit up . how if I go now to Prestongrange , catch he   as I still easily might   before he sleep , and make a full submission ? who could blame I ? not Stewart the writer ; I have but to say that I be follow , despair of get clear , and so give in . not Catriona : here , too , I have my answer ready ; that I could not bear she should expose her father . so , in a moment , I could lay all these trouble by , which be after all and truly none of mine ; swim clear of the Appin murder ; get forth out of hand - stroke of all the Stewarts and Campbells , all the Whigs and Tories , in the land ; and live henceforth to my own mind , and be able to enjoy and to improve my fortune , and devote some hour of my youth to court Catriona , which would be surely a more suitable occupation than to hide and run and be follow like a hunted thief , and begin over again the dreadful misery of my escape with Alan . 

 at first I think no shame of this capitulation ; I be only amazed I have not think upon the thing and do it early ; and begin to inquire into the cause of the change . these I trace to my lowness of spirit , that back to my late recklessness , and that again to the common , old , public , disconsidere sin of self - indulgence . instantly the text come in my head , " how can Satan cast out Satan ? " what ?   I think   I have , by self - indulgence ; and the following of pleasant path , and the lure of a young maid , cast myself wholly out of conceit with my own character , and jeopardise the life of James and Alan ? and I be to seek the way out by the same road as I have enter in ? no ; the hurt that have be cause by self - indulgence must be cure by self - denial ; the flesh I have pamper must be crucify . I look about I for that course which I least like to follow : this be to leave the wood without wait to see Alan , and go forth again alone , in the dark and in the midst of my perplexed and dangerous fortune . 

 I have be the more careful to narrate this passage of my reflection , because I think it be of some utility , and may serve as an example to young man . but there be reason   they say   in plant kale , and even in ethic and religion , room for common sense . it be already close on Alan s hour , and the moon be down . if I leave   as I could not very decently whistle to my spy to follow I   they might miss I in the dark and tack themselves to Alan by mistake . if I stay , I could at the least of it set my friend upon his guard which might prove his mere salvation . I have adventure other people safety in a course of self - indulgence ; to have endanger they again , and now on a mere design of penance , would have be scarce rational . accordingly , I have scarce rise from my place ere I sit down again , but already in a different frame of spirit , and equally marvel at my past weakness and rejoice in my present composure . 

 presently after come a crackling in the thicket . put my mouth near down to the ground , I whistle a note or two , of Alan s air ; an answer come in the like guard tone , and soon we have knock together in the dark . 

 " be this you at last , Davie ? " he whisper . 

 " just myself , " say I. 

 " God , man , but I ve be weary to see ye ! " say he . " I ve have the long kind of a time . a day , I ve have my dwelling into the inside of a stack of hay , where I couldnae see the nebs of my ten finger ; and then two hour of it wait here for you , and you never come ! dod , and ye re none too soon the way it be , with I to sail the morn ! the morn ? what be I say ? the day , I mean . " 

 " ay , Alan , man , the day , sure enough , " say I. " it s past twelve now , surely , and ye sail the day . this ll be a long road you have before you . " 

 " we ll have a long crack of it first , " say he . 

 " well , indeed , and I have a good deal it will be tell you to hear , " say I. 

 and I tell he what behoove , make rather a jumble of it , but clear enough when do . he hear I out with very few question , laugh here and there like a man delight : and the sound of his laughing   above all there , in the dark , where neither one of we could see the other   be extraordinary friendly to my heart . 

 " ay , Davie , ye re a queer character , " say he , when I have do : " a queer bitch after a , and I have no mind of meet with the like of ye . as for your story , Prestongrange be a Whig like yoursel , so I ll say the less of he ; and , dod ! I believe he be the good friend ye have , if ye could only trust he . but Simon Fraser and James More be my ain kind of cattle , and I ll give they the name that they deserve . the muckle black deil be father to the Frasers , a body ken that ; and as for the Gregara , I never could abye the reek of they since I could stotter on two foot . I bloody the nose of one , I mind , when I be still so wambly on my leg that I cowpe upon the top of he . a proud man be my father that day , God rest he ! and I think he have the cause . I ll never can deny but what Robin be something of a piper , " he add ; " but as for James More , the deil guide he for I ! " 

 " one thing we have to consider , " say I. " be Charles Stewart right or wrong ? be it only I they re after , or the pair of we ? " 

 " and what s your ain opinion , you that s a man of so much experience ? " say he . 

 " it pass I , " say I. 

 " and I too , " say Alan . " do ye think this lass would keep her word to ye ? " he ask . 

 " I do that , " say I. 

 " well , there s nae telling , " say he . " and anyway , that s over and do : he ll be join to the rest of they lang syne . " 

 " how many would ye think there would be of they ? " I ask . 

 " that depend , " say Alan . " if it be only you , they would likely send two - three lively , brisk young birkie , and if they think that I be to appear in the employ , I daresay ten or twelve , " say he . 

 it be no use , I give a little crack of laughter . 

 " and I think your own two eye will have see I drive that number , or the double of it , near hand ! " cry he . 

 " it matter the less , " say I , " because I be well rid of they for this time . " 

 " Nae doubt that s your opinion , " say he ; " but I wouldnae be the least surprised if they be hunker this wood . ye see , David man ; they ll be Hieland folk . there ll be some fraser , I m think , and some of the Gregara ; and I would never deny but what the both of they , and the Gregara in especial , be clever experienced person . a man ken little till he s drive a spreagh of neat cattle   say   ten mile through a throng lowland country and the black soldier maybe at his tail . it s there that I learn a great part of my penetration . and ye need nae tell I : it s well than war ; which be the next good , however , though generally rather a bauchle of a business . now the Gregara have have grand practice . " 

 " no doubt that s a branch of education that be leave out with I , " say I. 

 " and I can see the mark of it upon ye constantly , " say Alan . " but that s the strange thing about you folk of the college learning : ye re ignorat , and ye cannae see t. Wae s I for my Greek and Hebrew ; but , man , I ken that I dinnae ken they there s the differ of it . now , here s you . ye lie on your wame a bittie in the bield of this wood , and ye tell I that ye ve cuist off these Frasers and Macgregors . why ? because I couldnae see they , say you . ye blockhead , that s their livelihood . " 

 " take the bad of it , " say I , " and what be we to do ? " 

 " I be think of that same , " say he . " we might twine . it wouldnae be greatly to my taste ; and forbye that , I see reason against it . first , it s now unco dark , and it s just humanly possible we might give they the clean slip . if we keep together , we make but the ae line of it ; if we gang separate , we make twae of they : the more likelihood to stave in upon some of these gentry of your . and then , second , if they keep the track of we , it may come to a fecht for it yet , Davie ; and then , I ll confess I would be blythe to have you at my oxter , and I think you would be none the bad of have I at your . so , by my way of it , we should creep out of this wood no far go than just the inside of next minute , and hold away east for Gillane , where I m to find my ship . it ll be like old day while it last , Davie ; and   come the time   we ll have to think what you should be do . I m wae to leave ye here , want I . " 

 " have with ye , then ! " say I. " do ye gang back where you be stop ? " 

 " deil a fear ! " say Alan . " they be good folk to I , but I think they would be a good deal disappoint if they see my bonny face again . for   the way time go   I be nae just what ye could call a Walcome Guest . which make I the keener for your company , Mr. David Balfour of the Shaws , and set ye up ! for , leave aside twa crack here in the wood with Charlie Stewart , I have scarce say black or white since the day we part at Corstorphine . " 

 with which he rise from his place , and we begin to move quietly eastward through the wood . 

 CHAPTER XII on the MARCH again with ALAN 

 it be likely between one and two ; the moon   as I have say   be down ; a strongish wind , carry a heavy wrack of cloud , have set in suddenly from the west ; and we begin our movement in as black a night as ever a fugitive or a murderer want . the whiteness of the path guide we into the sleep town of Broughton , thence through Picardy , and beside my old acquaintance the gibbet of the two thief . a little beyond we make a useful beacon , which be a light in an upper window of Lochend . steer by this , but a good deal at random , and with some trampling of the harvest , and stumble and fall down upon the bank , we make our way across country , and win forth at last upon the linky , boggy muirland that they call the Figgate Whins . here , under a bush of whin , we lie down the remainder of that night and slumber . 

 the day call we about five . a beautiful morning it be , the high westerly wind still blow strong , but the cloud all blow away to Europe . Alan be already sit up and smile to himself . it be my first sight of my friend since we be part , and I look upon he with enjoyment . he have still the same big great - coat on his back ; but   what be new   he have now a pair of knitted boot - hose draw above the knee . Doubtless these be intend for disguise ; but , as the day promise to be warm , he make a most unseasonable figure . 

 " well , Davie , " say he , " be this no a bonny morning ? here be a day that look the way that a day ought to . this be a great change of it from the belly of my haystack ; and while you be there sottere and sleep I have do a thing that maybe I do very seldom . " 

 " and what be that ? " say I. 

 " o , just say my prayer , " say he . 

 " and where be my gentry , as ye call they ? " I ask . 

 " Gude ken , " say he ; " and the short and the long of it be that we must take our chance of they . up with your foot - sol , Davie ! Forth , Fortune , once again of it ! and a bonny walk we be like to have . " 

 so we go east by the beach of the sea , towards where the salt - pan be smoke in by the Esk mouth . no doubt there be a by - ordinary bonny blink of morning sun on Arthur s Seat and the green Pentlands ; and the pleasantness of the day appear to set Alan among nettle . 

 " I feel like a gomeral , " say he , " to be leave Scotland on a day like this . it stick in my head ; I would maybe like it well to stay here and hing . " 

 " ay , but ye wouldnae , Alan , " say I. 

 " no , but what France be a good place too , " he explain ; " but it s some way no the same . it s brawer I believe , but it s no Scotland . I like it fine when I m there , man ; yet I kind of weary for scot divot and the Scots peat - reek . " 

 " if that s all you have to complain of , Alan , it s no such great affair , " say I. 

 " and it set I ill to be complain , whatever , " say he , " and I but new out of yon deil s haystack . " 

 " and so you be unco weary of your haystack ? " I ask . 

 " Weary s nae word for it , " say he . " I m not just precisely a man that s easily cast down ; but I do well with caller air and the lift above my head . I m like the auld Black Douglas   wasnae t ?   that likit well to hear the laverock sing than the mouse cheep . and yon place , ye see , Davie whilk be a very suitable place to hide in , as I m free to own be pit mirk from dawn to gloame . there be day   or night , for how would I tell one from other ?   that seem to I as long as a long winter . " 

 " how do you know the hour to bide your tryst ? " I ask . 

 " the goodman bring I my meat and a drop brandy , and a candle - dowp to eat it by , about eleeven , " say he . " so , when I have swallow a bit , it would he time to be get to the wood . there I lay and weary for ye sore , Davie , " say he , lay his hand on my shoulder " and guess when the two hour would be about by unless Charlie Stewart would come and tell I on his watch and then back to the doom haystack . na , it be a driech employ , and praise the Lord that I have warstle through with it ! " 

 " what do you do with yourself ? " I ask . 

 " Faith , " say he , " the good I could ! while I play at the knucklebone . I m an extraordinar good hand at the knucklebone , but it s a poor piece of business play with naebody to admire ye . and while I would make song . " 

 " what be they about ? " say I. 

 " o , about the deer and the heather , " say he , " and about the ancient old chief that be all by with it lang syne , and just about what song be about in general . and then while I would make believe I have a set of pipe and I be play . I play some grand spring , and I think I play they awful bonny ; I vow while that I could hear the squeal of they ! but the great affair be that it s do with . " 

 with that he carry I again to my adventure , which he hear all over again with more particularity , and extraordinary approval , swear at interval that I be " a queer character of a callant . " 

 " so ye be frich ene of Sim Fraser ? " he ask once . 

 " in troth be I ! " cry I. 

 " so would I have be , Davie , " say he . " and that be indeed a driedful man . but it be only proper to give the deil his due : and I can tell you he be a most respectable person on the field of war . " 

 " be he so brave ? " I ask . 

 " Brave ! " say he . " he be as brave as my steel sword . " 

 the story of my duel set he beside himself . 

 " to think of that ! " he cry . " I show ye the trick in Corrynakiegh too . and three time three time disarm ! it s a disgrace upon my character that learn ye ! here , stand up , out with your airn ; ye shall walk no step beyond this place upon the road till ye can do yoursel and I mair credit . " 

 " Alan , " say I , " this be midsummer madness . here be no time for fence lesson . " 

 " I cannae well say no to that , " he admit . " but three time , man ! and you stand there like a straw bogle and rinne to fetch your ain sword like a doggie with a pocket - napkin ! David , this man Duncansby must be something altogether by - ordinar ! he maun be extraordinar skilly . if I have the time , I would gang straight back and try a turn at he mysel . the man must be a provost . " 

 " you silly fellow , " say I , " you forget it be just I . " 

 " na , " say he , " but three time ! " 

 " when ye ken yourself that I be fair incompetent , " I cry . 

 " well , I never hear tell the equal of it , " say he . 

 " I promise you the one thing , Alan , " say I. " the next time that we forgather , I ll be well learn . you shall not continue to bear the disgrace of a friend that can not strike . " 

 " ay , the next time ! " say he . " and when will that be , I would like to ken ? " 

 " well , Alan , I have have some thought of that , too , " say I ; " and my plan be this . it s my opinion to be call an advocate . " 

 " that s but a weary trade , Davie , " say Alan , " and rather a blagyard one forby . Ye would be well in a king s coat than that . " 

 " and no doubt that would be the way to have we meet , " cry I. " but as you ll be in King Lewie s coat , and I ll be in King Geordie s , we ll have a dainty meeting of it . " 

 " there s some sense in that , " he admit . 

 " an advocate , then , it ll have to be , " I continue , " and I think it a more suitable trade for a gentleman that be three time disarm . but the beauty of the thing be this : that one of the good college for that kind of learning and the one where my kinsman , Pilrig , make his study be the college of Leyden in Holland . now , what say you , Alan ? could not a cadet of Royal Ecossais get a furlough , slip over the march , and call in upon a Leyden student ? " 

 " well , and I would think he could ! " cry he . " ye see , I stand well in with my colonel , Count Drummond - Melfort ; and , what s mair to the purpose I have a cousin of mine lieutenant - colonel in a regiment of the Scots - Dutch . naething could be mair proper than what I would get a leave to see Lieutenant - Colonel Stewart of Halkett s. and Lord Melfort , who be a very scienteefic kind of a man , and write book like Casar , would be doubtless very pleased to have the advantage of my observe . " 

 " be Lord Meloort an author , then ? " I ask , for much as Alan think of soldier , I think more of the gentry that write book . 

 " the very same , Davie , " say he . " one would think a colonel would have something well to attend to . but what can I say that make song ? " 

 " well , then , " say I , " it only remain you should give I an address to write you at in France ; and as soon as I be get to Leyden I will send you mine . " 

 " the good will be to write I in the care of my chieftain , " say he , " Charles Stewart , of Ardsheil , Esquire , at the town of Melons , in the Isle of France . it might take long , or it might take short , but it would aye get to my hand at the last of it . " 

 we have a haddock to our breakfast in Musselburgh , where it amuse I vastly to hear Alan . his great - coat and boot - hose be extremely remarkable this warm morning , and perhaps some hint of an explanation have be wise ; but Alan go into that matter like a business , or I should rather say , like a diversion . he engage the goodwife of the house with some compliment upon the rizzoring of our haddock ; and the whole of the rest of our stay hold she in talk about a cold he have take on his stomach , gravely relate all manner of symptom and suffering , and hear with a vast show of interest all the old wife remedy she could supply he with in return . 

 we leave Musselburgh before the first ninepenny coach be due from Edinburgh for   as Alan say   that be a rencounter we might very well avoid . the wind although still high , be very mild , the sun shine strong , and Alan begin to suffer in proportion . from Prestonpans he have I aside to the field of Gladsmuir , where he exert himself a great deal more than needful to describe the stage of the battle . Thence , at his old round pace , we travel to Cockenzie . though they be build herring - bus there at Mrs. Cadell s , it seem a desert - like , back - go town , about half full of ruined house ; but the ale - house be clean , and Alan , who be now in a glowing heat , must indulge himself with a bottle of ale , and carry on to the new luckie with the old story of the cold upon his stomach , only now the symptom be all different . 

 I sit listen ; and it come in my mind that I have scarce ever hear he address three serious word to any woman , but he be always drolle and fleer and make a private mock of they , and yet bring to that business a remarkable degree of energy and interest . something to this effect I remark to he , when the good - wife   as chance   be call away . 

 " what do ye want ? " say he . " a man should aye put his good foot forrit with the womankind ; he should aye give they a bit of a story to divert they , the poor lamb ! it s what ye should learn to attend to , David ; ye should get the principle , it s like a trade . now , if this have be a young lassie , or onyways bonnie , she would never have hear tell of my stomach , Davie . but aince they re too old to be seek joe , they a set up to be apotecarie . why ? what do I ken ? they ll be just the way God make they , I suppose . but I think a man would be a gomeral that didnae give his attention to the same . " 

 and here , the luckie come back , he turn from I as if with impatience to renew their former conversation . the lady have branch some while before from Alan s stomach to the case of a goodbrother of her own in Aberlady , whose last sickness and demise she be describe at extraordinary length . sometimes it be merely dull , sometimes both dull and awful , for she talk with unction . the upshot be that I fall in a deep muse , look forth of the window on the road , and scarce mark what I see . presently have any be look they might have see I to start . 

 " we pit a fomentation to his foot , " the good - wife be say , " and a het stane to his wame , and we gi he hyssop and water of pennyroyal , and fine , clean balsam of sulphur for the hoast . . . " 

 " Sir , " say I , cut very quietly in , " there s a friend of mine go by the house . " 

 " be that e en sae ? " reply Alan , as though it be a thing of small account . and then , " Ye be say , mem ? " say he ; and the wearyful wife go on . 

 presently , however , he pay she with a half - crown piece , and she must go forth after the change . 

 " be it he with the red head ? " ask Alan . 

 " Ye have it , " say I. 

 " what do I tell you in the wood ? " he cry . " and yet it s strange he should be here too ! be he his lane ? " 

 " his lee - lane for what I could see , " say I. 

 " do he gang by ? " he ask . 

 " straight by , " say I , " and look neither to the right nor left . " 

 " and that s queerer yet , " say Alan . " it stick in my mind , Davie , that we should be stir . but where to ? deil hae t ! this be like old day fairly , " cry he . 

 " there be one big differ , though , " say I , " that now we have money in our pocket . " 

 " and another big differ , Mr. Balfour , " say he , " that now we have dog at our tail . they re on the scent ; they re in full cry , David . it s a bad business and be damn to it . " and he sit think hard with a look of his that I know well . 

 " I m say , Luckie , " say he , when the goodwife return , " have ye a back road out of this change house ? " 

 she tell he there be and where it lead to . 

 " then , sir , " say he to I , " I think that will be the short road for we . and here s good - bye to ye , my braw woman ; and I ll no forget thon of the cinnamon water . " 

 we go out by way of the woman s kale yard , and up a lane among field . Alan look sharply to all side , and see we be in a little hollow place of the country , out of view of man , sit down . 

 " now for a council of war , Davie , " say he . " but first of all , a bit lesson to ye . suppose that I have be like you , what would yon old wife have mind of the pair of we ! just that we have go out by the back gate . and what do she mind now ? a fine , canty , friendly , cracky man , that suffer with the stomach , poor body ! and be real ta en up about the goodbrother . o man , David , try and learn to have some kind of intelligence ! " 

 " I ll try , Alan , " say I. 

 " and now for he of the red head , " say he ; " be he gaun fast or slow ? " 

 " Betwixt and between , " say I. 

 " no kind of a hurry about the man ? " he ask . 

 " never a sign of it , " say I. 

 " Nhm ! " say Alan , " it look queer . we see nothing of they this morning on the Whins ; he s pass we by , he doesnae seem to be look , and yet here he be on our road ! Dod , Davie , I begin to take a notion . I think it s no you they re seek , I think it s I ; and I think they ken fine where they re gaun . " 

 " they ken ? " I ask . 

 " I think Andie Scougal s sell I he or his mate wha ken some part of the affair or else Charlie s clerk callant , which would be a pity too , " say Alan ; " and if you askit I for just my inward private conviction , I think there ll be head crack on Gillane sand . " 

 " Alan , " I cry , " if you re at all right there ll be folk there and to spare . it ll be small service to crack head . " 

 " it would aye be a satisfaction though , " say Alan . " but bide a bit ; bide a bit ; I m think and thank to this bonny westland wind , I believe I ve still a chance of it . it s this way , Davie . I m no trysted with this man Scougal till the gloaming come . but , " say he , " if I can get a bit of a wind out of the west I ll be there long or that , " he say , " and lie - to for ye behind the Isle of Fidra . now if your gentry ken the place , they ken the time forbye . do ye see I come , Davie ? thank to Johnnie Cope and other red - coat gomeral , I should ken this country like the back of my hand ; and if ye re ready for another bit run with Alan Breck , we ll can cast back inshore , and come to the seaside again by Dirleton . if the ship s there , we ll try and get on board of she . if she s no there , I ll just have to get back to my weary haystack . but either way of it , I think we will leave your gentry whistle on their thumb . " 

 " I believe there s some chance in it , " say I. " have on with ye , Alan ! " 

 CHAPTER XIII GILLANE sand 

 I do not profit by Alan s pilotage as he have do by his marching under General Cope ; for I can scarce tell what way we go . it be my excuse that we travel exceed fast . some part we run , some trot , and the rest walk at a vengeance of a pace . twice , while we be at top speed , we run against country - folk ; but though we plump into the first from round a corner , Alan be as ready as a loaded musket . 

 " have ye see my horse ? " he gasp . 

 " Na , man , I haenae see nae horse the day , " reply the countryman . 

 and Alan spar the time to explain to he that we be travel " ride and tie " ; that our charger have escape , and it be fear he have go home to Linton . not only that , but he expend some breath   of which he have not very much leave   to curse his own misfortune and my stupidity which be say to be its cause . 

 " they that cannae tell the truth , " he observe to myself as we go on again , " should be aye mindful to leave an honest , handy lee behind they . if folk dinnae ken what ye re do , Davie , they re terrible take up with it ; but if they think they ken , they care nae mair for it than what I do for pease porridge . " 

 as we have first make inland , so our road come in the end to lie very near due north ; the old Kirk of Aberlady for a landmark on the left ; on the right , the top of the Berwick Law ; and it be thus we strike the shore again , not far from Dirleton . from north Berwick west to Gillane Ness there run a string of four small islet , Craiglieth , the Lamb , Fidra , and Eyebrough , notable by their diversity of size and shape . Fidra be the most particular , be a strange grey islet of two hump , make the more conspicuous by a piece of ruin ; and I mind that   as we draw close to it   by some door or window of these ruin the sea peep through like a man s eye . under the lee of Fidra there be a good anchorage in westerly wind , and there , from a far way off , we could see the thistle riding . 

 the shore in face of these islet be altogether waste . here be no dwelling of man , and scarce any passage , or at most of vagabond child run at their play . gillane be a small place on the far side of the Ness , the folk of Dirleton go to their business in the inland field , and those of North Berwick straight to the sea - fishing from their haven ; so that few part of the coast be lonely . but I mind , as we crawl upon our belly into that multiplicity of height and hollow , keep a bright eye upon all side , and our heart hammer at our rib , there be such a shining of the sun and the sea , such a stir of the wind in the bent grass , and such a bustle of down - pop rabbit and up - fly gull , that the desert seem to I , like a place alive . no doubt it be in all way well choose for a secret embarcation , if the secret have be keep ; and even now that it be out , and the place watch , we be able to creep unperceive to the front of the sandhill , where they look down immediately on the beach and sea . 

 but here Alan come to a full stop . 

 " Davie , " say he , " this be a kittle passage ! as long as we lie here we re safe ; but I m nane sae muckle nearer to my ship or the coast of France . and as soon as we stand up and signal the brig , it s another matter . for where will your gentry be , think ye ? " 

 " maybe they re no come yet , " say I. " and even if they be , there s one clear matter in our favour . they ll be all arrange to take we , that s true . but they ll have arrange for our come from the east and here we be upon their west . " 

 " ay , " say Alan , " I wish we be in some force , and this be a battle , we would have bonnily out - manouvre they ! but it isnae , Davit ; and the way it be , be a wee thing less inspiring to Alan Breck . I swither , Davie . " 

 " time fly , Alan , " say I. 

 " I ken that , " say Alan . " I ken naethe else , as the french folk say . but this be a dreidful case of heid or tail . o ! if I could but ken where your gentry be ! " 

 " Alan , " say I , " this be no like you . it s get to be now or never . " 

 " this be no I , quo he , " 

 sing Alan , with a queer face betwixt shame and drollery . 

 " neither you nor I , quo he , neither you nor I . 
 wow , na , Johnnie man ! neither you nor I . " 

 and then of a sudden he stand straight up where he be , and with a handkerchief fly in his right hand , march down upon the beach . I stand up myself , but linger behind he , scan the sand - hill to the east . his appearance be at first unremarked : Scougal not expect he so early , and my gentry watch on the other side . then they awake on board the Thistle , and it seem they have all in readiness , for there be scarce a second s bustle on the deck before we see a skiff put round her stern and begin to pull lively for the coast . almost at the same moment of time , and perhaps half a mile away towards Gillane Ness , the figure of a man appear for a blink upon a sandhill , wave with his arm ; and though he be go again in the same flash , the gull in that part continue a little long to fly wild . 

 Alan have not see this , look straight to seaward at the ship and skiff . 

 " it maun be as it will ! " say he , when I have tell he , " Weel may yon boatie row , or my craig ll have to thole a raxing . " 

 that part of the beach be long and flat , and excellent walking when the tide be down ; a little cressy burn flow over it in one place to the sea ; and the sandhill run along the head of it like the rampart of a town . no eye of ours could spy what be pass behind there in the bent , no hurry of ours could mend the speed of the boat s come : time stand still with we through that uncanny period of wait . 

 " there be one thing I would like to ken , " say Alan . " I would like to ken these gentry s order . we re worth four hunner pound the pair of we : how if they take the gun to we , Davie ! they would get a bonny shot from the top of that lang sandy bank . " 

 " morally impossible , " say I. " the point be that they can have no gun . this thing have be go about too secret ; pistol they may have , but never gun . " 

 " I believe ye ll be in the right , " say Alan . " for all which I be wear a good deal for yon boat . " 

 and he snap his finger and whistle to it like a dog . 

 it be now perhaps a third of the way in , and we ourselves already hard on the margin of the sea , so that the soft sand rise over my shoe . there be no more to do whatever but to wait , to look as much as we be able at the creep nearer of the boat , and as little as we could manage at the long impenetrable front of the sandhill , over which the gull twinkle and behind which our enemy be doubtless marshalling . 

 " this be a fine , bright , caller place to get shoot in , " say Alan suddenly ; " and , man , I wish that I have your courage ! " 

 " Alan ! " I cry , " what kind of talk be this of it ! you re just make of courage ; it s the character of the man , as I could prove myself if there be nobody else . " 

 " and you would be the more mistaken , " say he . " what make the differ with I be just my great penetration and knowledge of affair . but for auld , cauld , dour , deadly courage , I be not fit to hold a candle to yourself . look at we two here upon the sand . here be I , fair hotching to be off ; here s you   for all that I ken   in two mind of it whether you ll no stop . do you think that I could do that , or would ? no I ! firstly , because I havenae get the courage and wouldnae daur ; and secondly , because I be a man of so much penetration and would see ye damn first . " 

 " it s there ye re come , be it ? " I cry . " ah , man Alan , you can wile your old wife , but you never can wile I . " 

 remembrance of my temptation in the wood make I strong as iron . 

 " I have a tryst to keep , " I continue . " I be tryste with your cousin Charlie ; I have pass my word . " 

 " braw tryst that you ll can keep , " say Alan . " Ye ll just mistryst aince and for a with the gentry in the bent . and what for ? " he go on with an extreme threaten gravity . " just tell I that , my mannie ! be ye to be speerite away like Lady Grange ? be they to drive a dirk in your inside and bury ye in the bent ? or be it to be the other way , and be they to bring ye in with James ? be they folk to be trustit ? would ye stick your head in the mouth of Sim Fraser and the ither whig ? " he add with extraordinary bitterness . 

 " Alan , " cry I , " they re all rogue and liar , and I m with ye there . the more reason there should be one decent man in such a land of thief ! my word be pass , and I ll stick to it . I say long syne to your kinswoman that I would stumble at no risk . do ye mind of that ? the night Red Colin fall , it be . no more I will , then . here I stop . Prestongrange promise I my life : if he s to be mansworn , here I ll have to die . " 

 " Aweel aweel , " say Alan . 

 all this time we have see or hear no more of our pursuer . in truth we have catch they unawares ; their whole party   as I be to learn afterwards   have not yet reach the scene ; what there be of they be spread among the bent towards Gillane . it be quite an affair to call they in and bring they over , and the boat be make speed . they be besides but cowardly fellow : a mere leash of Highland cattle - thief , of several clan , no gentleman there to be the captain and the more they look at Alan and I upon the beach , the less   I must suppose   they like the look of we . 

 whoever have betray Alan it be not the captain : he be in the skiff himself , steer and stir up his oarsman , like a man with his heart in his employ . already he be near in , and the boat secure already Alan s face have flame crimson with the excitement of his deliverance , when our friend in the bent , either in their despair to see their prey escape they or with some hope of scar Andie , raise suddenly a shrill cry of several voice . 

 this sound , arise from what appear to be a quite deserted coast , be really very daunting , and the man in the boat hold water instantly . 

 " what s this of it ? " sing out the captain , for he be come within an easy hail . 

 " freen o mine , " say Alan , and begin immediately to wade forth in the shallow water towards the boat . " Davie , " he say , pausing , " Davie , be ye no coming ? I be swi to leave ye . " 

 " not a hair of I , " say I. 

 " he stand part of a second where he be to his knee in the salt water , hesitate . 

 " he that will to Cupar , maun to Cupar , " say he , and swash in deep than his waist , be haul into the skiff , which be immediately direct for the ship . 

 I stand where he have leave I , with my hand behind my back ; Alan sit with his head turn watch I ; and the boat draw smoothly away . of a sudden I come the near hand to shed tear , and seem to myself the most deserted solitary lad in Scotland . with that I turn my back upon the sea and face the sandhill . there be no sight or sound of man ; the sun shine on the wet sand and the dry , the wind blow in the bent , the gull make a dreary piping . as I pass higher up the beach , the sand - lice be hop nimbly about the strand tangle . the devil any other sight or sound in that unchancy place . and yet I know there be folk there , observe I , upon some secret purpose . they be no soldier , or they would have fall on and take we ere now ; doubtless they be some common rogue hire for my undoing , perhaps to kidnap , perhaps to murder I outright . from the position of those engage , the first be the more likely ; from what I know of their character and ardency in this business , I think the second very possible ; and the blood run cold about my heart . 

 I have a mad idea to loosen my sword in the scabbard ; for though I be very unfit to stand up like a gentleman blade to blade , I think I could do some scathe in a random combat . but I perceive in time the folly of resistance . this be no doubt the joint " expedient " on which Prestongrange and Fraser be agree . the first , I be very sure , have do something to secure my life ; the second be pretty likely to have slip in some contrary hint into the ear of Neil and his companion ; and if I be to show bare steel I might play straight into the hand of my bad enemy and seal my own doom . 

 these thought bring I to the head of the beach . I cast a look behind , the boat be near the brig , and Alan fly his handkerchief for a farewell , which I reply to with the waving of my hand . but Alan himself be shrink to a small thing in my view , alongside of this pass that lie in front of I . I set my hat hard on my head , clench my tooth , and go right before I up the face of the sand - wreath . it make a hard climb , be steep , and the sand like water underfoot . but I catch hold at last by the long bent - grass on the brae - top , and pull myself to a good footing . the same moment man stir and stand up here and there , six or seven of they , ragged - like knave , each with a dagger in his hand . the fair truth be , I shut my eye and pray . when I open they again , the rogue be creep the least thing near without speech or hurry . every eye be upon mine , which strike I with a strange sensation of their brightness , and of the fear with which they continue to approach I . I hold out my hand empty ; whereupon one ask , with a strong Highland brogue , if I surrender . 

 " under protest , " say I , " if ye ken what that mean , which I misdoubt . " 

 at that word , they come all in upon I like a flight of bird upon a carrion , seize I , take my sword , and all the money from my pocket , bind I hand and foot with some strong line , and cast I on a tussock of bent . there they sit about their captive in a part of a circle and gaze upon he silently like something dangerous , perhaps a lion or a tiger on the spring . presently this attention be relax . they draw near together , fall to speech in the Gaelic , and very cynically divide my property before my eye . it be my diversion in this time that I could watch from my place the progress of my friend s escape . I see the boat come to the brig and be hoist in , the sail fill , and the ship pass out seaward behind the isle and by North Berwick . 

 in the course of two hour or so , more and more ragged Highlandmen keep collect . Neil among the first , until the party must have number near a score . with each new arrival there be a fresh bout of talk , that sound like complaint and explanation ; but I observe one thing , none of those who come late have any share in the division of my spoil . the last discussion be very violent and eager , so that once I think they would have quarrel ; on the heel of which their company part , the bulk of they return westward in a troop , and only three , Neil and two other , remain sentry on the prisoner . 

 " I could name one who would be very ill pleased with your day s work , Neil Duncanson , " say I , when the rest have move away . 

 he assure I in answer I should be tenderly use , for he know he be " acquent wi the leddy . " 

 this be all our talk , nor do any other son of man appear upon that portion of the coast until the sun have go down among the Highland mountain , and the gloaming be begin to grow dark . at which hour I be aware of a long , lean , bony - like lothian man of a very swarthy countenance , that come towards we among the bent on a farm horse . 

 " lad , " cry he , " have ye a paper like this ? " and hold up one in his hand . Neil produce a second , which the newcomer study through a pair of horn spectacle , and say all be right and we be the folk he be seek , immediately dismount . I be then set in his place , my foot tie under the horse s belly , and we set forth under the guidance of the Lowlander . his path must have be very well choose , for we meet but one pair a pair of lover the whole way , and these , perhaps take we to be free - trader , flee on our approach . we be at one time close at the foot of Berwick Law on the south side ; at another , as we pass over some open hill , I spy the light of a clachan and the old tower of a church among some tree not far off , but too far to cry for help , if I have dream of it . at last we come again within sound of the sea . there be moonlight , though not much ; and by this I could see the three huge tower and broken battlement of Tantallon , that old chief place of the Red Douglases . the horse be picket in the bottom of the ditch to graze , and I be lead within , and forth into the court , and thence into the tumble - down stone hall . here my conductor build a brisk fire in the midst of the pavement , for there be a chill in the night . my hand be loose , I be set by the wall in the inner end , and   the Lowlander have produce provision   I be give oatmeal bread and a pitcher of french brandy . this do , I be leave once more alone with my three highlandman . they sit close by the fire drinking and talk ; the wind blow in by the breach , cast about the smoke and flame , and sing in the top of the tower ; I could hear the sea under the cliff , and , my mind be reassure as to my life , and my body and spirit weary with the day s employment , I turn upon one side and slumber . 

 I have no mean of guess at what hour I be waken , only the moon be down and the fire be low . my foot be now loose , and I be carry through the ruin and down the cliff - side by a precipitous path to where I find a fisher s boat in a haven of the rock . this I be have on board of , and we begin to put forth from the shore in a fine starlight . 

 CHAPTER XIV the BASS 

 I have no thought where they be take I ; only look here and there for the appearance of a ship ; and there run the while in my head a word of Ransome s the twenty - pounder . if I be to be expose a second time to that same former danger of the plantation , I judge it must turn ill with I ; there be no second Alan ; and no second shipwreck and spare yard to be expect now ; and I see myself hoe tobacco under the whip s lash . the thought chill I ; the air be sharp upon the water , the stretcher of the boat drench with a cold dew : and I shiver in my place beside the steersman . this be the dark man whom I have call hitherto the Lowlander ; his name be Dale , ordinarily call Black Andie . feel the thrill of my shiver , he very kindly hand I a rough jacket full of fish - scale , with which I be glad to cover myself . 

 " I thank you for this kindness , " say I , " and will make so free as to repay it with a warning . you take a high responsibility in this affair . you be not like these ignorant , barbarous highlander , but know what the law be and the risk of those that break it . " 

 " I be no just exactly what ye would can an extremist for the law , " say he , " at the good of time ; but in this business I act with a good warranty . " 

 " what be you go to do with I ? " I ask . 

 " Nae harm , " say he , " nae harm ava . Ye ll have strong freen , I m think . Ye ll be richt eneuch yet . " 

 there begin to fall a greyness on the face of the sea ; little dab of pink and red , like coal of slow fire , come in the east ; and at the same time the geese awaken , and begin cry about the top of the Bass . it be just the one crag of rock , as everybody know , but great enough to carve a city from . the sea be extremely little , but there go a hollow plowter round the base of it . with the growing of the dawn I could see it clear and clear ; the straight crag paint with sea - bird dropping like a morning frost , the slop top of it green with grass , the clan of white geese that cry about the side , and the black , broken building of the prison sit close on the sea s edge . 

 at the sight the truth come in upon I in a clap . 

 " it s there you re take I ! " I cry . 

 " just to the Bass , mannie , " say he : " Whaur the auld saint be afore ye , and I misdoubt if ye have come so fairly by your preeson . " 

 " but none dwell there now , " I cry ; " the place be long a ruin . " 

 " it ll be the mair pleisand a change for the solan geese , then , " quoth Andie dryly . 

 the day come slowly brighter I observe on the bilge , among the big stone with which fisherfolk ballast their boat , several keg and basket , and a provision of fuel . all these be discharge upon the crag . Andie , myself , and my three Highlanders   I call they mine , although it be the other way about , land along with they . the sun be not yet up when the boat move away again , the noise of the oar on the thole - pin echo from the cliff , and leave we in our singular reclusion : 

 Andie Dale be the Prefect   as I would jocularly call he   of the Bass , be at once the shepherd and the gamekeeper of that small and rich estate . he have to mind the dozen or so of sheep that feed and fatten on the grass of the sloping part of it , like beast graze the roof of a cathedral . he have charge besides of the solan geese that roost in the crag ; and from these an extraordinary income be derive . the young be dainty eating , as much as two shilling a - piece be a common price , and pay willingly by epicure ; even the grown bird be valuable for their oil and feather ; and a part of the minister s stipend of North Berwick be pay to this day in solan geese , which make it   in some folk eye   a parish to be covet . to perform these several business , as well as to protect the geese from poacher , Andie have frequent occasion to sleep and pass day together on the crag ; and we find the man at home there like a farmer in his steading . bid we all shoulder some of the package , a matter in which I make haste to bear a hand , he lead we in by a locked gate , which be the only admission to the island , and through the ruin of the fortress , to the governor s house . there we see by the ash in the chimney and a stand bed - place in one corner , that he make his usual occupation . 

 this bed he now offer I to use , say he suppose I would set up to be gentry . 

 " my gentrice have nothing to do with where I lie , " say I. " I bless God I have lie hard ere now , and can do the same again with thankfulness . while I be here , Mr. Andie , if that be your name , I will do my part and take my place beside the rest of you ; and I ask you on the other hand to spare I your mockery , which I own I like ill . " 

 he grumble a little at this speech , but seem upon reflection to approve it . indeed , he be a long - headed , sensible man , and a good Whig and Presbyterian ; read daily in a pocket Bible , and be both able and eager to converse seriously on religion , lean more than a little towards the cameronian extreme . his moral be of a more doubtful colour . I find he be deep in the free trade , and use the ruin of Tantallon for a magazine of smuggle merchandise . as for a gauger , I do not believe he value the life of one at half - a - farthing . but that part of the coast of Lothian be to this day as wild a place , and the common there as rough a crew , as any in Scotland . 

 one incident of my imprisonment be make memorable by a consequence it have long after . there be a warship at this time station in the Firth , the Seahorse , Captain Palliser . it chance she be cruise in the month of September , ply between Fife and Lothian , and sound for sunk danger . early one fine morning she be see about two mile to east of we , where she lower a boat , and seem to examine the Wildfire Rocks and Satan s Bush , famous danger of that coast . and presently after have get her boat again , she come before the wind and be head directly for the Bass . this be very troublesome to Andie and the Highlanders ; the whole business of my sequestration be design for privacy , and here , with a navy captain perhaps blunder ashore , it look to become public enough , if it be nothing bad . I be in a minority of one , I be no Alan to fall upon so many , and I be far from sure that a warship be the least likely to improve my condition . all which consider , I give Andie my parole of good behaviour and obedience , and be have briskly to the summit of the rock , where we all lay down , at the cliff s edge , in different place of observation and concealment . the Seahorse come straight on till I think she would have strike , and we   look giddily down   could see the ship s company at their quarter and hear the leadsman sing at the lead . then she suddenly wear and let fly a volley of I know not how many great gun . the rock be shake with the thunder of the sound , the smoke flow over our head , and the geese rise in number beyond computation or belief . to hear their screaming and to see the twinkling of their wing , make a most inimitable curiosity ; and I suppose it be after this somewhat childish pleasure that Captain Palliser have come so near the Bass . he be to pay dear for it in time . during his approach I have the opportunity to make a remark upon the rigging of that ship by which I ever after know it mile away ; and this be a means   under Providence   of my averting from a friend a great calamity , and inflict on Captain Palliser himself a sensible disappointment . 

 all the time of my stay on the rock we live well . we have small ale and brandy , and oatmeal , of which we make our porridge night and morning . at time a boat come from the Castleton and bring we a quarter of mutton , for the sheep upon the rock we must not touch , these be specially feed to market . the goose be unfortunately out of season , and we let they be . we fish ourselves , and yet more often make the goose to fish for we : observe one when he have make a capture and scar he from his prey ere he have swallow it . 

 the strange nature of this place , and the curiosity with which it abound , hold I busy and amuse . Escape be impossible , I be allow my entire liberty , and continually explore the surface of the isle wherever it might support the foot of man . the old garden of the prison be still to be observe , with flower and pot - herb run wild , and some ripe cherry on a bush . a little low stand a chapel or a hermit s cell ; who build or dwelt in it , none may know , and the thought of its age make a ground of many meditation . the prison , too , where I now bivouac with Highland cattle - thief , be a place full of history , both human and divine . I think it strange so many saint and martyr should have go by there so recently , and leave not so much as a leaf out of their bible , or a name carve upon the wall , while the rough soldier lad that mount guard upon the battlement have fill the neighbourhood with their memento break tobacco - pipe for the most part , and that in a surprising plenty , but also metal button from their coat . there be time when I think I could have hear the pious sound of psalm out of the martyr s dungeon , and see the soldier tramp the rampart with their glinting pipe , and the dawn rise behind they out of the North Sea . 

 no doubt it be a good deal Andie and his tale that put these fancy in my head . he be extraordinarily well acquainted with the story of the rock in all particular , down to the name of private soldier , his father have serve there in that same capacity . he be gift besides with a natural genius for narration , so that the people seem to speak and the thing to be do before your face . this gift of his and my assiduity to listen bring we the more close together . I could not honestly deny but what I like he ; I soon see that he like I ; and indeed , from the first I have set myself out to capture his good - will . an odd circumstance   to be tell presently   effect this beyond my expectation ; but even in early day we make a friendly pair to be a prisoner and his gaoler . 

 I should trifle with my conscience if I pretend my stay upon the Bass be wholly disagreeable . it seem to I a safe place , as though I be escape there out of my trouble . no harm be to be offer I ; a material impossibility , rock and the deep sea , prevent I from fresh attempt ; I feel I have my life safe and my honour safe , and there be time when I allow myself to gloat on they like steal water . at other time my thought be very different , I recall how strong I have express myself both to Rankeillor and to Stewart ; I reflect that my captivity upon the Bass , in view of a great part of the coast of Fife and Lothian , be a thing I should be think more likely to have invent than endure ; and in the eye of these two gentleman , at least , I must pass for a boaster and a coward . now I would take this lightly enough ; tell myself that so long as I stand well with Catriona Drummond , the opinion of the rest of man be but moonshine and spill water ; and thence pass off into those meditation of a lover which be so delightful to himself and must always appear so surprisingly idle to a reader . but anon the fear would take I otherwise ; I would be shake with a perfect panic of self - esteem , and these suppose hard judgment appear an injustice impossible to be support . with that another train of thought would he present , and I have scarce begin to be concern about man s judgment of myself , than I be haunt with the remembrance of James Stewart in his dungeon and the lamentation of his wife . then , indeed , passion begin to work in I ; I could not forgive myself to sit there idle : it seem   if I be a man at all   that I could fly or swim out of my place of safety ; and it be in such humour and to amuse my self - reproach that I would set the more particularly to win the good side of Andie Dale . 

 at last , when we two be alone on the summit of the rock on a bright morning , I put in some hint about a bribe . he look at I , cast back his head , and laugh out loud . 

 " ay , you re funny , Mr. Dale , " say I , " but perhaps if you ll glance an eye upon that paper you may change your note . " 

 the stupid highlander have take from I at the time of my seizure nothing but hard money , and the paper I now show Andie be an acknowledgment from the British Linen Company for a considerable sum . 

 he read it . " Troth , and ye re nane sae ill aff , " say he . 

 " I think that would maybe vary your opinion , " say I. 

 " Hout ! " say he . " it show I ye can bribe ; but I m no to be bribit . " 

 " we ll see about that yet a while , " say I. " and first , I ll show you that I know what I be talk . you have order to detain I here till after Thursday , 21st September . " 

 " ye re no a thegether wrong either , " say Andie . " I m to let you gang , bar order contrair , on Saturday , the 23rd . " 

 I could not but feel there be something extremely insidious in this arrangement . that I be to re - appear precisely in time to be too late would cast the more discredit on my tale , if I be minded to tell one ; and this screw I to fighting point . 

 " now then , Andie , you that ken the world , listen to I , and think while ye listen , " say I. " I know there be great folk in the business , and I make no doubt you have their name to go upon . I have see some of they myself since this affair begin , and say my say into their face too . but what kind of a crime would this be that I have commit ? or what kind of a process be this that I be fall under ? to be apprehend by some rag John - Hielandman on August 30th , carry to a rickle of old stone that be now neither fort nor gaol   whatever it once be   but just the gamekeeper s lodge of the Bass Rock , and set free again , September 23rd , as secretly as I be first arrest do that sound like law to you ? or do it sound like justice ? or do it not sound honestly like a piece of some low dirty intrigue , of which the very folk that meddle with it be ashamed ? " 

 " I canna gainsay ye , Shaws . it look unco underhand , " say Andie . " and werenae the folk guid sound whig and true - blue Presbyterians I would have see they ayont Jordan and Jeroozlem or I would have set hand to it . " 

 " the Master of Lovat ll be a braw Whig , " say I , " and a grand Presbyterian . " 

 " I ken naethe by he , " say he . " I hae nae troking wi Lovats . " 

 " no , it ll be Prestongrange that you ll be deal with , " say I. 

 " ah , but I ll no tell ye that , " say Andie . 

 " little need when I ken , " be my retort . 

 " there s just the ae thing ye can be fairly sure of , Shaws , " say Andie . " and that be that   try as ye please   I m no deal wi yoursel ; nor yet I amnae goin to , " he add . 

 " well , Andie , I see I ll have to be speak out plain with you , " I reply . and tell he so much as I think needful of the fact . 

 he hear I out with some serious interest , and when I have do , seem to consider a little with himself . 

 " shaw , " say he at last , " I ll deal with the naked hand . it s a queer tale , and no very creditable , the way you tell it ; and I m far frae mint that be other than the way that ye believe it . as for yoursel , ye seem to I rather a dacent - like young man . but I , that s aulder and mair judeecious , see perhaps a wee bit further forrit in the job than what ye can dae . and here the maitter clear and plain to ye . there ll be nae skaith to yoursel if I keep ye here ; far free that , I think ye ll be a hantle well by it . there ll be nae skaith to the kintry just ae mair Hielantman hangit Gude ken , a guid riddance ! on the ither hand , it would be considerable skaith to I if I would let you free . Sae , speakin as a guid Whig , an honest freen to you , and an anxious freen to my ainsel , the plain fact be that I think ye ll just have to bide here wi Andie an the solan . " 

 " Andie , " say I , lay my hand upon his knee , " this Hielantman s innocent . " 

 " ay , it s a peety about that , " say he . " but ye see , in this warld , the way God make it , we cannae just get a thing that we want . " 

 CHAPTER XV BLACK ANDIE S TALE of TOD LAPRAIK 

 I have yet say little of the Highlanders . they be all three of the follower of James More , which bind the accusation very tight about their master s neck . all understand a word or two of English , but Neil be the only one who judge he have enough of it for general converse , in which   when once he get embark   his company be often tempt to the contrary opinion . they be tractable , simple creature ; show much more courtesy than might have be expect from their raggedness and their uncouth appearance , and fall spontaneously to be like three servant for Andie and myself . 

 dwell in that isolate place , in the old fall ruin of a prison , and among endless strange sound of the sea and the sea - bird , I think I perceive in they early the effect of superstitious fear . when there be nothing do they would either lie and sleep , for which their appetite appear insatiable , or Neil would entertain the other with story which seem always of a terrifying strain . if neither of these delight be within reach if perhaps two be sleep and the third could find no mean to follow their example I would see he sit and listen and look about he in a progression of uneasiness , start , his face blench , his hand clutch , a man string like a bow . the nature of these fear I have never an occasion to find out , but the sight of they be catch , and the nature of the place that we be in favourable to alarm . I can find no word for it in the English , but Andie have an expression for it in the scot from which he never vary . 

 " ay , " he would say , " it s an unco place , the Bass . " 

 it be so I always think of it . it be an unco place by night , unco by day ; and these be unco sound , of the calling of the solan , and the plash of the sea and the rock echo , that hang continually in our ear . it be chiefly so in moderate weather . when the wave be anyway great they roar about the rock like thunder and the drum of army , dreadful but merry to hear ; and it be in the calm day that a man could daunt himself with listen not a Highlandman only , as I several time experiment on myself , so many still , hollow noise haunt and reverberate in the porch of the rock . 

 this bring I to a story I hear , and a scene I take part in , which quite change our term of living , and have a great effect on my departure . it chance one night I fall in a muse beside the fire and   that little air of Alan s come back to my memory   begin to whistle . a hand be lay upon my arm , and the voice of Neil bid I to stop , for it be not " canny music . " 

 " not canny ? " I ask . " how can that be ? " 

 " na , " say he ; " it will be make by a bogle and her want ta heid upon his body . "   13 

 " well , " say I , " there can be no bogle here , Neil ; for it s not likely they would fash themselves to frighten geese . " 

 " ay ? " say Andie , " be that what ye think of it ! but I ll can tell ye there s be waur nor bogle here . " 

 " what s waur than bogle , Andie ? " say I. 

 " Warlocks , " say he . " or a warlock at the least of it . and that s a queer tale , too , " he add . " and if ye would like , I ll tell it ye . " 

 to be sure we be all of the one mind , and even the Highlander that have the least English of the three set himself to listen with all his might . 

 the Tale of Tod Lapraik 

 my faither , Tam Dale , peace to his bane , be a wild , splore lad in his young day , wi little wisdom and little grace . he be fond of a lass and fond of a glass , and fond of a ran - dan ; but I could never hear tell that he be muckle use for honest employment . Frae ae thing to anither , he list at last for a sodger and be in the garrison of this fort , which be the first way that ony of the Dales cam to set foot upon the Bass . sorrow upon that service ! the governor brew his ain ale ; it seem it be the warst conceivable . the rock be proveesione free the shore with viver , the thing be ill - guide , and there be while when they but to fish and shoot solan for their diet . to crown a , thir be the day of the Persecution . the perishin cauld chalmer be all occupeed wi sant and martyr , the saut of the yearth , of which it wasnae worthy . and though Tam Dale carry a firelock there , a single sodger , and like a lass and a glass , as I be sayin , the mind of the man be mair just than set with his position . he have glint of the glory of the kirk ; there be while when his dander rase to see the Lord s sant misguide , and shame cover he that he should be haulde a can le   or carry a firelock   in so black a business . there be night of it when he be here on sentry , the place a wheesht , the frost o winter maybe rive in the wa s , and he would hear ane o the prisoner strike up a psalm , and the rest join in , and the bless sound rise from the different chalmer or dungeon , I would raither say so that this auld craig in the sea be like a pairt of Heev n. Black shame be on his saul ; his sin hove up before he muckle as the Bass , and above a , that chief sin , that he should have a hand in hagge and hash at Christ s Kirk . but the truth be that he resist the spirit . day cam , there be the rouse compainion , and his guid resolve depairtit . 

 in thir day , dwalle upon the Bass a man of God , Peden the Prophet be his name . Ye ll have hear tell of Prophet Peden . there be never the wale of he sinsyne , and it s a question wi mony if there ever be his like afore . he be wild s a peat - hag , fearsome to look at , fearsome to hear , his face like the day of judgment . the voice of he be like a solan s and dinnle d in folk lug , and the word of he like coal of fire . 

 now there be a lass on the rock , and I think she have little to do , for it be nae place far decent weeman ; but it seem she be bonny , and she and Tam Dale be very well agree . it befell that Peden be in the gairden his lane at the praying when Tam and the lass cam by ; and what should the lassie do but mock with laughter at the sant s devotion ? he rise and lookit at the twa o they , and Tam s knee knoitere thegether at the look of he . but whan he spak , it be mair in sorrow than in anger . " poor thing , poor thing ! " say he , and it be the lass he lookit at , " I hear you skirl and laugh , " he say , " but the Lord have a deid shot prepare for you , and at that surprising judgment ye shall skirl but the ae time ! " shortly thereafter she be daundere on the craig wi twa - three sodger , and it be a blawy day . there cam a gowst of wind , claught she by the coat , and awa wi her bag and baggage . and it be remark by the sodger that she gi but the ae skirl . 

 Nae doubt this judgment have some weicht upon Tam Dale ; but it pass again and he none the well . ae day he be flyte wi anither sodger - lad . " Deil hae I ! " quo Tam , for he be a profane swearer . and there be Peden glower at he , gash an waefu ; Peden wi his lang chaft an luntin een , the maud happe about his kist , and the hand of he hold out wi the black nail upon the finger - nebs for he have nae care of the body . " Fy , fy , poor man ! " cry he , " the poor fool man ! Deil hae I , quo he ; an I see the deil at his oxter . " the conviction of guilt and grace cam in on Tam like the deep sea ; he flang doun the pike that be in his hand " I will nae mair lift arm against the cause o Christ ! " say he , and be as gude s word . there be a sair fyke in the beginning , but the governor , see he resolve , gi he his discharge , and he go and dwallt and merried in North Berwick , and have aye a gude name with honest folk free that day on . 

 it be in the year seeventeen hunner and sax that the Bass cam in the hand o the Da rymple , and there be twa man soucht the chairge of it . Baith be weel qualified , for they have baith be sodger in the garrison , and ken the gate to handle solan , and the season and value of they . Forby that they be baith or they baith seem earnest professor and man of comely conversation . the first of they be just Tam Dale , my faither . the second be ane Lapraik , whom the folk can d Tod Lapraik maistly , but whether for his name or his nature I could never hear tell . Weel , Tam gae to see Lapraik upon this business , and take I , that be a toddlin laddie , by the hand . Tod have his dwallin in the lang loan benorth the kirkyaird . it s a dark uncanny loan , forby that the kirk have aye have an ill name since the day o James the Saxt and the deevil s cantrip play therein when the Queen be on the sea ; and as for Tod s house , it be in the mirk end , and be little like by some that ken the good . the door be on the sneck that day , and I and my faither gae straucht in . Tod be a wabster to his trade ; his loom stand in the but . there he sit , a muckle fat , white hash of a man like creish , wi a kind of a holy smile that gart I scunner . the hand of he aye caw the shuttle , but his een be steeke . we cry to he by his name , we skirl in the deid lug of he , we shake he by the shou ther . Nae mainner o service ! there he sit on his dowp , an caw the shuttle and smile like creish . 

 " God be guid to we , " say Tam Dale , " this be no canny ? " 

 he have jimp say the word , when Tod Lapraik cam to himsel . 

 " be this you , Tam ? " say he . " Haith , man ! I m blythe to see ye . I while fa into a bit dwam like this , " he say ; " its frae the stamach . " 

 Weel , they begin to crack about the Bass and which of they twa be to get the warding o t , and little by little cam to very ill word , and twin in anger . I mind weel that as my faither and I gae hame again , he cam ower and ower the same expression , how little he likit Tod Lapraik and his dwam . 

 " Dwam ! " say he . " I think folk hae brunt for dwam like yon . " 

 Aweel , my faither get the Bass and Tod have to go wantin . it be remember sinsyne what way he have ta en the thing . " Tam , " say he , " ye hae get the well o I aince mair , and I hope , " say he , " ye ll find at least a that ye expeckit at the Bass . " which have since be think remarkable expression . at last the time come for Tam Dale to take young solan . this be a business he be weel use wi , he have be a craigsman frae a laddie , and trustit nane but himsel . so there be he hingin by a line an speldering on the craig face , whaur its hie and steigh . fower tenty lad be on the tap , hauldin the line and mindin for his signal . but whaur Tam hang there be naething but the craig , and the sea belaw , and the solan skirlin and fly . it be a braw spring morn , and Tam whustle as he claught in the young geese . Mony s the time I ve hear he tell of this experience , and aye the swat run upon the man . 

 it chance , ye see , that Tam keeke up , and he be awaur of a muckle solan , and the solan pyking at the line . he thocht this by - ordinar and outside the creature s habit . he mind that rope be unco saft thing , and the solan s neb and the Bass Rock unco hard , and that twa hunner foot be raither mair than he would care to fa . 

 " Shoo ! " say Tam . " Awa , bird ! Shoo , awa wi ye ! " say he . 

 the solan keekit doon into Tam s face , and there be something unco in the creature s ee . just the ae keek it gi , and back to the rope . but now it wroucht and warstl t like a thing dementit . there never be the solan make that wroucht as that solan wroucht ; and it seem to understand its employ brawly , birze the saft rope between the neb of it and a crunkle jag o stane . 

 there gae a cauld stend o fear into Tam s heart . " this thing be nae bird , " think he . his een turnt backward in his heid and the day gae black aboot he . " if I get a dwam here , " he toucht , " it s by wi Tam Dale . " and he signal for the lad to pu he up . 

 and it seem the solan understand about signal . for nae soon be the signal make than he let be the rope , sprie his wing , squawk out loud , take a turn fly , and dash straucht at Tam Dale s een . Tam have a knife , he gart the cauld steel glitter . and it seem the solan understand about knife , for nae suner do the steel glint in the sun than he gi the ae squawk , but laighter , like a body disappointit , and flegge aff about the roundness of the craig , and Tam see he nae mair . and as sune as that thing be gane , Tam s heid drapt upon his shouther , and they pu d he up like a deid corp , dadde on the craig . 

 a dram of brandy   which he go never without   broucht he to his mind , or what be leave of it . up he sit . 

 " Rin , Geordie , rin to the boat , mak sure of the boat , man rin ! " he cry , " or yon solan ll have it awa , " say he . 

 the fower lad star at ither , an try to whilly - wha he to be quiet . but naething would satisfy Tam Dale , till ane o they have startit on aheid to stand sentry on the boat . the ither askit if he be for down again . 

 " Na , " say he , " and niether you nor I , " say he , " and as sune as I can win to stand on my twa foot we ll be aff frae this craig o Sawtan . " 

 sure eneuch , nae time be lose , and that be ower muckle ; for before they win to North Berwick Tam be in a cry fever . he lie a the simmer ; and wha be sae kind as come speire for he , but Tod Lapraik ! folk thocht afterwards that ilka time Tod cam near the house the fever have worsen . I kenna for that ; but what I ken the good , that be the end of it . 

 it be about this time o the year ; my grandfaither be out at the white fishing ; and like a bairn , I but to gang wi he . we have a grand take , I mind , and the way that the fish lie broucht we near in by the Bass , whaur we foregaithere wi anither boat that belange to a man Sandie Fletcher in Castleton . he s no lang deid neither , or ye could speir at himsel . Weel , Sandie hail . 

 " what s yon on the Bass ? " say he . 

 " on the Bass ? " say grandfaither . 

 " ay , " say Sandie , " on the green side o t. " 

 " Whatten kind of a thing ? " say grandfaither . " there cannae be naethe on the Bass but just the sheep . " 

 " it look unco like a body , " quo Sandie , who be near in . 

 " a body ! " say we , and we none of we likit that . for there be nae boat that could have bring a man , and the key o the prison yett hung ower my faither s at hame in the press bed . 

 we keept the twa boat close for company , and crap in nearer hand . Grandfaither have a gless , for he have be a sailor , and the captain of a smack , and have lose she on the sand of Tay . and when we take the glass to it , sure eneuch there be a man . he be in a crunkle o green brae , a wee below the chaipel , a by his lee lane , and lowped and flang and dance like a daft quean at a waddin . 

 " it s Tod , " say grandfather , and pass the gless to Sandie . 

 " ay , it s he , " say Sandie . 

 " or ane in the likeness o he , " say grandfaither . 

 " Sma be the differ , " quo Sandie . " De il or warlock , I ll try the gun at he , " quo he , and broucht up a fowling - piece that he aye carry , for Sandie be a notable famous shot in all that country . 

 " haud your hand , Sandie , " say grandfaither ; " we maun see clear first , " say he , " or this may be a dear day s wark to the baith of we . " 

 " Hout ! " say Sandie , " this be the Lord s judgment surely , and be damn to it , " say he . 

 " maybe ay , and maybe no , " say my grandfaither , worthy man ! " but have you a mind of the Procurator Fiscal , that I think ye ll have foregaithere wi before , " say he . 

 this be ower true , and Sandie be a wee thing set ajee . " Aweel , Edie , " say he , " and what would be your way of it ? " 

 " Ou , just this , " say grandfaither . " let I that have the fast boat gang back to North Berwick , and let you bide here and keep an eye on Thon . if I cannae find Lapraik , I ll join ye and the twa of we ll have a crack wi he . but if Lapraik s at hame , I ll rin up the flag at the harbour , and ye can try Thon Thing wi the gun . " 

 Aweel , so it be agree between they twa . I be just a bairn , an clum in Sandie s boat , whaur I thoucht I would see the good of the employ . my grandsire gi Sandie a sill tester to pit in his gun wi the leid drap , bein mair deidly again bogle . and then the as boat set aff for North Berwick , an the tither lie whaur it be and watch the wanchancy thing on the brae - side . 

 a the time we lay there it lowpe and flang and capered and span like a teetotum , and while we could hear it skelloch as it span . I hae see lassie , the daft queans , that would lowp and dance a winter s nicht , and still be lowpe and dance when the winter s day cam in . but there would be fowk there to hauld they company , and the lad to egg they on ; and this thing be its lee - lane . and there would be a fiddler diddle his elbock in the chimney - side ; and this thing have nae music but the skirling of the solan . and the lassie be bit o young thing wi the reid life dinnle and stende in their member ; and this be a muckle , fat , creishy man , and he fa n in the vale o year . say what ye like , I maun say what I believe . it be joy be in the creature s heart , the joy o hell , I daursay : joy whatever . Mony a time I have askit mysel why witch and warlock should sell their saul   whilk be their maist dear possession   and be auld , duddy , wrunkl t wife or auld , feckless , dodder man ; and then I mind upon Tod Lapraik dance a the hour by his lane in the black glory of his heart . Nae doubt they burn for it muckle in hell , but they have a grand time here of it , whatever ! and the Lord forgie we ! 

 Weel , at the hinder end , we see the wee flag yirk up to the mast - heid upon the harbour rock . that be a Sandie wait for . he up wi the gun , take a deleeberate aim , an pu d the trigger . there cam a bang and then ae waefu skirl frae the Bass . and there be we rubbin our een and lookin at ither like daft folk . for wi the bang and the skirl the thing have clean disappear . the sun glintit , the wund blow , and there be the bare yaird whaur the wonder have be lowpe and flinging but ae second syne . 

 the hale way hame I roar and grat wi the terror o that dispensation . the grawn folk be nane sae muckle well ; there be little say in Sandie s boat but just the name of God ; and when we win in by the pier , the harbour rock be fair black wi the folk waitin we . it seem they have fund Lapraik in ane of his dwam , caw the shuttle and smile . ae lad they send to hoist the flag , and the rest abode there in the wabster s house . you may be sure they like it little ; but it be a means of grace to several that stand there pray in to themsel s   for nane care to pray out loud   and look on thon awesome thing as it caw the shuttle . Syne , upon a suddenty , and wi the ae dreidfu skelloch , Tod spring up frae his hinderland and fall forrit on the wab , a bluidy corp . 

 when the corp be examine the leid drap hadnae play buff upon the warlock s body ; sorrow a leid drap be to be fund ! but there be grandfaither s sill tester in the puddock s heart of he . 

 
 Andie have scarce do when there befell a mighty silly affair that have its consequence . Neil , as I have say , be himself a great narrator . I have hear since that he know all the story in the Highlands ; and think much of himself , and be think much of by other on the strength of it . now Andie s tale remind he of one he have already hear . 

 " she would ken that story afore , " he say . " she be the story of Uistean More M Gillie Phadrig and the Gavar Vore . " 

 " it be no sic a thing , " cry Andie . " it be the story of my faither   now wi God   and Tod Lapraik . and the same in your beard , " say he ; " and keep the tongue of ye inside your Hielant chaft ! " 

 in deal with Highlanders it will be find , and have be show in history , how well it go with Lowland gentlefolk ; but the thing appear scarce feasible for Lowland commons . I have already remark that Andie be continually on the point of quarrel with our three MacGregors , and now , sure enough , it be to come . 

 " Thir will be no word to use to shentleman , " say Neil . 

 " Shentlemans ! " cry Andie . " Shentlemans , ye hielant stot ! if God would give ye the grace to see yoursel the way that ither see ye , ye would throw your denner up . " 

 there come some kind of a Gaelic oath from Neil , and the black knife be in his hand that moment . 

 there be no time to think ; and I catch the Highlander by the leg , and have he down , and his armed hand pin out , before I know what I be do . his comrade spring to rescue he , Andie and I be without weapon , the Gregara three to two . it seem we be beyond salvation , when Neil scream in his own tongue , order the other back , and make his submission to myself in a manner the most abject , even give I up his knife which   upon a repetition of his promise   I return to he on the morrow . 

 two thing I see plain : the first , that I must not build too high on Andie , who have shrink against the wall and stand there , as pale as death , till the affair be over ; the second , the strength of my own position with the Highlanders , who must have receive extraordinary charge to be tender of my safety . but if I think Andie come not very well out in courage , I have no fault to find with he upon the account of gratitude . it be not so much that he trouble I with thank , as that his whole mind and manner appear change ; and as he preserve ever after a great timidity of our companion , he and I be yet more constantly together . 

 CHAPTER XVI the missing WITNESS 

 on the seventeenth , the day I be tryste with the Writer , I have much rebellion against fate . the thought of he wait in the King s Arms , and of what he would think , and what he would say when next we meet , torment and oppress I . the truth be unbelievable , so much I have to grant , and it seem cruel hard I should be post as a liar and a coward , and have never consciously omit what it be possible that I should do . I repeat this form of word with a kind of bitter relish , and re - examine in that light the step of my behaviour . it seem I have behave to James Stewart as a brother might ; all the past be a picture that I could be proud of , and there be only the present to consider . I could not swim the sea , nor yet fly in the air , but there be always Andie . I have do he a service , he like I ; I have a lever there to work on ; if it be just for decency , I must try once more with Andie . 

 it be late afternoon ; there be no sound in all the Bass but the lap and bubble of a very quiet sea ; and my four companion be all creep apart , the three macgregor high on the rock , and Andie with his Bible to a sunny place among the ruin ; there I find he in deep sleep , and , as soon as he be awake , appeal to he with some fervour of manner and a good show of argument . 

 " if I thoucht it be to do guid to ye , Shaws ! " say he , star at I over his spectacle . 

 " it s to save another , " say I , " and to redeem my word . what would be more good than that ? do ye no mind the scripture , Andie ? and you with the Book upon your lap ! what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world ? " 

 " ay , " say he , " that s grand for you . but where do I come in ! I have my word to redeem the same s yoursel . and what be ye ask I to do , but just to sell it ye for siller ? " 

 " Andie ! have I name the name of siller ? " cry I. 

 " Ou , the name s naethe " , say he ; " the thing be there , whatever . it just come to this ; if I be to service ye the way that you propose , I ll lose my lifelihood . then it s clear ye ll have to make it up to I , and a pickle mair , for your ain credit like . and what s that but just a bribe ? and if even I be certain of the bribe ! but by a that I can learn , it s far frae that ; and if you be to hang , where would I be ? na : the thing s no possible . and just awa wi ye like a bonny lad ! and let Andie read his chapter . " 

 I remember I be at bottom a good deal gratify with this result ; and the next humour I fall into be one   I have near say   of gratitude to Prestongrange , who have save I , in this violent , illegal manner , out of the midst of my danger , temptation , and perplexity . but this be both too flimsy and too cowardly to last I long , and the remembrance of James begin to succeed to the possession of my spirit . the 21st , the day set for the trial , I pass in such misery of mind as I can scarce recall to have endure , save perhaps upon Isle Earraid only . much of the time I lay on a brae - side betwixt sleep and wake , my body motionless , my mind full of violent thought . sometimes I sleep indeed ; but the court - house of Inverary and the prisoner glance on all side to find his miss witness , follow I in slumber ; and I would wake again with a start to darkness of spirit and distress of body . I think Andie seem to observe I , but I pay he little heed . verily , my bread be bitter to I , and my day a burthen . 

 early the next morning   Friday , 22nd   a boat come with provision , and Andie place a packet in my hand . the cover be without address but seal with a Government seal . it enclose two note . " Mr. Balfour can now see for himself it be too late to meddle . his conduct will be observe and his discretion reward . " so run the first , which seem to be laboriously writ with the left hand . there be certainly nothing in these expression to compromise the writer , even if that person could be find ; the seal , which formidably serve instead of signature , be affix to a separate sheet on which there be no scratch of writing ; and I have to confess that   so far   my adversary know what they be do , and to digest as well as I be able the threat that peep under the promise . 

 but the second enclosure be by far the more surprising . it be in a lady s hand of writ . " Maister Dauvit Balfour be inform a friend be speire for he and her eye be of the grey , " it run and seem so extraordinary a piece to come to my hand at such a moment and under cover of a Government seal , that I stand stupid . Catriona s grey eye shine in my remembrance . I think , with a bound of pleasure , she must be the friend . but who should the writer be , to have her billet thus enclose with Prestongrange s ? and of all wonder , why be it think needful to give I this pleasing but most inconsequent intelligence upon the Bass ? for the writer , I could hit upon none possible except Miss Grant . her family , I remember , have remark on Catriona s eye and even name she for their colour ; and she herself have be much in the habit to address I with a broad pronunciation , by way of a sniff , I suppose , at my rusticity . no doubt , besides , but she live in the same house as this letter come from . so there remain but one step to be account for ; and that be how Prestongrange should have permit she at all in an affair so secret , or let her daft - like billet go in the same cover with his own . but even here I have a glimmering . for , first of all , there be something rather alarming about the young lady , and papa might be more under her domination than I know . and , second , there be the man s continual policy to be remember , how his conduct have be continually mingle with caress , and he have scarce ever , in the midst of so much contention , lay aside a mask of friendship . he must conceive that my imprisonment have incense I . perhaps this little jesting , friendly message be intend to disarm my rancour ? 

 I will be honest and I think it do . I feel a sudden warmth towards that beautiful Miss Grant , that she should stoop to so much interest in my affair . the summoning up of Catriona move I of itself to milder and more cowardly counsel . if the Advocate know of she and our acquaintance if I should please he by some of that " discretion " at which his letter point to what might not this lead ! in vain be the net prepare in the sight of any fowl , the scripture say . well , fowl must be wise than folk ! for I think I perceive the policy , and yet fall in with it . 

 I be in this frame , my heart beat , the grey eye plain before I like two star , when Andie break in upon my musing . 

 " I see ye have get guid news , " say he . 

 I find he look curiously in my face ; with that there come before I like a vision of James Stewart and the court of Inverary ; and my mind turn at once like a door upon its hinge . trial , I reflect , sometimes draw out long than be look for . even if I come to Inverary just too late , something might yet be attempt in the interest of James and in those of my own character , the good would be accomplish . in a moment , it seem without thought , I have a plan devise . 

 " Andie , " say I , " be it still to be to - morrow ? " 

 he tell I nothing be change . 

 " be anything say about the hour ? " I ask . 

 he tell I it be to be two o clock afternoon . 

 " and about the place ? " I pursue . 

 " Whatten place ? " say Andie . 

 " the place I be to be land at ? " say I. 

 he own there be nothing as to that . 

 " very well , then , " I say , " this shall be mine to arrange . the wind be in the east , my road lie westward : keep your boat , I hire it ; let we work up the Forth all day ; and land I at two o clock to - morrow at the westmost we ll can have reach . " 

 " Ye daft callant ! " he cry ; " ye would try for Inverary after a ! " 

 " just that , Andie , " say I. 

 " Weel , ye re ill to beat ! " say he . " and I be a kind o sorry for ye a day yesterday , " he add . " ye see , I be never entirely sure till then , which way of it ye really wantit . " 

 here be a spur to a lame horse ! 

 " a word in your ear , Andie , " say I. " this plan of mine have another advantage yet . we can leave these Hielandman behind we on the rock , and one of your boat from the Castleton can bring they off to - morrow . Yon Neil have a queer eye when he regard you ; maybe , if I be once out of the gate there might be knife again ; these red - shank be unco grudgeful . and if there should come to be any question , here be your excuse . our life be in danger by these savage ; be answerable for my safety , you choose the part to bring I from their neighbourhood and detain I the rest of the time on board your boat : and do you know , Andie ? " say I , with a smile , " I think it be very wisely choose . " 

 " the truth be I have nae goo for Neil , " say Andie , " nor he for I , I m think ; and I would like ill to come to my hand wi the man . Tam Anster will make a well hand of it with the cattle onyway . "   for this man , anster , come from Fife , where the Gaelic be still speak .   " ay , ay ! " say Andie , " Tam ll can deal with they the good . and troth ! the mair I think of it , the less I see we would be require . the place ay , feggs ! they have forget the place . eh , Shaws , ye re a lang - heided chield when ye like ! Forby that I m awe ye my life , " he add , with more solemnity , and offer I his hand upon the bargain . 

 Whereupon , with scarce more word , we step suddenly on board the boat , cast off , and set the lug . the Gregara be then busy upon breakfast , for the cookery be their usual part ; but , one of they step to the battlement , our flight be observe before we be twenty fathom from the rock ; and the three of they run about the ruin and the landing - shelf , for all the world like ant about a broken nest , hail and cry on we to return . we be still in both the lee and the shadow of the rock , which last lie broad upon the water , but presently come forth in almost the same moment into the wind and sunshine ; the sail fill , the boat heel to the gunwale , and we sweep immediately beyond sound of the man s voice . to what terror they endure upon the rock , where they be now desert without the countenance of any civilised person or so much as the protection of a Bible , no limit can be set ; nor have they any brandy leave to be their consolation , for even in the haste and secrecy of our departure Andie have manage to remove it . 

 it be our first care to set anster ashore in a cove by the Glenteithy Rocks , so that the deliverance of our maroon might be duly see to the next day . thence we keep away up Firth . the breeze , which be then so spirited , swiftly decline , but never wholly fail we . all day we keep move , though often not much more ; and it be after dark ere we be up with the Queensferry . to keep the letter of Andie s engagement   or what be leave of it   I must remain on board , but I think no harm to communicate with the shore in writing . on Prestongrange s cover , where the Government seal must have a good deal surprise my correspondent , I writ , by the boat s lantern , a few necessary word , aboard and Andie carry they to Rankeillor . in about an hour he come again , with a purse of money and the assurance that a good horse should be stand saddle for I by two to - morrow at Clackmannan Pool . this do , and the boat rid by her stone anchor , we lie down to sleep under the sail . 

 we be in the Pool the next day long ere two ; and there be nothing leave for I but to sit and wait . I feel little alacrity upon my errand . I would have be glad of any passable excuse to lay it down ; but none be to be find , my uneasiness be no less great than if I have be run to some desire pleasure . by shortly after one the horse be at the waterside , and I could see a man walk it to and fro till I should land , which vastly swell my impatience . Andie run the moment of my liberation very fine , show himself a man of his bare word , but scarce serve his employer with a heap measure ; and by about fifty second after two I be in the saddle and on the full stretch for Stirling . in a little more than an hour I have pass that town , and be already mount Alan Water side , when the weather break in a small tempest . the rain blind I , the wind have nearly beat I from the saddle , and the first darkness of the night surprise I in a wilderness still some way east of Balwhidder , not very sure of my direction and mount on a horse that begin already to be weary . 

 in the press of my hurry , and to be spar the delay and annoyance of a guide , I have follow   so far as it be possible for any horseman   the line of my journey with Alan . this I do with open eye , foresee a great risk in it , which the temp have now bring to a reality . the last that I know of where I be , I think it must have be about Uam Var ; the hour perhaps six at night . I must still think it great good fortune that I get about eleven to my destination , the house of Duncan Dhu . where I have wander in the interval perhaps the horse could tell . I know we be twice down , and once over the saddle and for a moment carry away in a roaring burn . steed and rider be bemire up to the eye . 

 from Duncan I have news of the trial . it be follow in all these Highland region with religious interest ; news of it spread from Inverary as swift as man could travel ; and I be rejoice to learn that , up to a late hour that Saturday it be not yet conclude ; and all man begin to suppose it must spread over the Monday . under the spur of this intelligence I would not sit to eat ; but , Duncan have agree to be my guide , take the road again on foot , with the piece in my hand and munching as I go . Duncan bring with he a flask of usquebaugh and a hand - lantern ; which last enlighten we just so long as we could find house where to rekindle it , for the thing leak outrageously and blow out with every gust . the more part of the night we walk blindfold among sheet of rain , and day find we aimless on the mountain . hard by we strike a hut on a burn - side , where we get bite and a direction ; and , a little before the end of the sermon , come to the kirk door of Inverary . 

 the rain have somewhat wash the upper part of I , but I be still bogge as high as to the knee ; I stream water ; I be so weary I could hardly limp , and my face be like a ghost s. I stand certainly more in need of a change of raiment and a bed to lie on , than of all the benefit in Christianity . for all which   be persuade the chief point for I be to make myself immediately public   I set the door of the church with the dirty Duncan at my tail , and find a vacant place sit down . 

 " thirteently , my brother , and in parenthesis , the law itself must be regard as a means of grace , " the minister be say , in the voice of one delight to pursue an argument . 

 the sermon be in English on account of the assize . the judge be present with their armed attendant , the halbert glitter in a corner by the door , and the seat be throng beyond custom with the array of lawyer . the text be in Romans 5th and 13th the minister a skilled hand ; and the whole of that able churchful from Argyle , and my Lords Elchies and Kilkerran , down to the halbertman that come in their attendance be sink with gather brow in a profound critical attention . the minister himself and a sprinkling of those about the door observe our entrance at the moment and immediately forget the same ; the rest either do not hear or would not hear or would not be hear ; and I sit amongst my friend and enemy unremarked . 

 the first that I single out be Prestongrange . he sit well forward , like an eager horseman in the saddle , his lip move with relish , his eye glue on the minister ; the doctrine be clearly to his mind . Charles Stewart , on the other hand , be half asleep , and look harassed and pale . as for Simon Fraser , he appear like a blot , and almost a scandal , in the midst of that attentive congregation , dig his hand in his pocket , shift his leg , clear his throat , and roll up his bald eyebrow and shoot out his eye to right and leave , now with a yawn , now with a secret smile . at time , too , he would take the Bible in front of he , run it through , seem to read a bit , run it through again , and stop and yawn prodigiously : the whole as if for exercise . 

 in the course of this restlessness his eye alight on myself . he sit a second stupefy , then tear a half - leaf out of the Bible , scrawl upon it with a pencil , and pass it with a whisper word to his next neighbour . the note come to Prestongrange , who give I but the one look ; thence it voyage to the hand of Mr. Erskine ; thence again to Argyle , where he sit between the other two lord of session , and his grace turn and fix I with an arrogant eye . the last of those interested in my presence be Charlie Stewart , and he too begin to pencil and hand about dispatch , none of which I be able to trace to their destination in the crowd . 

 but the passage of these note have arouse notice ; all who be in the secret   or suppose themselves to be so   be whisper information the rest question ; and the minister himself seem quite discountenance by the flutter in the church and sudden stir and whispering . his voice change , he plainly falter , nor do he again recover the easy conviction and full tone of his delivery . it would be a puzzle to he till his die day , why a sermon that have go with triumph through four part , should thus miscarry in the fifth . 

 as for I , I continue to sit there , very wet and weary , and a good deal anxious as to what should happen next , but greatly exult in my success . 

 chapter XVII the MEMORIAL 

 the last word of the blessing be scarce out of the minister s mouth before Stewart have I by the arm . we be the first to be forth of the church , and he make such extraordinary expedition that we be safe within the four wall of a house before the street have begin to be throng with the home - go congregation . 

 " be I yet in time ? " I ask . 

 " ay and no , " say he . " the case be over ; the jury be enclose , and will so kind as let we ken their view of it to - morrow in the morning , the same as I could have tell it my own self three day ago before the play begin . the thing have be public from the start . the panel ken it , Ye may do what ye will for I , whisper he two day ago . ye ken my fate by what the Duke of Argyle have just say to Mr. Macintosh . o , it s be a scandal ! 

 " the great Agyle he gae before , 
 he gart the cannon and gun to roar , " 

 and the very macer cry Cruachan ! but now that I have get you again I ll never despair . the oak shall go over the myrtle yet ; we ll de the Campbells yet in their own town . praise God that I should see the day ! " 

 he be leap with excitement , empty out his mail upon the floor that I might have a change of clothe , and incommode I with his assistance as I change . what remain to be do , or how I be to do it , be what he never tell I nor , I believe , so much as thought of . " we ll de the Campbells yet ! " that be still his overcome . and it be force home upon my mind how this , that have the external of a sober process of law , be in its essence a clan battle between savage clan . I think my friend the Writer none of the least savage . who that have only see he at a counsel s back before the Lord Ordinary or follow a golf ball and lay down his club on Bruntsfield link , could have recognise for the same person this voluble and violent clansman ? 

 James Stewart s counsel be four in number Sheriffs Brown of Colstoun and Miller , Mr. Robert Macintosh , and Mr. Stewart younger of Stewart Hall . these be covenant to dine with the Writer after sermon , and I be very obligingly include of the party . no soon the cloth lift , and the first bowl very artfully compound by Sheriff Miller , than we fall to the subject in hand . I make a short narration of my seizure and captivity , and be then examine and re - examine upon the circumstance of the murder . it will be remember this be the first time I have have my say out , or the matter at all handle , among lawyer ; and the consequence be very dispiriting to the other and   I must own   disappointing to myself . 

 " to sum up , " say Colstoun , " you prove that Alan be on the spot ; you have hear he proffer menace against Glenure ; and though you assure we he be not the man who fire , you leave a strong impression that he be in league with he , and consent , perhaps immediately assist , in the act . you show he besides , at the risk of his own liberty , actively further the criminal s escape . and the rest of your testimony   so far as the least material   depend on the bare word of Alan or of James , the two accuse . in short , you do not at all break , but only lengthen by one personage , the chain that bind our client to the murderer ; and I need scarcely say that the introduction of a third accomplice rather aggravate that appearance of a conspiracy which have be our stumble block from the beginning . " 

 " I be of the same opinion , " say Sheriff Miller . " I think we may all be very much oblige to Prestongrange for take a most uncomfortable witness out of our way . and chiefly , I think , Mr. Balfour himself might be oblige . for you talk of a third accomplice , but Mr. Balfour   in my view   have very much the appearance of a fourth . " 

 " allow I , sir ! " interpose Stewart the Writer . " there be another view . here we have a witness never fash whether material or not a witness in this cause , kidnap by that old , lawless , bandit crew of the Glengyle Macgregors , and sequester for near upon a month in a bourock of old ruin on the Bass . move that and see what dirt you fle on the proceeding ! sir , this be a tale to make the world ring with ! it would be strange , with such a grip as this , if we couldnae squeeze out a pardon for my client . " 

 " and suppose we take up Mr. Balfour s cause to - morrow ? " say Stewart Hall . " I be much deceive or we should find so many impediment throw in our path , as that James should have be hang before we have find a court to hear we . this be a great scandal , but I suppose we have none of we forget a great still , I mean the matter of the Lady Grange . the woman be still in durance ; my friend Mr. Hope of Rankeillor do what be humanly possible ; and how do he speed ? he never get a warrant ! well , it ll be the same now ; the same weapon will be use . this be a scene , gentleman , of clan animosity . the hatred of the name which I have the honour to bear , rage in high quarter . there be nothing here to be view but naked Campbell spite and scurvy Campbell intrigue . " 

 you may be sure this be to touch a welcome topic , and I sit for some time in the midst of my learn counsel , almost deaved with their talk but extremely little the wiser for its purport . the Writer be lead into some hot expression ; Colstoun must take he up and set he right ; the rest join in on different side , but all pretty noisy ; the Duke of Argyle be beat like a blanket ; King George come in for a few dig in the by - going and a great deal of rather elaborate defence ; and there be only one person that seem to be forget , and that be James of the Glens . 

 through all this Mr. Miller sit quiet . he be a slip of an oldish gentleman , ruddy and twinkling ; he speak in a smooth rich voice , with an infinite effect of pawkiness , deal out each word the way an actor do , to give the most expression possible ; and even now , when he be silent , and sit there with his wig lay aside , his glass in both hand , his mouth funnily purse , and his chin out , he seem the mere picture of a merry slyness . it be plain he have a word to say , and wait for the fit occasion . 

 it come presently . Colstoun have wind up one of his speech with some expression of their duty to their client . his brother sheriff be pleased , I suppose , with the transition . he take the table in his confidence with a gesture and a look . 

 " that suggest to I a consideration which seem overlook , " say he . " the interest of our client go certainly before all , but the world do not come to an end with James Stewart . " whereat he cock his eye . " I might condescend , exempli gratia , upon a Mr. George Brown , a Mr. Thomas Miller , and a Mr. David Balfour . Mr. David Balfour have a very good ground of complaint , and I think , gentleman if his story be properly redd out I think there would be a number of wig on the green . " 

 the whole table turn to he with a common movement . 

 " properly handle and carefully redd out , his be a story that could scarcely fail to have some consequence , " he continue . " the whole administration of justice , from its high officer downward , would be totally discredit ; and it look to I as if they would need to be replace . " he seem to shine with cunning as he say it . " and I need not point out to ye that this of Mr. Balfour s would be a remarkable bonny cause to appear in , " he add . 

 well , there they all be start on another hare ; Mr. Balfour s cause , and what kind of speech could be there deliver , and what official could be thus turn out , and who would succeed to their position . I shall give but the two specimen . it be propose to approach Simon Fraser , whose testimony , if it could be obtain , would prove certainly fatal to Argyle and to Prestongrange . Miller highly approve of the attempt . " we have here before we a dreepe roast , " say he , " here be cut - and - come - again for all . " and methought all lick their lip . the other be already near the end . Stewart the Writer be out of the body with delight , smell vengeance on his chief enemy , the Duke . 

 " gentleman , " cry he , charge his glass , " here be to Sheriff Miller . his legal ability be know to all . his culinary , this bowl in front of we be here to speak for . but when it come to the poleetical ! " cry he , and drain the glass . 

 " ay , but it will hardly prove politic in your meaning , my friend , " say the gratified Miller . " a revolution , if you like , and I think I can promise you that historical writer shall date from Mr. Balfour s cause . but properly guide , Mr. Stewart , tenderly guide , it shall prove a peaceful revolution . " 

 " and if the damned campbell get their ear rub , what care I ? " cry Stewart , smite down his fist . 

 it will be think I be not very well pleased with all this , though I could scarce forbear smile at a kind of innocency in these old intriguer . but it be not my view to have undergo so many sorrow for the advancement of Sheriff Miller or to make a revolution in the Parliament House : and I interpose accordingly with as much simplicity of manner as I could assume . 

 " I have to thank you , gentleman , for your advice , " say I. " and now I would like , by your leave , to set you two or three question . there be one thing that have fall rather on one aide , for instance : will this cause do any good to our friend James of the Glens ? " 

 they seem all a hair set back , and give various answer , but concur practically in one point , that James have now no hope but in the King s mercy . 

 " to proceed , then , " say I , " will it do any good to Scotland ? we have a saying that it be an ill bird that foul his own nest . I remember hear we have a riot in Edinburgh when I be an infant child , which give occasion to the late Queen to call this country barbarous ; and I always understand that we have rather lose than gain by that . then come the year forty - five , which make Scotland to be talk of everywhere ; but I never hear it say we have anyway gain by the Forty - five . and now we come to this cause of Mr. Balfour s , as you call it . Sheriff Miller tell we historical writer be to date from it , and I would not wonder . it be only my fear they would date from it as a period of calamity and public reproach . " 

 the nimble - witted Miller have already smell where I be travel to , and make haste to get on the same road . " forcibly put , Mr. Balfour , " say he . " a weighty observe , sir . " 

 " we have next to ask ourselves if it will be good for King George , " I pursue . " Sheriff Miller appear pretty easy upon this ; but I doubt you will scarce be able to pull down the house from under he , without his Majesty come by a knock or two , one of which might easily prove fatal . " 

 I give they a chance to answer , but none volunteer . 

 " of those for whom the case be to be profitable , " I go on , " Sheriff Miller give we the name of several , among the which he be good enough to mention mine . I hope he will pardon I if I think otherwise . I believe I hang not the least back in this affair while there be life to be save ; but I own I think myself extremely hazard , and I own I think it would be a pity for a young man , with some idea of come to the Bar , to ingrain upon himself the character of a turbulent , factious fellow before he be yet twenty . as for James , it seem at this date of the proceeding , with the sentence as good as pronounce he have no hope but in the King s mercy . may not his Majesty , then , be more pointedly address , the character of these high officer shelter from the public , and myself keep out of a position which I think spell ruin for I ? " 

 they all sit and gaze into their glass , and I could see they find my attitude on the affair unpalatable . but Miller be ready at all event . 

 " if I may be allow to put my young friend s notion in more formal shape , " say he , " I understand he to propose that we should embody the fact of his sequestration , and perhaps some head of the testimony he be prepared to offer , in a memorial to the Crown . this plan have element of success . it be as likely as any other   and perhaps likeli   to help our client . perhaps his Majesty would have the goodness to feel a certain gratitude to all concerned in such a memorial , which might be construe into an expression of a very delicate loyalty ; and I think , in the drafting of the same , this view might be bring forward . " 

 they all nod to each other , not without sigh , for the former alternative be doubtless more after their inclination . 

 " Paper , then , Mr. Stewart , if you please , " pursue Miller ; " and I think it might very fittingly be sign by the five of we here present , as procurator for the condemn man . " 

 " it can do none of we any harm , at least , " say Colstoun , heave another sigh , for he have see himself Lord Advocate the last ten minute . 

 thereupon they set themselves , not very enthusiastically , to draft the memorial a process in the course of which they soon catch fire ; and I have no more ado but to sit look on and answer an occasional question . the paper be very well express ; begin with a recitation of the fact about myself , the reward offer for my apprehension , my surrender , the pressure bring to bear upon I ; my sequestration ; and my arrival at Inverary in time to be too late ; go on to explain the reason of loyalty and public interest for which it be agree to waive any right of action ; and wind up with a forcible appeal to the King s mercy on behalf of James . 

 methought I be a good deal sacrifice , and rather represent in the light of a firebrand of a fellow whom my cloud of lawyer have restrain with difficulty from extreme . but I let it pass , and make but the one suggestion , that I should be describe as ready to deliver my own evidence and adduce that of other before any commission of inquiry and the one demand , that I should be immediately furnish with a copy . 

 Colstoun hummed and hawed . " this be a very confidential document , " say he . 

 " and my position towards Prestongrange be highly peculiar , " I reply . " no question but I must have touch his heart at our first interview , so that he have since stand my friend consistently . but for he , gentleman , I must now be lie dead or await my sentence alongside poor James . for which reason I choose to communicate to he the fact of this memorial as soon as it be copy . you be to consider also that this step will make for my protection . I have enemy here accustom to drive hard ; his grace be in his own country , Lovat by his side ; and if there should hang any ambiguity over our proceeding I think I might very well awake in gaol . " 

 not find any very ready answer to these consideration , my company of adviser be at the last persuade to consent , and make only this condition that I be to lay the paper before Prestongrange with the express compliment of all concern . 

 the Advocate be at the castle dining with his grace . by the hand of one of Colstoun s servant I send he a billet ask for an interview , and receive a summon to meet he at once in a private house of the town . here I find he alone in a chamber ; from his face there be nothing to be glean ; yet I be not so unobservant but what I spy some halbert in the hall , and not so stupid but what I could gather he be prepared to arrest I there and then , should it appear advisable . 

 " so , Mr. David , this be you ? " say he . 

 " where I fear I be not overly welcome , my lord , " say I. " and I would like before I go far to express my sense of your lordship s good office , even should they now cease . " 

 " I have hear of your gratitude before , " he reply drily , " and I think this can scarce be the matter you call I from my wine to listen to . I would remember also , if I be you , that you still stand on a very boggy foundation . " 

 " not now , my lord , I think , " say I ; " and if your lordship will but glance an eye along this , you will perhaps think as I do . " 

 he read it sedulously through , frown heavily ; then turn back to one part and another which he seem to weigh and compare the effect of . his face a little lightened . 

 " this be not so bad but what it might be bad , " say he ; " though I be still likely to pay dear for my acquaintance with Mr. David Balfour . " 

 " rather for your indulgence to that unlucky young man , my lord , " say I. 

 he still skim the paper , and all the while his spirit seem to mend . 

 " and to whom be I indebted for this ? " he ask presently . " other counsel must have be discuss , I think . who be it propose this private method ? be it Miller ? " 

 " my lord , it be myself , " say I. " these gentleman have show I no such consideration , as that I should deny myself any credit I can fairly claim , or spare they any responsibility they should properly bear . and the mere truth be , that they be all in favour of a process which should have remarkable consequence in the Parliament House , and prove for they   in one of their own expression   a dripping roast . before I intervene , I think they be on the point of share out the different law appointment . our friend Mr. Simon be to be take in upon some composition . " 

 Prestongrange smile . " these be our friend , " say he . " and what be your reason for dissent , Mr. David ? " 

 I tell they without concealment , express , however , with more force and volume those which regard Prestongrange himself . 

 " you do I no more than justice , " say he . " I have fight as hard in your interest as you have fight against mine . and how come you here to - day ? " he ask . " as the case draw out , I begin to grow uneasy that I have clip the period so fine , and I be even expect you to - morrow . but to - day I never dream of it . " 

 I be not of course , go to betray Andie . 

 " I suspect there be some very weary cattle by the road , " say I. 

 " if I have know you be such a mosstrooper you should have taste long of the Bass , " say he . 

 " speak of which , my lord , I return your letter . " and I give he the enclosure in the counterfeit hand . 

 " there be the cover also with the seal , " say he . 

 " I have it not , " say I. " it bear not even an address , and could not compromise a cat . the second enclosure I have , and with your permission , I desire to keep it . " 

 I think he wince a little , but he say nothing to the point . " to - morrow , " he resume , " our business here be to be finish , and I proceed by Glasgow . I would be very glad to have you of my party , Mr David . " 

 " my lord . . . " I begin . 

 " I do not deny it will be of service to I , " he interrupt . " I desire even that , when we shall come to Edinburgh , you should alight at my house . you have very warm friend in the Miss Grants , who will be overjoy to have you to themselves . if you think I have be of use to you , you can thus easily repay I , and so far from lose , may reap some advantage by the way . it be not every strange young man who be present in society by the King s Advocate . " 

 often enough already   in our brief relation   this gentleman have cause my head to spin ; no doubt but what for a moment he do so again now . here be the old fiction still maintain of my particular favour with his daughter , one of whom have be so good as to laugh at I , while the other two have scarce deign to remark the fact of my existence . and now I be to ride with my lord to Glasgow ; I be to dwell with he in Edinburgh ; I be to be bring into society under his protection ! that he should have so much good - nature as to forgive I be surprising enough ; that he could wish to take I up and serve I seem impossible ; and I begin to seek some ulterior meaning . one be plain . if I become his guest , repentance be exclude ; I could never think well of my present design and bring any action . and besides , would not my presence in his house draw out the whole pungency of the memorial ? for that complaint could not be very seriously regard , if the person chiefly injure be the guest of the official most incriminated . as I think upon this I could not quite refrain from smile . 

 " this be in the nature of a countercheck to the memorial ? " say I. 

 " you be cunne , Mr. David , " say he , " and you do not wholly guess wrong the fact will be of use to I in my defence . perhaps , however , you underrate friendly sentiment , which be perfectly genuine . I have a respect for you , David , mingle with awe , " say he , smile . 

 " I be more than willing , I be earnestly desirous to meet your wish , " say i. " it be my design to be call to the Bar , where your lordship s countenance would be invaluable ; and I be besides sincerely grateful to yourself and family for different mark of interest and of indulgence . the difficulty be here . there be one point in which we pull two way . you be try to hang James Stewart , I be try to save he . in so far as my riding with you would better your lordship s defence , I be at your lordship order ; but in so far as it would help to hang James Stewart , you see I at a stick . " 

 I think he swear to himself . " you should certainly be call ; the Bar be the true scene for your talent , " say he , bitterly , and then fall a while silent . " I will tell you , " he presently resume , " there be no question of James Stewart , for or against , James be a dead man ; his life be give and take buy   if you like it well   and sell ; no memorial can help no defalcation of a faithful Mr. David hurt he . blow high , blow low , there will be no pardon for James Stewart : and take that for say ! the question be now of myself : be I to stand or fall ? and I do not deny to you that I be in some danger . but will Mr. David Balfour consider why ? it be not because I push the case unduly against James ; for that , I be sure of condonation . and it be not because I have sequester Mr. David on a rock , though it will pass under that colour ; but because I do not take the ready and plain path , to which I be press repeatedly , and send Mr. David to his grave or to the gallow . hence the scandal hence this damned memorial , " strike the paper on his leg . " my tenderness for you have bring I in this difficulty . I wish to know if your tenderness to your own conscience be too great to let you help I out of it . " 

 no doubt but there be much of the truth in what he say ; if James be past helping , whom be it more natural that I should turn to help than just the man before I , who have help myself so often , and be even now set I a pattern of patience ? I be besides not only weary , but begin to be ashamed , of my perpetual attitude of suspicion and refusal . 

 " if you will name the time and place , I will be punctually ready to attend your lordship , " say I. 

 he shake hand with I . " and I think my miss have some news for you , " say he , dismiss I . 

 I come away , vastly pleased to have my peace make , yet a little concerned in conscience ; nor could I help wonder , as I go back , whether , perhaps , I have not be a scruple too good - natured . but there be the fact , that this be a man that might have be my father , an able man , a great dignitary , and one that , in the hour of my need , have reach a hand to my assistance . I be in the well humour to enjoy the remainder of that evening , which I pass with the advocate , in excellent company no doubt , but perhaps with rather more than a sufficiency of punch : for though I go early to bed I have no clear mind of how I get there . 

 CHAPTER xviii the TEE D ball 

 on the morrow , from the justice private room , where none could see I , I hear the verdict give in and judgment render upon James . the Duke s word I be quite sure I have correctly ; and since that famous passage have be make a subject of dispute , I may as well commemorate my version . have refer to the year 45 , the chief of the Campbells , sit as Justice - General upon the bench , thus address the unfortunate Stewart before he : " if you have be successful in that rebellion , you might have be give the law where you have now receive the judgment of it ; we , who be this day your judge , might have be try before one of your mock court of judicature ; and then you might have be satiate with the blood of any name or clan to which you have an aversion . " 

 " this be to let the cat out of the bag , indeed , " think I. and that be the general impression . it be extraordinary how the young advocate lad take hold and make a mock of this speech , and how scarce a meal pass but what someone would get in the word : " and then you might have be satiate . " many song be make in time for the hour s diversion , and be near all forgot . I remember one begin : 

 " what do ye want the bluid of , bluid of ? 
 be it a name , or be it a clan , 
 or be it an aefauld Hielandman , 
 that ye want the bluid of , bluid of ? " 

 another go to my old favourite air , the House of Airlie , and begin thus : 

 " it fall on a day when Argyle be on the bench , 
 that they serve he a Stewart for his denner . " 

 and one of the verse run : 

 " then up and spak the Duke , and flyte on his cook , 
 I regard it as a sensible aspersion , 
 that I would sup ava , an satiate my maw , 
 with the bluid of ony clan of my aversion . " 

 James be as fairly murder as though the Duke have get a fowling - piece and stalk he . so much of course I know : but other know not so much , and be more affect by the item of scandal that come to light in the progress of the cause . one of the chief be certainly this sally of the justice s. it be run hard by another of a juryman , who have strike into the midst of Coulston s speech for the defence with a " Pray , sir , cut it short , we be quite weary , " which seem the very excess of impudence and simplicity . but some of my new lawyer friend be still more staggered with an innovation that have disgrace and even vitiate the proceeding . one witness be never call . his name , indeed , be print , where it may still be see on the fourth page of the list : " James Drummond , alias Macgregor , alia James More , late tenant in inveronachile " ; and his precognition have be take , as the manner be , in writing . he have remember or invent   God help he   matter which be lead in James Stewart s shoe , and I see be like to prove wing to his own . this testimony it be highly desirable to bring to the notice of the jury , without expose the man himself to the peril of cross - examination ; and the way it be bring about be a matter of surprise to all . for the paper be hand round   like a curiosity   in court ; pass through the jury - box , where it do its work ; and disappear again   as though by accident   before it reach the counsel for the prisoner . this be count a most insidious device ; and that the name of James More should be mingle up with it fill I with shame for Catriona and concern for myself . 

 the following day , Prestongrange and I , with a considerable company , set out for Glasgow , where   to my impatience   we continue to linger some time in a mixture of pleasure and affair . I lodge with my lord , with whom I be encourage to familiarity ; have my place at entertainment ; be present to the chief guest ; and altogether make more of than I think accord either with my part or station ; so that , on stranger be present , I would often blush for Prestongrange . it must be own the view I have take of the world in these last month be fit to cast a gloom upon my character . I have meet many man , some of they leader in Israel whether by their birth or talent ; and who among they all have show clean hand ? as for the Browns and Millers , I have see their self - seeking , I could never again respect they . Prestongrange be the good yet ; he have save I , spar I rather , when other have it in their mind to murder I outright ; but the blood of James lie at his door ; and I think his present dissimulation with myself a thing below pardon . that he should affect to find pleasure in my discourse almost surprise I out of my patience . I would sit and watch he with a kind of a slow fire of anger in my bowel . " ah , friend , friend , " I would think to myself , " if you be but through with this affair of the memorial , would you not kick I in the street ? " here I do he , as event have prove , the most grave injustice ; and I think he be at once far more sincere , and a far more artful performer , than I suppose . 

 but I have some warrant for my incredulity in the behaviour of that court of young advocate that hang about in the hope of patronage . the sudden favour of a lad not previously hear of troubled they at first out of measure ; but two day be not go by before I find myself surround with flattery and attention . I be the same young man , and neither well nor bonnier , that they have reject a month before ; and now there be no civility too fine for I ! the same , do I say ? it be not so ; and the by - name by which I go behind my back confirm it . see I so firm with the Advocate , and persuade that I be to fly high and far , they have take a word from the golfing green , and call I the Tee d Ball .   14   I be tell I be now " one of themselves " ; I be to taste of their soft lining , who have already make my own experience of the roughness of the outer husk ; and one , to whom I have be present in Hope Park , be so aspired as even to remind I of that meeting . I tell he I have not the pleasure of remember it . 

 " why " say he , " it be Miss Grant herself present I ! my name be so - and - so . " 

 " it may very well be , sir , " say I ; " but I have keep no mind of it . " 

 at which he desist ; and in the midst of the disgust that commonly overflow my spirit I have a glisk of pleasure . 

 but I have not patience to dwell upon that time at length . when I be in company with these young politic I be bear down with shame for myself and my own plain way , and scorn for they and their duplicity . of the two evil , I think Prestongrange to be the least ; and while I be always as stiff as buckram to the young blood , I make rather a dissimulation of my hard feeling towards the Advocate , and be   in old Mr. Campbell s word   " soople to the laird . " himself comment on the difference , and bid I be more of my age , and make friend with my young comrade . 

 I tell he I be slow of make friend . 

 " I will take the word back , " say he . " but there be such a thing as Fair gude s en and fair gude day , Mr. David . these be the same young man with whom you be to pass your day and get through life : your backwardness have a look of arrogance ; and unless you can assume a little more lightness of manner , I fear you will meet difficulty in the path . " 

 " it will be an ill job to make a silk purse of a sow s ear , " say I. 

 on the morning of October 1st I be awaken by the clattering in of an express ; and get to my window almost before he have dismount , I see the messenger have ride hard . Somewhile after I be call to Prestongrange , where he be sit in his bedgown and nightcap , with his letter round he . 

 " Mr. David , " add he , " I have a piece of news for you . it concern some friend of your , of whom I sometimes think you be a little ashamed , for you have never refer to their existence . " 

 I suppose I blush . 

 " see you understand , since you make the answer signal , " say he . " and I must compliment you on your excellent taste in beauty . but do you know , Mr. David ? this seem to I a very enterprising lass . she crop up from every side . the Government of Scotland appear unable to proceed for Mistress Katrine Drummond , which be somewhat the case   no great while back   with a certain Mr. David Balfour . should not these make a good match ? her first intromission in politic but I must not tell you that story , the authority have decide you be to hear it otherwise and from a lively narrator . this new example be more serious , however ; and I be afraid I must alarm you with the intelligence that she be now in prison . " 

 I cry out . 

 " yes , " say he , " the little lady be in prison . but I would not have you to despair . unless you   with your friend and memorial   shall procure my downfall , she be to suffer nothing . " 

 " but what have she do ? what be her offence ? " I cry . 

 " it might be almost construe a high treason , " he return , " for she have break the king s Castle of Edinburgh . " 

 " the lady be much my friend , " I say . " I know you would not mock I if the thing be serious . " 

 " and yet it be serious in a sense , " say he ; " for this rogue of a Katrine or Cateran , as we may call she have set adrift again upon the world that very doubtful character , her papa . " 

 here be one of my prevision justify : James More be once again at liberty . he have lend his man to keep I a prisoner ; he have volunteer his testimony in the Appin case , and the same   no matter by what subterfuge   have be employ to influence the jury . now come his reward , and he be free . it might please the authority to give to it the colour of an escape ; but I know well I know it must be the fulfilment of a bargain . the same course of thought relieve I of the least alarm for Catriona . she might be think to have break prison for her father ; she might have believe so herself . but the chief hand in the whole business be that of Prestongrange ; and I be sure , so far from let she come to punishment , he would not suffer she to be even try . Whereupon thus come out of I the not very politic ejaculation : 

 " ah ! I be expect that ! " 

 " you have at time a great deal of discretion , too ! " say Prestongrange . 

 " and what be my lord please to mean by that ? " I ask . 

 " I be just marvel " , he reply , " that be so clever as to draw these inference , you should not be clever enough to keep they to yourself . but I think you would like to hear the detail of the affair . I have receive two version : and the least official be the more full and far the more entertaining , be from the lively pen of my eld daughter . here be all the town bizzing with a fine piece of work , she write , and what would make the thing more note   if it be only know   the malefactor be a protăšgăše of his lordship my papa . I be sure your heart be too much in your duty   if it be nothing else   to have forget Grey Eyes . what do she do , but get a broad hat with the flap open , a long hairy - like man s greatcoat , and a big gravatt ; kilt her coat up to Gude ken whaur , clap two pair of boot - hose upon her leg , take a pair of clout brogue   15   in her hand , and off to the Castle ! here she give herself out to be a soutar   16   in the employ of James More , and get admit to his cell , the lieutenant   who seem to have be full of pleasantry   make sport among his soldier of the soutar s greatcoat . presently they hear disputation and the sound of blow inside . out fly the cobbler , his coat fly , the flap of his hat beat about his face , and the lieutenant and his soldier mock at he as he run off . they laugh no so hearty the next time they have occasion to visit the cell and find nobody but a tall , pretty , grey - eyed lass in the female habit ! as for the cobbler , he be over the hill ayout Dumblane , and it s think that poor Scotland will have to console herself without he . I drink Catriona s health this night in public . indeed , the whole town admire she ; and I think the beaux would wear bit of her garter in their button - hole if they could only get they . I would have go to visit she in prison too , only I remember in time I be papa s daughter ; so I write she a billet instead , which I entrust to the faithful Doig , and I hope you will admit I can be political when I please . the same faithful gomeral be to despatch this letter by the express along with those of the wiseacre , so that you may hear Tom Fool in company with Solomon . talk of gomeral , do tell Dauvit Balfour . I would I could see the face of he at the thought of a long - legged lass in such a predicament ; to say nothing of the levity of your affectionate daughter , and his respectful friend . so my rascal sign herself ! " continue Prestongrange . " and you see , Mr. David , it be quite true what I tell you , that my daughter regard you with the most affectionate playfulness . " 

 " the gomeral be much oblige , " say I. 

 " and be not this prettily do ! " he go on . " be not this Highland maid a piece of a heroine ? " 

 " I be always sure she have a great heart , " say I. " and I wager she guess nothing . . . but I beg your pardon , this be to tread upon forbidden subject . " 

 " I will go bail she do not , " he return , quite openly . " I will go bail she think she be fly straight into King George s face . " 

 Remembrance of Catriona and the thought of she lie in captivity , move I strangely . I could see that even Prestongrange admire , and could not withhold his lip from smile when he consider her behaviour . as for Miss Grant , for all her ill habit of mockery , her admiration shine out plain . a kind of a heat come on I . 

 " I be not your lordship s daughter . . . " I begin . 

 " that I know of ! " he put in , smile . 

 " I speak like a fool , " say I ; " or rather I begin wrong . it would doubtless be unwise in Mistress Grant to go to she in prison ; but for I , I think I would look like a half - hearted friend if I do not fly there instantly . " 

 " so - ho , Mr. David , " say he ; " I think that you and I be in a bargain ? " 

 " my lord , " I say , " when I make that bargain I be a good deal affect by your goodness , but I ll never can deny that I be move besides by my own interest . there be self - seeking in my heart , and I think shame of it now . it may be for your lordship s safety to say this fashious Davie Balfour be your friend and housemate . say it then ; I ll never contradict you . but as for your patronage , I give it all back . I ask but the one thing let I go , and give I a pass to see she in her prison . " 

 he look at I with a hard eye . " you put the cart before the horse , I think , " say he . " that which I have give be a portion of my liking , which your thankless nature do not seem to have remark . but for my patronage , it be not give , nor   to be exact   be it yet offer . " he pause a bit . " and I warn you , you do not know yourself , " he add . " Youth be a hasty season ; you will think well of all this before a year . " 

 " well , and I would like to be that kind of youth ! " I cry . " I have see too much of the other party in these young advocate that fawn upon your lordship and be even at the pain to fawn on I . and I have see it in the old one also . they be all for by - end , the whole clan of they ! it s this that make I seem to misdoubt your lordship s like . why would I think that you would like I ? but ye tell I yourself ye have an interest ! " 

 I stop at this , confound that I have run so far ; he be observe I with an unfathomable face . 

 " my lord , I ask your pardon , " I resume . " I have nothing in my chaft but a rough country tongue . I think it would be only decent - like if I would go to see my friend in her captivity ; but I m owe you my life I ll never forget that ; and if it s for your lordship s good , here I ll stay . that s barely gratitude . " 

 " this might have be reach in few word , " say Prestongrange grimly . " it be easy , and it be at time gracious , to say a plain scot ay . " 

 " ah , but , my lord , I think ye take I not yet entirely ! " cry I. " for your sake , for my life - safe , and the kindness that ye say ye bear to I for these , I ll consent ; but not for any good that might be come to myself . if I stand aside when this young maid be in her trial , it s a thing I will be noway advantage by ; I will lose by it , I will never gain . I would rather make a shipwreck wholly than to build on that foundation . " 

 he be a minute serious , then smile . " you mind I of the man with the long nose , " say he ; " be you to see the moon by a telescope you would see David Balfour there ! but you shall have your way of it . I will ask at you one service , and then set you free : my clerk be overdrive ; be so good as copy I these few page , and when that be do , I shall bid you God speed ! I would never charge myself with Mr. David s conscience ; and if you could cast some part of it   as you go by   in a moss hag , you would find yourself to ride much easy without it . " 

 " perhaps not just entirely in the same direction though , my lord ! " say I. 

 " and you shall have the last word , too ! " cry he gaily . 

 indeed , he have some cause for gaiety , have now find the mean to gain his purpose . to lessen the weight of the memorial , or to have a readier answer at his hand , he desire I should appear publicly in the character of his intimate . but if I be to appear with the same publicity as a visitor to Catriona in her prison the world would scarce stint to draw conclusion , and the true nature of James More s escape must become evident to all . this be the little problem I have to set he of a sudden , and to which he have so briskly find an answer . I be to be tether in Glasgow by that job of copying , which in mere outward decency I could not well refuse ; and during these hour of employment Catriona be privately get rid of . I think shame to write of this man that load I with so many goodness . he be kind to I as any father , yet I ever think he as false as a cracked bell . 

 CHAPTER XIX I be MUCH in the hand of the lady 

 the copying be a weary business , the more so as I perceive very early there be no sort of urgency in the matter treat , and begin very early to consider my employment a pretext . I have no soon finish than I get to horse , use what remain of daylight to the good purpose , and be at last fairly benighted , sleep in a house by Almond - Water side . I be in the saddle again before the day , and the Edinburgh booth be just open when I clatter in by the West Bow and draw up a smoking horse at my lord Advocate s door . I have a write word for Doig , my lord s private hand that be think to be in all his secret a worthy little plain man , all fat and snuff and self - sufficiency . he I find already at his desk and already bedabble with maccabaw , in the same anteroom where I rencountere with James More . he read the note scrupulously through like a chapter in his Bible . 

 " H m , " say he ; " ye come a wee thing ahint - hand , Mr. Balfour . the bird s flaen we hae letten she out . " 

 " Miss Drummond be set free ? " I cry . 

 " Achy ! " say he . " what would we keep she for , ye ken ? to hae make a steer about the bairn would have please naebody . " 

 " and where ll she be now ? " say I. 

 " Gude ken ! " say Doig , with a shrug . 

 " she ll have go home to Lady Allardyce , I m think , " say I. 

 " that ll be it , " say he . 

 " then I ll gang there straight , " say I. 

 " but ye ll be for a bite or ye go ? " say he . 

 " neither bite nor sup , " say I. " I have a good wauch of milk in by Ratho . " 

 " Aweel , aweel , " say Doig . " but ye ll can leave your horse here and your bag , for it seem we re to have your up - put . " 

 " na , na " , say I. " Tamson s mear   17   would never be the thing for I this day of all day . " 

 Doig speak somewhat broad , I have be lead by imitation into an accent much more countrified than I be usually careful to affect a good deal broad , indeed , than I have write it down ; and I be the more ashamed when another voice join in behind I with a scrap of a ballad : 

 " gae saddle I the bonny black , 
 Gae saddle sune and mak he ready 
 for I will down the Gatehope - slack , 
 and a to see my bonny leddy . " 

 the young lady , when I turn to she , stand in a morning gown , and her hand muffle in the same , as if to hold I at a distance . yet I could not but think there be kindness in the eye with which she see I . 

 " my good respect to you , Mistress Grant , " say I , bow . 

 " the like to yourself , Mr. David , " she reply with a deep courtesy . " and I beg to remind you of an old musty saw , that meat and mass never hinder man . the mass I can not afford you , for we be all good protestant . but the meat I press on your attention . and I would not wonder but I could find something for your private ear that would be worth the stopping for . " 

 " Mistress Grant , " say I , " I believe I be already your debtor for some merry word and I think they be kind too on a piece of unsigned paper . " 

 " unsigned paper ? " say she , and make a droll face , which be likewise wondrous beautiful , as of one try to remember . 

 " or else I be the more deceived , " I go on . " but to be sure , we shall have the time to speak of these , since your father be so good as to make I for a while your inmate ; and the gomeral beg you at this time only for the favour of his liberty . " 

 " you give yourself hard name , " say she . 

 " Mr. Doig and I would be blythe to take hard at your clever pen , " say I. 

 " once more I have to admire the discretion of all man - folk , " she reply . " but if you will not eat , off with you at once ; you will be back the soon , for you go on a fool s errand . off with you , Mr. David , " she continue , open the door . 

 " he have lowpen on his bonny grey , 
 he rade the richt gate and the ready 
 I trow he would neither stint nor stay , 
 for he be seek his bonny leddy . " 

 I do not wait to be twice bid , and do justice to Miss Grant s citation on the way to Dean . 

 Old Lady Allardyce walk there alone in the garden , in her hat and mutch , and have a silver - mount staff of some black wood to lean upon . as I alight from my horse , and draw near to she with congee , I could see the blood come in her face , and her head fle into the air like what I have conceive of empress . 

 " what bring you to my poor door ? " she cry , speak high through her nose . " I can not bar it . the male of my house be dead and bury ; I have neither son nor husband to stand in the gate for I ; any beggar can pluck I by the baird   18   and a baird there be , and that s the bad of it yet ! " she add partly to herself . 

 I be extremely put out at this reception , and the last remark , which seem like a daft wife s , leave I near hand speechless . 

 " I see I have fall under your displeasure , ma am , " say I. " yet I will still be so bold as ask after Mistress Drummond . " 

 she consider I with a burn eye , her lip press close together into twenty crease , her hand shake on her staff . " this cow all ! " she cry . " ye come to I to speir for she ? would God I know ! " 

 " she be not here ? " I cry . 

 she throw up her chin and make a step and a cry at I , so that I fall back incontinent . 

 " out upon your leee throat ! " she cry . " what ! ye come and speir at I ! she s in jyle , whaur ye take she to that s all there be to it . and of a the being ever I behold in breek , to think it should be to you ! ye timmer scoun rel , if I have a male leave to my name I would have your jaicket dustit till ye raire . " 

 I think it not good to delay long in that place , because I remark her passion to be rise . as I turn to the horse - post she even follow I ; and I make no shame to confess that I ride away with the one stirrup on and scramble for the other . 

 as I know no other quarter where I could push my inquiry , there be nothing leave I but to return to the Advocate s. I be well receive by the four lady , who be now in company together , and must give the news of Prestongrange and what word go in the west country , at the most inordinate length and with great weariness to myself ; while all the time that young lady , with whom I so much desire to be alone again , observe I quizzically and seem to find pleasure in the sight of my impatience . at last , after I have endure a meal with they , and be come very near the point of appeal for an interview before her aunt , she go and stand by the music - case , and pick out a tune , sing to it on a high key " he that will not when he may , when he will he shall have nay . " but this be the end of her rigour , and presently , after make some excuse of which I have no mind , she carry I away in private to her father s library . I should not fail to say she be dress to the nine , and appear extraordinary handsome . 

 " now , Mr. David , sit ye down here and let we have a two - handed crack , " say she . " for I have much to tell you , and it appear besides that I have be grossly unjust to your good taste . " 

 " in what manner , Mistress Grant ? " I ask . " I trust I have never seem to fail in due respect . " 

 " I will be your surety , Mr. David , " say she . " your respect , whether to yourself or your poor neighbour , have be always and most fortunately beyond imitation . but that be by the question . you get a note from I ? " she ask . 

 " I be so bold as to suppose so upon inference , " say I , " and it be kindly think upon . " 

 " it must have prodigiously surprise you , " say she . " but let we begin with the beginning . you have not perhaps forget a day when you be so kind as to escort three very tedious miss to Hope Park ? I have the less cause to forget it myself , because you be so particular obliging as to introduce I to some of the principle of the Latin grammar , a thing which write itself profoundly on my gratitude . " 

 " I fear I be sadly pedantical , " say I , overcome with confusion at the memory . " you be only to consider I be quite unused with the society of lady . " 

 " I will say the less about the grammar then , " she reply . " but how come you to desert your charge ? he have throw she out , overboard , his ain dear Annie ! " she hum ; " and his ain dear Annie and her two sister have to taigle home by theirselve like a string of green geese ! it seem you return to my papa s , where you show yourself excessively martial , and then on to realm unknown , with an eye   it appear   to the Bass Rock ; solan geese be perhaps more to your mind than bonny lass . " 

 through all this raillery there be something indulgent in the lady s eye which make I suppose there might be well come . 

 " you take a pleasure to torment I , " say I , " and I make a very feckless plaything ; but let I ask you to be more merciful . at this time there be but the one thing that I care to hear of , and that will be news of Catriona . " 

 " do you call she by that name to her face , Mr. Balfour ? " she ask . 

 " in troth , and I be not very sure , " I stammer . 

 " I would not do so in any case to stranger , " say Miss Grant . " and why be you so much immerse in the affair of this young lady ? " 

 " I hear she be in prison , " say I. 

 " well , and now you hear that she be out of it , " she reply , " and what more would you have ? she have no need of any further champion . " 

 " I may have the great need of she , ma am , " say I. 

 " come , this be well ! " say Miss Grant . " but look I fairly in the face ; be I not bonny than she ? " 

 " I would be the last to be deny it , " say I. " there be not your marrow in all Scotland . " 

 " well , here you have the pick of the two at your hand , and must need speak of the other , " say she . " this be never the way to please the lady , Mr. Balfour . " 

 " but , mistress , " say I , " there be surely other thing besides mere beauty . " 

 " by which I be to understand that I be no well than I should be , perhaps ? " she ask . 

 " by which you will please understand that I be like the cock in the midden in the fable book , " say i. " I see the braw jewel and I like fine to see it too but I have more need of the pickle corn . " 

 " Bravissimo ! " she cry . " there be a word well say at last , and I will reward you for it with my story . that same night of your desertion I come late from a friend s house where I be excessively admire , whatever you may think of it and what should I hear but that a lass in a tartan screen desire to speak with I ? she have be there an hour or well , say the servant - lass , and she grat in to herself as she sit wait . I go to her direct ; she rise as I come in , and I know she at a look . Grey Eyes ! say I to myself , but be more wise than to let on . you will be Miss Grant at last ? she say , rise and look at I hard and pitiful . ay , it be true he say , you be bonny at all event . the way God make I , my dear , I say , but I would be gey and oblige if you could tell I what bring you here at such a time of the night . Lady , she say , we be kinsfolk , we be both come of the blood of the son of Alpin . my dear , I reply , I think no more of Alpin or his son than what I do of a kalestock . you have a well argument in these tear upon your bonny face . and at that I be so weak - minded as to kiss she , which be what you would like to do dearly , and I wager will never find the courage of . I say it be weak - minded of I , for I know no more of she than the outside ; but it be the wise stroke I could have hit upon . she be a very staunch , brave nature , but I think she have be little use with tenderness ; and at that caress   though to say the truth , it be but lightly give   her heart go out to I . I will never betray the secret of my sex , Mr. Davie ; I will never tell you the way she turn I round her thumb , because it be the same she will use to twist yourself . ay , it be a fine lass ! she be as clean as hill well water . " 

 " she be e en t ! " I cry . 

 " well , then , she tell I her concern , " pursue Miss Grant , " and in what a swither she be in about her papa , and what a taking about yourself , with very little cause , and in what a perplexity she have find herself after you be go away . and then I mind at long last , say she , that we be kinswoman , and that Mr. David should have give you the name of the bonniest of the bonny , and I be think to myself if she be so bonny she will be good at all event ; and I take up my foot sol out of that . that be when I forgave yourself , Mr. Davie . when you be in my society , you seem upon hot iron : by all mark , if ever I see a young man that want to be go , it be yourself , and I and my two sister be the lady you be so desirous to be go from ; and now it appear you have give I some notice in the by - going , and be so kind as to comment on my attraction ! from that hour you may date our friendship , and I begin to think with tenderness upon the Latin grammar . " 

 " you will have many hour to rally I in , " say I ; " and I think besides you do yourself injustice . I think it be Catriona turn your heart in my direction . she be too simple to perceive as you do the stiffness of her friend . " 

 " I would not like to wager upon that , Mr. David , " say she . " the lass have clear eye . but at least she be your friend entirely , as I be to see . I carry she in to his lordship my papa ; and his Advocacy be in a favourable stage of claret , be so good as to receive the pair of we . here be Grey Eyes that you have be deave with these day past , say I , she be come to prove that we speak true , and I lie the prettiest lass in the three Lothians at your foot make a papistical reservation of myself . she suit her action to my word : down she go upon her knee to he I would not like to swear but he see two of she , which doubtless make she appeal the more irresistible , for you be all a pack of Mahomedans tell he what have pass that night , and how she have withhold her father s man from follow of you , and what a case she be in about her father , and what a flutter for yourself ; and beg with weeping for the life of both of you   neither of which be in the slight danger , till I vow I be proud of my sex because it be do so pretty , and ashamed for it because of the smallness of the occasion . she have not go far , I assure you , before the Advocate be wholly sober , to see his inmost politic ravel out by a young lass and discover to the most unruly of his daughter . but we take he in hand , the pair of we , and bring that matter straight . properly manage and that mean manage by I there be no one to compare with my papa . " 

 " he have be a good man to I , " say I. 

 " well , he be a good man to Katrine , and I be there to see to it , " say she . 

 " and she plead for I ? " say I. 

 " she do that , and very movingly , " say Miss Grant . " I would not like to tell you what she say I find you vain enough already . " 

 " God reward she for it ! " cry I. 

 " with Mr. David Balfour , I suppose ? " say she . 

 " you do I too much injustice at the last ! " I cry . " I would tremble to think of she in such hard hand . do you think I would presume , because she beg my life ? she would do that for a new whelp puppy ! I have have more than that to set I up , if you but ken d. she kiss that hand of mine . ay , but she do . and why ? because she think I be play a brave part and might be go to my death . it be not for my sake but I need not be tell that to you , that can not look at I without laughter . it be for the love of what she think be bravery . I believe there be none but I and poor Prince Charlie have that honour do they . be this not to make a god of I ? and do you not think my heart would quake when I remember it ? " 

 " I do laugh at you a good deal , and a good deal more than be quite civil , " say she ; " but I will tell you one thing : if you speak to she like that , you have some glimmering of a chance . " 

 " I ? " I cry , " I would never dare . I can speak to you , Miss Grant , because it s a matter of indifference what ye think of I . but she ? no fear ! " say I. 

 " I think you have the large foot in all broad Scotland , " say she . 

 " Troth they be no very small , " say I , look down . 

 " ah , poor Catriona ! " cry Miss Grant . 

 and I could but stare upon she ; for though I now see very well what she be drive at   and perhaps some justification for the same , I be never swift at the uptake in such flimsy talk . 

 " ah well , Mr. David , " she say , " it go sore against my conscience , but I see I shall have to be your speaking board . she shall know you come to her straight upon the news of her imprisonment ; she shall know you would not pause to eat ; and of our conversation she shall hear just so much as I think convenient for a maid of her age and inexperience . believe I , you will be in that way much well serve than you could serve yourself , for I will keep the big foot out of the platter . " 

 " you know where she be , then ? " I exclaim . 

 " that I do , Mr. David , and will never tell , " say she . 

 " why that ? " I ask . 

 " well , " she say , " I be a good friend , as you will soon discover ; and the chief of those that I be friend to be my papa . I assure you , you will never heat nor melt I out of that , so you may spare I your sheep s eye ; and adieu to your David - Balfourship for the now . " 

 " but there be yet one thing more , " I cry . " there be one thing that must be stop , be mere ruin to herself , and to I too . " 

 " well , " she say , " be brief ; I have spend half the day on you already . " 

 " my Lady Allardyce believe , " I begin " she suppose she think that I abduct she . " 

 the colour come into Miss Grant s face , so that at first I be quite abash to find her ear so delicate , till I bethink I she be struggle rather with mirth , a notion in which I be altogether confirm by the shaking of her voice as she reply 

 " I will take up the defence of your reputation , " she say . " you may leave it in my hand . " 

 and with that she withdraw out of the library . 

 chapter XX I continue to move in good SOCIETY 

 for about exactly two month I remain a guest in Prestongrange s family , where I better my acquaintance with the bench , the bar , and the flower of Edinburgh company . you be not to suppose my education be neglect ; on the contrary , I be keep extremely busy . I study the French , so as to be more prepared to go to Leyden ; I set myself to the fencing , and work hard , sometimes three hour in the day , with notable advancement ; at the suggestion of my cousin , Pilrig , who be an apt musician , I be put to a singing class ; and by the order of my Miss Grant , to one for the dancing , at which I must say I prove far from ornamental . however , all be good enough to say it give I an address a little more genteel ; and there be no question but I learn to manage my coat skirt and sword with more dexterity , and to stand in a room as though the same belong to I . my clothe themselves be all earnestly re - ordered ; and the most trifling circumstance , such as where I should tie my hair , or the colour of my ribbon , debate among the three miss like a thing of weight . one way with another , no doubt I be a good deal improve to look at , and acquire a bit of modest air that would have surprise the good folk at Essendean . 

 the two young miss be very willing to discuss a point of my habiliment , because that be in the line of their chief thought . I can not say that they appear any other way conscious of my presence ; and though always more than civil , with a kind of heartless cordiality , could not hide how much I weary they . as for the aunt , she be a wonderful still woman ; and I think she give I much the same attention as she give the rest of the family , which be little enough . the eld daughter and the Advocate himself be thus my principal friend , and our familiarity be much increase by a pleasure that we take in common . before the court meet we spend a day or two at the house of Grange , live very nobly with an open table , and here it be that we three begin to ride out together in the field , a practice afterwards maintain in Edinburgh , so far as the Advocate s continual affair permit . when we be put in a good frame by the briskness of the exercise , the difficulty of the way , or the accident of bad weather , my shyness wear entirely off ; we forget that we be stranger , and speech not be require , it flow the more naturally on . then it be that they have my story from I , bit by bit , from the time that I leave Essendean , with my voyage and battle in the Covenant , wandering in the heather , etc . ; and from the interest they find in my adventure spring the circumstance of a jaunt we make a little later on , on a day when the court be not sit , and of which I will tell a trifle more at length . 

 we take horse early , and pass first by the house of Shaws , where it stand smokeless in a great field of white frost , for it be yet early in the day . here Prestongrange alight down , give I his horse , an proceeded alone to visit my uncle . my heart , I remember , swell up bitter within I at the sight of that bare house and the thought of the old miser sitting chitter within in the cold kitchen ! 

 " there be my home , " say I ; " and my family . " 

 " Poor David Balfour ! " say Miss Grant . 

 what pass during the visit I have never hear ; but it would doubtless not be very agreeable to Ebenezer , for when the Advocate come forth again his face be dark . 

 " I think you will soon be the laird indeed , Mr. Davie , " say he , turn half about with the one foot in the stirrup . 

 " I will never pretend sorrow , " say I ; and , to say the truth , during his absence Miss Grant and I have be embellish the place in fancy with plantation , parterre , and a terrace much as I have since carry out in fact . 

 Thence we push to the Queensferry , where Rankeillor give we a good welcome , be indeed out of the body to receive so great a visitor . here the Advocate be so unaffectedly good as to go quite fully over my affair , sit perhaps two hour with the Writer in his study , and express   I be tell   a great esteem for myself and concern for my fortune . to while this time , Miss Grant and I and young Rankeillor take boat and pass the Hope to Limekilns . Rankeillor make himself very ridiculous   and , I think , offensive   with his admiration for the young lady , and to my wonder   only it be so common a weakness of her sex   she seem , if anything , to be a little gratified . one use it have : for when we be come to the other side , she lay her command on he to mind the boat , while she and I pass a little far to the alehouse . this be her own thought , for she have be take with my account of Alison Hastie , and desire to see the lass herself . we find she once more alone indeed , I believe her father work all day in the field and she curtsy dutifully to the gentry - folk and the beautiful young lady in the riding - coat . 

 " be this all the welcome I be to get ? " say I , hold out my hand . " and have you no more memory of old friend ? " 

 " keep I ! wha s this of it ? " she cry , and then , " God s truth , it s the tautit   19   laddie ! " 

 " the very same , " say I. 

 " Mony s the time I ve thocht upon you and your freen , and blythe be I to see in your braw , "   20   she cry . " though I kent ye be come to your ain folk by the grand present that ye send I and that I thank ye for with a my heart . " 

 " there , " say Miss Grant to I , " run out by with ye , like a guid bairn . I didnae come here to stand and haud a candle ; it s she and I that be to crack . " 

 I suppose she stay ten minute in the house , but when she come forth I observe two thing that her eye be redden , and a silver brooch be go out of her bosom . this very much affect I . 

 " I never see you so well adorn , " say I. 

 " O Davie man , dinna be a pompous gowk ! " say she , and be more than usually sharp to I the remainder of the day . 

 about candlelight we come home from this excursion . 

 for a good while I hear nothing far of Catriona my Miss Grant remain quite impenetrable , and stop my mouth with pleasantry . at last , one day that she return from walk and find I alone in the parlour over my French , I think there be something unusual in her look ; the colour heighten , the eye sparkle high , and a bit of a smile continually bite in as she regard I . she seem indeed like the very spirit of mischief , and , walk briskly in the room , have soon involve I in a kind of quarrel over nothing and   at the least   with nothing intend on my side . I be like Christian in the slough the more I try to clamber out upon the side , the deep I become involve ; until at last I hear her declare , with a great deal of passion , that she would take that answer from the hand of none , and I must down upon my knee for pardon . 

 the causelessness of all this fuff stir my own bile . " I have say nothing you can properly object to , " say I , " and as for my knee , that be an attitude I keep for God . " 

 " and as a goddess I be to be serve ! " she cry , shake her brown lock at I and with a bright colour . " every man that come within waft of my petticoat shall use I so ! " 

 " I will go so far as ask your pardon for the fashion s sake , although I vow I know not why , " I reply . " but for these play - act posture , you can go to other . " 

 " O Davie ! " she say . " not if I be to beg you ? " 

 I bethink I I be fight with a woman , which be the same as to say a child , and that upon a point entirely formal . 

 " I think it a bairnly thing , " I say , " not worthy in you to ask , or I to render . yet I will not refuse you , neither , " say I ; " and the stain , if there be any , rest with yourself . " and at that I kneel fairly down . 

 " there ! " she cry . " there be the proper station , there be where I have be manoeuvre to bring you . " and then , suddenly , " Kep , "   21   say she , fling I a fold billet , and run from the apartment laughing . 

 the billet have neither place nor date . " dear Mr. David , " it begin , " I get your news continually by my cousin , Miss Grant , and it be a pleisand hearing . I be very well , in a good place , among good folk , but necessitate to be quite private , though I be hop that at long last we may meet again . all your friendship have be tell I by my love cousin , who love we both . she bid I to send you this writing , and oversee the same . I will be ask you to do all her command , and rest your affectionate friend , Catriona Macgregor - Drummond . P.S. will you not see my cousin , Allardyce ? " 

 I think it not the least brave of my campaign   as the soldier say   that I should have do as I be here bid and go forthright to the house by Dean . but the old lady be now entirely change and supple as a glove . by what mean Miss Grant have bring this round I could never guess ; I be sure , at least , she dare not to appear openly in the affair , for her papa be compromise in it pretty deep . it be he , indeed , who have persuade Catriona to leave , or rather , not to return , to her cousin s , place she instead with a family of Gregorys decent people , quite at the Advocate s disposition , and in whom she might have the more confidence because they be of his own clan and family . these keep she private till all be ripe , heated and help she to attempt her father s rescue , and after she be discharge from prison receive she again into the same secrecy . thus Prestongrange obtain and use his instrument ; nor do there leak out the small word of his acquaintance with the daughter of James More . there be some whispering , of course , upon the escape of that discredit person ; but the Government reply by a show of rigour , one of the cell porter be flog , the lieutenant of the guard   my poor friend , Duncansby   be break of his rank , and as for Catriona , all man be well enough please that her fault should be pass by in silence . 

 I could never induce Miss Grant to carry back an answer . " no , " she would say , when I persist , " I be go to keep the big foot out of the platter . " this be the more hard to bear , as I be aware she see my little friend many time in the week , and carry she my news whenever   as she say   I " have behave myself . " at last she treat I to what she call an indulgence , and I think rather more of a banter . she be certainly a strong , almost a violent , friend to all she like , chief among whom be a certain frail old gentlewoman , very blind and very witty , who dwelt on the top of a tall land on a strait close , with a nest of linnet in a cage , and throng all day with visitor . Miss Grant be very fond to carry I there and put I to entertain her friend with the narrative of my misfortune : and Miss Tibbie Ramsay   that be her name   be particular kind , and tell I a great deal that be worth knowledge of old folk and past affair in Scotland . I should say that from her chamber window , and not three foot away , such be the straitness of that close , it be possible to look into a bar loophole light the stairway of the opposite house . 

 here , upon some pretext , Miss Grant leave I one day alone with Miss Ramsay . I mind I think that lady inattentive and like one preoccupy . I be besides very uncomfortable , for the window , contrary to custom , be leave open and the day be cold . all at once the voice of Miss Grant sound in my ear as from a distance . 

 " here , Shaws ! " she cry , " keek out of the window and see what I have broughten you . " 

 I think it be the prettiest sight that ever I beheld . the well of the close be all in clear shadow where a man could see distinctly , the wall very black and dingy ; and there from the bar loophole I see two face smile across at I Miss Grant s and Catriona s. 

 " there ! " say Miss Grant , " I want she to see you in your braw like the lass of Limekilns . I want she to see what I could make of you , when I buckle to the job in earnest ! " 

 it come in my mind that she have be more than common particular that day upon my dress ; and I think that some of the same care have be bestow upon Catriona . for so merry and sensible a lady , Miss Grant be certainly wonderful take up with dud . 

 " Catriona ! " be all I could get out . 

 as for she , she say nothing in the world , but only wave her hand and smile to I , and be suddenly carry away again from before the loophole . 

 that vision be no soon lose than I run to the house door , where I find I be lock in ; thence back to Miss Ramsay , cry for the key , but might as well have cry upon the castle rock . she have pass her word , she say , and I must be a good lad . it be impossible to burst the door , even if it have be mannerly ; it be impossible I should leap from the window , be seven storey above ground . all I could do be to crane over the close and watch for their reappearance from the stair . it be little to see , be no more than the top of their two head each on a ridiculous bobbin of skirt , like to a pair of pincushion . nor do Catriona so much as look up for a farewell ; be prevent   as I hear afterwards   by Miss Grant , who tell her folk be never see to less advantage than from above downward . 

 on the way home , as soon as I be set free , I upbraid Miss Grant with her cruelty . 

 " I be sorry you be disappoint , " say she demurely . " for my part I be very pleased . you look well than I dread ; you look if it will not make you vain a mighty pretty young man when you appear in the window . you be to remember that she could not see your foot , " say she , with the manner of one reassure I . 

 " o ! " cry I , " leave my foot be they be no big than my neighbour . " 

 " they be even small than some , " say she , " but I speak in parable like a hebrew prophet . " 

 " I marvel little they be sometimes stone ! " say I. " but , you miserable girl , how could you do it ? why should you care to tantalise I with a moment ? " 

 " love be like folk , " say she ; " it need some kind of viver . "   22 

 " oh , Barbara , let I see she properly ! " I plead . " you can you see she when you please ; let I have half an hour . " 

 " who be it that be manage this love affair ! you ! or I ? " she ask , and as I continue to press she with my instance , fall back upon a deadly expedient : that of imitate the tone of my voice when I call on Catriona by name ; with which , indeed , she hold I in subjection for some day to follow . 

 there be never the least word hear of the memorial , or none by I . Prestongrange and his grace the Lord President may have hear of it   for what I know   on the deaf side of their head ; they keep it to themselves , at least the public be none the wiser ; and in course of time , on November 8th , and in the midst of a prodigious storm of wind and rain , poor James of the Glens be duly hang at Lettermore by Ballachulish . 

 so there be the final upshot of my politic ! innocent man have perish before James , and be like to keep on perish   in spite of all our wisdom   till the end of time . and till the end of time young folk   who be not yet use with the duplicity of life and man   will struggle as I do , and make heroical resolve , and take long risk ; and the course of event will push they upon the one side and go on like a march army . James be hang ; and here be I dwell in the house of Prestongrange , and grateful to he for his fatherly attention . he be hang ; and behold ! when I meet Mr. Simon in the causeway , I be fain to pull off my beaver to he like a good little boy before his dominie . he have be hang by fraud and violence , and the world wag along , and there be not a pennyweight of difference ; and the villain of that horrid plot be decent , kind , respectable father of family , who go to kirk and take the sacrament ! 

 but I have have my view of that detestable business they call politic I have see it from behind , when it be all bone and blackness ; and I be cure for life of any temptation to take part in it again . a plain , quiet , private path be that which I be ambitious to walk in , when I might keep my head out of the way of danger and my conscience out of the road of temptation . for , upon a retrospect , it appear I have not do so grandly , after all ; but with the great possible amount of big speech and preparation , have accomplish nothing . 

 the 25th of the same month a ship be advertise to sail from Leith ; and I be suddenly recommend to make up my mail for Leyden . to Prestongrange I could , of course , say nothing ; for I have already be a long while sorne on his house and table . but with his daughter I be more open , bewail my fate that I should be send out of the country , and assure she , unless she should bring I to farewell with Catriona , I would refuse at the last hour . 

 " have I not give you my advice ? " she ask . 

 " I know you have , " say I , " and I know how much I be beholden to you already , and that I be bid to obey your order . but you must confess you be something too merry a lass at time to lippen   23   to entirely . " 

 " I will tell you , then , " say she . " be you on board by nine o clock forenoon ; the ship do not sail before one ; keep your boat alongside ; and if you be not pleased with my farewell when I shall send they , you can come ashore again and seek Katrine for yourself . " 

 since I could make no more of she , I be fain to be content with this . 

 the day come round at last when she and I be to separate . we have be extremely intimate and familiar ; I be much in her debt ; and what way we be to part be a thing that put I from my sleep , like the vail I be to give to the domestic servant . I know she consider I too backward , and rather desire to rise in her opinion on that head . besides which , after so much affection show and   I believe   feel upon both side , it would have look cold - like to be anyways stiff . accordingly , I get my courage up and my word ready , and the last chance we be like to be alone , ask pretty boldly to be allow to salute she in farewell . 

 " you forget yourself strangely , Mr. Balfour , " say she . " I can not call to mind that I have give you any right to presume on our acquaintancy . " 

 I stand before she like a stop clock , and know not what to think , far less to say , when of a sudden she cast her arm about my neck and kiss I with the good will in the world . 

 " you inimitable bairn ! " she cry . " do you think that I would let we part like stranger ? because I can never keep my gravity at you five minute on end , you must not dream I do not love you very well : I be all love and laughter , every time I cast an eye on you ! and now I will give you an advice to conclude your education , which you will have need of before it s very long . never ask womenfolk . they re bind to answer no ; God never make the lass that could resist the temptation . it s suppose by divine to be the curse of Eve : because she do not say it when the devil offer she the apple , her daughter can say nothing else . " 

 " since I be so soon to lose my bonny professor , " I begin . 

 " this be gallant , indeed , " say she curtsey . 

 " I would put the one question , " I go on . " may I ask a lass to marry to I ? " 

 " you think you could not marry she without ! " she ask . " or else get she to offer ? " 

 " you see you can not be serious , " say I. 

 " I shall be very serious in one thing , David , " say she : " I shall always be your friend . " 

 as I get to my horse the next morning , the four lady be all at that same window whence we have once look down on Catriona , and all cry farewell and wave their pocket napkin as I ride away . one out of the four I know be truly sorry ; and at the thought of that , and how I have come to the door three month ago for the first time , sorrow and gratitude make a confusion in my mind . 

 PART ii FATHER and DAUGHTER 

 CHAPTER XXI the VOYAGE into HOLLAND 

 the ship lie at a single anchor , well outside the pier of Leith , so that all we passenger must come to it by the mean of skiff . this be very little troublesome , for the reason that the day be a flat calm , very frosty and cloudy , and with a low shift fog upon the water . the body of the vessel be thus quite hide as I draw near , but the tall spar of she stand high and bright in a sunshine like the flickering of a fire . she prove to be a very roomy , commodious merchant , but somewhat blunt in the bow , and loaden extraordinary deep with salt , salt salmon , and fine white linen stocking for the Dutch . upon my come on board , the captain welcome I one Sang   out of Lesmahago , I believe , a very hearty , friendly tarpaulin of a man , but at the moment in rather of a bustle . there have no other of the passenger yet appear , so that I be leave to walk about upon the deck , view the prospect and wonder a good deal what these farewell should be which I be promise . 

 all Edinburgh and the Pentland Hills glint above I in a kind of smuisty brightness , now and again overcome with blot of cloud ; of Leith there be no more than the top of chimney visible , and on the face of the water , where the haar   24   lay , nothing at all . out of this I be presently aware of a sound of oar pull , and a little after   as if out of the smoke of a fire   a boat issue . there sit a grave man in the stern sheet , well muffle from the cold , and by his side a tall , pretty , tender figure of a maid that bring my heart to a stand . I have scarce the time to catch my breath in , and be ready to meet she , as she step upon the deck , smile , and make my good bow , which be now vastly fine than some month before , when first I make it to her ladyship . no doubt we be both a good deal change : she seem to have shoot up like a young , comely tree . she have now a kind of pretty backwardness that become she well as of one that regard herself more highly and be fairly woman ; and for another thing , the hand of the same magician have be at work upon the pair of we , and Miss Grant have make we both braw , if she could make but the one bonny . 

 the same cry , in word not very different , come from both of we , that the other be come in compliment to say farewell , and then we perceive in a flash we be to ship together . 

 " o , why will not baby have be tell I ! " she cry ; and then remember a letter she have be give , on the condition of not open it till she be well on board . within be an enclosure for myself , and run thus : 

 " Dear Davie , what do you think of my farewell ? and what do you say to your fellow passenger ? do you kiss , or do you ask ? I be about to have sign here , but that would leave the purport of my question doubtful , and in my own case I ken the answer . so fill up here with good advice . do not be too blate ,   25   and for God s sake do not try to be too forward ; nothing act you worse . I be 

 " your affectionate friend and governess , 
 " Barbara Grant . " 

 I write a word of answer and compliment on a leaf out of my pocketbook , put it in with another scratch from Catriona , seal the whole with my new signet of the Balfour arm , and despatch it by the hand of Prestongrange s servant that still wait in my boat . 

 then we have time to look upon each other more at leisure , which we have not do for a piece of a minute before   upon a common impulse   we shake hand again . 

 " Catriona ? " say I. it seem that be the first and last word of my eloquence . 

 " you will be glad to see I again ? " say she . 

 " and I think that be an idle word , " say i. " we be too deep friend to make speech upon such trifle . " 

 " be she not the girl of all the world ? " she cry again . " I be never know such a girl so honest and so beautiful . " 

 " and yet she care no more for Alpin than what she do for a kale - stock , " say I. 

 " ah , she will say so indeed ! " cry Catriona . " yet it be for the name and the gentle kind blood that she take I up and be so good to I . " 

 " well , I will tell you why it be , " say I. " there be all sort of people s face in this world . there be Barbara s face , that everyone must look at and admire , and think she a fine , brave , merry girl . and then there be your face , which be quite different I never know how different till to - day . you can not see yourself , and that be why you do not understand ; but it be for the love of your face that she take you up and be so good to you . and everybody in the world would do the same . " 

 " everybody ? " say she . 

 " every live soul ! " say I. 

 " ah , then , that will be why the soldier at the castle take I up ! " she cry . 

 " Barbara have be teach you to catch I , " say I. 

 " she will have teach I more than that at all event . she will have teach I a great deal about Mr. David all the ill of he , and a little that be not so ill either , now and then , " she say , smile . " she will have tell I all there be of Mr. David , only just that he would sail upon this very same ship . and why it be you go ? " 

 I tell she . 

 " ah , well , " say she , " we will be some day in company and then   I suppose   good - bye for altogether ! I go to meet my father at a place of the name of Helvoetsluys , and from there to France , to be exile by the side of our chieftain . " 

 I could say no more than just " o ! " the name of James more always dry up my very voice . 

 she be quick to perceive it , and to guess some portion of my thought . 

 " there be one thing I must be say first of all , Mr. David , " say she . " I think two of my kinsfolk have not behave to you altogether very well . and the one of they two be James More , my father , and the other be the Laird of Prestongrange . Prestongrange will have speak by himself , or his daughter in the place of he . but for James More , my father , I have this much to say : he lie shackle in a prison ; he be a plain honest soldier and a plain Highland gentleman ; what they would be after he would never be guess ; but if he have understand it be to be some prejudice to a young gentleman like yourself , he would have die first . and for the sake of all your friendship , I will be ask you to pardon my father and family for that same mistake . " 

 " Catriona , " say I , " what that mistake be I do not care to know . I know but the one thing that you go to Prestongrange and beg my life upon your knee . o , I ken well enough it be for your father that you go , but when you be there you plead for I also . it be a thing I can not speak of . there be two thing I can not think of into myself : and the one be your good word when you call yourself my little friend , and the other that you plead for my life . let we never speak more , we two , of pardon or offence . " 

 we stand after that silent , Catriona look on the deck and I on she ; and before there be more speech , a little wind have spring up in the nor -west , they begin to shake out the sail and heave in upon the anchor . 

 there be six passenger besides our two self , which make of it a full cabin . three be solid merchant out of Leith , Kirkcaldy , and Dundee , all engage in the same adventure into High Germany . one be a Hollander returning ; the rest worthy merchant wife , to the charge of one of whom Catriona be recommend . Mrs. Gebbie   for that be her name   be by great good fortune heavily incommode by the sea , and lie day and night on the broad of she back . we be besides the only creature at all young on board the Rose , except a white - faced boy that do my old duty to attend upon the table ; and it come about that Catriona and I be leave almost entirely to ourselves . we have the next seat together at the table , where I wait on she with extraordinary pleasure . on deck , I make she a soft place with my cloak ; and the weather be singularly fine for that season , with bright frosty day and night , a steady , gentle wind , and scarce a sheet start all the way through the North Sea , we sit there   only now and again walk to and fro for warmth   from the first blink of the sun till eight or nine at night under the clear star . the merchant or Captain Sang would sometimes glance and smile upon we , or pass a merry word or two and give we the go - by again ; but the most part of the time they be deep in herring and chintz and linen , or in computation of the slowness of the passage , and leave we to our own concern , which be very little important to any but ourselves . 

 at the first , we have a great deal to say , and think ourselves pretty witty ; and I be at a little pain to be the beau , and she   I believe   to play the young lady of experience . but soon we grow plainer with each other . I lay aside my high , clip English   what little there be leave of it   and forget to make my Edinburgh bow and scrape ; she , upon her side , fall into a sort of kind familiarity ; and we dwelt together like those of the same household , only   upon my side   with a more deep emotion . about the same time the bottom seem to fall out of our conversation , and neither one of we the less pleased . while she would tell I old wife tale , of which she have a wonderful variety , many of they from my friend red - headed Niel . she tell they very pretty , and they be pretty enough childish tale ; but the pleasure to myself be in the sound of her voice , and the thought that she be tell and I listen . while , again , we would sit entirely silent , not communicate even with a look , and taste pleasure enough in the sweetness of that neighbourhood . I speak here only for myself . of what be in the maid s mind , I be not very sure that ever I ask myself ; and what be in my own , I be afraid to consider . I need make no secret of it now , either to myself or to the reader ; I be fall totally in love . she come between I and the sun . she have grow suddenly tall , as I say , but with a wholesome growth ; she seem all health , and lightness , and brave spirit ; and I think she walk like a young deer , and stand like a birch upon the mountain . it be enough for I to sit near by she on the deck ; and I declare I scarce spend two thought upon the future , and be so well content with what I then enjoy that I be never at the pain to imagine any further step ; unless perhaps that I would be sometimes tempt to take her hand in mine and hold it there . but I be too like a miser of what joy I have , and would venture nothing on a hazard . 

 what we speak be usually of ourselves or of each other , so that if anyone have be at so much pain as overhear we , he must have suppose we the most egotistical person in the world . it befall one day when we be at this practice , that we come on a discourse of friend and friendship , and I think now that we be sail near the wind . we say what a fine thing friendship be , and how little we have guess of it , and how it make life a new thing , and a thousand cover thing of the same kind that will have be say , since the foundation of the world , by young folk in the same predicament . then we remark upon the strangeness of that circumstance , that friend come together in the beginning as if they be there for the first time , and yet each have be alive a good while , lose time with other people . 

 " it be not much that I have do , " say she , " and I could be tell you the five - fifth of it in two - three word . it be only a girl I be , and what can befall a girl , at all event ? but I go with the clan in the year 45 . the man march with sword and fire - lock , and some of they in brigade in the same set of tartan ; they be not backward at the marching , I can tell you . and there be gentleman from the Low Country , with their tenant mount and trumpet to sound , and there be a grand skirling of war - pipe . I ride on a little Highland horse on the right hand of my father , James More , and of Glengyle himself . and here be one fine thing that I remember , that Glengyle kiss I in the face , because   say he   my kinswoman , you be the only lady of the clan that have come out , and I a little maid of maybe twelve year old ! I see Prince Charlie too , and the blue eye of he ; he be pretty indeed ! I have his hand to kiss in front of the army . o , well , these be the good day , but it be all like a dream that I have see and then awaken . it go what way you very well know ; and these be the bad day of all , when the red - coat soldier be out , and my father and uncle lay in the hill , and I be to be carry they their meat in the middle night , or at the short sight of day when the cock crow . yes , I have walk in the night , many s the time , and my heart great in I for terror of the darkness . it be a strange thing I will never have be meddle with by a bogle ; but they say a maid go safe . next there be my uncle s marriage , and that be a dreadful affair beyond all . Jean Kay be that woman s name ; and she have I in the room with she that night at Inversnaid , the night we take she from her friend in the old , ancient manner . she would and she wouldn t ; she be for marry Rob the one minute , and the next she would be for none of he . I will never have see such a feckless creature of a woman ; surely all there be of she would tell she ay or no . well , she be a widow ; and I can never be think a widow a good woman . " 

 " Catriona ! " say I , " how do you make out that ? " 

 " I do not know , " say she ; " I be only tell you the seeming in my heart . and then to marry a new man ! Fy ! but that be she ; and she be marry again upon my Uncle Robin , and go with he awhile to kirk and market ; and then weary , or else her friend get claught of she and talk her round , or maybe she turn ashamed ; at the least of it , she run away , and go back to her own folk , and say we have hold she in the lake , and I will never tell you all what . I have never think much of any female since that day . and so in the end my father , James More , come to be cast in prison , and you know the rest of it an well as I . " 

 " and through all you have no friend ? " say I. 

 " no , " say she ; " I have be pretty chief with two - three lass on the braes , but not to call it friend . " 

 " well , mine be a plain tale , " say I. " I never have a friend to my name till I meet in with you . " 

 " and that brave Mr. Stewart ? " she ask . 

 " o , yes , I be forget he , " I say . " but he be a man , and that in very different . " 

 " I would think so , " say she . " o , yes , it be quite different . " 

 " and then there be one other , " say I. " I once think I have a friend , but it prove a disappointment . " 

 she ask I who she be ? 

 " it be a he , then , " say I. " we be the two good lad at my father s school , and we think we love each other dearly . well , the time come when he go to Glasgow to a merchant s house , that be his second cousin once remove ; and write I two - three time by the carrier ; and then he find new friend , and I might write till I be tired , he take no notice . eh , Catriona , it take I a long while to forgive the world . there be not anything more bitter than to lose a fancied friend . " 

 then she begin to question I close upon his look and character , for we be each a great deal concern in all that touch the other ; till at last , in a very evil hour , I mind of his letter and go and fetch the bundle from the cabin . 

 " here be his letter , " say I , " and all the letter that ever I get . that will be the last I ll can tell of myself ; ye know the lave   26   as well as I do . " 

 " will you let I read they , then ? " say she . 

 I tell she , if she would be at the pain ; and she bid I go away and she would read they from the one end to the other . now , in this bundle that I give she , there be pack together not only all the letter of my false friend , but one or two of Mr. Campbell s when he be in town at the Assembly , and to make a complete roll of all that ever be write to I , Catriona s little word , and the two I have receive from Miss Grant , one when I be on the Bass and one on board that ship . but of these last I have no particular mind at the moment . 

 I be in that state of subjection to the thought of my friend that it matter not what I do , nor scarce whether I be in her presence or out of it ; I have catch she like some kind of a noble fever that live continually in my bosom , by night and by day , and whether I be wake or asleep . so it befell that after I be come into the fore - part of the ship where the broad bow splash into the billow , I be in no such hurry to return as you might fancy ; rather prolong my absence like a variety in pleasure . I do not think I be by nature much of an Epicurean : and there have come till then so small a share of pleasure in my way that I might be excuse perhaps to dwell on it unduly . 

 when I return to she again , I have a faint , painful impression as of a buckle slip , so coldly she return the packet . 

 " you have read they ? " say I ; and I think my voice sound not wholly natural , for I be turn in my mind for what could ail she . 

 " do you mean I to read all ? " she ask . 

 I tell she " yes , " with a droop voice . 

 " the last of they as well ? " say she . 

 I know where we be now ; yet I would not lie to she either . " I give they all without afterthought , " I say , " as I suppose that you would read they . I see no harm in any . " 

 " I will be differently make , " say she . " I thank God I be differently make . it be not a fit letter to be show I . it be not fit to be write . " 

 " I think you be speak of your own friend , Barbara Grant ? " say I. 

 " there will not be anything as bitter as to lose a fancied friend , " say she , quote my own expression . 

 " I think it be sometimes the friendship that be fancy ! " I cry . " what kind of justice do you call this , to blame I for some word that a tomfool of a madcap lass have write down upon a piece of paper ? you know yourself with what respect I have behave and would do always . " 

 " yet you would show I that same letter ! " say she . " I want no such friend . I can be do very well , Mr. Balfour , without she or you . " 

 " this be your fine gratitude ! " say I. 

 " I be very much oblige to you , " say she . " I will be ask you to take away your letter . " she seem to choke upon the word , so that it sound like an oath . 

 " you shall never ask twice , " say I ; pick up that bundle , walk a little way forward and cast they as far as possible into the sea . for a very little more I could have cast myself after they . 

 the rest of the day I walk up and down rag . there be few name so ill but what I give she they in my own mind before the sun go down . all that I have ever hear of Highland pride seem quite outdo ; that a girl   scarce grow   should resent so trifle an allusion , and that from her next friend , that she have near weary I with praise of ! I have bitter , sharp , hard thought of she , like an angry boy s. if I have kiss she indeed   I think , perhaps she would have take it pretty well ; and only because it have be write down , and with a spice of jocularity , up she must fuff in this ridiculous passion . it seem to I there be a want of penetration in the female sex , to make angel weep over the case of the poor man . 

 we be side by side again at supper , and what a change be there ! she be like curdled milk to I ; her face be like a wooden doll s ; I could have indifferently smite she or grovel at her foot , but she give I not the least occasion to do either . no soon the meal do than she betake herself to attend on Mrs. Gebbie , which I think she have a little neglect heretofore . but she be to make up for lose time , and in what remain of the passage be extraordinary assiduous with the old lady , and on deck begin to make a great deal more than I think wise of Captain Sang . not but what the Captain seem a worthy , fatherly man ; but I hat to behold she in the least familiarity with anyone except myself . 

 altogether , she be so quick to avoid I , and so constant to keep herself surround with other , that I must watch a long while before I could find my opportunity ; and after it be find , I make not much of it , as you be now to hear . 

 " I have no guess how I have offend , " say I ; " it should scarce be beyond pardon , then . o , try if you can pardon I . " 

 " I have no pardon to give , " say she ; and the word seem to come out of her throat like marble . " I will be very much oblige for all your friendship . " and she make I an eighth part of a curtsey . 

 but I have school myself beforehand to say more , and I be go to say it too . 

 " there be one thing , " say i. " if I have shock your particularity by the showing of that letter , it can not touch Miss Grant . she write not to you , but to a poor , common , ordinary lad , who might have have more sense than show it . if you be to blame I " 

 " I will advise you to say no more about that girl , at all event ! " say Catriona . " it be she I will never look the road of , not if she lie die . " she turn away from I , and suddenly back . " will you swear you will have no more to deal with she ? " she cry . 

 " indeed , and I will never be so unjust then , " say I ; " nor yet so ungrateful . " 

 and now it be I that turn away . 

 CHAPTER XXII HELVOETSLUYS 

 the weather in the end considerably worsen ; the wind sing in the shroud , the sea swell higher , and the ship begin to labour and cry out among the billow . the song of the leadsman in the chain be now scarce cease , for we thrid all the way among shoal . about nine in the morning , in a burst of wintry sun between two squall of hail , I have my first look of Holland a line of windmill birl in the breeze . it be besides my first knowledge of these daft - like contrivance , which give I a near sense of foreign travel and a new world and life . we come to an anchor about half - past eleven , outside the harbour of Helvoetsluys , in a place where the sea sometimes break and the ship pitch outrageously . you may be sure we be all on deck save Mrs. Gebbie , some of we in cloak , other mantle in the ship s tarpaulin , all cling on by rope , and jest the most like old sailor - folk that we could imitate . 

 presently a boat , that be back like a partancrab , come gingerly alongside , and the skipper of it hail our master in the Dutch . Thence Captain Sang turn , very trouble - like , to Catriona ; and the rest of we crowd about , the nature of the difficulty be make plain to all . the Rose be bind to the port of Rotterdam , whither the other passenger be in a great impatience to arrive , in view of a conveyance due to leave that very evening in the direction of the Upper Germany . this , with the present half - gale of wind , the captain   if no time be lose   declare himself still capable to save . now James More have tryste in Helvoet with his daughter , and the captain have engage to call before the port and place she   accord to the custom   in a shore boat . there be the boat , to be sure , and here be Catriona ready : but both our master and the patroon of the boat scruple at the risk , and the first be in no humour to delay . 

 " your father , " say he , " would be gey an little pleased if we be to break a leg to ye , Miss Drummond , let - a - be drown of you . take my way of it , " say he , " and come on - by with the rest of we here to Rotterdam . Ye can get a passage down the Maes in a sailing scoot as far as to the Brill , and thence on again , by a place in a rattel - waggon , back to Helvoet . " 

 but Catriona would hear of no change . she look white - like as she behold the bursting of the spray , the green sea that sometimes pour upon the fore - castle , and the perpetual bounding and swooping of the boat among the billow ; but she stand firmly by her father s order . " my father , James More , will have arrange it so , " be her first word and her last . I think it very idle and indeed wanton in the girl to be so literal and stand opposite to so much kind advice ; but the fact be she have a very good reason , if she would have tell we . sailing scoot and rattel - waggon be excellent thing ; only the use of they must first be pay for , and all she be possess of in the world be just two shilling and a penny halfpenny sterling . so it fall out that captain and passenger , not know of her destitution and she be too proud to tell they speak in vain . 

 " but you ken nae French and nae Dutch neither , " say one . 

 " it be very true , " say she , " but since the year 46 there be so many of the honest Scotch abroad that I will be do very well . I thank you . " 

 there be a pretty country simplicity in this that make some laugh , other look the more sorry , and Mr. Gebbie fall outright in a passion . I believe he know it be his duty   his wife have accept charge of the girl   to have go ashore with she and see she safe : nothing would have induce he to have do so , since it must have involve the lose of his conveyance ; and I think he make it up to his conscience by the loudness of his voice . at least he break out upon Captain Sang , rag and say the thing be a disgrace ; that it be mere death to try to leave the ship , and at any event we could not cast down an innocent maid in a boatful of nasty Holland fisher , and leave she to her fate . I be think something of the same ; take the mate upon one side , arrange with he to send on my chest by track - scoot to an address I have in Leyden , and stand up and signal to the fisher . 

 " I will go ashore with the young lady , Captain Sang , " say i. " it be all one what way I go to Leyden ; " and leap at the same time into the boat , which I manage not so elegantly but what I fall with two of the fisher in the bilge . 

 from the boat the business appear yet more precarious than from the ship , she stand so high over we , swing down so swift , and menace we so perpetually with she plunge and passage upon the anchor cable . I begin to think I have make a fool s bargain , that it be merely impossible Catriona should be get on board to I , and that I stand to be set ashore at Helvoet all by myself and with no hope of any reward but the pleasure of embrace James More , if I should want to . but this be to reckon without the lass s courage . she have see I leap with very little appearance   however much reality   of hesitation ; to be sure , she be not to be beat by her discard friend . up she stand on the bulwark and hold by a stay , the wind blow in her petticoat , which make the enterprise more dangerous , and give we rather more of a view of her stocking than would be think genteel in city . there be no minute lose , and scarce time give for any to interfere if they have wish the same . I stand up on the other side and spread my arm ; the ship swing down on we , the patroon humour his boat nearer in than be perhaps wholly safe , and Catriona leap into the air . I be so happy as to catch she , and the fisher readily support we , escape a fall . she hold to I a moment very tight , breathe quick and deep ; thence   she still cling to I with both hand   we be pass aft to our place by the steersman ; and Captain Sang and all the crew and passenger cheer and cry farewell , the boat be put about for shore . 

 as soon as Catriona come a little to herself she unhand I suddenly , but say no word . no more do I ; and indeed the whistling of the wind and the breaching of the spray make it no time for speech ; and our crew not only toil excessively but make extremely little way , so that the Rose have get her anchor and be off again before we have approach the harbour mouth . 

 we be no soon in smooth water than the patroon , accord to their beastly holland custom , stop his boat and require of we our fare . two guilde be the man s demand between three and four shilling english money for each passenger . but at this Catriona begin to cry out with a vast deal of agitation . she have ask of Captain Sang , she say , and the fare be but an English shilling . " do you think I will have come on board and not ask first ? " cry she . the patroon scold back upon she in a lingo where the oath be English and the rest right holland ; till at last   see she near tear   I privately slip in the rogue s hand six shilling , whereupon he be oblige enough to receive from she the other shilling without more complaint . no doubt I be a good deal nettled and ashamed . I like to see folk thrifty , but not with so much passion ; and I daresay it would be rather coldly that I ask she , as the boat move on again for shore , where it be that she be tryste with her father . 

 " he be to be inquire of at the house of one Sprott , an honest Scotch merchant , " say she ; and then with the same breath , " I be wish to thank you very much you be a brave friend to I . " 

 " it will be time enough when I get you to your father , " say I , little thinking that I speak so true . " I can tell he a fine tale of a loyal daughter . " 

 " o , I do not think I will be a loyal girl , at all event , " she cry , with a great deal of painfulness in the expression . " I do not think my heart be true . " 

 " yet there be very few that would have make that leap , and all to obey a father s order , " I observe . 

 " I can not have you to be think of I so , " she cry again . " when you have do that same , how would I stop behind ? and at all event that be not all the reason . " Whereupon , with a burn face , she tell I the plain truth upon her poverty . 

 " good guide we ! " cry I , " what kind of daft - like proceeding be this , to let yourself be launch on the continent of Europe with an empty purse I count it hardly decent scant decent ! " I cry . 

 " you forget James More , my father , be a poor gentleman , " say she . " he be a hunted exile . " 

 " but I think not all your friend be hunt exile , " I exclaim . " and be this fair to they that care for you ? be it fair to I ? be it fair to Miss Grant that counsel you to go , and would be drive fair horn - mad if she could hear of it ? be it even fair to these Gregory folk that you be live with , and use you lovingly ? it s a blessing you have fall in my hand ! suppose your father hinder by an accident , what would become of you here , and you your lee - lone in a strange place ? the thought of the thing frighten I , " I say . 

 " I will have lie to all of they , " she reply . " I will have tell they all that I have plenty . I tell she too . I could not be lower James More to they . " 

 I find out later on that she must have lower he in the very dust , for the lie be originally the father s , not the daughter s , and she thus oblige to persevere in it for the man s reputation . but at the time I be ignorant of this , and the mere thought of her destitution and the peril in which see must have fall , have ruffle I almost beyond reason . 

 " well , well , well , " say I , " you will have to learn more sense . " 

 I leave her mail for the moment in an inn upon the shore , where I get a direction for Sprott s house in my new French , and we walk there it be some little way behold the place with wonder as we go . indeed , there be much for scot folk to admire : canal and tree be intermingle with the house ; the house , each within itself , of a brave red brick , the colour of a rose , with step and bench of blue marble at the cheek of every door , and the whole town so clean you might have din upon the causeway . Sprott be within , upon his ledger , in a low parlour , very neat and clean , and set out with china and picture , and a globe of the earth in a brass frame . he be a big - chafted , ruddy , lusty man , with a crooked hard look to he ; and he make we not that much civility as offer we a seat . 

 " be James More Macgregor now in Helvoet , sir ? " say I. 

 " I ken nobody by such a name , " say he , impatient - like . 

 " since you be so particular , " say I , " I will amend my question , and ask you where we be to find in Helvoet one James Drummond , alias Macgregor , alia James More , late tenant in inveronachile ? " 

 " Sir , " say he , " he may be in Hell for what I ken , and for my part I wish he be . " 

 " the young lady be that gentleman s daughter , sir , " say I , " before whom , I think you will agree with I , it be not very become to discuss his character . " 

 " I have nothing to make either with he , or she , or you ! " cry he in his gross voice . 

 " under your favour , Mr. Sprott , " say I , " this young lady be come from Scotland seek he , and by whatever mistake , be give the name of your house for a direction . an error it seem to have be , but I think this place both you and I who be but her fellow - traveller by accident under a strong obligation to help our countrywoman . " 

 " will you de I daft ? " he cry . " I tell ye I ken naething and care less either for he or his breed . I tell ye the man owe I money . " 

 " that may very well be , sir , " say I , who be now rather more angry than himself . " at least , I owe you nothing ; the young lady be under my protection ; and I be neither at all use with these manner , nor in the least content with they . " 

 as I say this , and without particularly think what I do , I draw a step or two nearer to his table ; thus strike , by mere good fortune , on the only argument that could at all affect the man . the blood leave his lusty countenance . 

 " for the Lord s sake dinna be hasty , sir ! " he cry . " I be truly wishfu no to be offensive . but ye ken , sir , I m like a wheen guid - nature , honest , canty auld fellow my bark be waur nor my bite . to hear I , ye micht while fancy I be a wee thing dour ; but na , na ! it s a kind auld fallow at heart , Sandie Sprott ! and ye could never imagine the fyke and fash this man have be to I . " 

 " very good , sir , " say I. " then I will make that much freedom with your kindness as trouble you for your last news of Mr. Drummond . " 

 " you re welcome , sir ! " say he . " as for the young leddy   my respect to she ! , he ll just have clean forget she . I ken the man , ye see ; I have lose siller by he ere now . he think of naebody but just himsel ; clan , king , or dauchter , if he can get his wameful , he would give they a the go - by ! ay , or his correspondent either . for there be a sense in whilk I may be nearly almost say to be his correspondent . the fact be , we be employ thegether in a business affair , and I think it s like to turn out a dear affair for Sandie Sprott . the man s as guid s my pairtner , and I give ye my mere word I ken naethe by where he be . he micht be come here to Helvoet ; he micht come here the morn , he michtnae come for a twalmouth ; I would wonder at naethe or just at the ae thing , and that s if he be to pay I my siller . ye see what way I stand with it ; and it s clear I m no very likely to meddle up with the young leddy , as ye can she . she cannae stop here , that s ae thing certain sure . Dod , sir , I m a lone man ! if I be to tak she in , its highly possible the hellicat would try and gar I marry she when he turn up . " 

 " enough of this talk , " say I. " I will take the young leddy among well friend . give I , pen , ink , and paper , and I will leave here for James More the address of my correspondent in Leyden . he can inquire from I where he be to seek his daughter . " 

 this word I write and seal ; which while I be do , Sprott of his own motion make a welcome offer , to charge himself with Miss Drummond s mail , and even send a porter for they to the inn . I advance he to that effect a dollar or two to be a cover , and he give I an acknowledgment in writing of the sum . 

 Whereupon   I give my arm to Catriona   we leave the house of this unpalatable rascal . she have say no word throughout , leave I to judge and speak in her place ; I , upon my side , have be careful not to embarrass she by a glance ; and even now , although my heart still glow inside of I with shame and anger , I make it my affair to seem quite easy . 

 " now , " say I , " let we get back to yon same inn where they can speak the French , have a piece of dinner , and inquire for conveyance to Rotterdam . I will never be easy till I have you safe again in the hand of Mrs. Gebbie . " 

 " I suppose it will have to be , " say Catriona , " though whoever will be please , I do not think it will be she . and I will remind you this once again that I have but one shilling , and three baubee . " 

 " and just this once again , " say I , " I will remind you it be a blessing that I come alongst with you . " 

 " what else would I be think all this time ? " say she , and I think weigh a little on my arm . " it be you that be the good friend to I . " 

 CHAPTER XXIII travel in HOLLAND 

 the rattel - waggon , which be a kind of a long waggon set with bench , carry we in four hour of travel to the great city of Rotterdam . it be long past dark by then , but the street be pretty brightly light and throng with wild - like , outlandish character beard Hebrews , black man , and the horde of courtesans , most indecently adorn with finery and stop seaman by their very sleeve ; the clash of talk about we make our head to whirl ; and what be the most unexpected of all , we appear to be no more strike with all these foreigner than they with we . I make the good face I could , for the lass s sake and my own credit ; but the truth be I feel like a lost sheep , and my heart beat in my bosom with anxiety . once or twice I inquire after the harbour or the berth of the ship Rose : but either fall on some who speak only holland , or my own French fail I . try a street at a venture , I come upon a lane of lighted house , the door and window throng with wauf - like paint woman ; these jostle and mock upon we as we pass , and I be thankful we have nothing of their language . a little after we issue forth upon an open place along the harbour . 

 " we shall be do now , " cry I , as soon as I spy mast . " let we walk here by the harbour . we be sure to meet some that have the English , and at the good of it we may light upon that very ship . " 

 we do the next good , as happen ; for , about nine of the evening , whom should we walk into the arm of but Captain Sang ? he tell we they have make their run in the most incredible brief time , the wind hold strong till they reach port ; by which mean his passenger be all go already on their further travel . it be impossible to chase after the gebbie into the High Germany , and we have no other acquaintance to fall back upon but Captain sing himself . it be the more gratifying to find the man friendly and wishful to assist . he make it a small affair to find some good plain family of merchant , where Catriona might harbour till the Rose be loaden ; declare he would then blithely carry she back to Leith for nothing and see she safe in the hand of Mr. Gregory ; and in the meanwhile carry we to a late ordinary for the meal we stand in need of . he seem extremely friendly , as I say , but what surprise I a good deal , rather boisterous in the bargain ; and the cause of this be soon to appear . for at the ordinary , call for Rhenish wine and drinking of it deep , he soon become unutterably tipsy . in this case , as too common with all man , but especially with those of his rough trade , what little sense or manner he possess desert he ; and he behave himself so scandalous to the young lady , jest most ill - favouredly at the figure she have make on the ship s rail , that I have no resource but carry she suddenly away . 

 she come out of the ordinary clinging to I close . " take I away , David , " she say . " you keep I . I be not afraid with you . " 

 " and have no cause , my little friend ! " cry I , and could have find it in my heart to weep . 

 " where will you be take I ? " she say again . " Don t leave I at all event never leave I . " 

 " where be I take you to ? " say I stop , for I have be stave on ahead in mere blindness . " I must stop and think . but I ll not leave you , Catriona ; the Lord do so to I , and more also , if I should fail or fash you . " 

 she creep close into I by way of a reply . 

 " here , " I say , " be the still place we have hit on yet in this busy byke of a city . let we sit down here under yon tree and consider of our course . " 

 that tree   which I be little like to forget   stand hard by the harbour side . it be like a black night , but light be in the house , and near hand in the quiet ship ; there be a shining of the city on the one hand , and a buzz hang over it of many thousand walk and talk ; on the other , it be dark and the water bubble on the side . I spread my cloak upon a builder s stone , and make she sit there ; she would have keep she hold upon I , for she still shake with the late affront ; but I want to think clear , disengage myself , and pace to and fro before she , in the manner of what we call a smuggler s walk , belabour my brain for any remedy . by the course of these scatter thought I be bring suddenly face to face with a remembrance that , in the heat and haste of our departure , I have leave Captain Sang to pay the ordinary . at this I begin to laugh out loud , for I think the man well serve ; and at the same time , by an instinctive movement , carry my hand to the pocket where my money be . I suppose it be in the lane where the woman jostle we ; but there be only the one thing certain , that my purse be go . 

 " you will have think of something good , " say she , observe I to pause . 

 at the pinch we be in , my mind become suddenly clear as a perspective glass , and I see there be no choice of method . I have not one doit of coin , but in my pocket - book I have still my letter on the Leyden merchant ; and there be now but the one way to get to Leyden , and that be to walk on our two foot . 

 " Catriona , " say I , " I know you re brave and I believe you re strong do you think you could walk thirty mile on a plain road ? " we find it , I believe , scarce the two - third of that , but such be my notion of the distance . 

 " David , " she say , " if you will just keep near , I will go anywhere and do anything . the courage of my heart , it be all break . do not be leave I in this horrible country by myself , and I will do all else . " 

 " can you start now and march all night ? " say I. 

 " I will do all that you can ask of I , " she say , " and never ask you why . I have be a bad ungrateful girl to you ; and do what you please with I now ! and I think Miss Barbara Grant be the good lady in the world , " she add , " and I do not see what she would deny you for at all event . " 

 this be greek and Hebrew to I ; but I have other matter to consider , and the first of these be to get clear of that city on the Leyden road . it prove a cruel problem ; and it may have be one or two at night ere we have solve it . once beyond the house , there be neither moon nor star to guide we ; only the whiteness of the way in the midst and a blackness of an alley on both hand . the walking be besides make most extraordinary difficult by a plain black frost that fall suddenly in the small hour and turn that highway into one long slide . 

 " well , Catriona , " say I , " here we be like the king s son and the old wife daughter in your daft - like Highland tale . soon we ll be go over the seven ben , the seven glen and the seven mountain moor . " which be a common byword or overcome in those tale of hers that have stick in my memory . 

 " ah , " say she , " but here be no glen or mountain ! though I will never be deny but what the tree and some of the plain place hereabout be very pretty . but our country be the good yet . " 

 " I wish we could say as much for our own folk , " say I , recall Sprott and Sang , and perhaps James more himself . 

 " I will never complain of the country of my friend , " say she , and speak it out with an accent so particular that I seem to see the look upon her face . 

 I catch in my breath sharp and come near fall   for my pain   on the black ice . 

 " I do not know what you think , Catriona , " say I , when I be a little recover , " but this have be the good day yet ! I think shame to say it , when you have meet in with such misfortune and disfavour ; but for I , it have be the good day yet . " 

 " it be a good day when you show I so much love , " say she . 

 " and yet I think shame to be happy too , " I go on , " and you here on the road in the black night . " 

 " where in the great world would I be else ? " she cry . " I be think I be safest where I be with you . " 

 " I be quite forgive , then ? " I ask . 

 " will you not forgive I that time so much as not to take it in your mouth again ? " she cry . " there be nothing in this heart to you but thank . but I will be honest too , " she add , with a kind of suddenness , " and I ll never can forgive that girl . " 

 " be this Miss Grant again ? " say I. " you say yourself she be the good lady in the world . " 

 " so she will be , indeed ! " say Catriona . " but I will never forgive she for all that . I will never , never forgive she , and let I hear tell of she no more . " 

 " well , " say I , " this beat all that ever come to my knowledge ; and I wonder that you can indulge yourself in such bairnly whim . here be a young lady that be the good friend in the world to the both of we , that learn we how to dress ourselves , and in a great manner how to behave , as anyone can see that know we both before and after . " 

 but Catriona stop square in the midst of the highway . 

 " it be this way of it , " say she . " either you will go on to speak of she , and I will go back to yon town , and let come of it what God please ! or else you will do I that politeness to talk of other thing . " 

 I be the most nonplussed person in this world ; but I bethink I that she depend altogether on my help , that she be of the frail sex and not so much beyond a child , and it be for I to be wise for the pair of we . 

 " my dear girl , " say I , " I can make neither head nor tail of this ; but God forbid that I should do anything to set you on the jee . as for talk of Miss Grant , I have no such a mind to it , and I believe it be yourself begin it . my only design   if I take you up at all   be for your own improvement , for I hate the very look of injustice . not that I do not wish you to have a good pride and a nice female delicacy ; they become you well ; but here you show they to excess . " 

 " well , then , have you do ? " say she . 

 " I have do , " say I. 

 " a very good thing , " say she , and we go on again , but now in silence . 

 it be an eerie employment to walk in the gross night , behold only shadow and hear nought but our own step . at first , I believe our heart burn against each other with a deal of enmity ; but the darkness and the cold , and the silence , which only the cock sometimes interrupt , or sometimes the farmyard dog , have pretty soon bring down our pride to the dust ; and for my own particular , I would have jump at any decent opening for speech . 

 before the day peep , come on a warmish rain , and the frost be all wipe away from among our foot . I take my cloak to she and seek to hap she in the same ; she bid I , rather impatiently , to keep it . 

 " indeed and I will do no such thing , " say I. " here be I , a great , ugly lad that have see all kind of weather , and here be you a tender , pretty maid ! my dear , you would not put I to a shame ? " 

 without more word she let I cover she ; which as I be do in the darkness , I let my hand rest a moment on her shoulder , almost like an embrace . 

 " you must try to be more patient of your friend , " say I. 

 I think she seem to lean the least thing in the world against my bosom , or perhaps it be but fancy . 

 " there will be no end to your goodness , " say she . 

 and we go on again in silence ; but now all be change ; and the happiness that be in my heart be like a fire in a great chimney . 

 the rain pass ere day ; it be but a sloppy morning as we come into the town of Delft . the red gable house make a handsome show on either hand of a canal ; the servant lassie be out slestere and scrub at the very stone upon the public highway ; smoke rise from a hundred kitchen ; and it come in upon I strongly it be time to break our fast . 

 " Catriona , " say I , " I believe you have yet a shilling and three baubee ? " 

 " be you want it ? " say she , and pass I her purse . " I be wish it be five pound ! what will you want it for ? " 

 " and what have we be walk for all night , like a pair of waif Egyptians ! " say I. " just because I be rob of my purse and all I possess in that unchancy town of Rotterdam . I will tell you of it now , because I think the bad be over , but we have still a good tramp before we till we get to where my money be , and if you would not buy I a piece of bread , I be like to go fast . " 

 she look at I with open eye . by the light of the new day she be all black and pale for weariness , so that my heart smite I for she . but as for she , she break out laugh . 

 " my torture ! be we beggar then ! " she cry . " you too ? o , I could have wish for this same thing ! and I be glad to buy your breakfast to you . but it would be pleisand if I would have have to dance to get a meal to you ! for I believe they be not very well acquainted with our manner of dance over here , and might be pay for the curiosity of that sight . " 

 I could have kiss she for that word , not with a lover s mind , but in a heat of admiration . for it always warm a man to see a woman brave . 

 we get a drink of milk from a country wife but new come to the town , and in a baker s , a piece of excellent , hot , sweet - smell bread , which we eat upon the road as we go on . that road from Delft to the Hague be just five mile of a fine avenue shade with tree , a canal on the one hand , on the other excellent pasture of cattle . it be pleasant here indeed . 

 " and now , Davie , " say she , " what will you do with I at all event ? " 

 " it be what we have to speak of , " say I , " and the soon yet the well . I can come by money in Leyden ; that will be all well . but the trouble be how to dispose of you until your father come . I think last night you seem a little sweir to part from I ? " 

 " it will be more than seem then , " say she . 

 " you be a very young maid , " say I , " and I be but a very young callant . this be a great piece of difficulty . what way be we to manage ? unless indeed , you could pass to be my sister ? " 

 " and what for no ? " say she , " if you would let I ! " 

 " I wish you be so , indeed , " I cry . " I would be a fine man if I have such a sister . but the rub be that you be Catriona Drummond . " 

 " and now I will be Catriona Balfour , " she say . " and who be to ken ? they be all strange folk here . " 

 " if you think that it would do , " say I. " I own it trouble I . I would like it very ill , if I advise you at all wrong . " 

 " David , I have no friend here but you , " she say . 

 " the mere truth be , I be too young to be your friend , " say I. " I be too young to advise you , or you to be advise . I see not what else we be to do , and yet I ought to warn you . " 

 " I will have no choice leave , " say she . " my father James More have not use I very well , and it be not the first time , I be cast upon your hand like a sack of barley meal , and have nothing else to think of but your pleasure . if you will have I , good and well . if you will not " she turn and touch her hand upon my arm " David , I be afraid , " say she . 

 " no , but I ought to warn you , " I begin ; and then bethink I I be the bearer of the purse , and it would never do to seem too churlish . " Catriona , " say I , " don t misunderstand I : I be just try to do my duty by you , girl ! here be I go alone to this strange city , to be a solitary student there ; and here be this chance arise that you might dwell with I a bit , and be like my sister ; you can surely understand this much , my dear , that I would just love to have you ? " 

 " well , and here I be , " say she . " so that s soon settle . " 

 I know I be in duty bounden to have speak more plain . I know this be a great blot on my character , for which I be lucky that I do not pay more dear . but I mind how easy her delicacy have be startle with a word of kiss she in Barbara s letter ; now that she depend on I , how be I to be more bold ? besides , the truth be , I could see no other feasible method to dispose of she . and I daresay inclination pull I very strong . 

 a little beyond the Hague she fall very lame and make the rest of the distance heavily enough . twice she must rest by the wayside , which she do with pretty apology , call herself a shame to the Highlands and the race she come of , and nothing but a hindrance to myself . it be her excuse , she say , that she be not much use with walk shod . I would have have her strip off her shoe and stocking and go barefoot . but she point out to I that the woman of that country , even in the landward road , appear to be all shod . 

 " I must not be disgrace my brother , " say she , and be very merry with it all , although her face tell tale of she . 

 there be a garden in that city we be bind to , sand below with clean sand , the tree meet overhead , some of they trim , some preach , and the whole place beautify with alley and arbour . here I leave Catriona , and go forward by myself to find my correspondent . there I draw on my credit , and ask to be recommend to some decent , retired lodging . my baggage be not yet arrive , I tell he I suppose I should require his caution with the people of the house ; and explain that , my sister be come for a while to keep house with I , I should be want two chamber . this be all very well ; but the trouble be that Mr. Balfour in his letter of recommendation have condescend on a great deal of particular , and never a word of any sister in the case . I could see my Dutchman be extremely suspicious ; and view I over the rim of a great pair of spectacle he be a poor , frail body , and remind I of an infirm rabbit he begin to question I close . 

 here I fall in a panic . suppose he accept my tale   think I , suppose he invite my sister to his house , and that I bring she . I shall have a fine ravel pirn to unwind , and may end by disgrace both the lassie and myself . thereupon I begin hastily to expound to he my sister s character . she be of a bashful disposition , it appear , and be extremely fearful of meet stranger that I have leave she at that moment sit in a public place alone . and then , be launch upon the stream of falsehood , I must do like all the rest of the world in the same circumstance , and plunge in deep than be any service ; add some altogether needless particular of Miss Balfour s ill - health and retirement during childhood . in the midst of which I awake to a sense of my behaviour , and be turn to one blush . 

 the old gentleman be not so much deceive but what he discover a willingness to be quit of I . but he be first of all a man of business ; and know that my money be good enough , however it might be with my conduct , he be so far oblige as to send his son to be my guide and caution in the matter of a lodging . this imply my presenting of the young man to Catriona . the poor , pretty child be much recover with resting , look and behave to perfection , and take my arm and give I the name of brother more easily than I could answer she . but there be one misfortune : think to help , she be rather towardly than otherwise to my Dutchman . and I could not but reflect that Miss Balfour have rather suddenly outgrown her bashfulness . and there be another thing , the difference of our speech . I have the Low Country tongue and dwell upon my word ; she have a hill voice , speak with something of an English accent , only far more delightful , and be scarce quite fit to be call a deacon in the craft of talk English grammar ; so that , for a brother and sister , we make a most uneven pair . but the young Hollander be a heavy dog , without so much spirit in his belly as to remark her prettiness , for which I scorn he . and as soon as he have find a cover to our head , he leave we alone , which be the great service of the two . 

 CHAPTER XXIV FULL story of a copy of heinecciu 

 the place find be in the upper part of a house back on a canal . we have two room , the second enter from the first ; each have a chimney build out into the floor in the dutch manner ; and be alongside , each have the same prospect from the window of the top of a tree below we in a little court , of a piece of the canal , and of house in the holland architecture and a church spire upon the further side . a full set of bell hang in that spire and make delightful music ; and when there be any sun at all , it shine direct in our two chamber . from a tavern hard by we have good meal send in . 

 the first night we be both pretty weary , and she extremely so . there be little talk between we , and I pack she off to her bed as soon as she have eat . the first thing in the morning I write word to Sprott to have her mail send on , together with a line to Alan at his chief s ; and have the same despatch , and her breakfast ready , ere I wake she . I be a little abashed when she come forth in her one habit , and the mud of the way upon her stocking . by what inquiry I have make , it seem a good few day must pass before her mail could come to hand in Leyden , and it be plainly needful she must have a shift of thing . she be unwilling at first that I should go to that expense ; but I remind she she be now a rich man s sister and must appear suitably in the part , and we have not get to the second merchant s before she be entirely charm into the spirit of the thing , and her eye shin . it please I to see she so innocent and thorough in this pleasure . what be more extraordinary be the passion into which I fall on it myself ; be never satisfied that I have buy she enough or fine enough , and never weary of behold she in different attire . indeed , I begin to understand some little of Miss Grant s immersion in the interest of clothe ; for the truth be , when you have the ground of a beautiful person to adorn , the whole business become beautiful . the dutch chintze I should say be extraordinary cheap and fine ; but I would be ashamed to set down what I pay for stocking to she . altogether I spend so great a sum upon this pleasuring   as I may call it   that I be ashamed for a great while to spend more ; and by way of a set - off , I leave our chamber pretty bare . if we have bed , if Catriona be a little braw , and I have light to see she by , we be richly enough lodge for I . 

 by the end of this merchandising I be glad to leave she at the door with all our purchase , and go for a long walk alone in which to read myself a lecture . here have I take under my roof , and as good as to my bosom , a young lass extremely beautiful , and whose innocence be her peril . my talk with the old Dutchman , and the lie to which I be constrain , have already give I a sense of how my conduct must appear to other ; and now , after the strong admiration I have just experience and the immoderacy with which I have continue my vain purchase , I begin to think of it myself as very hazard . I bethink I , if I have a sister indeed , whether I would so expose she ; then , judge the case too problematical , I vary my question into this , whether I would so trust Catriona in the hand of any other christian being ; the answer to which make my face to burn . the more cause , since I have be entrap and have entrap the girl into an undue situation , that I should behave in it with scrupulous nicety . she depend on I wholly for her bread and shelter ; in case I should alarm her delicacy , she have no retreat . besides I be her host and her protector ; and the more irregularly I have fall in these position , the less excuse for I if I should profit by the same to forward even the most honest suit ; for with the opportunity that I enjoy , and which no wise parent would have suffer for a moment , even the most honest suit would be unfair . I see I must be extremely hold - off in my relation ; and yet not too much so neither ; for if I have no right to appear at all in the character of a suitor , I must yet appear continually , and if possible agreeably , in that of host . it be plain I should require a great deal of tact and conduct , perhaps more than my year afford . but I have rush in where angel might have fear to tread , and there be no way out of that position save by behave right while I be in it . I make a set of rule for my guidance ; pray for strength to be enable to observe they , and as a more human aid to the same end purchase a study - book in law . this be all that I could think of , I relax from these grave consideration ; whereupon my mind bubble at once into an effervescency of pleasing spirit , and it be like one treading on air that I turn homeward . as I think that name of home , and recall the image of that figure await I between four wall , my heart beat upon my bosom . 

 my trouble begin with my return . she run to greet I with an obvious and affect pleasure . she be clothe , besides , entirely in the new clothe that I have buy for she ; look in they beyond expression well ; and must walk about and drop I curtsey to display they and to be admire . I be sure I do it with an ill grace , for I think to have choke upon the word . 

 " well , " she say , " if you will not be care for my pretty clothe , see what I have do with our two chamber . " and she show I the place all very finely sweep , and the fire glow in the two chimney . 

 I be glad of a chance to seem a little more severe than I quite feel . " Catriona , " say I , " I be very much displeased with you , and you must never again lay a hand upon my room . one of we two must have the rule while we be here together ; it be most fit it should be I who be both the man and the elder ; and I give you that for my command . " 

 she drop I one of her curtsey ; which be extraordinary taking . " if you will be cross , " say she , " I must be make pretty manner at you , Davie . I will be very obedient , as I should be when every stitch upon all there be of I belong to you . but you will not be very cross either , because now I have not anyone else . " 

 this strike I hard , and I make haste , in a kind of penitence , to blot out all the good effect of my last speech . in this direction progress be more easy , be down hill ; she lead I forward , smile ; at the sight of she , in the brightness of the fire and with her pretty beck and look , my heart be altogether melt . we make our meal with infinite mirth and tenderness ; and the two seem to be commingle into one , so that our very laughter sound like a kindness . 

 in the midst of which I awake to well recollection , make a lame word of excuse , and set myself boorishly to my study . it be a substantial , instructive book that I have buy , by the late Dr. Heineccius , in which I be to do a great deal read these next few day , and often very glad that I have no one to question I of what I read . methought she bite her lip at I a little , and that cut I . indeed it leave she wholly solitary , the more as she be very little of a reader , and have never a book . but what be I to do ? 

 so the rest of the evening flow by almost without speech . 

 I could have beat myself . I could not lie in my bed that night for rage and repentance , but walk to and fro on my bare foot till I be nearly perish , for the chimney be go out and the frost keen . the thought of she in the next room , the thought that she might even hear I as I walk , the remembrance of my churlishness and that I must continue to practise the same ungrateful course or be dishonour , put I beside my reason . I stand like a man between Scylla and Charybdis : what must she think of I ? be my one thought that soften I continually into weakness . what be to become of we ? the other which steel I again to resolution . this be my first night of wakefulness and divided counsel , of which I be now to pass many , pace like a madman , sometimes weep like a childish boy , sometimes pray   I fain would hope   like a Christian . 

 but prayer be not very difficult , and the hitch come in practice . in her presence , and above all if I allow any beginning of familiarity , I find I have very little command of what should follow . but to sit all day in the same room with she , and feign to be engage upon Heineccius , surpass my strength . so that I fall instead upon the expedient of absent myself so much as I be able ; take out class and sit there regularly , often with small attention , the test of which I find the other day in a note - book of that period , where I have leave off to follow an edify lecture and actually scribble in my book some very ill verse , though the Latinity be rather well than I think that I could ever have compass . the evil of this course be unhappily near as great as its advantage . I have the less time of trial , but I believe , while the time last , I be try the more extremely . for she be so much leave to solitude , she come to greet my return with an increase fervour that come nigh to overmaster I . these friendly offer I must barbarously cast back ; and my rejection sometimes wound she so cruelly that I must unbend and seek to make it up to she in kindness . so that our time pass in up and down , tiff and disappointment , upon the which I could almost say   if it may be say with reverence   that I be crucify . 

 the base of my trouble be Catriona s extraordinary innocence , at which I be not so much surprised as fill with pity and admiration . she seem to have no thought of our position , no sense of my struggle ; welcome any mark of my weakness with responsive joy ; and when I be drive again to my retrenchment , do not always dissemble her chagrin . there be time when I have think to myself , " if she be over head in love , and set her cap to catch I , she would scarce behave much otherwise ; " and then I would fall again into wonder at the simplicity of woman , from whom I feel   in these moment   that I be not worthy to be descend . 

 there be one point in particular on which our warfare turn , and of all thing , this be the question of her clothe . my baggage have soon follow I from Rotterdam , and her from Helvoet . she have now , as it be , two wardrobe ; and it grow to be understand between we   I could never tell how   that when she be friendly she would wear my clothe , and when otherwise her own . it be mean for a buffet , and   as it be   the renunciation of her gratitude ; and I feel it so in my bosom , but be generally more wise than to appear to have observe the circumstance . 

 once , indeed , I be betray into a childishness great than her own ; it fall in this way . on my return from class , think upon she devoutly with a great deal of love and a good deal of annoyance in the bargain , the annoyance begin to fade away out of my mind ; and spy in a window one of those force flower , of which the hollander be so skilled in the artifice , I give way to an impulse and buy it for Catriona . I do not know the name of that flower , but it be of the pink colour , and I think she would admire the same , and carry it home to she with a wonderful soft heart . I have leave she in my clothe , and when I return to find she all change and a face to match , I cast but the one look at she from head to foot , ground my tooth together , fling the window open , and my flower into the court , and then   between rage and prudence   myself out of that room again , of which I slam she door as I go out . 

 on the steep stair I come near fall , and this bring I to myself , so that I begin at once to see the folly of my conduct . I go , not into the street as I have purpose , but to the house court , which be always a solitary place , and where I see my flower   that have cost I vastly more than it be worth   hang in the leafless tree . I stand by the side of the canal , and look upon the ice . country people go by on their skate , and I envy they . I could see no way out of the pickle I be in no way so much as to return to the room I have just leave . no doubt be in my mind but I have now betray the secret of my feeling ; and to make thing bad , I have show at the same time   and that with wretched boyishness   incivility to my helpless guest . 

 I suppose she must have see I from the open window . it do not seem to I that I have stand there very long before I hear the crunching of footstep on the frozen snow , and turn somewhat angrily   for I be in no spirit to be interrupt   see Catriona draw near . she be all change again , to the clocked stocking . 

 " be we not to have our walk to - day ? " say she . 

 I be look at she in a maze . " where be your brooch ? " say I. 

 she carry her hand to her bosom and coloured high . " I will have forget it , " say she . " I will run upstairs for it quick , and then surely we ll can have our walk ? " 

 there be a note of plead in that last that stagger I ; I have neither word nor voice to utter they ; I could do no more than nod by way of answer ; and the moment she have leave I , climb into the tree and recover my flower , which on her return I offer she . 

 " I buy it for you , Catriona , " say I. 

 she fix it in the midst of her bosom with the brooch , I could have think tenderly . 

 " it be none the well of my handling , " say I again , and blush . 

 " I will be like it none the bad , you may be sure of that , " say she . 

 we do not speak so much that day ; she seem a thought on the reserve , though not unkindly . as for I , all the time of our walking , and after we come home , and I have see she put my flower into a pot of water , I be think to myself what puzzle woman be . I be think , the one moment , it be the most stupid thing on earth she should not have perceive my love ; and the next , that she have certainly perceive it long ago , and   be a wise girl with the fine female instinct of propriety   conceal her knowledge . 

 we have our walk daily . out in the street I feel more safe ; I relax a little in my guardedness ; and for one thing , there be no Heineccius . this make these period not only a relief to myself , but a particular pleasure to my poor child . when I come back about the hour appoint , I would generally find she ready dress , and glow with anticipation . she would prolong their duration to the extreme , seem to dread   as I do myself   the hour of the return ; and there be scarce a field or waterside near Leyden , scarce a street or lane there , where we have not linger . outside of these , I bid her confine herself entirely to our lodging ; this in the fear of she encounter any acquaintance , which would have render our position very difficult . from the same apprehension I would never suffer she to attend church , nor even go myself ; but make some kind of shift to hold worship privately in our own chamber I hope with an honest , but I be quite sure with a very much divided mind . indeed , there be scarce anything that more affect I , than thus to kneel down alone with she before God like man and wife . 

 one day it be snow downright hard . I have think it not possible that we should venture forth , and be surprised to find she wait for I ready dress . 

 " I will not be do without my walk , " she cry . " you be never a good boy , Davie , in the house ; I will never be care for you only in the open air . I think we two will well turn egyptian and dwell by the roadside . " 

 that be the good walk yet of all of they ; she cling near to I in the fall snow ; it beat about and melt on we , and the drop stand upon her bright cheek like tear and run into her smile mouth . Strength seem to come upon I with the sight like a giant s ; I think I could have catch she up and run with she into the uttermost place in the earth ; and we speak together all that time beyond belief for freedom and sweetness . 

 it be the dark night when we come to the house door . she press my arm upon her bosom . " thank you kindly for these same good hour , " say she , on a deep note of her voice . 

 the concern in which I fall instantly on this address , put I with the same swiftness on my guard ; and we be no soon in the chamber , and the light make , than she behold the old , dour , stubborn countenance of the student of Heineccius . Doubtless she be more than usually hurt ; and I know for myself , I find it more than usually difficult to maintain any strangeness . even at the meal , I durst scarce unbuckle and scarce lift my eye to she ; and it be no soon over than I fall again to my civilian , with more seeming abstraction and less understanding than before . Methought , as I read , I could hear my heart strike like an eight - day clock . hard as I feign to study , there be still some of my eyesight that spill beyond the book upon Catriona . she sit on the floor by the side of my great mail , and the chimney light she up , and shine and blink upon she , and make her glow and darken through a wonder of fine hue . now she would be gaze in the fire , and then again at I ; and at that I would be plunge in a terror of myself , and turn the page of Heineccius like a man look for the text in church . 

 suddenly she call out aloud . " o , why do not my father come ? " she cry , and fall at once into a storm of tear . 

 I leap up , fling Heineccius fairly in the fire , run to her side , and cast an arm around her sob body . 

 she put I from she sharply , " you do not love your friend , " say she . " I could be so happy too , if you would let I ! " and then , " o , what will I have do that you should hate I so ? " 

 " hate you ! " cry I , and hold her firm . " you blind less , can you not see a little in my wretched heart ? do you not think when I sit there , read in that fool - book that I have just burn and be damn to it , I take ever the least thought of any stricken thing but just yourself ? night after night I could have grat to see you sit there your lone . and what be I to do ? you be here under my honour ; would you punish I for that ? be it for that that you would spurn a love servant ? " 

 at the word , with a small , sudden motion , she cling near to I . I raise her face to mine , I kiss it , and she bow her brow upon my bosom , clasp I tight . I see in a mere whirl like a man drunken . then I hear her voice sound very small and muffle in my clothe . 

 " do you kiss she truly ? " she ask . 

 there go through I so great a heave of surprise that I be all shake with it . 

 " Miss Grant ? " I cry , all in a disorder . " yes , I ask she to kiss I good - bye , the which she do . " 

 " ah , well ! " say she , " you have kiss I too , at all event . " 

 at the strangeness and sweetness of that word , I see where we have fall ; rose , and set she on her foot . 

 " this will never do , " say I. " this will never , never do . o catrine , catrine ! " then there come a pause in which I be debar from any speaking . and then , " go away to your bed , " say I. " go away to your bed and leave I . " 

 she turn to obey I like a child , and the next I know of it , have stop in the very doorway . 

 " good night , Davie ! " say she . 

 " and o , good night , my love ! " I cry , with a great outbreak of my soul , and catch she to I again , so that it seem I must have break she . the next moment I have thrust she from the room , shut to the door even with violence , and stand alone . 

 the milk be spill now , the word be out and the truth tell . I have creep like an untrusty man into the poor maid s affection ; she be in my hand like any frail , innocent thing to make or mar ; and what weapon of defence be leave I ? it seem like a symbol that Heineccius , my old protection , be now burn . I repent , yet could not find it in my heart to blame myself for that great failure . it seem not possible to have resist the boldness of her innocence or that last temptation of her weeping . and all that I have to excuse I do but make my sin appear the great it be upon a nature so defenceless , and with such advantage of the position , that I seem to have practise . 

 what be to become of we now ? it seem we could no long dwell in the one place . but where be I to go ? or where she ? without either choice or fault of ours , life have conspire to wall we together in that narrow place . I have a wild thought of marry out of hand ; and the next moment put it from I with revolt . she be a child , she could not tell her own heart ; I have surprise her weakness , I must never go on to build on that surprisal ; I must keep she not only clear of reproach , but free as she have come to I . 

 down I sit before the fire , and reflect , and repent , and beat my brain in vain for any mean of escape . about two of the morning , there be three red ember leave and the house and all the city be asleep , when I be aware of a small sound of weeping in the next room . she think that I sleep , the poor soul ; she regret her weakness and what perhaps   God help she !   she call her forwardness and in the dead of the night solace herself with tear . tender and bitter feeling , love and penitence and pity , struggle in my soul ; it seem I be under bond to heal that weeping . 

 " o , try to forgive I ! " I cry out , " try , try to forgive I . let we forget it all , let we try if we ll no can forget it ! " 

 there come no answer , but the sobbing cease . I stand a long while with my hand still clasp as I have speak ; then the cold of the night lay hold upon I with a shudder , and I think my reason reawaken . 

 " you can make no hand of this , Davie , " think I. " to bed with you like a wise lad , and try if you can sleep . to - morrow you may see your way . " 

 CHAPTER XXV the return of JAMES MORE 

 I be call on the morrow out of a late and troubled slumber by a knocking on my door , run to open it , and have almost swoon with the contrariety of my feeling , mostly painful ; for on the threshold , in a rough wraprascal and an extraordinary big laced hat , there stand James More . 

 I ought to have be glad perhaps without admixture , for there be a sense in which the man come like an answer to prayer . I have be say till my head be weary that Catriona and I must separate , and look till my head ache for any possible mean of separation . here be the mean come to I upon two leg , and joy be the hindmost of my thought . it be to be consider , however , that even if the weight of the future be lift off I by the man s arrival , the present heave up the more black and menacing ; so that , as I first stand before he in my shirt and breech , I believe I take a leap step backward like a person shoot . 

 " ah , " say he , " I have find you , Mr. Balfour . " and offer I his large , fine hand , the which   recover at the same time my post in the doorway , as if with some thought of resistance   I take he by doubtfully . " it be a remarkable circumstance how our affair appear to intermingle , " he continue . " I be owe you an apology for an unfortunate intrusion upon your , which I suffer myself to be entrap into by my confidence in that false - face , Prestongrange ; I think shame to own to you that I be ever trust to a lawyer . " he shrug his shoulder with a very french air . " but indeed the man be very plausible , " say he . " and now it seem that you have busy yourself handsomely in the matter of my daughter , for whose direction I be remit to yourself . " 

 " I think , sir , " say I , with a very painful air , " that it will be necessary we two should have an explanation . " 

 " there be nothing amiss ? " he ask . " my agent , Mr. Sprott " 

 " for God s sake moderate your voice ! " I cry . " she must not hear till we have have an explanation . " 

 " she be in this place ? " cry he . 

 " that be her chamber door , " say I. 

 " you be here with she alone ? " he ask . 

 " and who else would I have get to stay with we ? " cry I. 

 I will do he the justice to admit that he turn pale . 

 " this be very unusual , " say he . " this be a very unusual circumstance . you be right , we must hold an explanation . " 

 so say he pass I by , and I must own the tall old rogue appear at that moment extraordinary dignify . he have now , for the first time , the view of my chamber , which I scan   I may say   with his eye . a bit of morning sun glint in by the window pane , and show it off ; my bed , my mail , and washing dish , with some disorder of my clothe , and the unlighted chimney , make the only plenishing ; no mistake but it look bare and cold , and the most unsuitable , beggarly place conceivable to harbour a young lady . at the same time come in on my mind the recollection of the clothe that I have buy for she ; and I think this contrast of poverty and prodigality bear an ill appearance . 

 he look all about the chamber for a seat , and find nothing else to his purpose except my bed , take a place upon the side of it ; where , after I have close the door , I could not very well avoid join he . for however this extraordinary interview might end , it must pass if possible without wake Catriona ; and the one thing needful be that we should sit close and talk low . but I can scarce picture what a pair we make ; he in his great coat which the coldness of my chamber make extremely suitable ; I shiver in my shirt and breek ; he with very much the air of a judge ; and I   whatever I look   with very much the feeling of a man who have hear the last trumpet . 

 " well ? " say he . 

 and " well , " I begin , but find myself unable to go far . 

 " you tell I she be here ? " say he again , but now with a spice of impatience that seem to brace I up . 

 " she be in this house , " say I , " and I know the circumstance would be call unusual . but you be to consider how very unusual the whole business be from the beginning . here be a young lady land on the coast of Europe with two shilling and a penny halfpenny . she be direct to yon man Sprott in Helvoet . I hear you call he your agent . all I can say be he could do nothing but damn and swear at the mere mention of your name , and I must fee he out of my own pocket even to receive the custody of her effect . you speak of unusual circumstance , Mr. Drummond , if that be the name you prefer . here be a circumstance , if you like , to which it be barbarity to have expose she . " 

 " but this be what I can not understand the least , " say James . " my daughter be place into the charge of some responsible person , whose name I have forget . " 

 " Gebbie be the name , " say I ; " and there be no doubt that Mr. Gebbie should have go ashore with she at Helvoet . but he do not , Mr. Drummond ; and I think you might praise God that I be there to offer in his place . " 

 " I shall have a word to say to Mr. Gebbie before long , " say he . " as for yourself , I think it might have occur that you be somewhat young for such a post . " 

 " but the choice be not between I and somebody else , it be between I and nobody , " cry I. " nobody offer in my place , and I must say I think you show a very small degree of gratitude to I that do . " 

 " I shall wait until I understand my obligation a little more in the particular , " say he . 

 " indeed , and I think it star you in the face , then , " say I. " your child be desert , she be clean fling away in the midst of Europe , with scarce two shilling , and not two word of any language speak there : I must say , a bonny business ! I bring she to this place . I give she the name and the tenderness due to a sister . all this have not go without expense , but that I scarce need to hint at . they be service due to the young lady s character which I respect ; and I think it would be a bonny business too , if I be to be sing her praise to her father . " 

 " you be a young man , " he begin . 

 " so I hear you tell I , " say I , with a good deal of heat . 

 " you be a very young man , " he repeat , " or you would have understand the significancy of the step . " 

 " I think you speak very much at your ease , " cry I. " what else be I to do ? it be a fact I might have hire some decent , poor woman to be a third to we , and I declare I never think of it until this moment ! but where be I to find she , that be a foreigner myself ? and let I point out to your observation , Mr. Drummond , that it would have cost I money out of my pocket . for here be just what it come to , that I have to pay through the nose for your neglect ; and there be only the one story to it , just that you be so unloving and so careless as to have lose your daughter . " 

 " he that live in a glass house should not be cast stone , " say he ; " and we will finish inquire into the behaviour of Miss Drummond before we go on to sit in judgment on her father . " 

 " but I will be entrap into no such attitude , " say I. " the character of Miss Drummond be far above inquiry , as her father ought to know . so be mine , and I be tell you that . there be but the two way of it open . the one be to express your thank to I as one gentleman to another , and to say no more . the other   if you be so difficult as to be still dissatisfied   be to pay I , that which I have expend and be do . " 

 he seem to soothe I with a hand in the air . " there , there , " say he . " you go too fast , you go too fast , Mr. Balfour . it be a good thing that I have learn to be more patient . and I believe you forget that I have yet to see my daughter . " 

 I begin to be a little relieved upon this speech and a change in the man s manner that I spy in he as soon as the name of money fall between we . 

 " I be think it would be more fit if you will excuse the plainness of my dressing in your presence that I should go forth and leave you to encounter she alone ? " say I. 

 " what I would have look for at your hand ! " say he ; and there be no mistake but what he say it civilly . 

 I think this well and well still , and as I begin to pull on my hose , recall the man s impudent mendicancy at Prestongrange s , I determine to pursue what seem to be my victory . 

 " if you have any mind to stay some while in Leyden , " say I , " this room be very much at your disposal , and I can easy find another for myself : in which way we shall have the least amount of flit possible , there be only one to change . " 

 " why , sir , " say he , make his bosom big , " I think no shame of a poverty I have come by in the service of my king ; I make no secret that my affair be quite involve ; and for the moment , it would be even impossible for I to undertake a journey . " 

 " until you have occasion to communicate with your friend , " say I , " perhaps it might be convenient for you   as of course it would be honourable to myself   if you be to regard yourself in the light of my guest ? " 

 " Sir , " say he , " when an offer be frankly make , I think I honour myself most to imitate that frankness . your hand , Mr. David ; you have the character that I respect the most ; you be one of those from whom a gentleman can take a favour and no more word about it . I be an old soldier , " he go on , look rather disgust - like around my chamber , " and you need not fear I shall prove burthensome . I have eat too often at a dyke - side , drink of the ditch , and have no roof but the rain . " 

 " I should be tell you , " say I , " that our breakfast be send customarily in about this time of morning . I propose I should go now to the tavern , and bid they add a cover for yourself and delay the meal the matter of an hour , which will give you an interval to meet your daughter in . " 

 methought his nostril wag at this . " o , an hour ? " say he . " that be perhaps superfluous . half an hour , Mr. David , or say twenty minute ; I shall do very well in that . and by the way , " he add , detain I by the coat , " what be it you drink in the morning , whether ale or wine ? " 

 " to be frank with you , sir , " say I , " I drink nothing else but spare , cold water . " 

 " tut - tut , " say he , " that be fair destruction to the stomach , take an old campaigner s word for it . our country spirit at home be perhaps the most entirely wholesome ; but as that be not come - at - able , Rhenish or a white wine of Burgundy will be next good . " 

 " I shall make it my business to see you be supply , " say I. 

 " why , very good , " say he , " and we shall make a man of you yet , Mr. David . " 

 by this time , I can hardly say that I be mind he at all , beyond an odd thought of the kind of father - in - law that he be like to prove ; and all my care centre about the lass his daughter , to whom I determine to convey some warning of her visitor . I step to the door accordingly , and cry through the panel , knock thereon at the same time : " Miss Drummond , here be your father come at last . " 

 with that I go forth upon my errand , have   by two word   extraordinarily damage my affair . 

 CHAPTER XXVI the THREESOME 

 whether or not I be to be so much blame , or rather perhaps pity , I must leave other to judge . my shrewdness   of which I have a good deal , too   seem not so great with the lady . no doubt , at the moment when I awake she , I be think a good deal of the effect upon James More ; and similarly when I return and we be all sit down to breakfast , I continue to behave to the young lady with deference and distance ; as I still think to have be most wise . her father have cast doubt upon the innocence of my friendship ; and these , it be my first business to allay . but there be a kind of an excuse for Catriona also . we have share in a scene of some tenderness and passion , and give and receive caress : I have thrust she from I with violence ; I have call aloud upon she in the night from the one room to the other ; she have pass hour of wakefulness and weeping ; and it be not to be suppose I have be absent from her pillow thought . upon the back of this , to be awake , with unaccustomed formality , under the name of Miss Drummond , and to be thenceforth use with a great deal of distance and respect , lead she entirely in error on my private sentiment ; and she be indeed so incredibly abuse as to imagine I repentant and try to draw off ! 

 the trouble betwixt we seem to have be this : that whereas I   since I have first set eye on his great hat   think singly of James More , his return and suspicion , she make so little of these that I may say she scarce remark they , and all her trouble and doing regard what have pass between we in the night before . this be partly to be explain by the innocence and boldness of her character ; and partly because James More , have speed so ill in his interview with I , or have his mouth close by my invitation , say no word to she upon the subject . at the breakfast , accordingly , it soon appear we be at cross purpose . I have look to find she in clothe of her own : I find she   as if her father be forget   wear some of the good that I have buy for she , and which she know   or think   that I admire she in . I have look to find she imitate my affectation of distance , and be most precise and formal ; instead I find she flushed and wild - like , with eye extraordinary bright , and a painful and varying expression , call I by name with a sort of appeal of tenderness , and refer and defer to my thought and wish like an anxious or a suspect wife . 

 but this be not for long . as I behold she so regardless of her own interest , which I have jeopardise and be now endeavour to recover , I redouble my own coldness in the manner of a lesson to the girl . the more she come forward , the far I draw back ; the more she betray the closeness of our intimacy , the more pointedly civil I became , until even her father   if he have not be so engross with eat   might have observe the opposition . in the midst of which , of a sudden , she become wholly change , and I tell myself , with a good deal of relief , that she have take the hint at last . 

 all day I be at my class or in quest of my new lodging ; and though the hour of our customary walk hang miserably on my hand , I can not say but I be happy on the whole to find my way clear , the girl again in proper keeping , the father satisfied or at least acquiescent , and myself free to prosecute my love with honour . at supper , as at all our meal , it be James More that do the talking . no doubt but he talk well if anyone could have believe he . but I will speak of he presently more at large . the meal at an end , he rise , get his great coat , and look   as I think   at I , observe he have affair abroad . I take this for a hint that I be to be go also , and get up ; whereupon the girl , who have scarce give I greeting at my entrance , turn her eye upon I wide open with a look that bade I stay . I stand between they like a fish out of water , turn from one to the other ; neither seem to observe I , she gaze on the floor , he button his coat : which vastly swell my embarrassment . this appearance of indifference argue , upon her side , a good deal of anger very near to burst out . upon his , I think it horribly alarming ; I make sure there be a tempest brewing there ; and consider that to be the chief peril , turn towards he and put myself   so to speak   in the man s hand . 

 " can I do anything for you , Mr. Drummond ? " say I. 

 he stifle a yawn , which again I think to be duplicity . " why , Mr. David , " say he , " since you be so obliging as to propose it , you might show I the way to a certain tavern "   of which he give the name   " where I hope to fall in with some old companion in arm . " 

 there be no more to say , and I get my hat and cloak to bear he company . 

 " and as for you , " say he to his daughter , " you have well go to your bed . I shall be late home , and early to bed and early to rise , gar bonny lass have bright eye . " 

 Whereupon he kiss she with a good deal of tenderness , and usher I before he from the door . this be so do   I think on purpose   that it be scarce possible there should be any parting salutation ; but I observe she do not look at I , and set it down to terror of James More . 

 it be some distance to that tavern . he talk all the way of matter which do not interest I the small , and at the door dismiss I with empty manner . thence I walk to my new lodging , where I have not so much as a chimney to hold I warm , and no society but my own thought . these be still bright enough ; I do not so much as dream that Catriona be turn against I ; I think we be like folk pledge ; I think we have be too near and speak too warmly to be sever , least of all by what be only step in a most needful policy . and the chief of my concern be only the kind of father - in - law that I be get , which be not at all the kind I would have choose : and the matter of how soon I ought to speak to he , which be a delicate point on several side . in the first place , when I think how young I be I blush all over , and could almost have find it in my heart to have desist ; only that if once I let they go from Leyden without explanation , I might lose she altogether . and in the second place , there be our very irregular situation to be keep in view , and the rather scant measure of satisfaction I have give James More that morning . I conclude , on the whole , that delay would not hurt anything , yet I would not delay too long neither ; and get to my cold bed with a full heart . 

 the next day , as James More seem a little on the complain hand in the matter of my chamber , I offer to have in more furniture ; and come in the afternoon , with porter bring chair and table , find the girl once more left to herself . she greet I on my admission civilly , but withdraw at once to her own room , of which she shut the door . I make my disposition , and pay and dismiss the man so that she might hear they go , when I suppose she would at once come forth again to speak to I . I wait yet awhile , then knock upon her door . 

 " Catriona ! " say I. 

 the door be open so quickly , even before I have the word out , that I think she must have stand behind it listen . she remain there in the interval quite still ; but she have a look that I can not put a name on , as of one in a bitter trouble . 

 " be we not to have our walk to - day either ? " so I falter . 

 " I be thank you , " say she . " I will not be care much to walk , now that my father be come home . " 

 " but I think he have go out himself and leave you here alone , " say I. 

 " and do you think that be very kindly say ? " she ask . 

 " it be not unkindly mean , " I reply . " what ail you , Catriona ? what have I do to you that you should turn from I like this ? " 

 " I do not turn from you at all , " she say , speak very carefully . " I will ever be grateful to my friend that be good to I ; I will ever be his friend in all that I be able . but now that my father James More be come again , there be a difference to be make , and I think there be some thing say and do that would be well to be forget . but I will ever be your friend in all that I be able , and if that be not all that . . . . if it be not so much . . . . not that you will be care ! but I would not have you think of I too hard . it be true what you say to I , that I be too young to be advise , and I be hop you will remember I be just a child . I would not like to lose your friendship , at all event . " 

 she begin this very pale ; but before she be do , the blood be in her face like scarlet , so that not her word only , but her face and the trembling of her very hand , besought I to be gentle . I see , for the first time , how very wrong I have do to place the child in that position , where she have be entrap into a moment s weakness , and now stand before I like a person sham . 

 " Miss Drummond , " I say , and stick , and make the same beginning once again , " I wish you could see into my heart , " I cry . " you would read there that my respect be undiminishe . if that be possible , I should say it be increase . this be but the result of the mistake we make ; and have to come ; and the less say of it now the well . of all of our life here , I promise you it shall never pass my lip ; I would like to promise you too that I would never think of it , but it s a memory that will be always dear to I . and as for a friend , you have one here that would die for you . " 

 " I be thank you , " say she . 

 we stand awhile silent , and my sorrow for myself begin to get the upper hand ; for here be all my dream come to a sad tumble , and my love lose , and myself alone again in the world as at the beginning . 

 " well , " say I , " we shall be friend always , that s a certain thing . but this be a kind of farewell , too : it s a kind of a farewell after all ; I shall always ken Miss Drummond , but this be a farewell to my Catriona . " 

 I look at she ; I could hardly say I see she , but she seem to grow great and brighten in my eye ; and with that I suppose I must have lose my head , for I call out her name again and make a step at she with my hand reach forth . 

 she shrink back like a person strike , her face flame ; but the blood spring no fast up into her cheek , than what it flow back upon my own heart , at sight of it , with penitence and concern . I find no word to excuse myself , but bow before her very deep , and go my way out of the house with death in my bosom . 

 I think it be about five day that follow without any change . I see she scarce ever but at meal , and then of course in the company of James More . if we be alone even for a moment , I make it my devoir to behave the more distantly and to multiply respectful attention , have always in my mind s eye that picture of the girl shrink and flame in a blush , and in my heart more pity for she than I could depict in word . I be sorry enough for myself , I need not dwell on that , have fall all my length and more than all my height in a few second ; but , indeed , I be near as sorry for the girl , and sorry enough to be scarce angry with her save by fit and start . her plea be good ; she have be place in an unfair position ; if she have deceive herself and I , it be no more than be to have be look for . 

 and for another thing she be now very much alone . her father , when he be by , be rather a caress parent ; but he be very easy lead away by his affair and pleasure , neglect she without compunction or remark , spend his night in tavern when he have the money , which be more often than I could at all account for ; and even in the course of these few day , fail once to come to a meal , which Catriona and I be at last compel to partake of without he . it be the evening meal , and I leave immediately that I have eat , observe I suppose she would prefer to be alone ; to which she agree and   strange as it may seem   I quite believe she . indeed , I think myself but an eyesore to the girl , and a reminder of a moment s weakness that she now abhor to think of . so she must sit alone in that room where she and I have be so merry , and in the blink of that chimney whose light have shine upon our many difficult and tender moment . there she must sit alone , and think of herself as of a maid who have most unmaidenly proffer her affection and have the same reject . and in the meanwhile I would be alone some other place , and read myself   whenever I be tempt to be angry   lesson upon human frailty and female delicacy . and altogether I suppose there be never two poor fool make themselves more unhappy in a great misconception . 

 as for James , he pay not so much heed to we , or to anything in nature but his pocket , and his belly , and his own prating talk . before twelve hour be go he have raise a small loan of I ; before thirty , he have ask for a second and be refuse . money and refusal he take with the same kind of high good nature . indeed , he have an outside air of magnanimity that be very well fit to impose upon a daughter ; and the light in which he be constantly present in his talk , and the man s fine presence and great way go together pretty harmoniously . so that a man that have no business with he , and either very little penetration or a furious deal of prejudice , might almost have be take in . to I , after my first two interview , he be as plain as print ; I see he to be perfectly selfish , with a perfect innocency in the same ; and I would hearken to his swagger talk   of arm , and " an old soldier , " and " a poor Highland gentleman , " and " the strength of my country and my friend "   as I might to the babbling of a parrot . 

 the odd thing be that I fancy he believe some part of it himself , or do at time ; I think he be so false all through that he scarce know when he be lie ; and for one thing , his moment of dejection must have be wholly genuine . there be time when he would be the most silent , affectionate , cling creature possible , hold Catriona s hand like a big baby , and beg of I not to leave if I have any love to he ; of which , indeed , I have none , but all the more to his daughter . he would press and indeed beseech we to entertain he with our talk , a thing very difficult in the state of our relation ; and again break forth in pitiable regret for his own land and friend , or into Gaelic singing . 

 " this be one of the melancholy air of my native land , " he would say . " you may think it strange to see a soldier weep , and indeed it be to make a near friend of you , " say he . " but the note of this singing be in my blood , and the word come out of my heart . and when I mind upon my red mountain and the wild bird call there , and the brave stream of water run down , I would scarce think shame to weep before my enemy . " then he would sing again , and translate to I piece of the song , with a great deal of boggling and much express contempt against the English language . " it say here , " he would say , " that the sun be go down , and the battle be at an end , and the brave chief be defeat . and it tell here how the star see they flee into strange country or lie dead on the red mountain ; and they will never more shout the call of battle or wash their foot in the stream of the valley . but if you have only some of this language , you would weep also because the word of it be beyond all expression , and it be mere mockery to tell you it in English . " 

 well , I think there be a good deal of mockery in the business , one way and another ; and yet , there be some feeling too , for which I hat he , I think , the bad of all . and it use to cut I to the quick to see Catriona so much concerned for the old rogue , and weep herself to see he weep , when I be sure one half of his distress flow from his last night s drink in some tavern . there be time when I be tempt to lend he a round sum , and see the last of he for good ; but this would have be to see the last of Catriona as well , for which I be scarcely so prepared ; and besides , it go against my conscience to squander my good money on one who be so little of a husband . 

 chapter XXVII a TWOSOME 

 I believe it be about the fifth day , and I know at least that James be in one of his fit of gloom , when I receive three letter . the first be from Alan , offer to visit I in Leyden ; the other two be out of Scotland and prompt by the same affair , which be the death of my uncle and my own complete accession to my right . Rankeillor s be , of course , wholly in the business view ; Miss Grant s be like herself , a little more witty than wise , full of blame to I for not have write   though how be I to write with such intelligence ?   and of rally talk about Catriona , which it cut I to the quick to read in her very presence . 

 for it be of course in my own room that I find they , when I come to dinner , so that I be surprised out of my news in the very first moment of read it . this make a welcome diversion for all three of we , nor could any have foresee the ill consequence that ensue . it be accident that bring the three letter the same day , and that give they into my hand in the same room with James More ; and of all the event that flow from that accident , and which I might have prevent if I have hold my tongue , the truth be that they be preordain before Agricola come into Scotland or Abraham set out upon his travel . 

 the first that I open be naturally Alan s ; and what more natural than that I should comment on his design to visit I ? but I observe James to sit up with an air of immediate attention . 

 " be that not Alan Breck that be suspect of the Appin accident ? " he inquire . 

 I tell he , " ay , " it be the same ; and he withhold I some time from my other letter , ask of our acquaintance , of Alan s manner of life in France , of which I know very little , and far of his visit as now propose . 

 " all we forfeit folk hang a little together , " he explain , " and besides I know the gentleman : and though his descent be not the thing , and indeed he have no true right to use the name of Stewart , he be very much admire in the day of Drummossie . he do there like a soldier ; if some that need not be name have do as well , the upshot need not have be so melancholy to remember . there be two that do their good that day , and it make a bond between the pair of we , " say he . 

 I could scarce refrain from shoot out my tongue at he , and could almost have wish that Alan have be there to have inquire a little far into that mention of his birth . though , they tell I , the same be indeed not wholly regular . 

 meanwhile , I have open Miss Grant s , and could not withhold an exclamation . 

 " Catriona , " I cry , forget , the first time since her father be arrive , to address she by a handle , " I be come into my kingdom fairly , I be the laird of Shaws indeed my uncle be dead at last . " 

 she clap her hand together leap from her seat . the next moment it must have come over both of we at once what little cause of joy be leave to either , and we stand opposite , star on each other sadly . 

 but James show himself a ready hypocrite . " my daughter , " say he , " be this how my cousin learn you to behave ? Mr. David have lose a new friend , and we should first condole with he on his bereavement . " 

 " Troth , sir , " say I , turn to he in a kind of anger , " I can make no such great face . his death be as blithe news as ever I get . " 

 " it s a good soldier s philosophy , " say James . " tis the way of flesh , we must all go , all go . and if the gentleman be so far from your favour , why , very well ! but we may at least congratulate you on your accession to your estate . " 

 " nor can I say that either , " I reply , with the same heat . " it be a good estate ; what matter that to a lone man that have enough already ? I have a good revenue before in my frugality ; and but for the man s death which gratify I , shame to I that must confess it ! I see not how anyone be to be better by this change . " 

 " come , come , " say he , " you be more affected than you let on , or you would never make yourself out so lonely . here be three letter ; that mean three that wish you well ; and I could name two more , here in this very chamber . I have know you not so very long , but Catriona , when we be alone , be never do with the singing of your praise . " 

 she look up at he , a little wild at that ; and he slide off at once into another matter , the extent of my estate , which   during the most of the dinner time   he continue to dwell upon with interest . but it be to no purpose he dissemble ; he have touch the matter with too gross a hand : and I know what to expect . Dinner be scarce eat when he plainly discover his design . he remind Catriona of an errand , and bid she attend to it . " I do not see you should be one beyond the hour , " he add , " and friend David will be good enough to bear I company till you return . " she make haste to obey he without word . I do not know if she understand , I believe not ; but I be completely satisfied , and sit strengthen my mind for what should follow . 

 the door have scarce close behind her departure , when the man lean back in his chair and address I with a good affectation of easiness . only the one thing betray he , and that be his face ; which suddenly shine all over with fine point of sweat . 

 " I be rather glad to have a word alone with you , " say he , " because in our first interview there be some expression you misapprehend and I have long mean to set you right upon . my daughter stand beyond doubt . so do you , and I would make that good with my sword against all gainsayer . but , my dear David , this world be a censorious place as who should know it well than myself , who have live ever since the day of my late depart father , God sain he ! in a perfect spate of calumny ? we have to face to that ; you and I have to consider of that ; we have to consider of that . " and he wag his head like a minister in a pulpit . 

 " to what effect , Mr. Drummond ? " say I. " I would be oblige to you if you would approach your point . " 

 " ay , ay , " say he , laugh , " like your character , indeed ! and what I most admire in it . but the point , my worthy fellow , be sometimes in a kittle bit . " he fill a glass of wine . " though between you and I , that be such fast friend , it need not bother we long . the point , I need scarcely tell you , be my daughter . and the first thing be that I have no thought in my mind of blame you . in the unfortunate circumstance , what could you do else ? Deed , and I can not tell . " 

 " I thank you for that , " say I , pretty close upon my guard . 

 " I have besides study your character , " he go on ; " your talent be fair ; you seem to have a moderate competence , which do no harm ; and one thing with another , I be very happy to have to announce to you that I have decide on the latter of the two way open . " 

 " I be afraid I be dull , " say I. " what way be these ? " 

 he bend his brow upon I formidably and uncross his leg . " why , sir , " say he , " I think I need scarce describe they to a gentleman of your condition ; either that I should cut your throat or that you should marry my daughter . " 

 " you be pleased to be quite plain at last , " say I. 

 " and I believe I have be plain from the beginning ! " cry he robustiously . " I be a careful parent , Mr. Balfour ; but I thank God , a patient and deleeborate man . there be many a father , sir , that would have hirsle you at once either to the altar or the field . my esteem for your character " 

 " Mr. Drummond , " I interrupt , " if you have any esteem for I at all , I will beg of you to moderate your voice . it be quite needless to rowt at a gentleman in the same chamber with yourself and lend you his good attention . " 

 " why , very true , " say he , with an immediate change . " and you must excuse the agitation of a parent . " 

 " I understand you then , " I continue " for I will take no note of your other alternative , which perhaps it be a pity you let fall I understand you rather to offer I encouragement in case I should desire to apply for your daughter s hand ? " 

 " it be not possible to express my meaning well , " say he , " and I see we shall do well together . " 

 " that remain to be yet see , " say I. " but so much I need make no secret of , that I bear the lady you refer to the most tender affection , and I could not fancy , even in a dream , a well fortune than to get she . " 

 " I be sure of it , I feel certain of you , David , " he cry , and reach out his hand to I . 

 I put it by . " you go too fast , Mr. Drummond , " say I. " there be condition to be make ; and there be a difficulty in the path , which I see not entirely how we shall come over . I have tell you that , upon my side , there be no objection to the marriage , but I have good reason to believe there will be much on the young lady s. " 

 " this be all beside the mark , " say he . " I will engage for her acceptance . " 

 " I think you forget , Mr. Drummond , " say I , " that , even in deal with myself , you have be betray into two - three unpalatable expression . I will have none such employ to the young lady . I be here to speak and think for the two of we ; and I give you to understand that I would no more let a wife be force upon myself , than what I would let a husband be force on the young lady . " 

 he sit and glower at I like one in doubt and a good deal of temper . 

 " so that be to be the way of it , " I conclude . " I will marry Miss Drummond , and that blithely , if she be entirely willing . but if there be the least unwillingness , as I have reason to fear marry she will I never . " 

 " well well , " say he , " this be a small affair . as soon as she return I will sound she a bit , and hope to reassure you " 

 but I cut in again . " not a finger of you , Mr. Drummond , or I cry off , and you can seek a husband to your daughter somewhere else , " say i. " it be I that be to be the only dealer and the only judge . I shall satisfy myself exactly ; and none else shall anyways meddle you the least of all . " 

 " upon my word , sir ! " he exclaim , " and who be you to be the judge ? " 

 " the bridegroom , I believe , " say I. 

 " this be to quibble , " he cry . " you turn your back upon the fact . the girl , my daughter , have no choice leave to exercise . her character be go . " 

 " and I ask your pardon , " say I , " but while this matter lie between she and you and I , that be not so . " 

 " what security have I ! " he cry . " be I to let my daughter s reputation depend upon a chance ? " 

 " you should have think of all this long ago , " say I , " before you be so misguided as to lose she ; and not afterwards when it be quite too late . I refuse to regard myself as any way accountable for your neglect , and I will be browbeat by no man live . my mind be quite make up , and come what may , I will not depart from it a hair s breadth . you and I be to sit here in company till her return : upon which , without either word or look from you , she and I be to go forth again to hold our talk . if she can satisfy I that she be willing to this step , I will then make it ; and if she can not , I will not . " 

 he leap out of his chair like a man sting . " I can spy your manouvre , " he cry ; " you would work upon she to refuse ! " 

 " maybe ay , and maybe no , " say i. " that be the way it be to be , whatever . " 

 " and if I refuse ? " cry he . 

 " then , Mr. Drummond , it will have to come to the throat - cut , " say I. 

 what with the size of the man , his great length of arm in which he come near rival his father , and his reputed skill at weapon , I do not use this word without trepidation , to say nothing at all of the circumstance that he be Catriona s father . but I might have spar myself alarm . from the poorness of my lodging he do not seem to have remark his daughter s dress , which be indeed all equally new to he and from the fact that I have show myself averse to lend , he have embrace a strong idea of my poverty . the sudden news of my estate convince he of his error , and he have make but the one bind of it on this fresh venture , to which he be now so wed , that I believe he would have suffer anything rather than fall to the alternative of fighting . 

 a little while long he continue to dispute with I , until I hit upon a word that silence he . 

 " if I find you so averse to let I see the lady by herself , " say I , " I must suppose you have very good ground to think I in the right about her unwillingness . " 

 he gabble some kind of an excuse . 

 " but all this be very exhausting to both of our temper , " I add , " and I think we would do well to preserve a judicious silence . " 

 the which we do until the girl return , and I must suppose would have cut a very ridiculous figure have there be any there to view we . 

 CHAPTER XXVIII in which I be left alone 

 I open the door to Catriona and stop she on the threshold . 

 " your father wish we to take our walk , " say I. 

 she look to James More , who nod , and at that , like a train soldier , she turn to go with I . 

 we take one of our old way , where we have go often together , and be more happy than I can tell of in the past . I come a half a step behind , so that I could watch she unobserved . the knocking of her little shoe upon the way sound extraordinary pretty and sad ; and I think it a strange moment that I should be so near both end of it at once , and walk in the midst between two destiny , and could not tell whether I be hear these step for the last time , or whether the sound of they be to go in and out with I till death should part we . 

 she avoid even to look at I , only walk before she , like one who have a guess of what be come . I see I must speak soon before my courage be run out , but where to begin I know not . in this painful situation , when the girl be as good as force into my arm and have already besought my forbearance , any excess of pressure must have seem indecent ; yet to avoid it wholly would have a very cold - like appearance . between these extreme I stand helpless , and could have bite my finger ; so that , when at last I manage to speak at all , it may be say I speak at random . 

 " Catriona , " say I , " I be in a very painful situation ; or rather , so we be both ; and I would be a good deal oblige to you if you would promise to let I speak through first of all , and not to interrupt I till I have do . " 

 she promise I that simply . 

 " well , " say I , " this that I have get to say be very difficult , and I know very well I have no right to be say it . after what pass between the two of we last Friday , I have no manner of right . we have get so ravel up   and all by my fault   that I know very well the least I could do be just to hold my tongue , which be what I intend fully , and there be nothing far from my thought than to have trouble you again . but , my dear , it have become merely necessary , and no way by it . you see , this estate of mine have fall in , which make of I rather a well match ; and the the business would not have quite the same ridiculous - like appearance that it would before . besides which , it s suppose that our affair have get so much ravel up   as I be say   that it would be well to let they be the way they be . in my view , this part of the thing be vastly exagerate , and if I be you I would not wear two thought on it . only it s right I should mention the same , because there s no doubt it have some influence on James More . then I think we be none so unhappy when we dwelt together in this town before . I think we do pretty well together . if you would look back , my dear " 

 " I will look neither back nor forward , " she interrupt . " tell I the one thing : this be my father s do ? " 

 " he approve of it , " say I. " he approve I that I should ask your hand in marriage , " and be go on again with somewhat more of an appeal upon her feeling ; but she mark I not , and strike into the midst . 

 " he tell you to ! " she cry . " it be no sense deny it , you say yourself that there be nothing far from your thought . he tell you to . " 

 " he speak of it the first , if that be what you mean , " I begin . 

 she be walk ever the fast , and look fain in front of she ; but at this she make a little noise in her head , and I think she would have run . 

 " without which , " I go on , " after what you say last Friday , I would never have be so troublesome as make the offer . but when he as good as ask I , what be I to do ? " 

 she stop and turn round upon I . 

 " well , it be refuse at all event , " she cry , " and there will be an end of that . " 

 and she begin again to walk forward . 

 " I suppose I could expect no well , " say I , " but I think you might try to be a little kind to I for the last end of it . I see not why you should be harsh . I have love you very well , Catriona no harm that I should call you so for the last time . I have do the good that I could manage , I be try the same still , and only vex that I can do no well . it be a strange thing to I that you can take any pleasure to be hard to I . " 

 " I be not think of you , " she say , " I be think of that man , my father . " 

 " well , and that way , too ! " say I. " I can be of use to you that way , too ; I will have to be . it be very needful , my dear , that we should consult about your father ; for the way this talk have go , an angry man will be James More . " 

 she stop again . " it be because I be disgrace ? " she ask . 

 " that be what he be think , " I reply , " but I have tell you already to make nought of it . " 

 " it will be all one to I , " she cry . " I prefer to be disgrace ! " 

 I do not know very well what to answer , and stand silent . 

 there seem to be something work in her bosom after that last cry ; presently she break out , " and what be the meaning of all this ? why be all this shame loundere on my head ? how could you dare it , David Balfour ? " 

 " my dear , " say I , " what else be I to do ? " 

 " I be not your dear , " she say , " and I defy you to be call I these word . " 

 " I be not think of my word , " say I. " my heart bleed for you , Miss Drummond . whatever I may say , be sure you have my pity in your difficult position . but there be just the one thing that I wish you would bear in view , if it be only long enough to discuss it quietly ; for there be go to be a collieshangie when we two get home . take my word for it , it will need the two of we to make this matter end in peace . " 

 " ay , " say she . there spring a patch of red in either of her cheek . " be he for fight you ? " say she . 

 " well , he be that , " say I. 

 she give a dreadful kind of laugh . " at all event , it be complete ! " she cry . and then turn on I . " my father and I be a fine pair , " say she , " but I be thank the good God there will be somebody bad than what we be . I be thank the good God that he have let I see you so . there will never be the girl make that will not scorn you . " 

 I have bear a good deal pretty patiently , but this be over the mark . 

 " you have no right to speak to I like that , " say I. " what have I do but to be good to you , or try to be ? and here be my repayment ! o , it be too much . " 

 she keep look at I with a hateful smile . " Coward ! " say she . 

 " the word in your throat and in your father s ! " I cry . " I have dare he this day already in your interest . I will dare he again , the nasty pole - cat ; little I care which of we should fall ! come , " say I , " back to the house with we ; let we be do with it , let I be do with the whole Hieland crew of you ! you will see what you think when I be dead . " 

 she shake her head at I with that same smile I could have strike she for . 

 " o , smile away ! " I cry . " I have see your bonny father smile on the wrong side this day . not that I mean he be afraid , of course , " I add hastily , " but he prefer the other way of it . " 

 " what be this ? " she ask . 

 " when I offer to draw with he , " say I. 

 " you offer to draw upon James More ! " she cry . 

 " and I do so , " say I , " and find he backward enough , or how would we be here ? " 

 " there be a meaning upon this , " say she . " what be it you be mean ? " 

 " he be to make you take I , " I reply , " and I would not have it . I say you should be free , and I must speak with you alone ; little I suppose it would be such a speaking ! and what if I refuse ? say he .   then it must come to the throat - cutting , say I , for I will no more have a husband force on that young lady , than what I would have a wife force upon myself . these be my word , they be a friend s word ; bonnily have I pay for they ! now you have refuse I of your own clear free will , and there live no father in the Highlands , or out of they , that can force on this marriage . I will see that your wish be respect ; I will make the same my business , as I have all through . but I think you might have that decency as to affect some gratitude . deed , and I think you know I well ! I have not behave quite well to you , but that be weakness . and to think I a coward , and such a coward as that O , my lass , there be a stab for the last of it ! " 

 " Davie , how would I guess ? " she cry . " o , this be a dreadful business ! I and mine , " she give a kind of a wretched cry at the word " I and mine be not fit to speak to you . o , I could be kneel down to you in the street , I could be kiss your hand for forgiveness ! " 

 " I will keep the kiss I have get from you already , " cry I. " I will keep the one I want and that be something worth ; I will not be kiss in penitence . " 

 " what can you be think of this miserable girl ? " say she . 

 " what I be try to tell you all this while ! " say I , " that you have well leave I alone , whom you can make no more unhappy if you try , and turn your attention to James More , your father , with whom you be like to have a queer pirn to wind . " 

 " o , that I must be go out into the world alone with such a man ! " she cry , and seem to catch herself in with a great effort . " but trouble yourself no more for that , " say she . " he do not know what kind of nature be in my heart . he will pay I dear for this day of it ; dear , dear , will he pay . " 

 she turn , and begin to go home and I to accompany she . at which she stop . 

 " I will be go alone , " she say . " it be alone I must be see he . " 

 some little time I rag about the street , and tell myself I be the worst use lad in Christendom . anger choke I ; it be all very well for I to breathe deep ; it seem there be not air enough about Leyden to supply I , and I think I would have burst like a man at the bottom of the sea . I stop and laugh at myself at a street corner a minute together , laugh out loud , so that a passenger look at I , which bring I to myself . 

 " well , " I think , " I have be a gull and a ninny and a soft Tommy long enough . time it be do . here be a good lesson to have nothing to do with that accurse sex , that be the ruin of the man in the beginning and will be so to the end . God know I be happy enough before ever I see she ; God know I can be happy enough again when I have see the last of she . " 

 that seem to I the chief affair : to see they go . I dwell upon the idea fiercely ; and presently slip on , in a kind of malevolence , to consider how very poorly they be likely to fare when Davie Balfour be no long by to be their milk - cow ; at which , to my very own great surprise , the disposition of my mind turn bottom up . I be still angry ; I still hat she ; and yet I think I owe it to myself that she should suffer nothing . 

 this carry I home again at once , where I find the mail draw out and ready fasten by the door , and the father and daughter with every mark upon they of a recent disagreement . Catriona be like a wooden doll ; James more breathe hard , his face be dot with white spot , and his nose upon one side . as soon as I come in , the girl look at he with a steady , clear , dark look that might have be follow by a blow . it be a hint that be more contemptuous than a command , and I be surprised to see James More accept it . it be plain he have have a master talk - to ; and I could see there must be more of the devil in the girl than I have guess , and more good humour about the man than I have give he the credit of . 

 he begin , at least , call I Mr. Balfour , and plainly speak from a lesson ; but he get not very far , for at the first pompous swell of his voice , Catriona cut in . 

 " I will tell you what James More be mean , " say she . " he mean we have come to you , beggar - folk , and have not behave to you very well , and we be ashamed of our ingratitude and ill - behaviour . now we be want to go away and be forget ; and my father will have guide his gear so ill , that we can not even do that unless you will give we some more alm . for that be what we be , at an event , beggar - folk and sorner . " 

 " by your leave , Miss Drummond , " say I , " I must speak to your father by myself . " 

 she go into her own room and shut the door , without a word or a look . 

 " you must excuse she , Mr. Balfour , " say James More . " she have no delicacy . " 

 " I be not here to discuss that with you , " say I , " but to be quit of you . and to that end I must talk of your position . now , Mr. Drummond , I have keep the run of your affair more closely than you bargain for . I know you have money of your own when you be borrow mine . I know you have have more since you be here in Leyden , though you conceal it even from your daughter . " 

 " I bid you beware . I will stand no more baiting , " he break out . " I be sick of she and you . what kind of a damned trade be this to be a parent ! I have have expression use to I " there he break off . " Sir , this be the heart of a soldier and a parent , " he go on again , lay his hand on his bosom , " outraged in both character and I bid you beware . " 

 " if you would have let I finish , " say I , " you would have find I speak for your advantage . " 

 " my dear friend , " he cry , " I know I might have rely upon the generosity of your character . " 

 " Man ! will you let I speak ? " say I. " the fact be that I can not win to find out if you be rich or poor . but it be my idea that your mean , as they be mysterious in their source , so they be something insufficient in amount ; and I do not choose your daughter to be lack . if I durst speak to herself , you may be certain I would never dream of trust it to you ; because I know you like the back of my hand , and all your blustering talk be that much wind to I . however , I believe in your way you do still care something for your daughter after all ; and I must just be do with that ground of confidence , such as it be . " 

 Whereupon , I arrange with he that he be to communicate with I , as to his whereabouts and Catriona s welfare , in consideration of which I be to serve he a small stipend . 

 he hear the business out with a great deal of eagerness ; and when it be do , " my dear fellow , my dear son , " he cry out , " this be more like yourself than any of it yet ! I will serve you with a soldier s faithfulness " 

 " let I hear no more of it ! " say I. " you have get I to that pitch that the bare name of soldier rise on my stomach . our traffic be settle ; I be now go forth and will return in one half - hour , when I expect to find my chamber purge of you . " 

 I give they good measure of time ; it be my one fear that I might see Catriona again , because tear and weakness be ready in my heart , and I cherish my anger like a piece of dignity . perhaps an hour go by ; the sun have go down , a little wisp of a new moon be follow it across a scarlet sunset ; already there be star in the east , and in my chamber , when at last I enter they , the night lie blue . I light a taper and review the room ; in the first there remain nothing so much as to awake a memory of those who be go ; but in the second , in a corner of the floor , I spy a little heap that bring my heart into my mouth . she have leave behind at her departure all that she have ever have of I . it be the blow that I feel sorest , perhaps because it be the last ; and I fall upon that pile of clothing and behave myself more foolish than I care to tell of . 

 late in the night , in a strict frost , and my tooth chattering , I come again by some portion of my manhood and consider with myself . the sight of these poor frock and ribbon , and her shift , and the clocked stocking , be not to be endure ; and if I be to recover any constancy of mind , I see I must be rid of they ere the morning . it be my first thought to have make a fire and burn they ; but my disposition have always be oppose to wastery , for one thing ; and for another , to have burn these thing that she have wear so close upon her body seem in the nature of a cruelty . there be a corner cupboard in that chamber ; there I determine to bestow they . the which I do and make it a long business , fold they with very little skill indeed but the more care ; and sometimes drop they with my tear . all the heart be go out of I , I be weary as though I have run mile , and sore like one beat ; when , as I be fold a kerchief that she wear often at her neck , I observe there be a corner neatly cut from it . it be a kerchief of a very pretty hue , on which I have frequently remark ; and once that she have it on , I remember tell she   by way of a banter   that she wear my colour . there come a glow of hope and like a tide of sweetness in my bosom ; and the next moment I be plunge back in a fresh despair . for there be the corner crumple in a knot and cast down by itself in another part of the floor . 

 but when I argue with myself , I grow more hopeful . she have cut that corner off in some childish freak that be manifestly tender ; that she have cast it away again be little to be wonder at ; and I be inclined to dwell more upon the first than upon the second , and to be more pleased that she have ever conceive the idea of that keepsake , than concerned because she have fling it from she in an hour of natural resentment . 

 CHAPTER XXIX we meet in DUNKIRK 

 altogether , then , I be scare so miserable the next day but what I have many hopeful and happy snatch ; throw myself with a good deal of constancy upon my study ; and make out to endure the time till Alan should arrive , or I might hear word of Catriona by the mean of James More . I have altogether three letter in the time of our separation . one be to announce their arrival in the town of Dunkirk in France , from which place James shortly after start alone upon a private mission . this be to England and to see Lord Holderness ; and it have always be a bitter thought that my good money help to pay the charge of the same . but he have need of a long spoon who soup with the de il , or James More either . during this absence , the time be to fall due for another letter ; and as the letter be the condition of his stipend , he have be so careful as to prepare it beforehand and leave it with Catriona to be despatch . the fact of our correspondence arouse her suspicion , and he be no soon go than she have burst the seal . what I receive begin accordingly in the writing of James More : 

 " my dear Sir , your esteemed favour come to hand duly , and I have to acknowledge the inclosure accord to agreement . it shall be all faithfully expend on my daughter , who be well , and desire to be remember to her dear friend . I find she in rather a melancholy disposition , but trust in the mercy of God to see she re - establish . our manner of life be very much alone , but we solace ourselves with the melancholy tune of our native mountain , and by walk up the margin of the sea that lie next to Scotland . it be well day with I when I lay with five wound upon my body on the field of Gladsmuir . I have find employment here in the hara of a french nobleman , where my experience be value . but , my dear Sir , the wage be so exceedingly unsuitable that I would be ashamed to mention they , which make your remittance the more necessary to my daughter s comfort , though I daresay the sight of old friend would be still well . 

 " my dear Sir , 
 " your affectionate , obedient servant , 
 " James Macgregor Drummond . " 

 below it begin again in the hand of Catriona : 

 " do not be believe he , it be all lie together , C. M. D. " 

 not only do she add this postscript , but I think she must have come near suppress the letter ; for it come long after date , and be closely follow by the third . in the time betwixt they , Alan have arrive , and make another life to I with his merry conversation ; I have be present to his cousin of the Scots - Dutch , a man that drink more than I could have think possible and be not otherwise of interest ; I have be entertain to many jovial dinner and give some myself , all with no great change upon my sorrow ; and we two   by which I mean Alan and myself , and not at all the cousin   have discuss a good deal the nature of my relation with James More and his daughter . I be naturally diffident to give particular ; and this disposition be not anyway lessen by the nature of Alan s commentary upon those I give . 

 " I cannae make heed nor tail of it , " he would say , " but it stick in my mind ye ve make a gowk of yourself . there s few people that have have more experience than Alan Breck : and I can never call to mind to have hear tell of a lassie like this one of your . the way that you tell it , the thing s fair impossible . ye must have make a terrible hash of the business , David . " 

 " there be while that I be of the same mind , " say I. 

 " the strange thing be that ye seem to have a kind of fancy for she too ! " say Alan . 

 " the big kind , Alan , " say I , " and I think I ll take it to my grave with I . " 

 " well , ye beat I , whatever ! " he would conclude . 

 I show he the letter with Catriona s postscript . " and here again ! " he cry . " impossible to deny a kind of decency to this Catriona , and sense forby ! as for James More , the man s as boss as a drum ; he s just a wame and a wheen word ; though I ll can never deny that he fight reasonably well at Gladsmuir , and it s true what he say here about the five wound . but the loss of he be that the man s boss . " 

 " ye see , Alan , " say I , " it go against the grain with I to leave the maid in such poor hand . " 

 " ye couldnae weel find poor , " he admit . " but what be ye to do with it ? it s this way about a man and a woman , ye see , Davie : the weemenfolk have get no kind of reason to they . either they like the man , and then a go fine ; or else they just det he , and ye may spare your breath ye can do naething . there s just the two set of they they that would sell their coat for ye , and they that never look the road ye re on . that s a that there be to woman ; and you seem to be such a gomeral that ye cannae tell the tane frae the tither . " 

 " well , and I m afraid that s true for I , " say I. 

 " and yet there s naethe easy ! " cry Alan . " I could easy learn ye the science of the thing ; but ye seem to I to be bear blind , and there s where the deefficulty come in . " 

 " and can you no help I ? " I ask , " you that be so clever at the trade ? " 

 " ye see , David , I wasnae here , " say he . " I m like a field officer that have naebody but blind man for scout and ĂŠclaireurs ; and what would he ken ? but it stick in my mind that ye ll have make some kind of bauchle ; and if I be you I would have a try at she again . " 

 " would ye so , man Alan ? " say I. 

 " I would e en t , " say he . 

 the third letter come to my hand while we be deep in some such talk : and it will be see how pat it fall to the occasion . James profess to be in some concern upon his daughter s health , which I believe be never well ; abound in kind expression to myself ; and finally propose that I should visit they at Dunkirk . 

 " you will now be enjoy the society of my old comrade Mr. Stewart , " he write . " why not accompany he so far in his return to France ? I have something very particular for Mr. Stewart s ear ; and , at any rate , I would be pleased to meet in with an old fellow - soldier and one so mettle as himself . as for you , my dear sir , my daughter and I would be proud to receive our benefactor , whom we regard as a brother and a son . the french nobleman have prove a person of the most filthy avarice of character , and I have be necessitate to leave the hara . you will find we in consequence a little poorly lodge in the auberge of a man Bazin on the dune ; but the situation be caller , and I make no doubt but we might spend some very pleasant day , when Mr. Stewart and I could recall our service , and you and my daughter divert yourselves in a manner more befit your age . I beg at least that Mr. Stewart would come here ; my business with he open a very wide door . " 

 " what do the man want with I ? " cry Alan , when he have read . " what he want with you be clear enough it s siller . but what can he want with Alan Breck ? " 

 " o , it ll be just an excuse , " say i. " he be still after this marriage , which I wish from my heart that we could bring about . and he ask you because he think I would be less likely to come want you . " 

 " well , I wish that I kent , " say Alan . " he and I be never onyways pack ; we use to girn at ither like a pair of piper . something for my ear , quo he ! I ll maybe have something for his hinder - end , before we re through with it . dod , I m think it would be a kind of divertisement to gang and see what he ll be after ! Forby that I could see your lassie then . what say ye , Davie ? will ye ride with Alan ? " 

 you may be sure I be not backward , and Alan s furlough run towards an end , we set forth presently upon this joint adventure . 

 it be near dark of a January day when we ride at last into the town of Dunkirk . we leave our horse at the post , and find a guide to Bazin s Inn , which lie beyond the wall . night be quite fall , so that we be the last to leave that fortress , and hear the door of it close behind we as we pass the bridge . on the other side there lie a lighted suburb , which we thridde for a while , then turn into a dark lane , and presently find ourselves wad in the night among deep sand where we could hear a bullering of the sea . we travel in this fashion for some while , follow our conductor mostly by the sound of his voice ; and I have begin to think he be perhaps mislead we , when we come to the top of a small brae , and there appear out of the darkness a dim light in a window . 

 " Voila l auberge a Bazin , " say the guide . 

 Alan smack his lip . " an unco lonely bit , " say he , and I think by his tone he be not wholly pleased . 

 a little after , and we stand in the low storey of that house , which be all in the one apartment , with a stair lead to the chamber at the side , bench and table by the wall , the cooking fire at the one end of it , and shelf of bottle and the cellar - trap at the other . here Bazin , who be an ill - look , big man , tell we the scottish gentleman be go abroad he know not where , but the young lady be above , and he would call she down to we . 

 I take from my breast that kerchief want the corner , and knot it about my throat . I could hear my heart go ; and Alan pat I on the shoulder with some of his laughable expression , I could scarce refrain from a sharp word . but the time be not long to wait . I hear her step pass overhead , and see she on the stair . this she descend very quietly , and greet I with a pale face and a certain seeming of earnestness , or uneasiness , in her manner that extremely dash I . 

 " my father , James More , will be here soon . he will be very pleased to see you , " she say . and then of a sudden her face flamed , her eye lighten , the speech stop upon her lip ; and I make sure she have observe the kerchief . it be only for a breath that she be discompose ; but methought it be with a new animation that she turn to welcome Alan . " and you will be his friend , Alan Breck ? " she cry . " many be the dozen time I will have hear he tell of you ; and I love you already for all your bravery and goodness . " 

 " well , well , " say Alan , hold her hand in his and view she , " and so this be the young lady at the last of it ! David , ye re an awful poor hand of a description . " 

 I do not know that ever I hear he speak so straight to people s heart ; the sound of his voice be like song . 

 " what ? will he have be describe I ? " she cry . 

 " little else of it since I ever come out of France ! " say he , " forby a bit of a speciment one night in Scotland in a shaw of wood by Silvermills . but cheer up , my dear ! ye re bonnier than what he say . and now there s one thing sure ; you and I be to be a pair of friend . I m a kind of a henchman to Davie here ; I m like a tyke at his heel ; and whatever he care for , I ve get to care for too and by the holy airn ! they ve get to care for I ! so now you can see what way you stand with Alan Breck , and ye ll find ye ll hardly lose on the transaction . he s no very bonnie , my dear , but he s leal to they he love . " 

 " I thank you from my heart for your good word , " say she . " I have that honour for a brave , honest man that I can not find any to be answer with . " 

 use traveller freedom , we spar to wait for James More , and sit down to meat , we threesome . Alan have Catriona sit by he and wait upon his want : he make she drink first out of his glass , he surround she with continual kind gallantry , and yet never give I the most small occasion to be jealous ; and he keep the talk so much in his own hand , and that in so merry a note , that neither she nor I remember to be embarrassed . if any have see we there , it must have be suppose that Alan be the old friend and I the stranger . indeed , I have often cause to love and to admire the man , but I never love or admire he well than that night ; and I could not help remark to myself   what I be sometimes rather in danger of forget   that he have not only much experience of life , but in his own way a great deal of natural ability besides . as for Catriona , she seem quite carry away ; her laugh be like a peal of bell , her face gay as a May morning ; and I own , although I be well pleased , yet I be a little sad also , and think myself a dull , stockish character in comparison of my friend , and very unfit to come into a young maid s life , and perhaps de down her gaiety . 

 but if that be like to be my part , I find that at least I be not alone in it ; for , James more return suddenly , the girl be change into a piece of stone . through the rest of that evening , until she make an excuse and slip to bed , I keep an eye upon she without cease ; and I can bear testimony that she never smile , scarce speak , and look mostly on the board in front of she . so that I really marvel to see so much devotion   as it use to be   change into the very sickness of hate . 

 of James More it be unnecessary to say much ; you know the man already , what there be to know of he ; and I be weary of write out his lie . enough that he drink a great deal , and tell we very little that be to any possible purpose . as for the business with Alan , that be to be reserve for the morrow and his private hearing . 

 it be the more easy to be put off , because Alan and I be pretty weary with four day s ride , and sit not very late after Catriona . 

 we be soon alone in a chamber where we be to make - shift with a single bed . Alan look on I with a queer smile . 

 " Ye muckle ass ! " say he . 

 " what do ye mean by that ? " I cry . 

 " mean ? what do I mean ! it s extraordinar , David man , " say he , " that you should be so mortal stupit . " 

 again I beg he to speak out . 

 " well , it s this of it , " say he . " I tell ye there be the two kind of woman they that would sell their shift for ye , and the other . just you try for yoursel , my bonny man ! but what s that neepkin at your craig ? " 

 I tell he . 

 " I thocht it be something thereabout , " say he . 

 nor would he say another word though I besiege he long with importunity . 

 CHAPTER XXX the letter from the SHIP 

 Daylight show we how solitary the inn stand . it be plainly hard upon the sea , yet out of all view of it , and beset on every side with scabbit hill of sand . there be , indeed , only one thing in the nature of a prospect , where there stand out over a brae the two sail of a windmill , like an ass s ear , but with the ass quite hide . it be strange   after the wind rise , for at first it be dead calm   to see the turning and following of each other of these great sail behind the hillock . Scarce any road come by there ; but a number of footway travel among the bent in all direction up to Mr. Bazin s door . the truth be , he be a man of many trade , not any one of they honest , and the position of his inn be the good of his livelihood . smuggler frequent it ; political agent and forfeit person bind across the water come there to await their passage ; and I daresay there be bad behind , for a whole family might have be butcher in that house and nobody the wiser . 

 I sleep little and ill . long ere it be day , I have slip from beside my bedfellow , and be warm myself at the fire or walk to and fro before the door . Dawn break mighty sullen ; but a little after , spring up a wind out of the west , which burst the cloud , let through the sun , and set the mill to the turning . there be something of spring in the sunshine , or else it be in my heart ; and the appearing of the great sail one after another from behind the hill , divert I extremely . at time I could hear a creak of the machinery ; and by half - past eight of the day , and I think this dreary , desert place be like a paradise . 

 for all which , as the day draw on and nobody come near , I begin to be aware of an uneasiness that I could scarce explain . it seem there be trouble afoot ; the sail of the windmill , as they come up and go down over the hill , be like person spy ; and outside of all fancy , it be surely a strange neighbourhood and house for a young lady to be bring to dwell in . 

 at breakfast , which we take late , it be manifest that James More be in some danger or perplexity ; manifest that Alan be alive to the same , and watch he close ; and this appearance of duplicity upon the one side , and vigilance upon the other , hold I on live coal . the meal be no soon over than James seem to come begin to make apology . he have an appointment of a private nature in the town   it be with the french nobleman , he tell I , and we would please excuse he till about noon . meanwhile he carry his daughter aside to the far end of the room , where he seem to speak rather earnestly and she to listen with much inclination . 

 " I be care less and less about this man James , " say Alan . " there s something no right with the man James , and I shouldnae wonder but what Alan Breck would give an eye to he this day . I would like fine to see yon french nobleman , Davie ; and I daresay you could find an employ to yoursel , and that would be to speir at the lassie for some news o your affair . just tell it to she plainly tell she ye re a muckle ass at the off - set ; and then , if I be you , and ye could do it naitural , I would just mint to she I be in some kind of a danger ; a weemenfolk like that . " 

 " I cannae lee , Alan , I cannae do it naitural , " say I , mock he . 

 " the more fool you ! " say he . " then ye ll can tell she that I recommend it ; that ll set she to the laughing ; and I wouldnae wonder but what that be the next good . but see to the pair of they ! if I didnae feel just sure of the lassie , and that she be awful pleased and chief with Alan , I would think there be some kind of hocus - pocus about you . " 

 " and be she so pleased with ye , then , Alan ? " I ask . 

 " she think a heap of I , " say he . " and I m no like you : I m one that can tell . that she do she think a heap of Alan . and troth ! I m think a good deal of he mysel ; and with your permission , Shaws , I ll be get a wee yont amang the bent , so that I can see what way James go . " 

 one after another went , till I be leave alone beside the breakfast table ; James to Dunkirk , Alan dog he , Catriona up the stair to her own chamber . I could very well understand how she should avoid to be alone with I ; yet be none the well pleased with it for that , and bent my mind to entrap she to an interview before the man return . upon the whole , the good appear to I to do like Alan . if I be out of view among the sandhill , the fine morning would decoy she forth ; and once I have she in the open , I could please myself . 

 no soon say than do ; nor be I long under the bield of a hillock before she appear at the inn door , look here and there , and   see nobody   set out by a path that lead directly seaward , and by which I follow she . I be in no haste to make my presence know ; the far she go I make sure of the long hear to my suit ; and the ground be all sandy it be easy to follow her unheard . the path rise and come at last to the head of a knowe . Thence I have a picture for the first time of what a desolate wilderness that inn stand hide in ; where be no man to be see , nor any house of man , except just Bazin s and the windmill . only a little far on , the sea appear and two or three ship upon it , pretty as a drawing . one of these be extremely close in to be so great a vessel ; and I be aware of a shock of new suspicion , when I recognise the trim of the seahorse . what should an english ship be do so near in to France ? why be Alan bring into her neighbourhood , and that in a place so far from any hope of rescue ? and be it by accident , or by design , that the daughter of James More should walk that day to the seaside ? 

 presently I come forth behind she in the front of the sandhill and above the beach . it be here long and solitary ; with a man - o -war s boat draw up about the middle of the prospect , and an officer in charge and pace the sand like one who wait . I sit down where the rough grass a good deal cover I , and look for what should follow . Catriona go straight to the boat ; the officer meet she with civility ; they have ten word together ; I see a letter change hand ; and there be Catriona return . at the same time , as if this be all her business on the Continent , the boat shove off and be head for the Seahorse . but I observe the officer to remain behind and disappear among the bent . 

 I like the business little ; and the more I consider of it , like it less . be it Alan the officer be seek ? or Catriona ? she draw near with her head down , look constantly on the sand , and make so tender a picture that I could not bear to doubt her innocence . the next , she raise her face and recognise I ; seem to hesitate , and then come on again , but more slowly , and I think with a change colour . and at that thought , all else that be upon my bosom fear , suspicion , the care of my friend s life be clean swallow up ; and I rise to my foot and stand wait she in a drunkenness of hope . 

 I give she " good morning " as she come up , which she return with a good deal of composure . 

 " will you forgive my have follow you ? " say I. 

 " I know you be always mean kindly , " she reply ; and then , with a little outburst , " but why will you be send money to that man ! it must not be . " 

 " I never send it for he , " say I , " but for you , as you know well . " 

 " and you have no right to be send it to either one of we , " she say . " David , it be not right . " 

 " it be not , it be all wrong , " say I , " and I pray God he will help this dull fellow   if it be at all possible   to make it well . Catriona , this be no kind of life for you to lead ; and I ask your pardon for the word , but yon man be no fit father to take care of you . " 

 " do not be speak of he , even ! " be her cry . 

 " and I need speak of he no more ; it be not of he that I be think , o , be sure of that ! " say I. " I think of the one thing . I have be alone now this long time in Leyden ; and when I be by way of at my study , still I be think of that . Next Alan come , and I go among soldier - man to their big dinner ; and still I have the same thought . and it be the same before , when I have she there beside I . Catriona , do you see this napkin at my throat ! you cut a corner from it once and then cast it from you . they re your colour now ; I wear they in my heart . my dear , I can not be want you . o , try to put up with I ! " 

 I step before she so as to intercept she walk on . 

 " try to put up with I , " I be say , " try and bear I with a little . " 

 still she have never the word , and a fear begin to rise in I like a fear of death . 

 " Catriona , " I cry , gaze on her hard , " be it a mistake again ? be I quite lose ? " 

 she raise her face to I , breathless . 

 " do you want I , Davie , truly ? " say she , and I scarce could hear she say it . 

 " I do that , " say I. " O , sure you know it I do that . " 

 " I have nothing leave to give or to keep back , " say she . " I be all your from the first day , if you would have have a gift of I ! " she say . 

 this be on the summit of a brae ; the place be windy and conspicuous , we be to be see there even from the english ship ; but I kneel down before she in the sand , and embrace her knee , and burst into that storm of weeping that I think it must have break I . all thought be wholly beat from my mind by the vehemency of my discomposure . I know not where I be . I have forget why I be happy ; only I know she stoop , and I feel her cherish I to her face and bosom , and hear her word out of a whirl . 

 " Davie , " she be say , " o , Davie , be this what you think of I ! be it so that you be care for poor I ! o , Davie , Davie ! " 

 with that she weep also , and our tear be commingle in a perfect gladness . 

 it might have be ten in the day before I come to a clear sense of what a mercy have befall I ; and sit over against she , with her hand in mine , gaze in her face , and laugh out loud for pleasure like a child , and call she foolish and kind name . I have never see the place that look so pretty as those bent by Dunkirk ; and the windmill sail , as they bobbed over the knowe , be like a tune of music . 

 I know not how much long we might have continue to forget all else besides ourselves , have I not chance upon a reference to her father , which bring we to reality . 

 " my little friend , " I be call she again and again , rejoice to summon up the past by the sound of it , and to gaze across on she , and to be a little distant " my little friend , now you be mine altogether ; mine for good , my little friend and that man s no long at all . " 

 there come a sudden whiteness in her face , she pluck her hand from mine . 

 " Davie , take I away from he ! " she cry . " there s something wrong ; he s not true . there will be something wrong ; I have a dreadful terror here at my heart . what will he be want at all event with that King s ship ? what will this word be say ? " and she hold the letter forth . " my mind misgive I , it will be some ill to Alan . open it , Davie open it and see . " 

 I take it , and look at it , and shake my head . 

 " no , " say I , " it go against I , I can not open a man s letter . " 

 " not to save your friend ? " she cry . 

 " I cannae tell , " say I. " I think not . if I be only sure ! " 

 " and you have but to break the seal ! " say she . 

 " I know it , " say I , " but the thing go against I . " 

 " give it here , " say she , " and I will open it myself . " 

 " nor you neither , " say I. " you least of all . it concern your father , and his honour , dear , which we be both misdoubte . no question but the place be dangerous - like , and the english ship be here , and your father have word from it , and yon officer that stay ashore . he would not be alone either ; there must be more along with he ; I daresay we be spy upon this minute . ay , no doubt , the letter should be open ; but somehow , not by you nor I . " 

 I be about thus far with it , and my spirit very much overcome with a sense of danger and hidden enemy , when I spy Alan , come back again from follow James and walk by himself among the sand - hill . he be in his soldier s coat , of course , and mighty fine ; but I could not avoid to shudder when I think how little that jacket would avail he , if he be once catch and fling in a skiff , and carry on board of the Seahorse , a deserter , a rebel , and now a condemn murderer . 

 " there , " say I , " there be the man that have the good right to open it : or not , as he think fit . " 

 with which I call upon his name , and we both stand up to be a mark for he . 

 " if it be so if it be more disgrace will you can bear it ? " she ask , look upon I with a burn eye . 

 " I be ask something of the same question when I have see you but the once , " say I. " what do you think I answer ? that if I like you as I think I do and O , but I like you well ! I would marry you at his gallow foot . " 

 the blood rise in her face ; she come close up and press upon I , hold my hand : and it be so that we await Alan . 

 he come with one of his queer smile . " what be I tell ye , David ? " say he . 

 " there be a time for all thing , Alan , " say I , " and this time be serious . how have you speed ? you can speak out plain before this friend of ours . " 

 " I have be upon a fool s errand , " say he . 

 " I doubt we have do well than you , then , " say I ; " and , at least , here be a great deal of matter that you must judge of . do you see that ? " I go on , point to the ship . " that be the Seahorse , Captain Palliser . " 

 " I should ken she , too , " say Alan . " I have fyke enough with she when she be station in the Forth . but what ail the man to come so close ? " 

 " I will tell you why he come there first , " say I. " it be to bring this letter to James More . why he stop here now that it s deliver , what it s likely to be about , why there s an officer hide in the bent , and whether or not it s probable that he s alone I would rather you consider for yourself . " 

 " a letter to James More ? " say he . 

 " the same , " say I. 

 " well , and I can tell ye more than that , " say Alan . " for the last night , when you be fast asleep , I hear the man collogue with some one in the French , and then the door of that inn to be open and shut . " 

 " Alan ! " cry I , " you sleep all night , and I be here to prove it . " 

 " ay , but I would never trust Alan whether he be asleep or wake ! " say he . " but the business look bad . let s see the letter . " 

 I give it he . 

 " Catriona , " say he , " you have to excuse I , my dear ; but there s nothing less than my fine bone upon the cast of it , and I ll have to break this seal . " 

 " it be my wish , " say Catriona . 

 he open it , glance it through , and fling his hand in the air . 

 " the stink brock ! " say he , and cram the paper in his pocket . " here , let s get our thing together . this place be fair death to I . " and he begin to walk towards the inn . 

 it be Catriona that speak the first . " he have sell you ? " she ask . 

 " sell I , my dear , " say Alan . " but thank to you and Davie , I ll can jink he yet . just let I win upon my horse , " he add . 

 " Catriona must come with we , " say I. " she can have no more traffic with that man . she and I be to be marry . " at which she press my hand to her side . 

 " be ye there with it ? " say Alan , look back . " the good day s work that ever either of you do yet ! and I m bind to say , my dawtie , ye make a real , bonny couple . " 

 the way that he be follow bring we close in by the windmill , where I be aware of a man in seaman s trouser , who seem to be spy from behind it . only , of course , we take he in the rear . 

 " see , Alan ! " 

 " Wheesht ! " say , he , " this be my affair . " 

 the man be , no doubt , a little deafen by the clattering of the mill , and we get up close before he notice . then he turn , and we see he be a big fellow with a mahogany face . 

 " I think , sir , " say Alan , " that you speak the English ? " 

 " non , monsieur , " say he , with an incredible bad accent . 

 " non , monsieur , " cry Alan , mock he . " be that how they learn you french on the seahorse ? ye muckle , gutsey hash , here s a Scots boot to your english hurdie ! " 

 and bound on he before he could escape , he deal the man a kick that lay he on his nose . then he stand , with a savage smile , and watch he scramble to his foot and scamper off into the sand - hill . 

 " but it s high time I be clear of these empty bent ! " say Alan ; and continue his way at top speed , and we still follow , to the backdoor of Bazin s inn . 

 it chance that as we enter by the one door we come face to face with James more enter by the other . 

 " here ! " say I to Catriona , " quick ! upstairs with you and make your packet ; this be no fit scene for you . " 

 in the meanwhile James and Alan have meet in the midst of the long room . she pass they close by to reach the stair ; and after she be some way up I see her turn and glance at they again , though without pause . indeed , they be worth look at . Alan wear as they meet one of his good appearance of courtesy and friendliness , yet with something eminently warlike , so that James smell danger off the man , as folk smell fire in a house , and stand prepare for accident . 

 Time press . Alan s situation in that solitary place , and his enemy about he , might have daunt Casar . it make no change in he ; and it be in his old spirit of mockery and daffe that he begin the interview . 

 " a braw good day to ye again , Mr. Drummond , " say he . " what ll yon business of yours be just about ? " 

 " why , the thing be private , and rather of a long story , " say James , " I think it will keep very well till we have eat . " 

 " I m none so sure of that , " say Alan . " it stick in my mind it s either now or never ; for the fact be I and Mr. Balfour here have get a line , and we re think of the road . " 

 I see a little surprise in James s eye ; but he hold himself stoutly . 

 " I have but the one word to say to cure you of that , " say he , " and that be the name of my business . " 

 " say it then , " say Alan . " Hout ! wha mind for Davie ? " 

 " it be a matter that would make we both rich man , " say James . 

 " do you tell I that ? " cry Alan . 

 " I do , sir , " say James . " the plain fact be that it be Cluny s Treasure . " 

 " no ! " cry Alan . " have ye get word of it ? " 

 " I ken the place , Mr. Stewart , and can take you there , " say James . 

 " this crown all ! " say Alan . " well , and I m glad I come to Dunkirk . and so this be your business , be it ? halver , I m think ? " 

 " that be the business , sir , " say James . 

 " well , well , " say Alan ; and then in the same tone of childlike interest , " it have naethe to do with the seahorse , then ? " he ask . 

 " with what ? " say James . 

 " or the lad that I have just kick the bottom of behind yon windmill ? " pursue Alan . " Hut , man ! have do with your lee ! I have Palliser s letter here in my pouch . you re by with it , James More . you can never show your face again with dacent folk . " 

 James be take all aback with it . he stand a second , motionless and white , then swell with the live anger . 

 " do you talk to I , you bastard ? " he roar out . 

 " Ye glee d swine ! " cry Alan , and hit he a sound buffet on the mouth , and the next wink of time their blade clash together . 

 at the first sound of the bare steel I instinctively leap back from the collision . the next I see , James parry a thrust so nearly that I think he kill ; and it low up in my mind that this be the girl s father , and in a manner almost my own , and I draw and run in to sever they . 

 " keep back , Davie ! be ye daft ! damn ye , keep back ! " roar Alan . " your blood be on your ain heid then ! " 

 I beat their blade down twice . I be knock reel against the wall ; I be back again betwixt they . they take no heed of I , thrust at each other like two fury . I can never think how I avoid be stab myself or stab one of these two rodomont , and the whole business turn about I like a piece of a dream ; in the midst of which I hear a great cry from the stair , and Catriona spring before her father . in the same moment the point of my sword encounter some thing yield . it come back to I redden . I see the blood flow on the girl s kerchief , and stand sick . 

 " will you be kill he before my eye , and I his daughter after all ! " she cry . 

 " my dear , I have do with he , " say Alan , and go , and sit on a table , with his arm cross and the sword naked in his hand . 

 awhile she stand before the man , panting , with big eye , then swing suddenly about and face he . 

 " begone ! " be her word , " take your shame out of my sight ; leave I with clean folk . I be a daughter of Alpin ! shame of the son of Alpin , begone ! " 

 it be say with so much passion as awake I from the horror of my own bloody sword . the two stand face , she with the red stain on her kerchief , he white as a rag . I know he well enough I know it must have pierce he in the quick place of his soul ; but he betake himself to a bravado air . 

 " why , " say he , sheathe his sword , though still with a bright eye on Alan , " if this brawl be over I will but get my portmanteau " 

 " there go no pockmantie out of this place except with I , " say Alan . 

 " Sir ! " cry James . 

 " James More , " say Alan , " this lady daughter of yours be to marry my friend Davie , upon the which account I let you pack with a hale carcase . but take you my advice of it and get that carcase out of harm s way or ower late . little as you suppose it , there be leemit to my temper . " 

 " be damned , sir , but my money s there ! " say James . 

 " I m vex about that , too , " say Alan , with his funny face , " but now , ye see , it s mine . " and then with more gravity , " be you advise , James More , you leave this house . " 

 James seem to cast about for a moment in his mind ; but it s to be think he have enough of Alan s swordsmanship , for he suddenly put off his hat to we and   with a face like one of the damned   bade we farewell in a series . with which he be go . 

 at the same time a spell be lift from I . 

 " Catriona , " I cry , " it be I it be my sword . o , be you much hurt ? " 

 " I know it , Davie , I be love you for the pain of it ; it be do defend that bad man , my father . see ! " she say , and show I a bleed scratch , " see , you have make a man of I now . I will carry a wound like an old soldier . " 

 Joy that she should be so little hurt , and the love of her brave nature , support I . I embrace she , I kiss the wound . 

 " and be I to be out of the kissing , I that never lose a chance ? " say Alan ; and put I aside and take Catriona by either shoulder , " my dear , " he say , " you re a true daughter of Alpin . by all account , he be a very fine man , and he may weel be proud of you . if ever I be to get marry , it s the marrow of you I would be seek for a mother to my son . and I bear s a king s name and speak the truth . " 

 he say it with a serious heat of admiration that be honey to the girl , and through she , to I . it seem to wipe we clean of all James More s disgrace . and the next moment he be just himself again . 

 " and now by your leave , my dawtie , " say he , " this be a very bonny ; but Alan Breck ll be a wee thing near to the gallow than he s care for ; and dod ! I think this be a grand place to be leave . " 

 the word recall we to some wisdom . Alan run upstairs and return with our saddle - bag and James More s portmanteau ; I pick up Catriona s bundle where she have drop it on the stair ; and we be set forth out of that dangerous house , when Bazin stop the way with cry and gesticulation . he have whip under a table when the sword be draw , but now he be as bold as a lion . there be his bill to be settle , there be a chair break , Alan have sit among his dinner thing , James More have flee . 

 " here , " I cry , " pay yourself , " and fling he down some Lewie d or ; for I think it be no time to be account . 

 he spring upon that money , and we pass he by , and run forth into the open . upon three side of the house be seaman hasting and close in ; a little near to we James more wave his hat as if to hurry they ; and right behind he , like some foolish person hold up his hand , be the sail of the windmill turning . 

 Alan give but one glance , and lay himself down to run . he carry a great weight in James More s portmanteau ; but I think he would as soon have lose his life as cast away that booty which be his revenge ; and he run so that I be distressed to follow he , and marvel and exult to see the girl bound at my side . 

 as soon as we appear , they cast off all disguise upon the other side ; and the seaman pursue we with shout and view - hullohs . we have a start of some two hundred yard , and they be but bandy - legged tarpaulin after all , that could not hope to better we at such an exercise . I suppose they be arm , but do not care to use their pistol on french ground . and as soon as I perceive that we not only hold our advantage but draw a little away , I begin to feel quite easy of the issue . for all which , it be a hot , brisk bit of work , so long as it last ; Dunkirk be still far off ; and when we pop over a knowe , and find a company of the garrison marching on the other side on some manouvre , I could very well understand the word that Alan have . 

 he stop run at once ; and mop at his brow , " they re a real bonny folk , the french nation , " say he . 

 conclusion 

 no soon be we safe within the wall of Dunkirk than we hold a very necessary council - of - war on our position . we have take a daughter from her father at the sword s point ; any judge would give she back to he at once , and by all likelihood clap I and Alan into jail ; and though we have an argument upon our side in Captain Palliser s letter , neither Catriona nor I be very keen to be use it in public . upon all account it seem the most prudent to carry the girl to Paris to the hand of her own chieftain , Macgregor of Bohaldie , who would be very willing to help his kinswoman , on the one hand , and not at all anxious to dishonour James upon other . 

 we make but a slow journey of it up , for Catriona be not so good at the riding as the running , and have scarce sit in the saddle since the Forty - five . but we make it out at last , reach Paris early of a Sabbath morning , and make all speed , under Alan s guidance , to find Bohaldie . he be finely lodge , and live in a good style , have a pension on the Scots Fund , as well as private mean ; greet Catriona like one of his own house , and seem altogether very civil and discreet , but not particularly open . we ask of the news of James More . " Poor James ! " say he , and shake his head and smile , so that I think he know far than he mean to tell . then we show he Palliser s letter , and he draw a long face at that . 

 " Poor James ! " say he again . " well , there be bad folk than James More , too . but this be dreadful bad . tut , tut , he must have forget himself entirely ! this be a most undesirable letter . but , for all that , gentleman , I can not see what we would want to make it public for . it s an ill bird that foul his own nest , and we be all scot folk and all Hieland . " 

 upon this we all agree , save perhaps Alan ; and still more upon the question of our marriage , which Bohaldie take in his own hand , as though there have be no such person as James More , and give Catriona away with very pretty manner and agreeable compliment in French . it be not till all be over , and our health drunk , that he tell we James be in that city , whither he have precede we some day , and where he now lie sick , and like to die . I think I see by my wife s face what way her inclination point . 

 " and let we go see he , then , " say I. 

 " if it be your pleasure , " say Catriona . these be early day . 

 he be lodge in the same quarter of the city with his chief , in a great house upon a corner ; and we be guide up to the garret where he lie by the sound of Highland piping . it seem he have just borrow a set of they from Bohaldie to amuse his sickness ; though he be no such hand as be his brother Rob , he make good music of the kind ; and it be strange to observe the french folk crowd on the stair , and some of they laugh . he lie prop in a pallet . the first look of he I see he be upon his last business ; and , doubtless , this be a strange place for he to die in . but even now I find I can scarce dwell upon his end with patience . Doubtless , Bohaldie have prepare he ; he seem to know we be marry , compliment we on the event , and give we a benediction like a patriarch . 

 " I have be never understand , " say he . " I forgive you both without an afterthought ; " after which he speak for all the world in his old manner , be so obliging as to play we a tune or two upon his pipe , and borrow a small sum before I leave . 

 I could not trace even a hint of shame in any part of his behaviour ; but he be great upon forgiveness ; it seem always fresh to he . I think he forgive I every time we meet ; and when after some four day he pass away in a kind of odour of affectionate sanctity , I could have tear my hair out for exasperation . I have he bury ; but what to put upon his tomb be quite beyond I , till at last I consider the date would look well alone . 

 I think it wise to resign all thought of Leyden , where we have appear once as brother and sister , and it would certainly look strange to return in a new character . Scotland would be do for we ; and thither , after I have recover that which I have leave behind , we sail in a Low Country ship . 

 
 and now , Miss Barbara Balfour   to set the lady first , and Mr. Alan Balfour young of Shaws , here be the story bring fairly to an end . a great many of the folk that take a part in it , you will find   if you think well   that you have see and speak with . Alison Hastie in Limekilns be the lass that rock your cradle when you be too small to know of it , and walk abroad with you in the policy when you be big . that very fine great lady that be Miss Barbara s name - mamma be no other than the same Miss Grant that make so much a fool of David Balfour in the house of the Lord Advocate . and I wonder whether you remember a little , lean , lively gentleman in a scratch - wig and a wraprascal , that come to Shaws very late of a dark night , and whom you be awaken out of your bed and bring down to the dining - hall to be present to , by the name of Mr. Jamieson ? or have Alan forget what he do at Mr. Jamieson s request a most disloyal act for which , by the letter of the law , he might be hang no less than drink the king s health across the water ? these be strange doing in a good Whig house ! but Mr. Jamieson be a man privileged , and might set fire to my corn - barn ; and the name they know he by now in France be the Chevalier Stewart . 

 as for Davie and Catriona , I shall watch you pretty close in the next day , and see if you be so bold as to be laugh at papa and mamma . it be true we be not so wise as we might have be , and make a great deal of sorrow out of nothing ; but you will find as you grow up that even the artful Miss Barbara , and even the valiant Mr. Alan , will be not so very much wise than their parent . for the life of man upon this world of ours be a funny business . they talk of the angel weep ; but I think they must more often be hold their side as they look on ; and there be one thing I determine to do when I begin this long story , and that be to tell out everything as it befell . 

