THE VIRGINIANS 





 CHAPTER I. in which one of the Virginians visit home 

 on the library wall of one of the most famous writer of America , there hang two crossed sword , which his relative wear in the great War of Independence . the one sword be gallantly draw in the service of the king , the other be the weapon of a brave and honoured republican soldier . the possessor of the harmless trophy have earn for himself a name alike honour in his ancestor ' country and his own , where genius such as his have always a peaceful welcome . 
 the ensue history remind I of yonder sword in the historian 's study at Boston . in the Revolutionary War , the subject of this story , native of America , and child of the Old Dominion , find themselves engage on different side in the quarrel , come together peaceably at its conclusion , as brother should , their love ever have materially diminish , however angrily the contest divide they . the colonel in scarlet , and the general in blue and buff , hang side by side in the wainscoted parlour of the Warringtons , in England , where a descendant of one of the brother have show their portrait to I , with many of the letter which they write , and the book and paper which belong to they . in the Warrington family , and to distinguish they from other personage of that respectable race , these effigy have always go by the name of " the Virginians " ; by which name their memoir be christen . 
 they both of they pass much time in Europe . they live just on the verge of that Old World from which we be drift away so swiftly . they be familiar with many variety of man and fortune . their lot bring they into contact with personage of whom we read only in book , who seem alive , as I read in the Virginians ' letter regard they , whose voice I almost fancy I hear , as I read the yellow page write score of year since , blot with the boyish tear of disappointed passion , dutifully despatch after famous ball and ceremony of the grand Old World , scribble by camp - fire , or out of prison ; nay , there be one that have a bullet through it , and of which a great portion of the text be blot out with the blood of the bearer . 
 these letter have probably never be preserve , but for the affectionate thrift of one person , to whom they never fail in their dutiful correspondence . their mother keep all her son ' letter , from the very first , in which Henry , the young of the twin , send his love to his brother , then ill of a sprain at his grandfather 's house of Castlewood , in Virginia , and thank his grandpapa for a horse which he rid with his tutor , down to the last , " from my beloved son , " which reach she but a few hour before her death . the venerable lady never visit Europe , save once with her parent in the reign of George the Second ; take refuge in Richmond when the house of Castlewood be burn down during the war ; and be call Madam Esmond ever after that event ; never care much for the name or family of Warrington , which she hold in very slight estimation as compare to her own . 
 the letter of the Virginians , as the reader will presently see , from specimen to be show to he , be by no means full . they be hint rather than description indication and outline chiefly : it may be , that the present writer have mistake the form , and fill in the colour wrongly : but , pore over the document , I have try to imagine the situation of the writer , where he be , and by what person surround . I have draw the figure as I fancy they be ; set down conversation as I think I might have hear they ; and so , to the good of my ability , endeavour to revivify the bygone time and people . with what success the task have be accomplish , with what profit or amusement to himself , the kind reader will please to determine . 
 one summer morning in the year 1756 , and in the reign of his Majesty King George the Second , the Young Rachel , virginian ship , Edward Franks master , come up the Avon river on her happy return from her annual voyage to the Potomac . she proceed to Bristol with the tide , and moor in the stream as near as possible to Trail 's wharf , to which she be consign . Mr. Trail , her part owner , who could survey his ship from his counting - house window , straightway take boat and come up her side . the owner of the Young Rachel , a large grave man in his own hair , and of a demure aspect , give the hand of welcome to Captain Franks , who stand on his deck , and congratulate the captain upon the speedy and fortunate voyage which he have make . and , remark that we ought to be thankful to Heaven for its mercy , he proceed presently to business by ask particular relative to cargo and passenger . 
 Franks be a pleasant man , who love a joke . " we have , " say he , " but yonder ugly negro boy , who be fetch the trunk , and a passenger who have the state cabin to himself . " 
 Mr. Trail look as if he would have prefer more mercy from Heaven . " confound you , Franks , and your luck ! the Duke William , which come in last week , bring fourteen , and she be not half of our tonnage . " 
 " and this passenger , who have the whole cabin , do not   pay nothing , " continue the Captain . " swear now , it will do you good , Mr. Trail , indeed it will . I have try the medicine . " 
 " a passenger take the whole cabin and not pay ? gracious mercy , be you a fool , Captain Franks ? " 
 " ask the passenger himself , for here he come . " and , as the master speak , a young man of some nineteen year of age come up the hatchway . he have a cloak and a sword under his arm , and be dress in deep mourning , and call out , " Gumbo , you idiot , why do not   you fetch the baggage out of the cabin ? well , shipmate , our journey be end . you will see all the little folk to - night whom you have be talk about . give my love to Polly , and Betty , and Little Tommy ; not forget my duty to Mrs. Franks . I think , yesterday , the voyage would never be do , and now I be almost sorry it be over . that little berth in my cabin look very comfortable now I be go to leave it . " 
 Mr. Trail scowl at the young passenger who have pay no money for his passage . he scarcely nod his head to the stranger , when Captain Franks say , " this here gentleman be Mr. Trail , sir , whose name you have a - heerd of . " 
 " it be pretty well know in Bristol , sir , " say Mr. Trail , majestically . 
 " and this be Mr. Warrington , Madam Esmond Warrington 's son , of Castlewood , " continue the Captain . 
 the british merchant 's hat be instantly off his head , and the owner of the beaver be make a prodigious number of bow as if a crown prince be before he . 
 " gracious power , Mr. Warrington ! this be a delight , indeed ! what a crown mercy that your voyage should have be so prosperous ! you must have my boat to go on shore . let I cordially and respectfully welcome you to England : let I shake your hand as the son of my benefactress and patroness , Mrs. Esmond Warrington , whose name be know and honour on Bristol ' Change , I warrant you . be not   it , Franks ? " 
 " there be no sweet tobacco come from Virginia , and no well brand than the Three Castles , " say Mr. Franks , draw a great brass tobacco - box from his pocket , and thrust a quid into his jolly mouth . " you do not   know what a comfort it be , sir ! you will take to it , bless you , as you grow old . will not   he , Mr. Trail ? I wish you have ten shipload of it instead of one . you might have ten shipload : I have   tell Madam Esmond so ; I have   ride over her plantation ; she treat I like a lord when I go to the house ; she do not   grudge I the good of wine , or keep I cool my heel in the counting - room as some folk do "   with a look at Mr. Trail . " she be a real bear lady , she be ; and might have a thousand hogshead as easy as her hundred , if there be but hand enough . " 
 " I have lately engage in the Guinea trade , and could supply her ladyship with any number of healthy young negro before next fall , " say Mr. Trail , obsequiously . 
 " we be averse to the purchase of negro from Africa , " say the young gentleman , coldly . " my grandfather and my mother have always object to it , and I do not like to think of sell or buy the poor wretch . " 
 " it be for their good , my dear young sir ! for their temporal and their spiritual good ! " cry Mr. Trail . " and we purchase the poor creature only for their benefit ; let I talk this matter over with you at my own house . I can introduce you to a happy home , a christian family , and a british merchant 's honest fare . can not   I , Captain Franks ? " 
 " can not   say , " growl the Captain . " never ask I to take bite or sup at your table . ask I to psalm - singing once , and to hear Mr. Ward preach : do not   care for they sort of entertainment . " 
 not choose to take any notice of this remark , Mr. Trail continue in his low tone : " business be business , my dear young sir , and I know , ' tis only my duty , the duty of all of we , to cultivate the fruit of the earth in their season . as the heir of Lady Esmond 's estate for I speak , I believe , to the heir of that great property ? " 
 the young gentleman make a bow . 
 " I would urge upon you , at the very early moment , the propriety , the duty of increase the ample mean with which Heaven have bless you . as an honest factor , I could not do otherwise ; as a prudent man , should I scruple to speak of what will tend to your profit and mine ? no , my dear Mr. George . " 
 " my name be not George ; my name be Henry , " say the young man as he turn his head away , and his eye fill with tear . 
 " gracious power ! what do you mean , sir ? do you not say you be my lady 's heir ? and be not George Esmond Warrington , Esq . " 
 " hold your tongue , you fool ! " cry Mr. Franks , strike the merchant a tough blow on his sleek side , as the young lad turn away . " do not   you see the young gentleman a - swab his eye , and note his black clothe ? " 
 " what do you mean , Captain Franks , by lay your hand on your owner ? Mr. George be the heir ; I know the Colonel 's will well enough . " 
 " Mr. George be there , " say the Captain , point with his thumb to the deck . 
 " where ? " cry the factor . 
 " Mr. George be there ! " reiterate the Captain , again lift up his finger towards the topmast , or the sky beyond . " he be dead a year , sir , come next 9th of July . he would go out with General Braddock on that dreadful business to the Belle Riviere . he and a thousand more never come back again . every man of they be murder as he fall . you know the indian way , Mr. Trail ? " and here the Captain pass his hand rapidly round his head . " horrible ! be not   it , sir ? horrible ! he be a fine young man , the very picture of this one ; only his hair be black , which be now hang in a bloody indian wigwam . he be often and often on board of the Young Rachel , and would have his chest of book break open on deck before they be land . he be a shy and silent young gent : not like this one , which be the merry , wild young fellow , full of his song and fun . he take on dreadful at the news ; go to his bed , have that fever which lay so many of them by the heel along that swampy Potomac , but he be get well on the voyage : the voyage make every one well ; and , in course , the young gentleman can not   be for ever a - crying after a brother who die and leave he a great fortune . ever since we sight Ireland he have be quite gay and happy , only he would go off at time , when he be most merry , say , ' I wish my dear georgy could enjoy this here sight along with I , and when you mention the t'other 's name , you see , he could not   stand it . ' " and the honest Captain 's own eye fill with tear , as he turn and look towards the object of his compassion . 
 Mr. Trail assume a lugubrious countenance befit the tragic compliment with which he prepare to greet the young Virginian ; but the latter answer he very curtly , decline his offer of hospitality , and only stay in Mr. Trail 's house long enough to drink a glass of wine and to take up a sum of money of which he stand in need . but he and Captain Franks part on the very warm term , and all the little crew of the Young Rachel cheer from the ship 's side as their passenger leave it . 
 again and again Harry Warrington and his brother have pore over the english map , and determine upon the course which they should take upon arrive at home . all Americans who love the old country and what gently - nurture man or woman of anglo - Saxon race do not ? have ere this rehearse their english travel , and visit in fancy the spot with which their hope , their parent ' fond story , their friend ' description , have render they familiar . there be few thing to I more affect in the history of the quarrel which divide the two great nation than the recurrence of that word Home , as use by the young towards the eld country . Harry Warrington have his chart lay out . before London , and its glorious temple of St. Paul 's and St. Peter 's ; its grim Tower , where the brave and loyal have shed their blood , from Wallace down to Balmerino and Kilmarnock , pity by gentle heart ; before the awful window of Whitehall , whence the martyr Charles have issue , to kneel once more , and then ascend to Heaven ; before Playhouses , Parks , and Palaces , wondrous resort of wit , pleasure , and splendour ; before Shakspeare 's resting - place under the tall spire which rise by Avon , amidst the sweet Warwickshire pasture ; before Derby , and Falkirk , and Culloden , where the cause of honour and loyalty have fall , it might be to rise no more : before all these point of their pilgrimage there be one which the young virginian brother hold even more sacred , and that be the home of their family , that old Castlewood in Hampshire , about which their parent have talk so fondly . from Bristol to Bath , from Bath to Salisbury , to winchester , to Hexton , to home ; they know the way , and have map the journey many and many a time . 
 we must fancy our american traveller to be a handsome young fellow , whose suit of sable only make he look the more interesting . the plump landlady from her bar , surround by her china and punch - bowl , and stout gild bottle of strong water , and glitter row of silver flagon , look kindly after the young gentleman as he pass through the inn - hall from his post - chaise , and the obsequious chamberlain bow he upstairs to the Rose or the dolphin . the trim chambermaid drop her good curtsey for his fee , and Gumbo , in the inn - kitchen , where the townsfolk drink their mug of ale by the great fire , brag of his young master 's splendid house in Virginia , and of the immense wealth to which he be heir . the postchaise whirl the traveller through the most delightful home - scenery his eye have ever light on . if english landscape be pleasant to the American of the present day , who must need contrast the rich wood and glow pasture , and picturesque ancient village of the old country with the rough aspect of his own , how much pleasanter must Harry Warrington 's course have be , whose journey have lie through swamp and forest solitude from one virginian ordinary to another log - house at the end of the day 's route , and who now light suddenly upon the busy , happy , splendid scene of english summer ? and the highroad , a hundred year ago , be not that grass - grow desert of the present time . it be alive with constant travel and traffic : the country town and inn swarm with life and gaiety . the ponderous waggon , with its bell and plod team ; the light post - coach that achieve the journey from the White Hart , Salisbury , to the Swan with two Necks , London , in two day ; the string of packhorse that have not yet leave the road ; my lord 's gilt postchaise - and - six , with the outrider gallop on ahead ; the country squire 's great coach and heavy Flanders mare ; the farmer trot to market , or the parson jolt to the cathedral town on Dumpling , his wife behind on the pillion all these crowd sight and brisk people greet the young traveller on his summer journey . Hodge , the farmer 's boy , take off his hat , and Polly , the milkmaid , bob a curtsey , as the chaise whirl over the pleasant village - green , and the white - head child lift their chubby face and cheer . the church - spire glisten with gold , the cottage - gable glare in sunshine , the great elm murmur in summer , or cast purple shadow over the grass . young Warrington never have such a glorious day , or witness a scene so delightful . to be nineteen year of age , with high health , high spirit , and a full purse , to be make your first journey , and roll through the country in a postchaise at nine mile an hour o happy youth ! almost it make one young to think of he ! but Harry be too eager to give more than a pass glance at the Abbey at Bath , or gaze with more than a moment 's wonder at the mighty Minster at Salisbury . until he behold Home it seem to he he have no eye for any other place . 
 at last the young gentleman 's postchaise draw up at the rustic inn on Castlewood Green , of which his grandsire have many a time talk to he , and which bear as its ensign , swing from an elm near the inn porch , the Three Castles of the Esmond family . they have a sign , too , over the gateway of Castlewood House , bear the same cognisance . this be the hatchment of Francis , Lord Castlewood , who now lie in the chapel hard by , his son reign in his stead . 
 Harry Warrington have often hear of Francis , Lord Castlewood . it be for Frank 's sake , and for his great love towards the boy , that Colonel Esmond determine to forgo his claim to the english estate and rank of his family , and retire to Virginia . the young man have lead a wild youth ; he have fight with distinction under Marlborough ; he have marry a foreign lady , and most lamentably adopt her religion . at one time he have be a Jacobite   for loyalty to the sovereign be ever hereditary in the Esmond family , but have receive some slight or injury from the Prince , which have cause he to rally to King George 's side . he have , on his second marriage , renounce the error of Popery which he have temporarily embrace , and return to the Established Church again . he have , from his constant support of the King and the Minister of the time being , be reward by his Majesty George II . , and die an english peer . an earl 's coronet now figure on the hatchment which hang over Castlewood gate and there be an end of the jolly gentleman . between Colonel Esmond , who have become his stepfather , and his lordship there have ever be a brief but affectionate correspondence on the Colonel 's part especially , who love his stepson , and have a hundred story to tell about he to his grandchild . Madam Esmond , however , say she could see nothing in her half - brother . he be dull , except when he drink too much wine , and that , to be sure , be every day at dinner . then he be boisterous , and his conversation not pleasant . he be good - look yes a fine tall stout animal ; she have rather her boy should follow a different model . in spite of the grandfather 's encomium of the late lord , the boy have no very great respect for their kinsman 's memory . the lad and their mother be staunch Jacobites , though have every respect for his present Majesty ; but right be right , and nothing could make their heart swerve from their allegiance to the descendant of the martyr Charles . 
 with a beat heart Harry Warrington walk from the inn towards the house where his grandsire 's youth have be pass . the little village - green of Castlewood slop down towards the river , which be span by an old bridge of a single broad arch , and from this the ground rise gradually towards the house , grey with many gable and buttress , and back by a darkle wood . an old man sate at the wicket on a stone bench in front of the great arched entrance to the house , over which the earl 's hatchment be hang . an old dog be crouch at the man 's foot . immediately above the ancient sentry at the gate be an open casement with some homely flower in the window , from behind which good - humour girl ' face be peep . they be watch the young traveller dress in black as he walk up gaze towards the castle , and the ebony attendant who follow the gentleman 's step also accoutre in mourning . so be he at the gate in mourning , and the girl when they come out have black ribbon . 
 to Harry 's surprise , the old man accost he by his name . " you have have a nice ride to Hexton , Master Harry , and the sorrel carry you well . " 
 " I think you must be Lockwood , " say Harry , with rather a tremulous voice , hold out his hand to the old man . his grandfather have often tell he of Lockwood , and how he have accompany the Colonel and the young Viscount in Marlborough 's war forty year ago . the veteran seem puzzle by the mark of affection which Harry extend to he . the old dog gaze at the new - comer , and then go and put his head between his knee . " I have hear of you often . how do you know my name ? " 
 " they say I forget most thing , " say the old man , with a smile ; " but I be not   so bad as that quite . only this mornin ' , when you go out , my darter say , ' Father , do you know why you have a black coat on ? ' ' in course I know why I have a black coat , ' say I. ' my lord be dead . they say ' twa a foul blow , and Master Frank be my lord now , and Master Harry ' why , what have you do since you have   go out this morning ? why , you have a - grow'd tall and change your hair though I know I know you . " 
 one of the young woman have trip out by this time from the porter 's lodge , and drop the strange a pretty curtsey . " Grandfather sometimes do not recollect very well , " she say , point to her head . " your honour seem to have hear of Lockwood ? " 
 " and you , have you never hear of Colonel Francis Esmond ? " 
 " he be Captain and Major in Webb 's foot , and I be with he in two campaign , sure enough , " cry Lockwood . " be not   I , Ponto ? " 
 " the Colonel as marry Viscountess Rachel , my late lord 's mother ? and go to live amongst the Indians ? we have hear of he . sure we have his picture in our gallery , and hisself paint it . " 
 " go to live in Virginia , and die there seven year ago , and I be his grandson . " 
 " Lord , your honour ! why , your honour 's skin 's as white as mine , " cry molly . " Grandfather , do you hear this ? his honour be Colonel Esmond 's grandson that use to send you tobacco , and his honour have come all the way from Virginia . " 
 " to see you , Lockwood , " say the young man , " and the family . I only set foot on english ground yesterday , and my first visit be for home . I may see the house , though the family be from home ? " molly dare to say Mrs. Barker would let his honour see the house , and Harry Warrington make his way across the court , seem to know the place as well as if he have be bear there , Miss Molly think , who follow , accompany by Mr. Gumbo make she a profusion of polite bow and speech . 




 CHAPTER II . in which Harry have to pay for his Supper 

 Colonel Esmond 's grandson ring for a while at his ancestor ' house of Castlewood , before any one within seem inclined to notice his summon . the servant , who at length issue from the door , seem to be very little affect by the announcement that the visitor be a relation of the family . the family be away , and in their absence John care very little for their relative , but be eager to get back to his game at card with Thomas in the window - seat . the housekeeper be busy get ready for my lord and my lady , who be expect that evening . only by strong entreaty could Harry gain leave to see my lady 's sitting - room and the picture - room , where , sure enough , be a portrait of his grandfather in periwig and breastplate , the counterpart of their picture in Virginia , and a likeness of his grandmother , as Lady Castlewood , in a yet early habit of Charles II . 's time ; her neck bare , her fair golden hair wave over her shoulder in ringlet which he remember to have see snowy white . from the contemplation of these sight the sulky housekeeper drive he . her family be about to arrive . there be my lady the Countess , and my lord and his brother , and the young lady , and the Baroness , who be to have the state bedroom . who be the Baroness ? the Baroness Bernstein , the young lady ' aunt . Harry write down his name on a paper from his own pocket - book , and lay it on a table in the hall . " Henry Esmond Warrington , of Castlewood , in Virginia , arrive in England yesterday stay at the Three Castles in the village . " the lackey rise up from their card to open the door to he , in order to get their " wail , " and Gumbo quit the bench at the gate , where he have be talk with old Lockwood , the porter , who take Harry 's guinea , hardly know the meaning of the gift . during the visit to the home of his father , Harry have only see little Polly 's countenance that be the least unselfish or kindly : he walk away , not care to own how disappointed he be , and what a damp have be strike upon he by the aspect of the place . they ought to have know he . have any of they ride up to his house in Virginia , whether the master be present or absent , the guest would have be make welcome , and , in sight of his ancestor ' hall , he have to go and ask for a dish of bacon and egg at a country alehouse ! 
 after his dinner , he go to the bridge and sate on it , look towards the old house , behind which the sun be descend as the rook come caw home to their nest in the elm . his young fancy picture to itself many of the ancestor of whom his mother and grandsire have tell he . he fancy knight and huntsman cross the ford ; cavalier of King Charles 's day ; my Lord Castlewood , his grandmother 's first husband , rid out with hawk and hound . the recollection of his dear lose brother come back to he as he indulge in these revery , and smite he with a pang of exceed tenderness and longing , insomuch that the young man hang his head and feel his sorrow renew for the dear friend and companion with whom , until of late , all his pleasure and grief have be share . as he sate plunge in his own thought , which be mingle up with the mechanical clinking of the blacksmith 's forge hard by , the noise of the evening , the talk of the rook , and the calling of the bird round about a couple of young man on horseback dash over the bridge . one of they , with an oath , call he a fool , and tell he to keep out of the way the other , who fancy he might have jostle the foot - passenger , and possibly might have send he over the parapet , push on more quickly when he reach the other side of the water , call likewise to Tom to come on ; and the pair of young gentleman be up the hill on their way to the house before Harry have recover himself from his surprise at their appearance , and wrath at their behaviour . in a minute or two , this advanced guard be follow by two livery servant on horseback , who scowl at the young traveller on the bridge a true british welcome of Curse you , who be you ? after these , in a minute or two , come a coach - and - six , a ponderous vehicle have need of the horse which draw it , and contain three lady , a couple of maid , and an armed man on a seat behind the carriage . three handsome pale face look out at Harry Warrington as the carriage pass over the bridge , and do not return the salute which , recognise the family arm , he give it . the gentleman behind the carriage glare at he haughtily . Harry feel terribly alone . he think he would go back to Captain Franks . the Rachel and her little tossing cabin seem a cheery spot in comparison to that on which he stand . the inn - folk do not know his name of Warrington . they tell he that be my lady in the coach , with her stepdaughter , my Lady Maria , and her daughter , my Lady Fanny ; and the young gentleman in the grey frock be Mr. William , and he with powder on the chestnut be my lord . it be the latter have swear the loud , and call he a fool ; and it be the grey frock which have nearly gallop Harry into the ditch . 
 the landlord of the Three Castles have show Harry a bedchamber , but he have refuse to have his portmanteaux unpacked , think that , for a certainty , the folk of the great house would invite he to theirs . one , two , three hour pass , and there come no invitation . Harry be fain to have his trunk open at last , and to call for his slipper and gown . just before dark , about two hour after the arrival of the first carriage , a second chariot with four horse have pass over the bridge , and a stout , high - coloured lady , with a very dark pair of eye , have look hard at Mr. Warrington . that be the Baroness Bernstein , the landlady say , my lord 's aunt , and Harry remember the first Lady Castlewood have come of a german family . Earl , and Countess , and Baroness , and postillion , and gentleman , and horse , have all disappear behind the castle gate , and Harry be fain to go to bed at last , in the most melancholy mood and with a cruel sense of neglect and loneliness in his young heart . he could not sleep , and , besides , ere long , hear a prodigious noise , and cursing , and giggling , and scream from my landlady 's bar , which would have serve to keep he awake . 
 then Gumbo 's voice be hear without , remonstrate , " you can not go in , sar my master asleep , sar ! " but a shrill voice , with many oath , which Harry Warrington recognise , curse Gumbo for a stupid , negro woolly - pate , and he be push aside , give entrance to a flood of oath into the room , and a young gentleman behind they . 
 " beg your pardon , Cousin Warrington , " cry the young blasphemer , " be you asleep ? beg your pardon for rid you over on the bridge . do not   know you course should not   have do it think it be a lawyer with a writ dress in black , you know . Gad ! think it be Nathan come to nab I . " and Mr. William laugh incoherently . it be evident that he be excited with liquor . 
 " you do I great honour to mistake I for a sheriff's - officer , cousin , " say Harry , with great gravity , sit up in his tall nightcap . 
 " Gad ! I think it be Nathan , and be go to send you souse into the river . but I ask your pardon . you see I have be drink at the Bell at Hexton , and the punch be good at the Bell at Hexton . Hullo ! you , Davis ! a bowl of punch ; d'you hear ? " 
 " I have have my share for to - night , cousin , and I should think you have , " Harry continue , always in the dignified style . 
 " you want I to go , Cousin What's - your - name , I see , " Mr. William say , with gravity . " you want I to go , and they want I to come , and I do not   want to come . I say , I would see he hang first , that be what I say . why should I trouble myself to come down all alone of an evening , and look after a fellow I do not   care a pin for ? zackly what I say . zackly what Castlewood say . why the devil should he go down ? Castlewood say , and so say my lady , but the Baroness would have you . it be all the Baroness 's doing , and if she say a thing , it must be do ; so you must just get up and come . " Mr. Esmond deliver these word with the most amiable rapidity and indistinctness , run they into one another , and tack about the room as he speak . but the young Virginian be in great wrath . " I tell you what , cousin , " he cry , " I will not   move for the Countess , or for the Baroness , or for all the cousin in Castlewood . " and when the landlord enter the chamber with the bowl of punch , which Mr. Esmond have order , the young gentleman in bed call out fiercely to the host , to turn that sot out of the room . 
 " Sot , you little tobacconist ! Sot , you Cherokee ! " scream out Mr. William . " jump out of bed , and I will drive my sword through your body . why do not   I do it to - day when I take you for a bailiff a confounded pettifog bum - bailiff ! " and he go on screech more oath and incoherency , until the landlord , the drawer , the hostler , and all the folk of the kitchen be bring to lead he away . after which Harry Warrington close his tent round he in sulky wrath , and , no doubt , finally go fast to sleep . 
 my landlord be very much more obsequious on the next morning when he meet his young guest , have now fully learn his name and quality . other messenger have come from the castle on the previous night to bring both the young gentleman home , and poor Mr. William , it appear , have return in a wheelbarrow , be not altogether unaccustomed to that mode of conveyance . " he never remember nothing about it the next day . he be of a real kind nature , Mr. William , " the landlord vow , " and the man get crown and half - crown from he by say that he beat they overnight when he be in liquor . he be the devil when he be tipsy , Mr. William , but when he be sober he be the very kind of young gentleman . " 
 as nothing be unknown to writer of biography of the present kind , it may be as well to state what have occur within the wall of Castlewood House , whilst Harry Warrington be without , await some token of recognition from his kinsman . on their arrival at home the family have find the paper on which the lad 's name be inscribe , and his appearance occasion a little domestic council . my Lord Castlewood suppose that must have be the young gentleman whom they have see on the bridge , and as they have not drown he they must invite he . let a man go down with the proper message , let a servant carry a note . Lady Fanny think it would be more civil if one of the brother would go to their kinsman , especially consider the original greeting which they have give . Lord Castlewood have not the slight objection to his brother William go yes , William should go . upon this Mr. William say   with a yet strong expression   that he would be hang if he would go . Lady Maria think the young gentleman whom they have remark at the bridge be a pretty fellow enough . Castlewood be dreadfully dull , I be sure neither of my brother do anything to make it amusing . he may be vulgar no doubt , he be vulgar but let we see the American . such be Lady Maria 's opinion . Lady Castlewood be neither for invite nor for refuse he , but for delaying . " wait till your aunt come , child ; perhaps the Baroness will not   like to see the young man ; at least , let we consult she before we ask he . " and so the hospitality to be offer by his near kinsfolk to poor Harry Warrington remain yet in abeyance . 
 at length the equipage of the Baroness Bernstein make its appearance , and whatever doubt there might be as to the reception of the virginian stranger , there be no lack of enthusiasm in this generous family regard their wealthy and powerful kinswoman . the state - chamber have already be prepare for she . the cook have arrive the previous day with instruction to get ready a supper for her such as her ladyship like . the table sparkle with old plate , and be set in the oak dining - room with the picture of the family round the wall . there be the late Viscount , his father , his mother , his sister these two lovely picture . there be his predecessor by Vandyck , and his Viscountess . there be Colonel Esmond , their relative in Virginia , about whose grandson the lady and gentleman of the Esmond family show such a very moderate degree of sympathy . 
 the feast set before their aunt , the Baroness , be a very good one , and her ladyship enjoy it . the supper occupy an hour or two , during which the whole Castlewood family be most attentive to their guest . the Countess press all the good dish upon she , of which she freely partook : the butler no soon see her glass empty than he fill it with champagne : the young folk and their mother keep up the conversation , not so much by talk , as by listen appropriately to their friend . she be full of spirit and humour . she seem to know everybody in Europe , and about those everybodie the wicked story . the Countess of Castlewood , ordinarily a very demure , severe woman , and a stickler for the propriety , smile at the very bad of these anecdote ; the girl look at one another and laugh at the maternal signal ; the boy giggle and roar with especial delight at their sister ' confusion . they also partook freely of the wine which the butler hand round , nor do they , or their guest , disdain the bowl of smoking punch , which be lay on the table after the supper . many and many a night , the Baroness say , she have drink at that table by her father 's side . " that be his place , " she point to the place where the Countess now sit . she see none of the old plate . that be all melt to pay his gambling debt . she hop , " young gentleman , that you do not   play . " 
 " never , on my word , " say Castlewood . 
 " never , ' pon honour , " say will wink at his brother . 
 the Baroness be very glad to hear they be such good boy . her face grow red with the punch ; and she become voluble , might have be think coarse , but that time be different , and those critic be inclined to be especially favourable . 
 she talk to the boy about their father , their grandfather other man and woman of the house . " the only man of the family be that , " she say , point   with an arm that be yet beautifully round and white   towards the picture of the military gentleman in the red coat and cuirass , and great black periwig . 
 " the Virginian ? what be he good for ? I always think he be good for nothing but to cultivate tobacco and my grandmother , " say my lord , laugh . 
 she strike her hand upon the table with an energy that make the glass dance . " I say he be the good of you all . there never be one of the male Esmonds that have more brain than a goose , except he . he be not fit for this wicked , selfish old world of ours , and he be right to go and live out of it . where would your father have be , young people , but for he ? " 
 " be he particularly kind to our papa ? " say Lady Maria . 
 " old story , my dear Maria ! " cry the Countess . " I be sure my dear Earl be very kind to he in give he that great estate in Virginia . " 
 " since his brother 's death , the lad who have be here to - day be heir to that . Mr. Draper tell I so ! peste ! I do not   know why my father give up such a property . " 
 " who have be here to - day ? " ask the Baroness , highly excited . 
 " Harry Esmond Warrington , of Virginia , " my lord answer : " a lad whom will nearly pitch into the river , and whom I press my lady the Countess to invite to stay here . " 
 " you mean that one of the virginian boy have be to Castlewood , and have not be ask to stay here ? " 
 " there be but one of they , my dear creature , " interpose the Earl . " the other , you know , have just be " 
 " for shame , for shame ! " 
 " oh ! it be not   pleasant , I confess , to be se " 
 " do you mean that a grandson of Henry Esmond , the master of this house , have be here , and none of you have offer he hospitality ? " 
 " since we do not   know it , and he be stay at the Castles ? " interpose Will . 
 " that he be stay at the Inn , and you be sit there ! " cry the old lady . " this be too bad call somebody to I . get I my hood I will go to the boy myself . come with I this instant , my Lord Castlewood . " 
 the young man rise up , evidently in wrath . " madame the Baroness of Bernstein , " he say , " your ladyship be welcome to go ; but as for I , I do not   choose to have such word as ' shameful ' apply to my conduct . I will not   go and fetch the young gentleman from Virginia , and I propose to sit here and finish this bowl of punch . eugene ! do not   eugene I , madam . I know her ladyship have a great deal of money , which you be desirous should remain in our amiable family . you want it more than I do . cringe for it I will not . " and he sink back in his chair . 
 the Baroness look at the family , who hold their head down , and then at my lord , but this time without any dislike . she lean over to he and say rapidly in German , " I have unright when I say the Colonel be the only man of the family . thou canst , if thou willest , Eugene . " to which remark my lord only bow . 
 " if you do not wish an old woman to go out at this hour of the night , let William , at least , go and fetch his cousin , " say the Baroness . 
 " the very thing I propose to he . " 
 " and so do we and so do we ! " cry the daughter in a breath . 
 " I be sure , I only want the dear Baroness 's consent ! " say their mother , " and shall be charm for my part to welcome our young relative . " 
 " will ! put on thy patten and get a lantern , and go fetch the Virginian , " say my lord . 
 " and we will have another bowl of punch when he come , " say William , who by this time have already have too much . and he go forth how we have see ; and how he have more punch ; and how ill he succeed in his embassy . 
 the worthy lady of Castlewood , as she catch sight of young Harry Warrington by the river - side , must have see a very handsome and interesting youth , and very likely have reason of her own for not desire his presence in her family . all mother be not eager to encourage the visit of interesting youth of nineteen in family where there be virgin of twenty . if Harry 's acre have be in Norfolk or Devon , in place of Virginia , no doubt the good Countess would have be rather more eager in her welcome . have she want he she would have give he her hand readily enough . if our people of ton be selfish , at any rate they show they be selfish ; and , be cold - hearted , at least have no hypocrisy of affection . 
 why should Lady Castlewood put herself out of the way to welcome the young stranger ? because he be friendless ? only a simpleton could ever imagine such a reason as that . People of fashion , like her ladyship , be friendly to those who have plenty of friend . a poor lad , alone , from a distant country , with only very moderate mean , and those not as yet in his own power , with uncouth manner very likely , and coarse provincial habit ; be a great lady call upon to put herself out of the way for such a youth ? allon donc ! he be quite as well at the alehouse as at the castle . 
 this , no doubt , be her ladyship 's opinion , which her kinswoman , the Baroness Bernstein , who know she perfectly well , entirely understand . the Baroness , too , be a woman of the world , and , possibly , on occasion , could be as selfish as any other person of fashion . she fully understand the cause of the deference which all the Castlewood family show to her mother , and daughter , and son , and be a woman of great humour , play upon the disposition of the various member of this family , amuse herself with their greediness , their humiliation , their artless respect for her money - box , and cling attachment to her purse . they be not very rich ; Lady Castlewood 's own money be settle on her child . the two elder have inherit nothing but flaxen head from their german mother , and a pedigree of prodigious distinction . but those who have money , and those who have none , be alike eager for the Baroness 's ; in this matter the rich be surely quite as greedy as the poor . 
 so if Madam Bernstein strike her hand on the table , and cause the glass and the person round it to tremble at her wrath , it be because she be excited with plenty of punch and champagne , which her ladyship be in the habit of take freely , and because she may have have a generous impulse when generous wine warm her blood , and feel indignant as she think of the poor lad yonder , sit friendless and lonely on the outside of his ancestor ' door ; not because she be specially angry with her relative , who she know would act precisely as they have do . 
 the exhibition of their selfishness and humiliation alike amuse she , as do Castlewood 's act of revolt . he be as selfish as the rest of the family , but not so mean ; and , as he candidly state , he could afford the luxury of a little independence , have tolerable estate to fall back upon . 
 Madam Bernstein be an early woman , restless , resolute , extraordinarily active for her age . she be up long before the languid Castlewood lady   just home from their London rout and ball   have quit their feather - bed , or jolly will have sleep off his various potation of punch . she be up , and pace the green terrace that sparkle with the sweet morning dew , which lie twinkling , also , on a flowery wilderness of trim parterre , and on the crisp wall of the dark box hedge , under which marble faun and dryad be cool themselves , whilst a thousand bird sing , the fountain plash and glitter in the rosy morning sunshine , and the rook caw from the great wood . 
 have the well - remember scene   for she have visit it often in childhood   a freshness and charm for she ? do it recall day of innocence and happiness , and do its calm beauty soothe or please , or awaken remorse in her heart ? her manner be more than ordinarily affectionate and gentle , when , presently , after pace the walk for a half - hour , the person for whom she be wait come to she . this be our young Virginian , to whom she have despatch an early billet by one of the Lockwoods . the note be sign B. Bernstein , and inform Mr. Esmond Warrington that his relative at Castlewood , and among they a dear friend of his grandfather , be most anxious that he should come to " Colonel Esmond 's house in England . " and now , accordingly , the lad make his appearance , pass under the old Gothic doorway , trip down the step from one garden terrace to another , hat in hand , his fair hair blow from his flushed cheek , his slim figure clothe in mourning . the handsome and modest look , the comely face and person , of the young lad please the lady . he make she a low bow which would have do credit to Versailles . she hold out a little hand to he , and , as his own palm close over it , she lay the other hand softly on his ruffle . she look very kindly and affectionately in the honest blushing face . 
 " I know your grandfather very well , Harry , " she say . " so you come yesterday to see his picture , and they turn you away , though you know the house be his of right ? " 
 Harry blush very red . " the servant do not know I . a young gentleman come to I last night , " he say , " when I be peevish , and he , I fear , be tipsy . I speak rudely to my cousin , and would ask his pardon . your ladyship know that in Virginia our manner towards stranger be different . I own I have expect another kind of welcome . be it you , madam , who send my cousin to I last night ? " 
 " I send he ; but you will find your cousin most friendly to you to - day . you must stay here . Lord Castlewood would have be with you this morning , only I be so eager to see you . there will be breakfast in an hour ; and meantime you must talk to I . we will send to the Three Castles for your servant and your baggage . give I your arm . stop , I drop my cane when you come . you shall be my cane . " 
 " my grandfather use to call we his crutch , " say Harry . 
 " you be like he , though you be fair . " 
 " you should have see you should have see George , " say the boy , and his honest eye well with tear . the recollection of his brother , the bitter pain of yesterday 's humiliation , the affectionateness of the present greeting all , perhaps , contribute to soften the lad 's heart . he feel very tenderly and gratefully towards the lady who have receive he so warmly . he be utterly alone and miserable a minute since , and here be a home and a kind hand hold out to he . no wonder he cling to it . in the hour during which they talk together , the young fellow have pour out a great deal of his honest heart to the kind new - find friend ; when the dial tell breakfast - time , he wonder to think how much he have tell she . she take he to the breakfast - room ; she present he to his aunt , the Countess , and bid he embrace his cousin . Lord Castlewood be frank and gracious enough . Honest will have a headache , but be utterly unconscious of the proceeding of the past night . the lady be very pleasant and polite , as lady of their fashion know how to be . how should Harry Warrington , a simple truth - tell lad from a distant colony , who have only yesterday put his foot upon English shore , know that my lady , so smile and easy in demeanour , be furious against he , and aghast at the favour with which Madam Bernstein seem to regard he ? 
 she be folle of he , talk of no one else , scarce notice the Castlewood young people , trot with he over the house , and tell he all its story , show he the little room in the courtyard where his grandfather use to sleep , and a cunning cupboard over the fireplace which have be make in the time of the catholic persecution ; drive out with he in the neighbouring country , and point out to he the most remarkable site and house , and have in return the whole of the young man 's story . 
 this brief biography the kind reader will please to accept , not in the precise word in which Mr. Harry Warrington deliver it to Madam Bernstein , but in the form in which it have be cast in the Chapters next ensue . 




 CHAPTER III . the Esmonds in Virginia 

 Henry Esmond , Esq . , an office who have serve with the rank of Colonel during the war of Queen Anne 's reign , find himself , at its close , compromise in certain attempt for the restoration of the Queen 's family to the throne of these realm . happily for itself , the nation prefer another dynasty ; but some of the few opponent of the house of Hanover take refuge out of the three kingdom , and amongst other , Colonel Esmond be counsel by his friend to go abroad . as Mr. Esmond sincerely regret the part which he have take , and as the august Prince who come to rule over England be the most pacable of sovereign , in a very little time the Colonel 's friend find mean to make his peace . 
 Mr. Esmond , it have be say , belong to the noble English family which take its title from Castlewood , in the county of hant ; and it be pretty generally know that King James II . and his son have offer the title of Marquis to Colonel Esmond and his father , and that the former might have assume the   irish   peerage hereditary in his family , but for an informality which he do not choose to set right . tired of the political struggle in which he have be engage , and annoy by family circumstance in Europe , he prefer to establish himself in Virginia , where he take possession of a large estate confer by King Charles I. upon his ancestor . here Mr. Esmond 's daughter and grandson be bear , and his wife die . this lady , when she marry he , be the widow of the Colonel 's kinsman , the unlucky Viscount Castlewood , kill in a duel by Lord Mohun , at the close of King William 's reign . 
 Mr. Esmond call his american house Castlewood , from the patrimonial home in the old country . the whole usage of Virginia , indeed , be fondly model after the english custom . it be a loyal colony . the Virginians boast that King Charles II . have be king in Virginia before he have be king in England . english king and english church be alike faithfully honour there . the resident gentry be ally to good english family . they hold their head above the dutch trader of New York , and the money - get roundhead of Pennsylvania and New England . never be people less republican than those of the great province which be soon to be foremost in the memorable revolt against the British Crown . 
 the gentry of Virginia dwelt on their great land after a fashion almost patriarchal . for its rough cultivation , each estate have a multitude of hand of purchase and assign servant who be subject to the command of the master . the land yield their food , live stock , and game . the great river swarm with fish for the taking . from their bank the passage home be clear . their ship take the tobacco off their private wharf on the bank of the Potomac or the James river , and carry it to London or Bristol , bring back english good and article of home manufacture in return for the only produce which the virginian gentry choose to cultivate . their hospitality be boundless . no stranger be ever send away from their gate . the gentry receive one another , and travel to each other 's house , in a state almost feudal . the question of Slavery be not bear at the time of which we write . to be the proprietor of black servant shock the feeling of no virginian gentleman ; nor , in truth , be the despotism exercise over the negro race generally a savage one . the food be plenty ; the poor black people lazy and not unhappy . you might have preach negro emancipation to Madam Esmond of Castlewood as you might have tell she to let the horse run loose out of her stable ; she have no doubt but that the whip and the corn - bag be good for both . 
 her father may have think otherwise , be of a sceptical turn on very many point , but his doubt do not break forth in active denial , and he be rather disaffect than rebellious . at one period , this gentleman have take a part in active life at home , and possibly might have be eager to share its reward ; but in latter day he do not seem to care for they . a something have occur in his life , which have cast a tinge of melancholy over all his existence . he be not unhappy to those about he most kind most affectionate , obsequious even to the woman of his family , whom be scarce ever contradict ; but there have be some bankruptcy of his heart , which his spirit never recover . he submit to life , rather than enjoy it , and never be in well spirit than in his last hour when he be go to lay it down . 
 have lose his wife , his daughter take the management of the Colonel and his affair ; and he give they up to her charge with an entire acquiescence . so that he have his book and his quiet , he care for no more . when company come to Castlewood , he entertain they handsomely , and be of a very pleasant , sarcastical turn . he be not in the least sorry when they go away . 
 " my love , I shall not be sorry to go myself , " he say to his daughter , " and you , though the most affectionate of daughter , will console yourself after a while . why should I , who be so old , be romantic ? you may , who be still a young creature . " this he say , not mean all he say , for the lady whom he address be a matter - of - fact little person , with very little romance in her nature . 
 after fifteen year ' residence upon his great virginian estate , affair prosper so well with the worthy proprietor , that he acquiesce in his daughter 's plan for the building of a mansion much grander and more durable than the plain wooden edifice in which he have be content to live , so that his heir might have a habitation worthy of their noble name . several of Madam Warrington 's neighbour have build handsome house for themselves ; perhaps it be her ambition to take rank in the country , which inspire this desire for improved quarter . Colonel Esmond , of Castlewood , neither care for quarter nor for quartering . but his daughter have a very high opinion of the merit and antiquity of her lineage ; and her sire , grow exquisitely calm and good - natured in his serene , decline year , humour his child 's peculiarity in an easy , banter way , nay , help she with his antiquarian learning , which be not inconsiderable , and with his skill in the art of painting , of which he be a proficient . a knowledge of heraldry , a hundred year ago , form part of the education of most noble lady and gentleman : during her visit to Europe , Miss Esmond have eagerly study the family history and pedigree , and return thence to Virginia with a store of document relative to her family on which she rely with implicit gravity and credence , and with the most edify volume then publish in France and England , respect the noble science . these work prove , to her perfect satisfaction , not only that the Esmonds be descend from noble Norman warrior , who come into England along with their victorious chief , but from native English of royal dignity : and two magnificent heraldic tree , cunningly paint by the hand of the Colonel , represent the family spring from the Emperor Charlemagne on the one hand , who be draw in plate - armour , with his imperial mantle and diadem , and on the other from Queen Boadicea , whom the Colonel insist upon paint in the light costume of an ancient british queen , with a prodigious gild crown , a trifling mantle of fur , and a lovely symmetrical person , tastefully tattooed with figure of a brilliant blue tint . from these two illustrious stock the family - tree rise until it unite in the thirteenth century somewhere in the person of the fortunate Esmond who claim to spring from both . 
 of the Warrington family , into which she marry , good Madam Rachel think but little . she write herself Esmond Warrington , but be universally call Madam Esmond of Castlewood , when after her father 's decease she come to rule over that domain . it be even to be fear that quarrel for precedence in the colonial society occasionally disturb her temper ; for though her father have have a marquis 's patent from King James , which he have burn and disown , she would frequently act as if that document exist and be in full force . she consider the English Esmonds of an inferior dignity to her own branch ; and as for the colonial aristocracy , she make no scruple of assert her superiority over the whole body of they . hence quarrel and angry word , and even a scuffle or two , as we gather from her note , at the Governor 's assembly at Jamestown . wherefore recall the memory of these squabble ? be not the person who engage in they beyond the reach of quarrel now , and have not the republic put an end to these social inequality ? Ere the establishment of Independence , there be no more aristocratic country in the world than Virginia ; so the Virginians , whose history we have to narrate , be breed to have the full respect for the institution of home , and the rightful king have not two more faithful little subject than the young twin of Castlewood . 
 when the boy ' grandfather die , their mother , in great state , proclaim her eld son George her successor and heir of the estate ; and Harry , George 's young brother by half an hour , be always enjoin to respect his senior . all the household be equally instruct to pay he honour ; the negro , of whom there be a large and happy family , and the assign servant from Europe , whose lot be make as bearable as it might be under the government of the lady of Castlewood . in the whole family there scarcely be a rebel save Mrs. Esmond 's faithful friend and companion , Madam Mountain , and Harry 's foster - mother , a faithful negro woman , who never could be make to understand why her child should not be first , who be handsomer , and strong , and cleverer than his brother , as she vow ; though , in truth , there be scarcely any difference in the beauty , strength , or stature of the twin . in disposition , they be in many point exceedingly unlike ; but in feature they resemble each other so closely , that but for the colour of their hair it have be difficult to distinguish they . in their bed , and when their head be cover with those vast ribboned nightcap which our great and little ancestor wear , it be scarcely possible for any but a nurse or mother to tell the one from the other child . 
 Howbeit alike in form , we have say that they differ in temper . the elder be peaceful , studious , and silent ; the young be warlike and noisy . he be quick at learn when he begin , but very slow at begin . no threat of the ferule would provoke Harry to learn in an idle fit , or would prevent George from help his brother in his lesson . Harry be of a strong military turn , drill the little negro on the estate and can they like a corporal , have many good boxing - match with they , and never bear malice if he be worst ; whereas George be spar of blow and gentle with all about he . as the custom in all family be , each of the boy have a special little servant assign he ; and it be a known fact that George , find his little wretch of a blackamoor asleep on his master 's bed , sit down beside it and brush the fly off the child with a feather fan , to the horror of old Gumbo , the child 's father , who find his young master so engage , and to the indignation of Madam Esmond , who order the young negro off to the proper officer for a whipping . in vain George implored and entreat burst into passionate tear , and besought a remission of the sentence . his mother be inflexible regard the young rebel 's punishment , and the little negro go off beseech his young master not to cry . 
 a fierce quarrel between mother and son ensue out of this event . her son would not be pacify . he say the punishment be a shame a shame ; that he be the master of the boy , and no one no , not his mother , have a right to touch he ; that she might order he to be correct , and that he would suffer the punishment , as he and Harry often have , but no one should lay a hand on his boy . tremble with passionate rebellion against what he conceive the injustice of procedure , he vow actually shriek out an oath , which shock his fond mother and governor , who never before hear such language from the usually gentle child that on the day he come of age he would set young Gumbo free go to visit the child in the slave ' quarter , and give he one of his own toy . 
 the young black martyr be an impudent , lazy , saucy little personage , who would be none the bad for a whipping , as the Colonel no doubt think ; for he acquiesce in the child 's punishment when Madam Esmond insist upon it , and only laugh in his good - natured way when his indignant grandson call out , 
 " you let mamma rule you in everything , grandpapa . " 
 " why , so I do , " say grandpapa . " Rachel , my love , the way in which I be petticoat - ride be so evident that even this baby have find it out . " 
 " then why do not   you stand up like a man ? " say little Harry ' , who always be ready to abet his brother . 
 Grandpapa look queerly . 
 " because I like sit down well , my dear , " he say . " I be an old gentleman , and stand fatigue I . " 
 on account of a certain apish drollery and humour which exhibit itself in the lad , and a liking for some of the old man 's pursuit , the first of the twin be the grandfather 's favourite and companion , and would laugh and talk out all his infantine heart to the old gentleman , to whom the young have seldom a word to say . George be a demure studious boy , and his sens seem to brighten up in the library , where his brother be so gloomy . he know the book before he could well - nigh carry they , and read in they long before he could understand they . Harry , on the other hand , be all alive in the stable or in the wood , eager for all party of hunting and fishing , and promise to be a good sportsman from a very early age . their grandfather 's ship be sail for Europe once when the boy be child , and they be ask , what present Captain Franks should bring they back ? George be divide between book and a fiddle ; Harry instantly declare for a little gun : and Madam Warrington   as she then be call   be hurt that her eld boy should have low taste , and applaud the young 's choice as more worthy of his name and lineage . " book , papa , I can fancy to be a good choice , " she reply to her father , who try to convince she that George have a right to his opinion , " though I be sure you must have pretty nigh all the book in the world already . but I never can desire I may be wrong , but I never can desire that my son , and the grandson of the Marquis of Esmond , should be a fiddler . " 
 " should be a fiddlestick , my dear , " the old Colonel answer . 
 " remember that Heaven 's way be not ours , and that each creature bear have a little kingdom of thought of his own , which it be a sin in we to invade . suppose George love music ? you can no more stop he than you can order a rise not to smell sweet , or a bird not to sing . " 
 " a bird ! a bird sing from nature ; George do not come into the world with a fiddle in his hand , " say Mrs. Warrington , with a toss of her head . " I be sure I hat the harpsichord when a chit at Kensington School , and only learn it to please my mamma . say what you will , dear sir , I can not believe that this fiddling be work for person of fashion . " 
 " and King David who play the harp , my dear ? " 
 " I wish my papa would read he more , and not speak about he in that way , " say Mrs. Warrington . 
 " Nay , my dear , it be but by way of illustration , " the father reply gently . it be Colonel Esmond 's nature , as he have own in his own biography , always to be lead by a woman ; and , his wife dead , he coax and dandle and spoil his daughter ; laugh at her caprice , but humour they ; make a joke of her prejudice , but let they have their way ; indulge , and perhaps increase , her natural imperiousness of character , though it be his maxim that we can not   change disposition by meddling , and only make hypocrite of our child by command they over - much . 
 at length the time come when Mr. Esmond be to have do with the affair of this life , and he lay they down as if glad to be rid of their burthen . we must not ring in an opening history with tolling bell , or preface it with a funeral sermon . all who read and hear that discourse , wonder where Parson Broadbent of Jamestown find the eloquence and the Latin which adorn it . perhaps Mr. Dempster know , the boy ' Scotch tutor , who correct the proof of the oration , which be print , by desire of his Excellency and many person of honour , at Mr. Franklin 's press in Philadelphia . no such sumptuous funeral have ever be see in the country as that which Madam Esmond Warrington ordain for her father , who would have be the first to smile at that pompous grief . the little lad of Castlewood , almost smother in black train and hatband , head the procession , and be follow by my Lord Fairfax from Greenway Court , by his Excellency the Governor of Virginia   with his coach , by the Randolphs , the Careys , the Harrisons , the Washingtons , and many other , for the whole county esteem the depart gentleman , whose goodness , whose high talent , whose benevolence and unobtrusive urbanity have earn for he the just respect of his neighbour . when inform of the event , the family of Colonel Esmond 's stepson , the Lord Castlewood of Hampshire in England , ask to be at the charge of the marble slab which record the name and virtue of his lordship 's mother and her husband ; and after due time of preparation , the monument be set up , exhibit the arm and coronet of the Esmonds , support by a little chubby group of weeping cherub , and recite an epitaph which for once do not tell any falsehood . 




 CHAPTER IV . in which Harry find a New Relative 

 kind friend , neighbour hospitable , cordial , even respectful , an ancient name , a large estate and a sufficient fortune , a comfortable home , supply with all the necessary and many of the luxury of life , and a troop of servant , black and white , eager to do your bidding ; good health , affectionate child , and , let we humbly add , a good cook , cellar , and library ought not a person in the possession of all these benefit to be consider very decently happy ? Madam Esmond Warrington possess all these cause for happiness ; she remind herself of they daily in her morning and evening prayer . she be scrupulous in her devotion , good to the poor , never knowingly do anybody a wrong . yonder I fancy she enthrone in her principality of Castlewood , the country gentlefolk pay her court , the son dutiful to she , the domestic tumble over each other 's black heel to do her bidding , the poor white grateful for her bounty and implicitly take her dos when they be ill , the small gentry always acquiesce in her remark , and for ever let her win at backgammon well , with all these benefit , which be more sure than fate allot to most mortal , I do not   think the little Princess Pocahontas , as she be call , be to be envy in the midst of her dominion . the Princess 's husband , who be cut off in early life , be as well perhaps out of the way . have he survive his marriage by many year , they would have quarrel fiercely , or , he would infallibly have be a henpecke husband , of which sort there be a few specimen still extant a hundred year ago . the truth be , little Madam Esmond never come near man or woman , but she try to domineer over they . if people obey , she be their very good friend ; if they resist , she fight and fight until she or they give in . we be all miserable sinner that be a fact we acknowledge in public every Sunday no one announce it in a more clear resolute voice than the little lady . as a mortal , she may have be in the wrong , of course ; only she very seldom acknowledge the circumstance to herself , and to other never . her father , in his old age , use to watch her freak of despotism , haughtiness , and stubbornness , and amuse himself with they . she feel that his eye be upon she ; his humour , of which quality she possess little herself , subdue and bewilder she . but , the Colonel go , there be nobody else whom she be dispose to obey , and so I be rather glad for my part that I do not live a hundred year ago at Castlewood in Westmorland County in Virginia . I fancy , one would not have be too happy there . happy , who be happy ? be not there a serpent in Paradise itself ? and if Eve have be perfectly happy beforehand , would she have listen to he ? 
 the management of the house of Castlewood have be in the hand of the active little lady long before the Colonel sleep the sleep of the just . she now exercise a rigid supervision over the estate ; dismiss Colonel Esmond 's english factor and employ a new one ; build , improve , plant , grow tobacco , appoint a new overseer , and import a new tutor . much as she love her father , there be some of his maxim by which she be not inclined to abide . have she not obey her papa and mamma during all their life , as a dutiful daughter should ? so ought all child to obey their parent , that their day might be long in the land . the little queen domineer over her little dominion , and the Princes her son be only her first subject . Ere long she discontinue her husband 's name of Warrington and go by the name of Madam Esmond in the country . her family pretension be know there . she have no objection to talk of the Marquis 's title which King James have give to her father and grandfather . her papa 's enormous magnanimity might induce he to give up his title and rank to the young branch of the family , and to her half - brother , my Lord Castlewood and his child ; but she and her son be of the eld branch of the Esmonds , and she expect that they should be treat accordingly . Lord Fairfax be the only gentleman in the colony of Virginia to whom she would allow precedence over she . she insist on the pas before all Lieutenant - Governors ' and Judges ' lady ; before the wife of the Governor of a colony she would , of course , yield as to the representative of the Sovereign . account be extant , in the family paper and letter , of one or two tremendous battle which Madam fight with the wife of colonial dignitary upon these question of etiquette . as for her husband 's family of Warrington , they be as naught in her eye . she marry an English baronet 's young son out of Norfolk to please her parent , whom she be always bind to obey . at the early age at which she marry a chit out of a boarding - school she would have jump overboard if her papa have order . " and that be always the way with the Esmonds , " she say . 
 the English Warringtons be not over - much flatter by the little American Princess 's behaviour to they , and her manner of speak about they . once a year a solemn letter use to be address to the Warrington family , and to her noble kinsman the Hampshire Esmonds ; but a Judge 's lady with whom Madam Esmond have quarrel return to England out of Virginia chance to meet Lady Warrington , who be in London with Sir Miles attend Parliament , and this person repeat some of the speech which the Princess Pocahontas be in the habit of make regard her own and her husband 's english relative , and my Lady Warrington , I suppose , carry the story to my Lady Castlewood ; after which the letter from Virginia be not answer , to the surprise and wrath of Madam Esmond , who speedily leave off write also . 
 so this good woman fall out with her neighbour , with her relative , and , as it must be own , with her son also . 
 a very early difference which occur between the Queen and Crown Prince arise out of the dismissal of Mr. Dempster , the lad 's tutor and the late Colonel 's secretary . in her father 's life Madam Esmond bear he with difficulty , or it should be rather say Mr. Dempster could scarce put up with she . she be jealous of book somehow , and think your bookworm dangerous folk , insinuate bad principle . she have hear that Dempster be a Jesuit in disguise , and the poor fellow be oblige to go build himself a cabin in a clearing , and teach school and practise medicine where he could find customer among the sparse inhabitant of the province . Master George vow he never would forsake his old tutor , and keep his promise . Harry have always love fishing and sporting well than book , and he and the poor Dominie have never be on term of close intimacy . another cause of dispute presently ensue . 
 by the death of an aunt , and at his father 's demise , the heir of Mr. George Warrington become entitled to a sum of six thousand pound , of which their mother be one of the trustee . she never could be make to understand that she be not the proprietor , and not merely the trustee of this money ; and be furious with the London lawyer , the other trustee , who refuse to send it over at her order . " be not all I have my son ' ? " she cry , " and would I not cut myself into little piece to serve they ? with the six thousand pound I would have buy Mr. Boulter 's estate and negro , which would have give we a good thousand pound a year , and make a handsome provision for my Harry . " her young friend and neighbour , Mr. Washington of Mount Vernon , could not convince she that the London agent be right , and must not give up his trust except to those for whom he hold it . Madam Esmond give the London lawyer a piece of her mind , and , I be sorry to say , inform Mr. Draper that he be an insolent pettifogger , and deserve to be punish for doubt the honour of a mother and an Esmond . it must be own that the Virginian Princess have a temper of her own . 
 George Esmond , her firstborn , when this little matter be refer to he , and his mother vehemently insist that he should declare himself , be of the opinion of Mr. Washington , and Mr. Draper , the London lawyer . the boy say he could not help himself . he do not want the money : he would be very glad to think otherwise , and to give the money to his mother , if he have the power . but Madam Esmond would not hear any of these reason . feeling be her reason . here be a chance of make Harry 's fortune dear Harry , who be leave with such a slender young brother 's ; pittance and the wretch in London would not help he ; his own brother , who inherit all her papa 's estate , would not help he . to think of a child of hers be so mean at fourteen year of age ! etc . etc . add tear , scorn , frequent innuendo , long estrangement , bitter outbreak , passionate appeal to Heaven , and the like , and we may fancy the widow 's state of mind . be there not beloved being of the gentler sex who argue in the same way nowadays ? the book of female logic be blot all over with tear , and Justice in their court be for ever in a passion . 
 this occurrence set the widow resolutely save for her young son , for whom , as in duty bind , she be eager to make a portion . the fine building be stop which the Colonel have commence at Castlewood , who have freight ship from New York with dutch brick , and import , at great charge , mantelpiece , carve cornice - work , sash and glass , carpet and costly upholstery from home . no more book be buy . the agent have order to discontinue send wine . Madam Esmond deeply regret the expense of a fine carriage which she have have from England , and only ride in it to church groaning in spirit , and cry to the son opposite she , " Harry , Harry ! I wish I have put by the money for thee , my poor portionless child three hundred and eighty guineas of ready money to Messieurs Hatchett ! " 
 " you will give I plenty while you live , and George will give I plenty when you die , " say Harry , gaily . 
 " not unless he change in spirit , my dear , " say the lady , with a grim glance at her eld boy . " not unless Heaven soften his heart and teach he charity , for which I pray day and night ; as Mountain know ; do you not , Mountain ? " 
 Mrs. Mountain , Ensign Mountain 's widow , Madam Esmond 's companion and manager , who take the fourth seat in the family coach on these Sundays , say , " Humph ! I know you be always disturb yourself and cry out about this legacy , and I do not   see that there be any need . " 
 " oh no ! no need ! " cry the widow , rustle in her silk ; " of course I have no need to be disturb , because my eld bear be a disobedient son and an unkind brother because he have an estate , and my poor Harry , bless he , but a mess of pottage . " 
 George look despairingly at his mother until he could see she no more for eye well up with tear . " I wish you would bless I , too , o my mother ! " he say , and burst into a passionate fit of weeping . Harry 's arm be in a moment round his brother 's neck , and he kiss George a score of time . 
 " never mind , George . I know whether you be a good brother or not . do not   mind what she say . she do not   mean it . " 
 " I do mean it , child , " cry the mother . " would to Heaven " 
 " hold your TONGUE , I SAY " roar out Harry . " it be a shame to speak so to he , ma'am . " 
 " and so it be , Harry , " say Mrs. Mountain , shake his hand . " you never say a truer word in your life . " 
 " Mrs. Mountain , do you dare to set my child against I ? " cry the widow . " from this very day , madam " 
 " turn I and my child into the street ? do , " say Mrs. Mountain . " that will be a fine revenge because the english lawyer will not   give you the boy 's money . find another companion who will tell you black be white , and flatter you : it be not my way , madam . when shall I go ? I shall not   be long a - packing . I do not bring much into Castlewood House , and I shall not take much out . " 
 " Hush ! the bell be ring for church , Mountain . let we try , if you please , and compose ourselves , " say the widow , and she look with eye of extreme affection , certainly at one perhaps at both of her child . George keep his head down , and Harry , who be near , get quite close to he during the sermon , and sit with his arm round his brother 's neck . 
 Harry have proceed in his narrative after his own fashion , intersperse it with many youthful ejaculation , and answer a number of incidental question ask by his listener . the old lady seem never tired of hear he . her amiable hostess and her daughter come more than once , to ask if she would ride , or walk , or take a dish of tea , or play a game at card ; but all these amusement Madam Bernstein decline , say that she find infinite amusement in Harry 's conversation . especially when any of the Castlewood family be present , she redouble her caress , insist upon the lad speak close to her ear , and would call out to the other , " Hush , my dear ! I can not   hear our cousin speak . " and they would quit the room , strive still to look pleased . 
 " be you my cousin , too ? " ask the honest boy . " you see kind than my other cousin . " 
 their talk take place in the wainscote parlour , where the family have take their meal in ordinary for at least two century past , and which , as we have say , be hang with portrait of the race . over Madam Bernstein 's great chair be a Kneller , one of the most brilliant picture of the gallery , represent a young lady of three or four and twenty , in the easy flow dress and loose robe of Queen Anne 's time a hand on a cushion near she , a quantity of auburn hair part off a fair forehead , and flow over pearly shoulder and a lovely neck . under this sprightly picture the lady sate with her knitting - needles . 
 when Harry ask , " be you my cousin , too ? " she say , " that picture be by Sir Godfrey , who think himself the great painter in the world . but he be not so good as Lely , who paint your grandmother my my Lady Castlewood , Colonel Esmond 's wife ; nor he so good as Sir Anthony Van Dyck , who paint your great - grandfather , yonder and who look , Harry , a much fine gentleman than he be . some of we be paint blacker than we be . do you recognise your grandmother in that picture ? she have the lovely fair hair and shape of any woman of her time . " 
 " I fancy I know the portrait from instinct , perhaps , and a certain likeness to my mother . " 
 " do Mrs. Warrington I beg her pardon , I think she call herself Madam or my Lady Esmond now ? " 
 " they call my mother so in our province , " say the boy . 
 " do she never tell you of another daughter her mother have in England , before she marry your grandfather ? " 
 " she never speak of one . " 
 " nor your grandfather ? " 
 " never . but in his picture - book , which he constantly make for us child , he use to draw a head very like that above your ladyship . that , and Viscount Francis , and King James III . , he draw a score of time , I be sure . " 
 " and the picture over I remind you of no one , Harry ? " 
 " no , indeed . " 
 " ah ! here be a sermon ! " say the lady , with a sigh . " Harry , that be my face once yes , it be and then I be call Beatrix Esmond . and your mother be my half - sister , child , and she have never even mention my name ! " 




 CHAPTER V. Family Jars 

 as Harry Warrington relate to his new - find relative the simple story of his adventure at home , no doubt Madam Bernstein , who possess a great sense of humour and a remarkable knowledge of the world , form her judgment respect the person and event describe ; and if her opinion be not in all respect favourable , what can be say but that man and woman be imperfect , and human life not entirely pleasant or profitable ? the court and city - breed lady recoil at the mere thought of her american sister 's countrified existence . such a life would be rather wearisome to most city - breed lady . but little Madam Warrington know no well , and be satisfied with her life , as indeed she be with herself in general . because you and I be epicure or dainty feeder , it do not follow that Hodge be miserable with his homely meal of bread and bacon . Madam Warrington have a life of duty and employment which might be humdrum , but at any rate be pleasant to she . she be a brisk little woman of business , and all the affair of her large estate come under her cognisance . no pie be bake at Castlewood but her little finger be in it . she set the maid to their spinning , she see the kitchen wench at their work , she trot afield on her pony , and oversee the overseer and the negro hand as they work in the tobacco - and corn - field . if a slave be ill , she would go to his quarter in any weather , and doctor he with great resolution . she have a book full of receipt after the old fashion , and a closet where she distil water and compound elixir , and a medicine - chest which be the terror of her neighbour . they tremble to be ill , lest the little lady should be upon they with her decoction and her pill . 
 a hundred year back there be scarce any town in Virginia ; the establishment of the gentry be little village in which they and their vassal dwelt . Rachel Esmond rule like a little queen in Castlewood ; the prince , her neighbour , govern their estate round about . many of these be rather needy potentate , live plentifully but in the roughest fashion , have numerous domestic whose livery be often rag ; keep open house , and turn away no stranger from their gate ; proud , idle , fond of all sort of field sport as become gentleman of good lineage . the widow of Castlewood be as hospitable as her neighbour , and a well economist than most of they . More than one , no doubt , would have have no objection to share her life - interest in the estate , and supply the place of papa to her boy . but where be the man good enough for a person of her ladyship 's exalted birth ? there be a talk of make the Duke of Cumberland viceroy , or even king , over America . Madam Warrington 's gossip laugh , and say she be wait for he . she remark , with much gravity and dignity , that person of as high birth as his Royal Highness have make offer of alliance to the Esmond family . 
 she have , as lieutenant under she , an officer 's widow who have be before name , and who have be Madam Esmond 's companion at school , as her late husband have be the regimental friend of the late Mr. Warrington . when the english girl at the Kensington Academy , where Rachel Esmond have her education , tease and torture the little american stranger , and laugh at the princified air which she give herself from a very early age , Fanny Parker defend and befriend she . they both marry ensign in Kingsley 's . they become tenderly attach to each other . it be " my fanny " and " my Rachel " in the letter of the young lady . then , my Fanny 's husband die in sad out - at - elbow circumstance , leave no provision for his widow and her infant ; and , in one of his annual voyage , Captain Franks bring over Mrs. Mountain , in the Young Rachel , to Virginia . 
 there be plenty of room in Castlewood House , and Mrs. Mountain serve to enliven the place . she play card with the mistress : she have some knowledge of music , and could help the eld boy in that way : she laugh and be pleased with the guest : she see to the stranger ' chamber , and preside over the press and the linen . she be a kind , brisk , jolly - look widow , and more than one unmarried gentleman of the colony ask she to change her name for his own . but she choose to keep that of Mountain , though , and perhaps because , it have bring she no good fortune . one marriage be enough for she , she say . Mr. Mountain have amiably spend her little fortune and his own . her last trinket go to pay his funeral ; and , as long as Madam Warrington would keep she at Castlewood , she prefer a home without a husband to any which as yet have be offer to she in Virginia . the two lady quarrel plentifully ; but they love each other : they make up their difference : they fall out again , to be reconcile presently . when either of the boy be ill , each lady vie with the other in maternal tenderness and care . in his last day and illness , Mrs. Mountain 's cheerfulness and kindness have be greatly appreciate by the Colonel , whose memory Madam Warrington regard more than that of any live person . so that , year after year , when Captain Franks would ask Mrs. Mountain , in his pleasant way , whether she be go back with he that voyage ? she would decline , and say that she propose to stay a year more . 
 and when suitor come to Madam Warrington , as come they would , she would receive their compliment and attention kindly enough , and ask more than one of these lover whether it be Mrs. Mountain he come after ? she would use her good office with Mountain . Fanny be the good creature , be of a good english family , and would make any gentleman happy . do the Squire declare it be to she and not she dependant that he pay his address ; she would make he her grave curtsey , say that she really have be utterly mistake as to his view , and let he know that the daughter of the Marquis of Esmond live for her people and her son , and do not propose to change her condition . have we not read how Queen Elizabeth be a perfectly sensible woman of business , and be pleased to inspire not only terror and awe , but love in the bosom of her subject ? so the little virginian princess have her favourite , and accept their flattery , and grow tired of they , and be cruel or kind to they as suit her wayward imperial humour . there be no amount of compliment which she would not graciously receive and take as her due . her little foible be so well know that the wag use to practise upon it . rattle Jack Firebrace of Henrico county have free quarter for month at Castlewood , and be a prime favourite with the lady there , because he address verse to she which he steal out of the pocket - book . Tom Humbold of Spotsylvania wager fifty hogshead against five that he would make her institute an order of knighthood , and win his wager . 
 the eld boy see these freak and oddity of his good mother 's disposition , and chafe and rag at they privately . from very early day he revolt when flattery and compliment be pay to the little lady , and strove to expose they with his juvenile satire ; so that his mother would say gravely , " the Esmonds be always of a jealous disposition , and my poor boy take after my father and mother in this . " George hat Jack Firebrace and Tom Humbold , and all their like ; whereas Harry go out sport with they , and fowling , and fishing , and cock - fighting , and enjoy all the fun of the country . 
 one winter , after their first tutor have be dismiss , Madam Esmond take they to Williamsburg , for such education as the school and college there afford , and there it be the fortune of the family to listen to the preaching of the famous Mr. Whitfield , who have come into Virginia , where the habit and preaching of the establish clergy be not very edifying . unlike many of the neighbouring province , Virginia be a Church of England colony : the clergyman be pay by the State and have glebe allot to they ; and , there be no Church of England bishop as yet in America , the colonist be oblige to import their divine from the mother - country . such as come be not , naturally , of the very good or most eloquent kind of pastor . nobleman 's hanger - on , insolvent parson who have quarrel with justice or the bailiff , bring their stain cassock into the colony in the hope of find a living there . no wonder that Whitfield 's great voice stir those whom harmless Mr. Broadbent , the Williamsburg chaplain , never could awaken . at first the boy be as much excited as their mother by Mr. Whitfield : they sing hymn , and listen to he with fervour , and , could he have remain long enough among they , Harry and George have both wear black coat probably instead of epaulette . the simple boy communicate their experience to one another , and be on the daily and nightly look - out for the sacred " call , " in the hope or the possession of which such a vast multitude of Protestant England be thrill at the time . 
 but Mr. Whitfield could not stay always with the little congregation of Williamsburg . his mission be to enlighten the whole benighted people of the Church , and from the East to the West to trumpet the truth and bid slumber sinner awaken . however , he comfort the widow with precious letter , and promise to send she a tutor for her son who should be capable of teach they not only profane learning , but of strengthen and confirm they in science much more precious . 
 in due course , a choose vessel arrive from England . young Mr. Ward have a voice as loud as Mr. Whitfield 's , and could talk almost as readily and for as long a time . night and evening the hall sound with his exhortation . the domestic negro creep to the door to listen to he . other servant darken the porch window with their crisp head to hear he discourse . it be over the black sheep of the Castlewood flock that Mr. Ward somehow have the most influence . these woolly lambling be immensely affect by his exhortation , and , when he give out the hymn , there be such a negro chorus about the house as might be hear across the Potomac such a chorus as would never have be hear in the Colonel 's time for that worthy gentleman have a suspicion of all cassock , and say he would never have any controversy with a clergyman but upon backgammon . where money be want for charitable purpose no man be more ready , and the good , easy virginian clergyman , who love backgammon heartily , too , say that the worthy Colonel 's charity must cover his other shortcoming . 
 Ward be a handsome young man . his preaching please Madam Esmond from the first , and , I daresay , satisfy she as much as Mr. Whitfield 's . of course it can not be the case at the present day when they be so finely educated , but woman , a hundred year ago , be credulous , eager to admire and believe , and apt to imagine all sort of excellence in the object of their admiration . for week , nay , month , Madam Esmond be never tired of hear Mr. Ward 's great glib voice and voluble commonplace : and , accord to she will not , she insist that her neighbour should come and listen to he , and order they to be convert . her young favourite , Mr. Washington , she be especially anxious to influence ; and again and again press he to come and stay at Castlewood and benefit by the spiritual advantage there to be obtain . but that young gentleman find he have particular business which call he home or away from home , and always order his horse of evening when the time be come for Mr. Ward 's exercise . and what boy be just towards their pedagogue ? the twin grow speedily tired and even rebellious under their new teacher . 
 they find he a bad scholar , a dull fellow , and ill - breed to boot . George know much more latin and Greek than his master , and catch he in perpetual blunder and false quantity . Harry , who could take much great liberty than be allow to his eld brother , mimicked Ward 's manner of eat and talk , so that Mrs. Mountain and even Madam Esmond be force to laugh , and little Fanny Mountain would crow with delight . Madam Esmond would have find the fellow out for a vulgar quack but for her son ' opposition , which she , on her part , oppose with her own indomitable will . " what matter whether he have more or less of profane learning ? " she ask ; " in that which be most precious , Mr. W. be able to be a teacher to all of we . what if his manner be a little rough ? Heaven do not choose its elect from among the great and wealthy . I wish you know one book , child , as well as Mr. Ward do . it be your wicked pride the pride of all the Esmonds which prevent you from listen to he . go down on your knee in your chamber and pray to be correct of that dreadful fault . " Ward 's discourse that evening be about Naaman the Syrian , and the pride he have in his native river of Abana and Pharpar , which he vainly imagine to be superior to the healing water of Jordan the moral being , that he , Ward , be the keeper and guardian of the undoubted water of Jordan , and that the unhappy , conceited boy must go to perdition unless they come to he . 
 George now begin to give way to a wicked sarcastic method , which , perhaps , he have inherit from his grandfather , and with which , when a quiet , skilful young person choose to employ it , he can make a whole family uncomfortable . he take up Ward 's pompous remark and make joke of they , so that that young divine chafe and almost choke over his great meal . he make Madam Esmond angry , and doubly so when he send off Harry into fit of laughter . her authority be defy , her officer scorn and insult , her young child pervert , by the obstinate eld brother . she make a desperate and unhappy attempt to maintain her power . 
 the boy be fourteen year of age , Harry be tall and much more advanced than his brother , who be delicate , and as yet almost childlike in stature and appearance . the baculine method be a quite common mode of argument in those day . sergeant , schoolmaster , slave - overseer , use the cane freely . our little boy have be horse many a day by Mr. Dempster , their Scotch tutor , in their grandfather 's time ; and Harry , especially , have get to be quite accustomed to the practice , and make very light of it . but , in the interregnum after Colonel Esmond 's death , the cane have be lay aside , and the young gentleman of Castlewood have be allow to have their own way . her own and her lieutenant 's authority be now spurn by the youthful rebel , the unfortunate mother think of restore it by mean of coercion . she take counsel of Mr. Ward . that athletic young pedagogue could easily find chapter and verse to warrant the course which he wish to pursue in fact , there be no doubt about the wholesomeness of the practice in those clay . he have begin by flatter the boy , find a good berth and snug quarter at Castlewood , and hop to remain there . 
 but they laugh at his flattery , they scorn his bad manner , they yawn soon at his sermon ; the more their mother favour he , the more they dislike he ; and so the tutor and the pupil cordially hat each other . Mrs. Mountain , who be the boy ' friend , especially George 's friend , whom she think unjustly treat by his mother , warn the lad to be prudent , and that some conspiracy be hatch against they . " Ward be more obsequious than ever to your mamma . it turn my stomach , it do , to hear he flat , and to see he gobble the odious wretch ! you must be on your guard , my poor boy you must learn your lesson , and not anger your tutor . a mischief will come , I know it will . your mamma be talk about you to Mr. Washington the other day , when I come into the room . I do not   like that Major Washington , you know I do not . do not   say o Mounty ! Master Harry . you always stand up for your friend , you do . the Major be very handsome and tall , and he may be very good , but he be much too old a young man for I . bless you , my dear , the quantity of wild oats your father sow and my own poor Mountain when they be ensign in Kingsley 's , would fill sack full ! show I Mr. Washington 's wild oat , I say not a grain ! well , I happen to step in last Tuesday , when he be here with your mamma ; and I be sure they be talk about you , for he say , ' Discipline be discipline , and must be preserve . there can be but one command in a house , ma'am , and you must be the mistress of your . ' " 
 " the very word he use to I , " cry Harry . " he tell I that he do not like to meddle with other folk ' affair , but that our mother be very angry , dangerously angry , he say , and he beg I to obey Mr. Ward , and specially to press George to do so . " 
 " let he manage his own house , not mine , " say George , very haughtily . and the caution , far from benefit he , only render the lad more supercilious and refractory . 
 on the next day the storm break , and vengeance fall on the little rebel 's head . word pass between George and Mr. Ward during the morning study . the boy be quite insubordinate and unjust : even his faithful brother cry out , and own that he be in the wrong . Mr. Ward keep his temper to compress , bottle up , cork down , and prevent your anger from present furious explosion , be call keep your temper and say he should speak upon this business to Madam Esmond . when the family meet at dinner , Mr. Ward request her ladyship to stay , and , temperately enough , lay the subject of dispute before she . 
 he ask Master Harry to confirm what he have say : and poor Harry be oblige to admit all the dominie 's statement . 
 George , stand under his grandfather 's portrait by the chimney , say haughtily that what Mr. Ward have say be perfectly correct . 
 " to be a tutor to such a pupil be absurd , " say Mr. Ward , make a long speech , intersperse with many of his usual scripture phrase , at each of which , as they occur , that wicked young George smile , and pishe scornfully , and at length Ward end by ask her honour 's leave to retire . 
 " not before you have punish this wicked and disobedient child , " say Madam Esmond , who have be gather anger during Ward 's harangue , and especially at her son 's behaviour . 
 " punish ! " say George . 
 " yes , sir , punish ! if mean of love and entreaty fail , as they have with your proud heart , other mean must be find to bring you to obedience . I punish you now , rebellious boy , to guard you from great punishment hereafter . the discipline of this family must be maintain . there can be but one command in a house , and I must be the mistress of mine . you will punish this refractory boy , Mr. Ward , as we have agree that you should do , and if there be the least resistance on his part , my overseer and servant will lend you aid . " 
 in some such word the widow no doubt must have speak , but with many vehement Scriptural allusion , which it do not become this chronicler to copy . to be for ever apply to the Sacred Oracles , and accommodate their sentence to your purpose to be for ever take Heaven into your confidence about your private affair , and passionately call for its interference in your family quarrel and difficulty to be so familiar with its design and scheme as to be able to threaten your neighbour with its thunder , and to know precisely its intention regard he and other who differ from your infallible opinion this be the schooling which our simple widow have receive from her impetuous young spiritual guide , and I doubt whether it bring she much comfort . 
 in the midst of his mother 's harangue , in spite of it , perhaps , George Esmond feel he have be wrong . " there can be but one command in the house , and you must be mistress I know who say those word before you , " George say , slowly , and look very white " and and I know , mother , that I have act wrongly to Mr. Ward . " 
 " he own it ! he ask pardon ! " cry Harry . " that be right , George ! that be enough : be not   it ? " 
 " no , it be not enough ! " cry the little woman . " the disobedient boy must pay the penalty of his disobedience . when I be headstrong , as I sometimes be as a child before my spirit be change and humble , my mamma punish I , and I submit . so must George . I desire you will do your duty , Mr. Ward . " 
 " stop , mother ! you do not   quite know what you be do , " George say , exceedingly agitated . 
 " I know that he who spar the rod spoil the child , ungrateful boy ! " say Madam Esmond , with more reference of the same nature , which George hear , look very pale and desperate . 
 upon the mantelpiece , under the Colonel 's portrait , stand a china cup , by which the widow set great store , as her father have always be accustom to drink from it . George suddenly take it , and a strange smile pass over his pale face . 
 " stay one minute . do not   go away yet , " he cry to his mother , who be leave the room . " you you be very fond of this cup , mother ? " and Harry look at he , wonder . " if I break it , it could never be mend , could it ? all the tinker ' rivet would not make it a whole cup again . my dear old grandpapa 's cup ! I have be wrong . Mr. Ward , I ask pardon . I will try and amend . " 
 the widow look at her son indignantly , almost scornfully . " I think , " she say , " I think an Esmond have be more of a man than to be afraid , and " here she give a little scream as Harry utter an exclamation , and dash forward with his hand stretch out towards his brother . 
 George , after look at the cup , raise it , open his hand , and let it fall on the marble slab below he . Harry have try in vain to catch it . 
 " it be too late , Hal , " George say . " you will never mend that again never . now , mother , I be ready , as it be your wish . will you come and see whether I be afraid ? Mr. Ward , I be your servant . your servant ? your slave ! and the next time I meet Mr. Washington , madam , I will thank he for the advice which he give you . " 
 " I say , do your duty , sir ! " cry Mrs. Esmond , stamp her little foot . and George , make a low bow to Mr. Ward , beg he to go first out of the room to the study . 
 " stop ! for God 's sake , mother , stop ! " cry poor Hal . but passion be boil in the little woman 's heart , and she would not hear the boy 's petition . " you only abet he , sir ! " she cry . " if I have to do it myself , it should be do ! " and Harry , with sadness and wrath in his countenance , leave the room by the door through which Mr. Ward and his brother have just issue . 
 the widow sink down on a great chair near it , and sit a while vacantly look at the fragment of the broken cup . then she incline her head towards the door one of half a dozen of carve mahogany which the Colonel have bring from Europe . for a while there be silence : then a loud outcry , which make the poor mother start . 
 in another minute Mr. Ward come out bleed , from a great wound on his head , and behind he Harry , with flare eye , and brandish a little couteau - de - chasse of his grandfather , which hung , with other of the Colonel 's weapon , on the library wall . 
 " I do not   care . I do it , " say Harry . " I could not   see this fellow strike my brother ; and , as he lift his hand , I fling the great ruler at he . I could not   help it . I will not   bear it ; and , if one lift a hand to I or my brother , I will have his life , " shout Harry , brandish the hanger . 
 the widow give a great gasp and a sigh as she look at the young champion and his victim . she must have suffer terribly during the few minute of the boy ' absence ; and the stripe which she imagine have be inflict on the elder have smite her own heart . she long to take both boy to it . she be not angry now . very likely she be delighted with the thought of the young 's prowess and generosity . " you be a very naughty disobedient child , " she say , in an exceedingly peaceable voice . " my poor Mr. Ward ! what a rebel , to strike you ! Papa 's great ebony ruler , be it ? lay down that hanger , child . ' Twas General Webb give it to my papa after the siege of Lille . let I bathe your wound , my good Mr. Ward , and thank Heaven it be no bad . mountain ! go fetch I some court - plaster out of the middle drawer in the japan cabinet . here come George . put on your coat and waistcoat , child ! you be go to take your punishment , sir , and that be sufficient . ask pardon , Harry , of good Mr. Ward , for your wicked rebellious spirit , I do , with all my heart , I be sure . and guard against your passionate nature , child and pray to be forgive . my son , o my son ! " here , with a burst of tear which she could no long control , the little woman throw herself on the neck of her eldest - bear ; whilst Harry , lay the hanger down , go up very feebly to Mr. Ward , and say , " indeed , I ask your pardon , sir . I could not   help it ; on my honour I could not ; nor bear to see my brother strike . " 
 the widow be scared , as after her embrace she look up at George 's pale face . in reply to her eager caress , he coldly kiss she on the forehead , and separate from she . " you mean for the good , mother , " he say , " and I be in the wrong . but the cup be break ; and all the king 's horse and all the king 's man can not mend it . there put the fair side outward on the mantelpiece , and the wound will not show . " 
 again Madam Esmond look at the lad , as he place the fragment of the poor cup on the ledge where it have always be use to stand . her power over he be go . he have dominate she . she be not sorry for the defeat ; for woman like not only to conquer , but to be conquer ; and from that day the young gentleman be master at Castlewood . his mother admire he as he go up to Harry , graciously and condescendingly give Hal his hand , and say , " thank you , brother ! " as if he be a prince , and Harry a general who have help he in a great battle . 
 then George go up to Mr. Ward , who be still piteously bath his eye and forehead in the water . " I ask pardon for Hal 's violence , sir , " George say , in great state . " you see , though we be very young , we be gentleman , and can not brook an insult from stranger . I should have submit , as it be mamma 's desire ; but I be glad she no long entertain it . " 
 " and pray , sir , who be to compensate I ? " say Mr. Ward ; " who be to repair the insult do to I ? " 
 " we be very young , " say George , with another of his old - fashioned bow . " we shall be fifteen soon . any compensation that be usual amongst gentleman " 
 " this , sir , to a minister of the Word ! " bawl out Ward , start up , and who know perfectly well the lad ' skill in fence , have a score of time be foil by the pair of they . 
 " you be not a clergyman yet . we think you might like to be consider as a gentleman . we do not know . " 
 " a gentleman ! I be a Christian , sir ! " say Ward , glare furiously , and clench his great fist . 
 " well , well , if you will not   fight , why do not   you forgive ? " say Harry . " if you do not   forgive , why do not   you fight ? that be what I call the horn of a dilemma ; " and he laugh his frank , jolly laugh . 
 but this be nothing to the laugh a few day afterwards , when , the quarrel have be patch up , along with poor Mr. Ward 's eye , the unlucky tutor be hold forth accord to his custom . he try to preach the boy into respect for he , to reawaken the enthusiasm which the congregation have feel for he ; he wrestle with their manifest indifference , he implore Heaven to warm their cold heart again , and to lift up those who be fall back . all be in vain . the widow weep no more at his harangue , be no long excite by his loud trope and simile , nor appear to be much frighten by the very hot menace with which he pepper his discourse . Nay , she plead headache , and would absent herself of an evening , on which occasion the remainder of the little congregation be very cold indeed . one day , then , Ward , still make desperate effort to get back his despise authority , be preach on the beauty of subordination , the present lax spirit of the age , and the necessity of obey our spiritual and temporal ruler . " for why , my dear friend , " he nobly ask   he be in the habit of ask immensely dull question , and straightway answer they with corresponding platitude , " why be governor appoint , but that we should be govern ? why be tutor engage , but that child should be teach ? "   here a look at the boy . " why be ruler " here he pause , look with a sad , puzzled face at the young gentleman . he see in their countenance the double meaning of the unlucky word he have utter , and stammer , and thump the table with his fist . " why , I say , be ruler " 
 " ruler , " say George , look at Harry . 
 " ruler ! " say Hal , put his hand to his eye , where the poor tutor still bear mark of the late scuffle . ruler , o - ho ! it be too much . the boy burst out in an explosion of laughter . Mrs. Mountain , who be full of fun , could not help join in the chorus ; and little Fanny , who have always behave very demurely and silently at these ceremony , crow again , and clap she little hand at the other laugh , not in the least know the reason why . 
 this could not be bear . Ward shut down the book before he ; in a few angry , but eloquent and manly word , say he would speak no more in that place ; and leave Castlewood not in the least regret by Madam Esmond , who have dot on he three month before . 




 CHAPTER VI . the Virginians begin to see the world 

 after the departure of her unfortunate spiritual adviser and chaplain , Madam Esmond and her son seem to be quite reconcile : but although George never speak of the quarrel with his mother , it must have weigh upon the boy 's mind very painfully , for he have a fever soon after the last recount domestic occurrence , during which illness his brain once or twice wander , when he shriek out , " Broken ! break ! it never , never can be mend ! " to the silent terror of his mother , who sate watch the poor child as he toss wakeful upon his midnight bed . his malady defy her skill , and increase in spite of all the nostrum which the good widow keep in her closet and administer so freely to her people . she have to undergo another humiliation , and one day little Mr. Dempster behold she at his door on horseback . she have ride through the snow on her pony , to implore he to give his aid to her poor boy . " I shall bury my resentment , madam , " say he , " as your ladyship bury your pride . please God , I maybe time enough to help my dear young pupil ! " so he put up his lancet , and his little provision of medicament ; call his only negro - boy after he , shut up his lonely hut , and once more return to Castlewood . that night and for some day afterwards it seem very likely that poor Harry would become heir of Castlewood ; but by Mr. Dempster 's skill the fever be get over , the intermittent attack diminish in intensity , and George be restore almost to health again . a change of air , a voyage even to England , be recommend , but the widow have quarrel with her child 's relative there , and own with contrition that she have be too hasty . a journey to the north and east be determine on , and the two young gentleman , with Mr. Dempster as their tutor , and a couple of servant to attend they , take a voyage to New York , and thence up the beautiful Hudson river to Albany , where they be receive by the first gentry of the province , and thence into the french province , where they have the good recommendation , and be hospitably entertain by the french gentry . Harry camp with the Indians , and take fur and shot bear . George , who never care for field - sport , and whose health be still delicate , be a special favourite with the french lady , who be accustomed to see very few young english gentleman speak the french language so readily as our young gentleman . George especially perfect his accent so as to be able to pass for a Frenchman . he have the bel air completely , every person allow . he dance the minuet elegantly . he learn the late import french catch and song , and play they beautifully on his violin , and would have sing they too but that his voice break at this time , and change from treble to bass ; and , to the envy of poor Harry , who be absent on a bear - hunt , he even have an affair of honour with a young ensign of the regiment of Auvergne , the Chevalier de la Jabotiere , whom he pink in the shoulder , and with whom he afterwards swear an eternal friendship . Madame de Mouchy , the superintendent 's lady , say the mother be blest who have such a son , and write a complimentary letter to Madam Esmond upon Mr. George 's behaviour . I fear , Mr. Whitfield would not have be over - pleased with the widow 's elation on hearing of her son 's prowess . 
 when the lad return home at the end of ten delightful month , their mother be surprised at their growth and improvement . George especially be so grow as to come up to his younger - bear brother . the boy could hardly be distinguish one from another , especially when their hair be powder ; but that ceremony be too cumbrous for country life , each of the gentleman commonly wear his own hair , George his raven black , and Harry his light lock tie with a ribbon . 
 the reader who have be so kind as to look over the first page of the lad 's simple biography , must have observe that Mr. George Esmond be of a jealous and suspicious disposition , most generous and gentle and incapable of an untruth , and though too magnanimous to revenge , almost incapable of forgive any injury . George leave home with no goodwill towards an honourable gentleman , whose name afterwards become one of the most famous in the world ; and he return from his journey not in the least altered in his opinion of his mother 's and grandfather 's friend . Mr. Washington , though then but just of age , look and feel much old . he always exhibit an extraordinary simplicity and gravity ; he have manage his mother 's and his family 's affair from a very early age , and be trust by all his friend and the gentry of his county more than person twice his senior . 
 Mrs. Mountain , Madam Esmond 's friend and companion , who dearly love the two boy and her patroness , in spite of many quarrel with the latter , and daily threat of parting , be a most amusing , droll letter - writer , and use to write to the two boy on their travel . now , Mrs. Mountain be of a jealous turn likewise ; especially she have a great turn for match - making , and fancy that everybody have a design to marry everybody else . there scarce come an unmarried man to Castlewood but Mountain imagine the gentleman have an eye towards the mistress of the mansion . she be positive that odious Mr. Ward intend to make love to the widow , and pretty sure the latter like he . she know that Mr. Washington want to be marry , be certain that such a shrewd young gentleman would look out for a rich wife , and , as for the difference of age , what matter that the Major   major be his rank in the militia   be fifteen year young than Madam Esmond ? they be use to such marriage in the family ; my lady her mother be how many year old than the Colonel when she marry he ? when she marry he and be so jealous that she never would let the poor Colonel out of her sight . the poor Colonel ! after his wife , he have be henpecke by his little daughter . and she would take after her mother , and marry again , be sure of that . Madam be a little chit of a woman , not five foot in her high headdress and shoe , and Mr. Washington a great tall man of six foot two . great tall man always marry little chit of woman : therefore , Mr. W. must be look after the widow . what could be more clear than the deduction ? 
 she communicate these sage opinion to her boy , as she call George , who beg she , for Heaven 's sake , to hold her tongue . this she say she could do , but she could not keep her eye always shut ; and she narrate a hundred circumstance which have occur in the young gentleman 's absence , and which tend , as she think , to confirm her notion . have Mountain impart these pretty suspicion to his brother ? George ask sternly . no . George be her boy ; Harry be his mother 's boy . " she like he good , and I like you well , George , " cry Mountain . " besides , if I be to speak to he , he would tell your mother in a minute . Poor Harry can keep nothing quiet , and then there would be a pretty quarrel between Madam and I ! " 
 " I beg you to keep this quiet , Mountain , " say Mr. George , with great dignity , " or you and I shall quarrel too . neither to I nor to any one else in the world must you mention such an absurd suspicion . " 
 Absurd ! why absurd ? Mr. Washington be constantly with the widow . his name be forever in her mouth . she be never tired of point out his virtue and example to her son . she consult he on every question respect her estate and its management . she never buy a horse or sell a barrel of tobacco without his opinion . there be a room at Castlewood regularly call Mr. Washington 's room . " he actually leave his clothe here and his portmanteau when he go away . ah ! George , George ! one day will come when he will not   go away , " groan Mountain , who , of course , always return to the subject of which she be forbid to speak . meanwhile Mr. George adopt towards his mother 's favourite a frigid courtesy , at which the honest gentleman chafe but do not care to remonstrate , or a stinging sarcasm , which he would break through as he would burst through so many bramble on those hunting excursion in which he and Harry Warrington ride so constantly together ; whilst George , retreat to his tent , read mathematic , and French , and Latin , and sulk in his book - room more and more lonely . 
 Harry be away from home with some other sporting friend   it be to be fear the young gentleman 's acquaintance be not all as eligible as Mr. Washington , when the latter come to pay a visit at Castlewood . he be so peculiarly tender and kind to the mistress there , and receive by she with such special cordiality , that George Warrington 's jealousy have well - nigh break out in open rupture . but the visit be one of adieu , as it appear . 
 Major Washington be go on a long and dangerous journey , quite to the western Virginia frontier and beyond it . the French have be for some time past make inroad into our territory . the government at home , as well as those of Virginia and Pennsylvania , be alarmed at this aggressive spirit of the Lords of Canada and Louisiana . some of our settler have already be drive from their holding by frenchman in arm , and the governor of the british province be desirous to stop their incursion , or at any rate to protest against their invasion . 
 we choose to hold our american colony by a law that be at least convenient for its framer . the maxim be , that whoever possess the coast have a right to all the territory inland as far as the Pacific ; so that the british charter only lay down the limit of the colony from north to south , leave they quite free from east to west . the French , meanwhile , have their colony to the north and south , and aim at connect they by the Mississippi and the St. Lawrence and the great intermediate lake and water lie to the westward of the british possession . in the year 1748 , though peace be sign between the two european kingdom , the colonial question remain unsettled , to be open again when either party should be strong enough to urge it . in the year 1753 , it come to an issue , on the Ohio river , where the british and french settler meet . to be sure , there exist other people besides french and British , who think they have a title to the territory about which the child of their White Fathers be battle , namely , the native Indians and proprietor of the soil . but the logician of St. James 's and Versailles wisely choose to consider the matter in dispute as a european and not a Red - man 's question , eliminate he from the argument , but employ his tomahawk as it might serve the turn of either litigant . 
 a company , call the Ohio Company , have grant from the Virginia government of land along that river , find themselves invade in their settlement by french military detachment , who roughly eject the Britons from their holding . these latter apply for protection to Mr. Dinwiddie , Lieutenant - Governor of Virginia , who determine upon send an ambassador to the french command officer on the Ohio , demand that the French should desist from their inroad upon the territory of his Majesty King George . 
 Young Mr. Washington jump eagerly at the chance of distinction which this service afford he , and volunteer to leave his home and his rural and professional pursuit in Virginia , to carry the governor 's message to the french officer . take a guide , an interpreter , and a few attendant , and follow the indian track , in the fall of the year 1753 , the intrepid young envoy make his way from Williamsburg almost to the shore of Lake Erie , and find the french commander at Fort le Boeuf . that officer 's reply be brief : his order be to hold the place and drive all the English from it . the French avow their intention of take possession of the Ohio . and with this rough answer the messenger from Virginia have to return through danger and difficulty , across lonely forest and frozen river , shape his course by the compass , and camping at night in the snow by the forest fire . 
 Harry Warrington curse his ill - fortune that he have be absent from home on a cock - fight , when he might have have chance of sport so much nobler ; and on his return from his expedition , which he have conduct with an heroic energy and simplicity , Major Washington be a great favourite than ever with the lady of Castlewood . she point he out as a model to both her son . " ah , Harry ! " she would say , " think of you , with your cock - fighting and your racing - match , and the Major away there in the wilderness , watch the French , and battle with the frozen river ! ah , George ! learning may be a very good thing , but I wish my eld son be do something in the service of his country ! " 
 " I desire no well than to go home and seek for employment , ma'am , " say George . " you surely will not have I serve under Mr. Washington , in his new regiment , or ask a commission from Mr. Dinwiddie ? " 
 " an Esmond can only serve with the king 's commission , " say Madam , " and as for ask a favour from Mr. Lieutenant - Governor Dinwiddie , I would rather beg my bread . " 
 Mr. Washington be at this time raise such a regiment as , with the scanty pay and patronage of the virginian government , he could get together , and propose , with the help of these man - of - war , to put a more peremptory veto upon the french invader than the solitary ambassador have be enable to lay . a small force under another officer , Colonel Trent , have be already despatch to the west , with order to fortify themselves so as to be able to resist any attack of the enemy . the french troop , greatly outnumber our , come up with the english outpost , who be fortify themselves at a place on the confine of Pennsylvania where the great city of Pittsburg now stand . a virginian officer with but forty man be in no condition to resist twenty time that number of Canadians , who appear before his incomplete work . he be suffer to draw back without molestation ; and the French , take possession of his fort , strengthen it , and christen it by the name of the canadian governor , Du Quesne . up to this time no actual blow of war have be strike . the troop represent the hostile nation be in presence the gun be load , but no one as yet have cry " Fire . " it be strange , that in a savage forest of Pennsylvania , a young virginian officer should fire a shot , and waken up a war which be to last for sixty year , which be to cover his own country and pass into Europe , to cost France her american colony , to sever our from we , and create the great western republic ; to rage over the Old World when extinguish in the New ; and , of all the myriad engage in the vast contest , to leave the prize of the great fame with he who strike the first blow ! 
 he little know of the fate in store for he . a simple gentleman , anxious to serve his king and do his duty , he volunteer for the first service , and execute it with admirable fidelity . in the ensue year he take the command of the small body of provincial troop with which he march to repel the Frenchmen . he come up with their advanced guard and fire upon they , kill their leader . after this he have himself to fall back with his troop , and be compel to capitulate to the superior french force . on the 4th of July , 1754 , the Colonel march out with his troop from the little fort where he have hastily entrench himself   and which they call Fort Necessity , give up the place to the conqueror , and take his way home . 
 his command be over : his regiment disband after the fruitless , inglorious march and defeat . Saddened and humble in spirit , the young officer present himself after a while to his old friend at Castlewood . he be very young : before he set forth on his first campaign he may have indulge in exaggerated hope of success , and utter they . " I be angry when I part from you , " he say to George Warrington , hold out his hand , which the other eagerly take . " you seem to scorn I and my regiment , George . I think you laugh at we , and your ridicule make I angry . I boast too much of what we would do . " 
 " Nay , you have do your good , George , " say the other , who quite forget his previous jealousy in his old comrade 's misfortune . " everybody know that a hundred and fifty starve man , with scarce a round of ammunition leave , could not face five time their number perfectly armed , and everybody who know Mr. Washington know that he would do his duty . Harry and I see the French in Canada last year . they obey but one will : in our province each governor have his own . they be royal troop the French send against you ... " 
 " oh , but that some of our be here ! " cry Madam Esmond , toss her head up . " I promise you a few good english regiment would make the white - coat run . " 
 " you think nothing of the provincial : and I must say nothing now we have be so unlucky , " say the Colonel , gloomily . " you make much of I when I be here before . do not   you remember what victory you prophesy for I how much I boast myself very likely over your good wine ? all those fine dream be over now . ' tis kind of your ladyship to receive a poor beat fellow as you do : " and the young soldier hang down his head . 
 George Warrington , with his extreme acute sensibility , be touch at the other 's emotion and simple testimony of sorrow under defeat . he be about to say something friendly to Mr. Washington , have not his mother , to whom the Colonel have be speak , reply herself : " kind of we to receive you , Colonel Washington ! " say the widow . " I never hear that when man be unhappy , our sex be less their friend . " 
 and she make the Colonel a very fine curtsey , which straightway cause her son to be more jealous of he than ever . 




 CHAPTER VII . preparation for War 

 Surely no man can have well claim to sympathy than bravery , youth , good look , and misfortune . Madam Esmond might have have twenty son , and yet have a right to admire her young soldier . Mr. Washington 's room be more than ever Mr. Washington 's room now . she rave about he and praise he in all company . she more than ever point out his excellence to her son , contrast his sterling quality with Harry 's love of pleasure   the wild boy !   and George 's listless musing over his book . George be not disposed to like Mr. Washington any well for his mother 's extravagant praise . he coax the jealous demon within he until he must have become a perfect pest to himself and all the friend round about he . he utter joke so deep that his simple mother do not know their meaning , but sate bewilder at his sarcasm , and powerless what to think of his moody , saturnine humour . 
 meanwhile , public event be occur which be to influence the fortune of all our homely family . the quarrel between the French and English North Americans , from be a provincial , have grow to be a national , quarrel . reinforcement from France have already arrive in Canada ; and english troop be expect in Virginia . " alas ! my dear friend ! " write Madame la Presidente de Mouchy , from Quebec , to her young friend George Warrington . " how contrary be the destiny to we ! I see you quit the embrace of an adore mother to precipitate yourself in the arm of Bellona . I see you pass wound after combat . I hesitate almost to wish victory to our lily when I behold you range under the banner of the Leopard . there be enmity which the heart do not recognise our assuredly be at peace among the tumult . all here love and salute you , as well as Monsieur the Bear - hunter , your brother   that cold Hippolyte who prefer the chase to the soft conversation of our lady !   your friend , your enemy , the Chevalier de la Jabotiere , burn to meet on the field of Mars his generous rival . M. Du Quesne speak of you last night at supper . M. Du Quesne , my husband , send affectuous remembrance to their young friend , with which be ever join those of your sincere Presidente de Mouchy . " 
 " the banner of the Leopard , " of which George 's fair correspondent write , be , indeed , fling out to the wind , and a number of the king 's soldier be rally round it . it be resolve to wrest from the French all the conquest they have make upon british dominion . a couple of regiment be raise and pay by the king in America , and a fleet with a couple more be despatch from home under an experienced commander . in February , 1755 , Commodore Keppel , in the famous ship centurion , in which Anson have make his voyage round the world , anchor in Hampton Roads with two ship of war under his command , and have on board General Braddock , his staff , and a part of his troop . Mr. Braddock be appoint by the Duke . a hundred year ago the Duke of Cumberland be call the Duke par excellence in England as another famous warrior have since be call . not so great a Duke certainly be that first - name Prince as his party esteem he , and surely not so bad a one as his enemy have paint he . a fleet of transport speedily follow Prince William 's general , bring store , and man , and money in plenty . 
 the great man land his troop at Alexandria on the Potomac river , and repair to Annapolis in Maryland , where he order the governor of the different colony to meet he in council , urge they each to call upon their respective province to help the common cause in this strait . 
 the arrival of the General and his little army cause a mighty excitement all through the province , and nowhere great than at Castlewood . Harry be off forthwith to see the troop under canvas at Alexandria . the sight of their line delight he , and the inspire music of their fife and drum . he speedily make acquaintance with the officer of both regiment ; he long to join in the expedition upon which they be bind , and be a welcome guest at their mess . 
 Madam Esmond be pleased that her son should have an opportunity of enjoy the society of gentleman of good fashion from England . she have no doubt their company be improve , that the english gentleman be very different from the horse - racing , cock - fight virginian squire , with whom Master Harry would associate , and the lawyer , and pettifogger , and toad - eater at the lieutenant - governor 's table . Madam Esmond have a very keen eye for detect flatterer in other folk ' house . against the little knot of official people at Williamsburg she be especially satirical , and have no patience with their etiquette and squabble for precedence . 
 as for the company of the king 's officer , Mr. Harry and his eld brother both smile at their mamma 's compliment to the elegance and propriety of the gentleman of the camp . if the good lady have but know all , if she could but have hear their joke and the song which they sing over their wine and punch , if she could have see the condition of many of they as they be carry away to their lodging , she would scarce have be so ready to recommend their company to her son . man and officer swagger the country round , and frighten the peaceful farm and village folk with their riot : the General rave and storm against his troop for their disorder ; against the provincial for their traitorous niggardliness ; the soldier take possession almost as of a conquered country , they scorn the provincial , they insult the wife even of their indian ally , who have come to join the english warrior , upon their arrival in America , and to march with they against the French . the General be compel to forbid the indian woman his camp . Amazed and outrage their husband retire , and but a few month afterwards their service be lose to he , when their aid would have be most precious . 
 some story against the gentleman of the camp , Madam Esmond might have hear , but she would have none of they . soldier would be soldier , that everybody know ; those officer who come over to Castlewood on her son 's invitation be most polite gentleman , and such indeed be the case . the widow receive they most graciously , and give they the good sport the country afford . presently , the General himself send polite message to the mistress of Castlewood . his father have serve with hers under the glorious Marlborough , and Colonel Esmond 's name be still know and respect in England . with her ladyship 's permission , General Braddock would have the honour of wait upon she at Castlewood , and pay his respect to the daughter of so meritorious an officer . 
 if she have know the cause of Mr. Braddock 's politeness , perhaps his compliment would not have charm Madam Esmond so much . the Commander - in - chief hold levee at Alexandria , and among the gentry of the country , who pay he their respect , be our twin of Castlewood , who mount their good nag , take with they their last London suit , and , with their two negro - boy , in smart livery behind they , ride in state to wait upon the great man . he be sulky and angry with the provincial gentry , and scarce take any notice of the young gentleman , only ask , casually , of his aide - de - camp at dinner , who the young squire Gawkeys be in blue and gold and red waistcoat ? 
 Mr. Dinwiddie , the Lieutenant - Governor of Virginia , the Agent from Pennsylvania , and a few more gentleman , happen to be din with his Excellency . " oh ! " say Mr. Dinwiddie , " those be the son of the Princess Pocahontas ; " on which , with a tremendous oath , the General ask , " who the deuce be she ? " 
 Dinwiddie , who do not love she , have indeed undergo a hundred pertness from the imperious little lady , now give a disrespectful and ridiculous account of Madam Esmond , make merry with her pomposity and immense pretension , and entertain General Braddock with anecdote regard she , until his Excellency fall asleep . 
 when he awake , Dinwiddie be go , but the Philadelphia gentleman be still at table , deep in conversation with the officer there present . the General take up the talk where it have be leave when he fall asleep , and speak of Madam Esmond in curt , disrespectful term , such as soldier be in the habit of use in those day , and ask , again , what be the name of the old fool about whom Dinwiddie have be talk ? he then break into expression of contempt and wrath against the gentry , and the country in general . 
 Mr. Franklin of Philadelphia repeat the widow 's name , take quite a different view of her character from that Mr. Dinwiddie have give , seem to know a good deal about she , her father , and her estate ; as , indeed , he do about every man or subject which come under discussion ; explain to the General that Madam Esmond have beef , and horse , and store in plenty , which might be very useful at the present juncture , and recommend he to conciliate she by all mean . the General have already make up his mind that Mr. Franklin be a very shrewd , intelligent person , and graciously order an aide - de - camp to invite the two young man to the next day 's dinner . when they appear he be very pleasant and good - natured ; the gentleman of the General 's family make much of they . they behave , as become person of their name , with modesty and good - breeding ; they return home delighted with their entertainment , nor be their mother less pleased at the civility which his Excellency have show to her boy . in reply to Braddock 's message , Madam Esmond pen a billet in her good style , acknowledge his politeness , and beg his Excellency to fix the time when she might have the honour to receive he at Castlewood . 
 we may be sure that the arrival of the army and the approach campaign form the subject of continue conversation in the Castlewood family . to make the campaign be the dear wish of Harry 's life . he dream only of war and battle ; he be for ever with the officer at Williamsburg ; he scour and clean and polish all the gun and sword in the house ; he renew the amusement of his childhood , and have the negro under arm . his mother , who have a gallant spirit , know that the time be come when one of her boy must leave she and serve the king . she scarce dare to think on whom the lot should fall . she admire and respect the elder , but she feel that she love the young boy with all the passion of her heart . 
 Eager as Harry be to be a soldier , and with all his thought bent on that glorious scheme , he too scarcely dare to touch on the subject near his heart . once or twice when he venture on it with George , the latter 's countenance wear an ominous look . Harry have a feudal attachment for his eld brother , worship he with an extravagant regard , and in all thing give way to he as the chief . so Harry see , to his infinite terror , how George , too , in his grave way , be occupy with military matter . George have the war of Eugene and Marlborough down from his bookshelf , all the military book of his grandfather , and the most warlike of Plutarch 's life . he and Dempster be practise with the foil again . the old Scotchman be an adept in the military art , though somewhat shy of say where he learn it . 
 Madam Esmond make she two boy the bearer of the letter in reply to his Excellency 's message , accompany her note with such large and handsome present for the General 's staff and the officer of the two Royal Regiments , as cause the General more than once to thank Mr. Franklin for have be the mean of bring this welcome ally into the camp . " would not one of the young gentleman like to see the campaign ? " the General ask . " a friend of theirs , who often speak of they Mr. Washington , who have be unlucky in the affair of last year have already promise to join he as aide - de - camp , and his Excellency would gladly take another young virginian gentleman into his family . " Harry 's eye brighten and his face flush at this offer . " he would like with all his heart to go ! " he cry out . George say , look hard at his young brother , that one of they would be proud to attend his Excellency , whilst it would be the other 's duty to take care of their mother at home . Harry allow his senior to speak . his will be even still obedient to George 's . however much he desire to go , he would not pronounce until George have declare himself . he long so for the campaign , that the actual wish make he timid . he dare not speak on the matter as he go home with George . they ride for mile in silence , or strove to talk upon indifferent subject ; each know what be pass in the other 's mind , and afraid to bring the awful question to an issue . 
 on their arrival at home the boy tell their mother of General Braddock 's offer . " I know it must happen , " she say ; " at such a crisis in the country our family must come forward . have you have you settle yet which of you be to leave I ? " and she look anxiously from one to another , dread to hear either name . 
 " the young ought to go , mother ; of course I ought to go ! " cry Harry , turn very red . 
 " of course he ought , " say Mrs. Mountain , who be present at their talk . 
 " there ! mountain say so ! I tell you so ! " again cry Harry , with a sidelong look at George . 
 " the head of the family ought to go , mother , " say George , sadly . 
 " no ! no ! you be ill , and have never recover your fever . ought he to go , mountain ? " 
 " you would make the good soldier , I know that , dear Hal . you and George Washington be great friend , and could travel well together , and he do not care for I , nor I for he , however much he be admire in the family . but , you see , ' tis the law of Honour , my Harry . "   he here speak to his brother with a voice of extraordinary kindness and tenderness .   " the grief I have have in this matter have be that I must refuse thee . I must go . have Fate give you the benefit of that extra half - hour of life which I have have before you , it would have be your lot , and you would have claim your right to go first , you know you would . " 
 " yes , George , " say poor Harry , " I own I should . " 
 " you will stay at home , and take care of Castlewood and our mother . if anything happen to I , you be here to fill my place . I would like to give way , my dear , as you , I know , would lay down your life to serve I . but each of we must do his duty . what would our grandfather say if he be here ? " 
 the mother look proudly at her two son . " my papa would say that his boy be gentleman , " falter Madam Esmond , and leave the young man , not choose , perhaps , to show the emotion which be fill her heart . it be speedily know amongst the servant that Mr. George be go on the campaign . Dinah , George 's foster - mother , be loud in her lamentation at lose he ; Phillis , Harry 's old nurse , be as noisy because Master George , as usual , be prefer over Master Harry . Sady , George 's servant , make preparation to follow his master , brag incessantly of the deed which he would do , while Gumbo , Harry 's boy , pretend to whimper at be leave behind , though , at home , Gumbo be anything but a fire - eater . 
 but , of all in the house , Mrs. Mountain be the most angry at George 's determination to go on the campaign . she have no patience with he . he do not know what he be do by leave home . she beg , implored , insist that he should alter his determination ; and vow that nothing but mischief would come from his departure . 
 George be surprised at the pertinacity of the good lady 's opposition . " I know , Mountain , " say he , " that Harry would be the well soldier ; but , after all , to go be my duty . " 
 " to stay be your duty ! " say Mountain , with a stamp of her foot . 
 " why do not my mother own it when we talk of the matter just now ? " 
 " your mother ! " say Mrs. Mountain , with a most gloomy , sardonic laugh ; " your mother , my poor child ! " 
 " what be the meaning of that mournful countenance , mountain ? " 
 " it may be that your mother wish you away , George ! " Mrs. Mountain continue , wag her head . " it may be , my poor delude boy , that you will find a father - in - law when you come back . " 
 " what in heaven do you mean ? " cry George , the blood rush into his face . 
 " do you suppose I have no eye , and can not see what be go on ? I tell you , child , that Colonel Washington want a rich wife . when you be go , he will ask your mother to marry he , and you will find he master here when you come back . that be why you ought not to go away , you poor , unhappy , simple boy ! do not   you see how fond she be of he ? how much she make of he ? how she be always hold he up to you , to Harry , to everybody who come here ? " 
 " but he be go on the campaign , too , " cry George . 
 " he be go on the marrying campaign , child ! " insist the widow . 
 " Nay ; General Braddock himself tell I that Mr. Washington have accept the appointment of aide - de - camp . " 
 " an artifice ! an artifice to blind you , my poor child ! " cry Mountain . " he will be wound and come back you will see if he do not . I have proof of what I say to you proof under his own hand look here ! " and she take from her pocket a piece of paper in Mr. Washington 's well - know handwriting . 
 " how come you by this paper ? " ask George , turn ghastly pale . 
 " I I find it in the Major 's chamber ! " say Mrs. Mountain , with a shamefaced look . 
 " you read the private letter of a guest stay in our house ? " cry George . " for shame ! I will not look at the paper ! " and he fling it from he on to the fire before he . 
 " I could not help it , George ; ' twa by chance , I give you my word , by the mere chance . you know Governor Dinwiddie be to have the Major 's room , and the state - room be get ready for Mr. Braddock , and we be expect ever so much company , and I have to take the thing which the major leaf here he treat the house just as if it be his own already into his new room , and this half - sheet of paper fall out of his writing - book , and I just give one look at it by the mere chance , and when I see what it be it be my duty to read it . " 
 " oh , you be a martyr to duty , Mountain ! " George say grimly . " I dare say Mrs. Bluebeard think it be her duty to look through the keyhole . " 
 " I never do look through the keyhole , George . it be a shame you should say so ! I , who have watch , and tend , and nurse you , like a mother ; who have sate up whole week with you in fever , and carry you from your bed to the sofa in these arm . there , sir , I do not   want you there now . my dear Mountain , indeed ! do not   tell I ! you fly into a passion , and , call name , and wound my feeling , who have love you like your mother like your mother ? I only hope she may love you half as well . I say you be all ungrateful . my Mr. Mountain be a wretch , and every one of you be as bad . " 
 there be but a smoulder log or two in the fireplace , and no doubt Mountain see that the paper be in no danger as it lie amongst the ash , or she would have seize it at the risk of burn her own finger , and ere she utter the above passionate defence of her conduct . perhaps George be absorb in his dismal thought ; perhaps his jealousy overpower he , for he do not resist any far when she stoop down and pick up the paper . 
 " you should thank your star , child , that I save the letter , " cry she . " see ! here be his own word , in his great big handwriting like a clerk . it be not my fault that he write they , or that I find they . read for yourself , I say , George Warrington , and be thankful that your poor dear old Mounty be watch over you ! " 
 every word and letter upon the unlucky paper be perfectly clear . George 's eye could not help take in the content of the document before he . " not a word of this , Mountain , " he say , give she a frightful look . " I I will return this paper to Mr. Washington . " 
 Mountain be scared at his face , at the idea of what she have do , and what might ensue . when his mother , with alarm in her countenance , ask he at dinner what ail he that he look so pale ? " do you suppose , madam , " say he , fill himself a great bumper of wine , " that to leave such a tender mother as you do not cause I cruel grief ? " 
 the good lady could not understand his word , his strange , fierce look , and stranger laughter . he banter all at the table ; call to the servant and laugh at they , and drink more and more . each time the door be open , he turn towards it ; and so do Mountain , with a guilty notion that Mr. Washington would step in . 




 CHAPTER VIII . in which George suffer from a Common Disease 

 on the day appoint for Madam Esmond 's entertainment to the General , the house of Castlewood be set out with the great splendour ; and Madam Esmond array herself in a much more magnificent dress than she be accustom to wear . indeed , she wish to do every honour to her guest , and to make the entertainment which , in reality , be a sad one to she as pleasant as might be for her company . the General 's new aide - de - camp be the first to arrive . the widow receive he in the cover gallery before the house . he dismount at the step , and his servant lead away his horse to the well - know quarter . no young gentleman in the colony be well mount or a well horseman than Mr. Washington . 
 for a while ere the Major retire to divest himself of his riding - boot , he and his hostess pace the gallery in talk . she have much to say to he ; she have to hear from he a confirmation of his own appointment as aide - de - camp to General Braddock , and to speak of her son 's approach departure . the negro servant bear the dish for the approach feast be pass perpetually as they talk . they descend the step down to the rough lawn in front of the house , and pace a while in the shade . Mr. Washington announce his Excellency 's speedy approach , with Mr. Franklin of Pennsylvania in his coach . 
 this Mr. Franklin have be a common printer 's boy , Mrs. Esmond have hear ; a pretty pass thing be come to when such person ride in the coach of the Commander - in - Chief ! Mr. Washington say , a more shrewd and sensible gentleman never ride in coach or walk on foot . Mrs. Esmond think the Major be too liberally disposed towards this gentleman ; but Mr. Washington stoutly maintain against the widow that the printer be a most ingenious , useful , and meritorious man . 
 " I be glad , at least , that , as my boy be go to make the campaign , he will not be with tradesman , but with gentleman , with gentleman of honour and fashion , " say Madam Esmond , in her most stately manner . 
 Mr. Washington have see the gentleman of honour and fashion over their cup , and perhaps think that all their saying and doing be not precisely such as would tend to instruct or edify a young man on his entrance into life ; but he wisely choose to tell no tale out of school , and say that Harry and George , now they be come into the world , must take their share of good and bad , and hear what both sort have to say . 
 " to be with a veteran officer of the fine army in the world , " falter the widow ; " with gentleman who have be breed in the midst of the Court ; with friend of his Royal Highness , the Duke " 
 the widow 's friend only incline his head . he do not choose to allow his countenance to depart from its usual handsome gravity . 
 " and with you , dear Colonel Washington , by whom my father always set such store . you do not   know how much he trust in you . you will take care of my boy , sir , will not you ? you be but five year old , yet I trust to you more than to his senior ; my father always tell the child , I alway bid they , to look up to Mr. Washington . " 
 " you know I would have do anything to win Colonel Esmond 's favour . Madam , how much would I not venture to merit his daughter 's ? " 
 the gentleman bow with not too ill a grace . the lady blush , and drop one of the low curtsy .   Madam Esmond 's curtsey be consider unrivalled over the whole province .   " Mr. Washington , " she say , " will be always sure of a mother 's affection , whilst he give so much of his to her child . " and so say she give he her hand , which he kiss with profound politeness . the little lady presently re - enter her mansion , lean upon the tall young officer 's arm . here they be join by George , who come to they , accurately powder and richly attire , salute his parent and his friend alike with low and respectful bow . nowadays , a young man walk into his mother 's room with hobnail high - low , and a wideawake on his head ; and instead of make she a bow , puff a cigar into her face . 
 but George , though he make the low possible bow to Mr. Washington and his mother , be by no mean in good - humour with either of they . a polite smile play round the low part of his countenance , whilst watchfulness and wrath glare out from the two upper window . what have be say or do ? nothing that might not have be perform or utter before the most decent , polite , or pious company . why then should Madam Esmond continue to blush , and the brave Colonel to look somewhat red , as he shake his young friend 's hand ? 
 the Colonel ask Mr. George if he have have good sport ? " no , " say George , curtly . " have you ? " and then he look at the picture of his father , which hang in the parlour . 
 the Colonel , not a talkative man ordinarily , straightway enter into a long description of his sport , and describe where he have be in the morning , and what wood he have hunt with the king 's officer ; how many bird they have shoot , and what game they have bring down . though not a jocular man ordinarily , the Colonel make a long description of Mr. Braddock 's heavy person and great boot , as he flounder through the virginian wood , hunting , as they call it , with a pack of dog gather from various house , with a pack of negro bark as loud as the dog , and actually shoot the deer when they come in sight of he . " Great God , sir ! " say Mr. Braddock , puff and blow , " what would Sir Robert have say in Norfolk , to see a man hunt with a fowling - piece in his hand , and a pack of dog actually lay on to a turkey ! " 
 " indeed , Colonel , you be vastly comical this afternoon ! " cry Madam Esmond , with a neat little laugh , whilst her son listen to the story , look more glum than ever . " what Sir Robert be there at Norfolk ? be he one of the newly arrive army - gentleman ? " 
 " the General mean Norfolk at home , madam , not Norfolk in Virginia , " say Colonel Washington . " Mr. Braddock have be talk of a visit to Sir Robert Walpole , who live in that county , and of the great hunt the old Minister keep there , and of his grand palace , and his picture at Houghton . I should like to see a good field and a good fox - chase at home well than any sight in the world , " the honest sportsman add with a sigh . 
 " nevertheless , there be good sport here , as I be say , " say young Esmond , with a sneer . 
 " what sport ? " cry the other , look at he . 
 " why , sure you know , without look at I so fiercely , and stamp your foot , as if you be go to charge I with the foil . be you not the good sportsman of the country - side ? be there not all the fish of the field , and the beast of the tree , and the fowl of the sea no the fish of the tree , and the beast of the sea and the bah ! you know what I mean . I mean shad , and salmon , and rock - fish , and roe - deer , and hog , and buffalo , and bison , and elephant , for what I know . I be no sportsman . " 
 " no , indeed , " say Mr. Washington , with a look of scarcely repress scorn . 
 " yes , I understand you . I be a milksop . I have be breed at my mamma 's knee . look at these pretty apron - string , Colonel ! who would not like to be tie to they ? see of what a charming colour they be ! I remember when they be black that be for my grandfather . " 
 " and who would not mourn for such a gentleman ? " say the Colonel , as the widow , surprised , look at her son . 
 " and , indeed , I wish my grandfather be here , and would resurge , as he promise to do on his tombstone ; and would bring my father , the Ensign , with he . " 
 " ah , Harry ! " cry Mrs. Esmond , burst into tear , as at this juncture her second son enter the room in just such another suit , gold - cord frock , braid waistcoat , silver - hilte sword , and solitaire , as that which his eld brother wear . " oh , Harry , Harry ! " cry Madam Esmond , and fly to her young son . 
 " what be it , mother ? " ask Harry , take she in his arm . " what be the matter , Colonel ? " 
 " upon my life , it would puzzle I to say , " answer the Colonel , bite his lip . 
 " a mere question , Hal , about pink ribbon , which I think vastly become to our mother ; as , no doubt , the Colonel do . " 
 " Sir , will you please to speak for yourself ? " cry the Colonel , bustle up , and then sink his voice again . 
 " he speak too much for himself , " weep the widow . 
 " I protest I do not   any more know the source of these tear , than the source of the Nile , " say George , " and if the picture of my father be to begin to cry , I should almost as much wonder at the paternal tear . what have I utter ? an allusion to ribbon ! be there some poison pin in they , which have be strike into my mother 's heart by a guilty fiend of a London mantua - maker ? I profess to wish to be lead in these lovely rein all my life long , " and he turn a pirouette on his scarlet heel . 
 " George Warrington ! what devil 's dance be you dance now ? " ask Harry , who love his mother , who love Mr. Washington , but who , of all creature , love and admire his brother George . 
 " my dear child , you do not understand dance you care not for the politer art you can get no more music out of a spinet than by pull a dead hog by the ear . by nature you be make for a man a man of war I do not mean a seventy - four , Colonel George , like that hulk which bring the hulking Mr. Braddock into our river . his Excellency , too , be a man of warlike turn , a follower of the sport of the field . I be a milksop , as I have have the honour to say . " 
 " you never show it yet . you beat that great Maryland man be twice your size , " break out Harry . 
 " under compulsion , Harry . ' tis tuptu , my lad , or else ' tis tuptomai , as thy breech well know when we follow school . but I be of a quiet turn , and would never lift my hand to pull a trigger , no , nor a nose , nor anything but a rose , " and here he take and handle one of Madam Esmond 's bright pink apron ribbon . " I hate sporting , which you and the Colonel love , and I want to shoot nothing alive , not a turkey , nor a titmouse , nor an ox , nor an ass , nor anything that have ear . those curl of Mr. Washington 's be prettily powdered . " 
 the militia colonel , who have be offend by the first part of the talk , and very much puzzle by the last , have take a modest draught from the great china bowl of apple - toddy which stand to welcome the guest in this as in all virginian house , and be far cool himself by pace the balcony in a very stately manner . 
 again almost reconcile with the elder , the appeased mother stand give a hand to each of her son . George put his disengaged hand on Harry 's shoulder . " I say one thing , George , " say he with a flush face . 
 " say twenty thing , Don Enrico , " cry the other . 
 " if you be not fond of sporting and that , and do not   care for kill game and hunting , be clever than I , why shouldst thou not stop at home and be quiet , and let I go out with Colonel George and Mr. Braddock ? that be what I say , " say Harry , deliver himself of his speech . 
 the widow look eagerly from the dark - haired to the fair - haired boy . she know not from which she would like to part . 
 " one of our family must go because honneur oblige , and my name be number one , number one must go first , " say George . 
 " tell you so , " say poor Harry . 
 " one must stay , or who be to look after mother at home ? we can not afford to be both scalp by Indians or fricasseed by French . " 
 " fricasseed by French ! " cry Harry ; " the good troop of the world ! englishman ! I should like to see they fricasseed by the French ! what a mortal thrashing you will give they ! " and the brave lad sigh to think he should not be present at the battue . 
 George sate down to the harpsichord and play and sing " malbrouk s'en va - t - en guerre , Mironton , mironton , mirontaine , " at the sound of which music the gentleman from the balcony enter . " I be play ' God save the king , ' Colonel , in compliment to the new expedition . " 
 " I never know whether thou art laugh or in earnest , " say the simple gentleman , " but surely methink that be not the air . " 
 George perform ever so many trill and quaver upon his harpsichord , and their guest watch he , wonder , perhaps , that a gentleman of George 's condition could set himself to such an effeminate business . then the Colonel take out his watch , say that his Excellency 's coach would be here almost immediately , and ask leave to retire to his apartment , and put himself in a fit condition to appear before her ladyship 's company . 
 " Colonel Washington know the way to his room pretty well , " say George , from the harpsichord , look over his shoulder , but never offer to stir . 
 " let I show the Colonel to his chamber , " cry the widow , in great wrath , and sail out of the apartment , follow by the enraged and bewildered Colonel , as George continue crash among the key . her high - spirited guest feel himself insult , he could hardly say how ; he be outraged and he could not speak ; he be almost stifle with anger . 
 Harry Warrington remark their friend 's condition . " for heaven 's sake , George , what do this all mean ? " he ask his brother . " why should not   he kiss her hand ? "   George have just before fetch out his brother from their library , to watch this harmless salute .   " I tell you it be nothing but common kindness . " 
 " nothing but common kindness ! " shriek out George . " look at that , Hal ! be that common kindness ? " and he show his junior the unlucky paper over which he have be brood for some time . it be but a fragment , though the meaning be indeed clear without the precede text . 
 the paper commence : " ... be old than myself , but I , again , be old than my year ; and you know , dear brother , have ever be consider a sober person . all child be well for a father 's superintendence , and her two , I trust , will find in I a tender friend and guardian . " 
 " friend and guardian ! curse he ! " shriek out George , clench his fist and his brother read on : 
 " ... the flattering offer which General Braddock hath make I , will , of course , oblige I to postpone this matter until after the campaign . when we have give the French a sufficient drubbing , I shall return to repose under my own vine and fig - tree . " 
 " he mean Castlewood . these be his vine , " George cry again , shake his fist at the creeper sun themselves on the wall . 
 " ... under my own vine and fig - tree ; where I hope soon to present my dear brother to his new sister - in - law . she have a pretty scripture name , which be ... " and here the document end . 
 " which be Rachel , " George go on bitterly . " Rachel be by no mean weep for her child , and have every desire to be comfort . now , Harry ! let we upstairs at once , kneel down as become we , and say , ' dear papa , welcome to your house of Castlewood . ' " 




 CHAPTER IX . hospitality 

 his Excellency the Commander - in - chief set forth to pay his visit to Madam Esmond in such a state and splendour as become the first personage in all his Majesty 's colony , plantation , and possession of North America . his guard of dragoon precede he out of Williamsburg in the midst of an immense shouting and yelling of a loyal , and principally negro , population . the General ride in his own coach . Captain Talmadge , his Excellency 's Master of the Horse , attend he at the door of the ponderous emblazon vehicle , and rid by the side of the carriage during the journey from Williamsburg to Madam Esmond 's house . Major Danvers , aide - de - camp , sate in the front of the carriage with the little postmaster from Philadelphia , Mr. Franklin , who , printer 's boy as he have be , be a wonderful shrewd person , as his Excellency and the gentleman of his family be fain to acknowledge , have a quantity of the most curious information respect the colony , and regard England too , where Mr. Franklin have be more than once . " ' twas extraordinary how a person of such humble origin should have acquire such a variety of learning and such a politeness of breed too , Mr. Franklin ! " his Excellency be pleased to observe , touch his hat graciously to the postmaster . 
 the postmaster bow , say it have be his occasional good fortune to fall into the company of gentleman like his Excellency , and that he have take advantage of his opportunity to study their honours ' manner , and adapt himself to they as far as he might . as for education , he could not boast much of that his father be but in straiten circumstance , and the advantage small in his native country of New England : but he have do to the utmost of his power , and gather what he could he know nothing like what they have in England . 
 Mr. Braddock burst out laugh , and say , " as for education , there be gentleman of the army , by George , who do not   know whether they should spell bull with two b 's or one . he have hear the Duke of Marlborough be no special good penman . he have not the honour of serve under that noble commander his grace be before his time but he thrash the French soundly , although he be no scholar . " 
 Mr. Franklin say he be aware of both those fact . 
 " nor be my Duke a scholar , " go on Mr. Braddock " aha , Mr. Postmaster , you have hear that , too I see by the wink in your eye . " 
 Mr. Franklin instantly withdraw the obnoxious or satirical wink in his eye , and look in the General 's jolly round face with a pair of orb as innocent as a baby 's . " he be no scholar , but he be a match for any french general that ever swallow the English for fricassee de crapaud . he save the crown for the good of king , his royal father , his Most gracious Majesty King George . " 
 Off go Mr. Franklin 's hat , and from his large buckle wig escape a great halo of powder . 
 " he be the soldier 's good friend , and have be the uncompromise enemy of all beggarly red - shank Scotch rebel and intrigue Romish Jesuits who would take our liberty from we , and our religion , by George . his Royal Highness , my gracious master , be not a scholar neither , but he be one of the fine gentleman in the world . " 
 " I have see his Royal Highness on horseback , at a review of the Guards , in Hyde Park , " say Mr. Franklin . " the Duke be indeed a very fine gentleman on horseback . " 
 " you shall drink his health to - day , Postmaster . he be the good of master , the good of friend , the good of son to his royal old father ; the good of gentleman that ever wear an epaulet . " 
 " epaulet be quite out of my way , sir , " say Mr. Franklin , laugh . " you know I live in a Quaker City . " 
 " of course they be out of your way , my good friend . every man to his business . you , and gentleman of your class , to your book , and welcome . we do not   forbid you ; we encourage you . we , to fight the enemy and govern the country . hey , gentleman ? Lord ! what road you have in this colony , and how this confound coach plunge ! who have we here , with the two negro boy in livery ? he rid a good gelding . " 
 " it be Mr. Washington , " say the aide - de - camp . 
 " I would like he for a corporal of the Horse Grenadiers , " say the General . " he have a good figure on a horse . he know the country too , Mr. Franklin . " 
 " yes , indeed . " 
 " and be a monstrous genteel young man , consider the opportunity he have have . I should have think he have the polish of Europe , by George I should . " 
 " he do his good , " say Mr. Franklin , look innocently at the stout chief , the exemplar of english elegance , who sit swag from one side to the other of the carriage , his face as scarlet as his coat swear at every other word ; ignorant on every point off parade , except the merit of a bottle and the look of a woman ; not of high birth , yet absurdly proud of his no - ancestry ; brave as a bulldog ; savage , lustful , prodigal , generous ; gentle in soft mood ; easy of love and laughter ; dull of wit ; utterly unread ; believe his country the first in the world , and he as good a gentleman as any in it . " yes , he be mighty well for a provincial , upon my word . he be beat at Fort What - d'ye - call - um last year , down by the Thingamy river . what be the name on't , Talmadge ? " 
 " the Lord know , sir , " say Talmadge ; " and I dare say the Postmaster , too , who be laugh at we both . " 
 " oh , Captain ! " 
 " be catch in a regular trap . he have only militia and Indians with he . good day , Mr. Washington . a pretty nag , sir . that be your first affair , last year ? " 
 " that at Fort Necessity ? yes , sir , " say the gentleman , gravely salute , as he ride up , follow by a couple of natty negro groom , in smart livery - coat and velvet hunting - cap . " I begin ill , sir , never have be in action until that unlucky day . " 
 " you be all raw levy , my good fellow . you should have see our militia run from the Scotch , and be curse to they . you should have have some troop with you . " 
 " your Excellency know ' tis my passionate desire to see and serve with they , " say Mr. Washington . 
 " by George , we shall try and gratify you , sir , " say the General , with one of his usual huge oath ; and on the heavy carriage roll towards Castlewood ; Mr. Washington ask leave to gallop on ahead , in order to announce his Excellency 's speedy arrival to the lady there . 
 the progress of the Commander - in - Chief be so slow , that several humbler person who be invite to meet his Excellency come up with his carriage , and , not like to pass the great man on the road , form quite a procession in the dusty wake of his chariot - wheel . first come Mr. Dinwiddie , the Lieutenant - Governor of his Majesty 's province , attend by his negro servant , and in company of Parson Broadbent , the jolly Williamsburg chaplain . these be presently join by little Mr. Dempster , the young gentleman 's schoolmaster , in his great Ramillies wig , which he keep for occasion of state . Anon appear Mr. Laws , the judge of the court , with Madam Laws on a pillion behind he , and their negro man carry a box contain her ladyship 's cap , and bestride a mule . the procession look so ludicrous , that Major Danvers and Mr. Franklin espy it , laugh outright , though not so loud as to disturb his Excellency , who be asleep by this time , bid the whole of this queer rearguard move on , and leave the Commander - in - Chief and his escort of dragoon to follow at their leisure . there be room for all at Castlewood when they come . there be meat , drink , and the good tobacco for his Majesty 's soldier ; and laughing and jollity for the negro ; and a plenteous welcome for their master . 
 the honest General require to be help to most dish at the table , and more than once , and be for ever hold out his glass for drink ; Nathan 's sangaree he pronounce to be excellent , and have drink largely of it on arrive before dinner . there be cider , ale , brandy , and plenty of good Bordeaux wine , some which Colonel Esmond himself have bring home with he to the colony , and which be fit for ponteeficis coeni , say little Mr. Dempster , with a wink to Mr. Broadbent , the clergyman of the adjoining parish . Mr. Broadbent return the wink and nod , and drink the wine without care about the Latin , as why should he , never have hitherto trouble himself about the language ? Mr. Broadbent be a gambling , guzzling , cock - fight divine , who have pass much time in the Fleet Prison , at Newmarket , at Hockley - in - the - Hole ; and have go of all sort of errand for his friend , Lord Cingbars , Lord Ringwood 's son   my Lady Cingbars 's waiting - woman be Mr. B. 's mother I dare say the modern reader have good not be too particular regard Mr. Broadbent 's father 's pedigree , have be of late send out to a church - living in Virginia . he and young George have fight many a match of cock together , take many a roe in company , haul in countless quantity of shad and salmon , slain wild geese and wild swan , pigeon and plover , and destroy myriad of canvas - back duck . it be say by the envious that Broadbent be the midnight poacher on whom Mr. Washington set his dog , and whom he can by the river - side at Mount Vernon . the fellow get away from his captor 's grip , and scramble to his boat in the dark ; but Broadbent be lay up for two sunday afterwards , and when he come abroad again have the evident remain of a black eye and a new collar to his coat . all the game at the card have George Esmond and Parson Broadbent play together , besides hunt all the bird in the air , the beast in the forest , and the fish of the sea . indeed , when the boy ride together to get their reading with Mr. Dempster , I suspect that Harry stay behind and take lesson from the other professor of european learning and accomplishment , George go his own way , read his own book , and , of course , tell no tale of his young brother . 
 all the bird of the Virginia air , and all the fish of the sea in season be here lay on Madam Esmond 's board to feed his Excellency and the rest of the english and american gentleman . the gumbo be declare to be perfection   young Mr. George 's black servant be name after this dish , be discover behind the door with his head in a bowl of this delicious hotch - potch , by the late Colonel , and grimly christen on the spot , the shad be rich and fresh , the stew terrapin be worthy of London aldermen   before George , he would like the Duke himself to taste they , his Excellency deign to say , and indeed , stew terrapin be worthy of any duke or even emperor . the negro - woman have a genius for cookery , and in Castlewood kitchen there be adept in the art bring up under the keen eye of the late and the present Madam Esmond . certain of the dish , especially the sweet and flan , Madam Esmond prepare herself with great neatness and dexterity ; carve several of the principal piece , as the kindly cumbrous fashion of the day be , put up the laced lappet of her sleeve , and show the prettiest round arm and small hand and wrist as she perform this ancient rite of a hospitality not so languid as ours . the old law of the table be that the mistress be to press her guest with a decent eagerness , to watch and see whom she could encourage to far enjoyment , to know culinary anatomic secret , and execute carving operation upon fowl , fish , game , joint of meat , and so forth ; to cheer her guest to fresh effort , to whisper her neighbour , Mr. Braddock " I have keep for your Excellency the jowl of this salmon . I will take no denial ! Mr. Franklin , you drink only water , sir , though our cellar have wholesome wine which give no headache . Mr. Justice , you love woodcock pie ? " 
 " because I know who make the pastry , " say Mr. Laws , the judge , with a profound bow . " I wish , madam , we have such a happy knack of pastry at home as you have at Castlewood . I often say to my wife , ' my dear , I wish you have Madam Esmond 's hand . ' " 
 " it be a very pretty hand ; I be sure other would like it too , " say Mr. Postmaster of Boston , at which remark Mr. Esmond look but half - pleased at the little gentleman . 
 " such a hand for a light pie - crust , " continue the Judge , " and my service to you , madam . " and he think the widow can not but be propitiate by this compliment . she say simply that she have lesson when she be at home in England for her education , and that there be certain dish which her mother teach she to make , and which her father and son both like . she be very glad if they please her company . More such remark follow : more dish ; ten time as much meat as be needful for the company . Mr. Washington do not embark in the general conversation much , but he and Mr. Talmadge , and Major Danvers , and the Postmaster , be deep in talk about road , river , conveyance , sumpter - horse and artillery train ; and the provincial militia Colonel have bit of bread lay at interval on the table before he , and station mark out , on which he have his finger , and regard which he be talk to his brother aide - de - camp , till a negro servant , change the course , brush off the Potomac with a napkin , and sweep up the Ohio in a spoon . 
 at the end of dinner , Mr. Broadbent leave his place and walk up behind the Lieutenant - Governor 's chair , where he say grace , return to his seat and resume his knife and fork when this work of devotion be over . and now the sweet and pudding be come , of which I can give you a list , if you like ; but what young lady care for the pudding of to - day , much more for those which be eat a hundred year ago , and which Madam Esmond have prepare for her guest with so much neatness and skill ? then , the table be clear , Nathan , her chief manager , lay a glass to every person , and fill his mistress 's . bow to the company , she say she drink but one toast , but know how heartily all the gentleman present will join she . then she call , " his Majesty , " bow to Mr. Braddock , who with his aide - de - camp and the colonial gentleman all loyally repeat the name of their beloved and gracious Sovereign . and hereupon , have drink her glass of wine and salute all the company , the widow retire between a row of negro servant , perform one of her very handsome curtsy at the door . 
 the kind mistress of Castlewood bear her part in the entertainment with admirable spirit , and look so gay and handsome , and speak with such cheerfulness and courage to all her company , that the few lady who be present at the dinner could not but congratulate Madam Esmond upon the elegance of the feast , and especially upon her manner of preside at it . but they be scarcely get to her drawing - room when her artificial courage fail she , and she burst into tear on the sofa by Mrs. Laws ' side , just in the midst of a compliment from that lady . " ah , madam ! " she say , " it may be an honour , as you say , to have the King 's representative in my house , and our family have receive great personage than Mr. Braddock . but he come to take one of my son away from I . who know whether my boy will return , or how ? I dream of he last night as wound , and quite white , with blood stream from his side . I would not be so ill - mannered as to let my grief be visible before the gentleman ; but , my good Mrs. Justice , who have part with child , and who have a mother 's heart of her own , would like I none the well , if mine be very easy this evening . " 
 the lady administer such consolation as seem proper or palatable to their hostess , who try not to give way far to her melancholy , and remember that she have other duty to perform , before yield to her own sad mood . " it will be time enough , madam , to be sorry when they be go , " she say to the Justice 's wife , her good neighbour . " my boy must not see I follow he with a wistful face , and have our parting make more dismal by my weakness . it be good that gentleman of his rank and station should show themselves where their country call they . that have always be the way of the Esmonds , and the same power which graciously preserve my dear father through twenty great battle in the Queen 's time , I trust and pray , will watch over my son now his turn be come to do his duty . " and , now , instead of lament her fate , or far allude to it , I dare say the resolute lady sate down with her female friend to a pool of card and a dish of coffee , whilst the gentleman remain in the neighbouring parlour , still call their toast and drink their wine . when one lady object that these latter be sit rather long , Madam Esmond say : " it would improve and amuse the boy to be with the english gentleman . such society be very rarely to be have in their distant province , and though their conversation sometimes be free , she be sure that gentleman and man of fashion would have regard to the youth of her son , and say nothing before they which young people should not hear . " 
 it be evident that the english gentleman relish the good cheer provide for they . whilst the lady be yet at their card , Nathan come in and whisper Mrs. Mountain , who at first cry out " no ! she would give no more the common Bordeaux they might have , and welcome , if they still want more but she would not give any more of the Colonel 's . " it appear that the dozen bottle of particular claret have be already drunk up by the gentleman , " besides ale , cider , Burgundy , Lisbon , and Madeira , " say Mrs. Mountain , enumerate the supply . 
 but Madam Esmond be for have no stint in the hospitality of the night . Mrs. Mountain be fain to bustle away with her key to the sacred vault where the Colonel 's particular Bordeaux lay , survive its master , who , too , have long pass underground . as they go on their journey , Mrs. Mountain ask whether any of the gentleman have have too much ? Nathan think Mister Broadbent be tipsy he always tipsy ; be then think the General gentleman be tipsy ; and he think Master George be a lilly drunk . 
 " Master George ! " cry Mrs. Mountain : " why , he will sit for day without touch a drop . " 
 nevertheless , Nathan persist in his notion that Master George be a lilly drunk . he be always fill his glass , he have talk , he have sing , he have cut joke , especially against Mr. Washington , which make Mr. Washington quite red and angry , Nathan say . " well , well ! " Mrs. Mountain cry eagerly ; " it be right a gentleman should make himself merry in good company , and pass the bottle along with his friend . " and she trot to the particular Bordeaux cellar with only the more alacrity . 
 the tone of freedom and almost impertinence which young George Esmond have adopt of late day towards Mr. Washington have very deeply vex and annoy that gentleman . there be scarce half a dozen year ' difference of age between he and the Castlewood twin ; but Mr. Washington have always be remark for a discretion and sobriety much beyond his time of life , whilst the boy of Castlewood seem young than theirs . they have always be till now under their mother 's anxious tutelage , and have look up to their neighbour of Mount Vernon as their guide , director , friend as , indeed , almost everybody seem to do who come in contact with the simple and upright young man . himself of the most scrupulous gravity and good breeding , in his communication with other folk he appear to exact , or , at any rate , to occasion , the same behaviour . his nature be above levity and joke : they seem out of place when address to he . he be slow of comprehend they : and they slunk as it be abash out of his society . " he always seem great to I , " say Harry Warrington , in one of his letter many year after the date of which we be write ; " and I never think of he otherwise than of a hero . when he come over to Castlewood and teach we boy survey , to see he rid to hound be as if he be charge an army . if he fire a shot , I think the bird must come down , and if be fling a net , the large fish in the river be sure to be in it . his word be always few , but they be always wise ; they be not idle , as our word be , they be grave , sober , and strong , and ready on occasion to do their duty . in spite of his antipathy to he , my brother respect and admire the General as much as I do that be to say , more than any mortal man . " 
 Mr. Washington be the first to leave the jovial party which be do so much honour to Madam Esmond 's hospitality . Young George Esmond , who have take his mother 's place when she leave it , have be free with the glass and with the tongue . he have say a score of thing to his guest which wound and chafe the latter , and to which Mr. Washington could give no reply . angry beyond all endurance , he leave the table at length , and walk away through the open window into the broad verandah or porch which belong to Castlewood as to all virginian house . 
 here Madam Esmond catch sight of her friend 's tall frame as it stride up and down before the window ; and , the evening be warm , or her game over , she give up her card to one of the other lady , and join her good neighbour out of door . he try to compose his countenance as well as he could : it be impossible that he should explain to his hostess why and with whom he be angry . 
 " the gentleman be long over their wine , " she say ; " gentleman of the army be always fond of it . " 
 " if drinking make good soldier , some yonder be distinguish themselves greatly , madam , " say Mr. Washington . 
 " and I dare say the General be at the head of his troop ? " 
 " no doubt , no doubt , " answer the Colonel , who always receive this lady 's remark , playful or serious , with a peculiar softness and kindness . " but the General be the General , and it be not for I to make remark on his Excellency 's doing at table or elsewhere . I think very likely that military gentleman bear and breed at home be different from we of the colony . we have such a hot sun , that we need not wine to fire our blood as they do . and drinking toast seem a point of honour with they . talmadge hiccup to I I should say , whisper to I just now , that an officer could no more refuse a toast than a challenge , and he say that it be after the great difficulty and dislike at first that he learn to drink . he have certainly overcome his difficulty with uncommon resolution . " 
 " what , I wonder , can you talk of for so many hour ? " ask the lady . 
 " I do not   think I can tell you all we talk of , madam , and I must not tell tale out of school . we talk about the war , and of the force Mr. Contrecoeur have , and how we be to get at he . the General be for make the campaign in his coach , and make light of it and the enemy . that we shall beat they , if we meet they , I trust there be no doubt . " 
 " how can there be ? " say the lady , whose father have serve under Marlborough . 
 " Mr. Franklin , though he be only from New England , " continue the gentleman , ' speak great good sense , and would have speak more if the english gentleman would let he ; but they reply invariably that we be only raw provincial , and do not   know what discipline british troop can do . have they not well hasten forwards and make turnpike road and have comfortable inn ready for his Excellency at the end of the day 's march ? ' there be some sort of inn , I suppose , ' say Mr. Danvers , ' not so comfortable as we have in England : we can not   expect that . ' ' no , you can not   expect that , ' say Mr. Franklin , who seem a very shrewd and facetious person . he drink his water , and seem to laugh at the Englishmen , though I doubt whether it be fair for a water - drinker to sit by and spy out the weakness of gentleman over their wine . " 
 " and my boy ? I hope they be prudent ? " say the widow , lay her hand on her guest 's arm . " Harry promise I , and when he give his word , I can trust he for anything . George be always moderate . why do you look so grave ? " 
 " indeed , to be frank with you , I do not know what have come over George in these last day , " say Mr. Washington . " he have some grievance against I which I do not understand , and of which I do not   care to ask the reason . he speak to I before the gentleman in a way which scarcely become he . we be go the campaign together , and ' tis a pity we begin such ill friend . " 
 " he have be ill . he be always wild and wayward , and hard to understand . but he have the most affectionate heart in the world . you will bear with he , you will protect he promise I you will . " 
 " dear lady , I will do so with my life , " Mr. Washington say with great fervour . " you know I would lay it down cheerfully for you or any you love . " 
 " and my father 's blessing and mine go with you , dear friend ! " cry the widow , full of thank and affection . 
 as they pursue their conversation , they have quit the porch under which they have first begin to talk , and where they could hear the laughter and toast of the gentleman over their wine , and be pace a walk on the rough lawn before the house . young George Warrington , from his place at the head of the table in the dining - room , could see the pair as they pass to and fro , and have listen for some time past , and reply in a very distracted manner to the remark of the gentleman round about he , who be too much engage with their own talk and joke , and drinking , to pay much attention to their young host 's behaviour . Mr. Braddock love a song after dinner , and Mr. Danvers , his aide - de - camp , who have a fine tenor voice , be delight his General with the late ditty from Marybone Gardens , when George Warrington , jump up , run towards the window , and then return and pull his brother Harry by the sleeve , who sate with his back towards the window . 
 " what be it ? " say Harry , who , for his part , be charm , too , with the song and chorus . 
 " come , " cry George , with a stamp of his foot , and the young follow obediently . 
 " what be it ? " continue George , with a bitter oath . " do not   you see what it be ? they be bill and coo this morning ; they be bill and coo now before go to roost . have we not well both go into the garden , and pay our duty to our mamma and papa ? " and he point to Mr. Washington , who be take the widow 's hand very tenderly in his . 




 CHAPTER X. a Hot Afternoon 

 General Braddock and the other guest of Castlewood be duly consign to their respective quarter , the boy retire to their own room , and there pour out to one another their opinion respect the great event of the day . they would not bear such a marriage no . be the representative of the Marquises of Esmond to marry the young son of a colonial family , who have be breed up as a land - surveyor ? Castlewood , and the boy at nineteen year of age , hand over to the tender mercy of a stepfather of three - and - twenty ! oh , it be monstrous ! Harry be for go straightway to his mother in her bedroom where her black maiden be divest her ladyship of the simple jewel and finery which she have assume in compliment to the feast protest against the odious match , and announce that they would go home , live upon their little property there , and leave she for ever , if the unnatural union take place . 
 George advocate another way of stop it , and explain his plan to his admire brother . " our mother , " he say , " can not   marry a man with whom one or both of we have be out on the field , and who have wound we or kill we , or whom we have wound or kill . we must have he out , Harry . " 
 Harry see the profound truth convey in George 's statement , and admire his brother 's immense sagacity . " no , George , " say he , " you be right . mother can not   marry our murderer ; she will not   be as bad as that . and if we pink he he be do for . ' cadit quaestio , ' as Mr. Dempster use to say . shall I send my boy with a challenge to Colonel George now ? " 
 " my dear Harry , " the elder reply , think with some complacency of his affair of honour at Quebec , " you be not accustomed to affair of this sort . " 
 " no , " own Harry , with a sigh , look with envy and admiration on his senior . 
 " we can not   insult a gentleman in our own house , " continue George , with great majesty ; " the law of honour forbid such inhospitable treatment . but , sir , we can ride out with he , and , as soon as the park gate be closed , we can tell he our mind . " 
 " that we can , by George ! " cry Harry , grasp his brother 's hand , " and that we will , too . I say , Georgy ... " here the lad 's face become very red , and his brother ask he what he would say ? 
 " this be my turn , brother , " Harry plead . " if you go the campaign , I ought to have the other affair . indeed , indeed , I ought . " and he pray for this bit of promotion . 
 " again the head of the house must take the lead , my dear , " George say , with a superb air . " if I fall , my Harry will avenge I . but I must fight George Washington , Hal : and ' tis good I should ; for , indeed , I hate he the bad . be it not he who counsel my mother to order that wretch , Ward , to lay hand on I ? " 
 " ah , George , " interpose the more pacable young brother , " you ought to forget and forgive . " 
 " Forgive ? never , sir , as long as I remember . you can not   order remembrance out of a man 's mind ; and a wrong that be a wrong yesterday must be a wrong to - morrow . I never , of my knowledge , do one to any man , and I never will suffer one , if I can help it . I think very ill of Mr. Ward , but I do not   think so badly of he as to suppose he will ever forgive thee that blow with the ruler . Colonel Washington be our enemy , mine especially . he have advise one wrong against I , and he meditate a great . I tell you , brother , we must punish he . " 
 the grandsire 's old Bordeaux have set George 's ordinarily pale countenance into a flame . Harry , his brother 's fond worshipper , could not but admire George 's haughty bearing and rapid declamation , and prepare himself , with his usual docility , to follow his chief . so the boy go to their bed , the eld convey special injunction to his junior to be civil to all the guest so long as they remain under the maternal roof on the morrow . 
 good manner and a repugnance to tell tale out of school , forbid we from say which of Madam Esmond 's guest be the first to fall under the weight of her hospitality . the respectable descendant of Messrs. Talmadge and Danvers , aide - de - camp to his Excellency , might not care to hear how their ancestor be intoxicate a hundred year ago ; and yet the gentleman themselves take no shame in the fact , and there be little doubt they or their comrade be tipsy twice or thrice in the week . let we fancy they reel to bed , support by sympathise negro ; and their vinous General , too stout a toper to have surrender himself to a half - dozen bottle of Bordeaux , conduct to his chamber by the young gentleman of the house , and speedily sleep the sleep which friendly Bacchus give . the good lady of Castlewood see the condition of her guest without the least surprise or horror ; and be up early in the morning , provide cool drink for their hot palate , which the servant carry to their respective chamber . at breakfast , one of the english officer rally Mr. Franklin , who take no wine at all , and therefore refuse the morning cool draught of toddy , by show how the Philadelphia gentleman lose two pleasure , the drink and the toddy . the young fellow say the disease be pleasant and the remedy delicious , and laughingly propose to continue repeat they both . the General 's new american aide - de - camp , Colonel Washington , be quite sober and serene . the british officer vow they must take he in hand , and teach he what the way of the english army be ; but the virginian gentleman gravely say he do not care to learn that part of the english military education . 
 the widow , occupy as she have be with the care of a great dinner , follow by a great breakfast on the morning ensuing , have scarce leisure to remark the behaviour of her son very closely , but at least see that George be scrupulously polite to her favourite , Colonel Washington , as to all the other guest of the house . 
 before Mr. Braddock take his leave , he have a private audience of Madam Esmond , in which his Excellency formally offer to take her son into his family ; and when the arrangement for George 's departure be settle between his mother and future chief , Madam Esmond , though she might feel they , do not show any squeamish terror about the danger of the bottle , which she see be amongst the severest and most certain which her son would have to face . she know her boy must take his part in the world , and encounter his portion of evil and good . " Mr. Braddock be a perfect fine gentleman in the morning , " she say stoutly to her aide - de - camp , Mrs. Mountain ; " and though my papa do not drink , ' tis certain that many of the good company in England do . " the jolly General good - naturedly shake hand with George , who present himself to his Excellency after the maternal interview be over , and bade George welcome , and to be in attendance at Frederick three day hence ; shortly after which time the expedition would set forth . 
 and now the great coach be again call into requisition , the General 's escort prance round it , the other guest and their servant go to horse . the lady of Castlewood attend his Excellency to the step of the verandah in front of her house , the young gentleman follow , and stand on each side of his coach - door . the guard trumpeter blow a shrill blast , the negro shout " Huzzay , and God sabe de King , " as Mr. Braddock most graciously take leave of his hospitable entertainer , and roll away on his road to headquarters . 
 as the boy go up the step , there be the Colonel once more take leave of their mother . no doubt she have be once more recommend George to his namesake 's care ; for Colonel Washington say : " with my life . you may depend on I , " as the lad return to their mother and the few guest still remain in the porch . the Colonel be boot and ready to depart . " farewell , my dear Harry , " he say . " with you , George , ' tis no adieu . we shall meet in three day at the camp . " 
 both the young man be go to danger , perhaps to death . Colonel Washington be take leave of she , and she be to see he no more before the campaign . no wonder the widow be very much move . 
 George Warrington watch his mother 's emotion , and interpret it with a pang of malignant scorn . " stay yet a moment , and console our mamma , " he say with a steady countenance , " only the time to get ourselves boot , and my brother and I will ride with you a little way , George . " George Warrington have already order his horse . the three young man be speedily under way , their negro groom behind they , and Mrs. Mountain , who know she have make mischief between they and tremble for the result , feel a vast relief that Mr. Washington be go without a quarrel with the brother , without , at any rate , an open declaration of love to their mother . 
 no man could be more courteous in demeanour than George Warrington to his neighbour and namesake , the Colonel . the latter be pleased and surprised at his young friend 's altered behaviour . the community of danger , the necessity of future fellowship , the soften influence of the long friendship which bind he to the Esmond family , the tender adieux which have just pass between he and the mistress of Castlewood , incline the Colonel to forget the unpleasantness of the past day , and make he more than usually friendly with his young companion . George be quite gay and easy : it be Harry who be melancholy now : he ride silently and wistfully by his brother , keep away from Colonel Washington , to whose side he use always to press eagerly before . if the honest Colonel remark his young friend 's conduct , no doubt he attribute it to Harry 's know affection for his brother , and his natural anxiety to be with George now the day of their parting be so near . 
 they talk far about the war , and the probable end of the campaign : none of the three doubt its successful termination . two thousand veteran british troop with their commander must get the well of any force the French could bring against they , if only they move in decent time . the ardent young virginian soldier have an immense respect for the experienced valour and tactic of the regular troop . King George II . have no more loyal subject than Mr. Braddock 's new aide - de - camp . 
 so the party ride amicably together , until they reach a certain rude log - house , call Benson 's , of which the proprietor , accord to the custom of the day and country , do not disdain to accept money from his guest in return for hospitality provide . there be a recruiting station here , and some officer and man of Halkett 's regiment assemble , and here Colonel Washington suppose that his young friend would take leave of he . 
 whilst their horse be bait , they enter the public room , and find a rough meal prepare for such as be disposed to partake . George Warrington enter the place with a particularly gay and lively air , whereas poor Harry 's face be quite white and woebegone . 
 " one would think , Squire Harry , ' twa you who be go to leave home and fight the French and Indians , and not Mr. George , " say Benson . 
 " I may be alarmed about danger to my brother , " say Harry , " though I might bear my own share pretty well . ' tis not my fault that I stay at home . " 
 " no , indeed , brother , " cry George . 
 " Harry Warrington 's courage do not need any proof ! " cry Mr. Washington . 
 " you do the family honour by speak so well of we , Colonel , " say Mr. George , with a low bow . " I dare say we can hold our own , if need be . " 
 whilst his friend be vaunt his courage , Harry look , to say the truth , by no mean courageous . as his eye meet his brother 's , he read in George 's look an announcement which alarm the fond faithful lad . " you be not go to do it now ? " he whisper his brother . 
 " yes , now , " say Mr. George , very steadily . 
 " for God 's sake , let I have the turn . you be go on the campaign , you ought not to have everything and there may be an explanation , George . we may be all wrong . " 
 " Psha , how can we ? it must be do now do not   be alarm . no name shall be mention I shall easily find a subject . " 
 a couple of Halkett 's officer , whom our young gentleman know , be sit under the porch , with the Virginian toddy - bowl before they . 
 " what be you conspire , gentleman ? " cry one of they . " be it a drink ? " 
 by the tone of their voice and their flushed cheek , it be clear the gentleman have already be engage in drink that morning . 
 " the very thing , sir , " George say gaily . " fresh glass , Mr. Benson ! what , no glass ? then we must have at the bowl . " 
 " many a good man have drunk from it , " say Mr. Benson ; and the lad one after another , and bow first to their military acquaintance , touch the bowl with their lip . the liquor do not seem to be much diminish for the boy ' drinking , though George especially give himself a toper 's air , and protest it be delicious after their ride . he call out to Colonel Washington , who be at the porch , to join his friend , and drink . 
 the lad 's tone be offensive , and resemble the manner lately adopt by he , and which have so much chafe Mr. Washington . he bow , and say he be not thirsty . 
 " Nay , the liquor be pay for , " say George ; " never fear , Colonel . " 
 " I say I be not thirsty . I do not say the liquor be not pay for , " say the young Colonel , drum with his foot . 
 " when the King 's health be propose , an officer can hardly say no . I drink the health of his Majesty , gentleman , " cry George . " Colonel Washington can drink it or leave it . the king ! " 
 this be a point of military honour . the two british officer of Halkett 's , Captain Grace and Mr. Waring , both drink " the king . " Harry Warrington drink " the king . " Colonel Washington , with glare eye , gulp , too , a slight draught from the bowl . 
 then Captain Grace propose " the Duke and the Army , " which toast there be likewise no gainsaying . Colonel Washington have to swallow " the Duke and the Army . " 
 " you do not   seem to stomach the toast , Colonel , " say George . 
 " I tell you again , I do not   want to drink , " reply the Colonel . " it seem to I the Duke and the Army would be serve all the well if their health be not drunk so often . " 
 " you be not up to the way of regular troop as yet , " say Captain Grace , with rather a thick voice . 
 " may be not , sir . " 
 " a british officer , " continue Captain Grace , with great energy but doubtful articulation , " never neglect a toast of that sort , nor any other duty . a man who refuse to drink the health of the Duke hang I , such a man should be try by a court - martial ! " 
 " what mean this language to I ? you be drunk , sir ! " roar Colonel Washington , jump up , and strike the table with his fist . 
 " a cursed provincial officer say I be drunk ! " shriek out Captain Grace . " Waring , do you hear that ? " 
 " I hear it , sir ! " cry George Warrington . " we all hear it . he enter at my invitation the liquor call for be mine : the table be mine and I be shocked to hear such monstrous language use at it as Colonel Washington have just employ towards my esteemed guest , Captain Waring . " 
 " confound your impudence , you infernal young jackanape ! " bellow out Colonel Washington . " you dare to insult I before british officer , and find fault with my language ? for month past , I have bear with such impudence from you , that if I have not love your mother yes , sir , and your good grandfather and your brother I would I would " here his word fail he , and the irate Colonel , with glare eye and purple face , and every limb quiver with wrath , stand for a moment speechless before his young enemy . 
 " you would what , sir ? " say George , very quietly , " if you do not love my grandfather , and my brother , and my mother . you be make her petticoat a plea for some conduct of yours you would do what , sir , may I ask again ? " 
 " I would put you across my knee and whip you , you snarl little puppy , that be what I would do ! " cry the Colonel , who have find breath by this time , and vent another explosion of fury . 
 " because you have know we all our life , and make our house your own , that be no reason you should insult either of we ! " here cry Harry , start up . " what you have say , George Washington , be an insult to I and my brother alike . you will ask pardon , sir ! " 
 " Pardon ? " 
 " or give we the reparation that be due to gentleman , " continue Harry . 
 the stout Colonel 's heart smite he to think that he should be at mortal quarrel or call upon to shed the blood of one of the lad he love . as Harry stand face he , with his fair hair , flush cheek , and quiver voice , an immense tenderness and kindness fill the bosom of the eld man . " I I be bewilder , " he say . " my word , perhaps , be very hasty . what have be the meaning of George 's behaviour to I for month back ? only tell I , and , perhaps " 
 the evil spirit be awake and victorious in young George Warrington : his black eye shoot out scorn and hatred at the simple and guileless gentleman before he . " you be shirk from the question , sir , as you do from the toast just now , " he say . " I be not a boy to suffer under your arrogance . you have publicly insult I in a public place , and I demand a reparation . " 
 " in Heaven 's name , be it ! " say Mr. Washington , with the deep grief in his face . 
 " and you have insult I , " continue Captain Grace , reel towards he . " what be it he say ? confound the militia captain colonel , what be he ? you have   insult I ! oh , Waring ! to think I should be insult by a captain of militia ! " and tear bedew the noble Captain 's cheek as this harrowing thought cross his mind . 
 " I insult you , you hog ! " the Colonel again yell out , for he be little affect by humour , and have no disposition to laugh as the other have at the scene . and , behold , at this minute a fourth adversary be upon he . 
 " Great Powers , sir ! " say Captain Waring , " be three affair not enough for you , and must I come into the quarrel , too ? you have a quarrel with these two young gentleman . " 
 " Hasty word , sir ! " cry poor Harry once more . 
 " Hasty word , sir ! " cry Captain Waring . " a gentleman tell another gentleman that he will put he across his knee and whip he , and you call those hasty word ? let I tell you if any man be to say to I , ' Charles Waring , ' or ' Captain Waring , I will put you across my knee and whip you , ' I would say , ' I will drive my cheese - toaster through his body , ' if he be as big as Goliath , I would . that be one affair with young Mr. George Warrington . Mr. Harry , of course , as a young man of spirit , will stand by his brother . that be two . between Grace and the Colonel apology be impossible . and , now run I through the body ! you call an officer of my regiment of Halkett 's , sir ! a hog before my face ! great heaven , sir ! Mr. Washington , be you all like this in Virginia ? excuse I , I would use no offensive personality , as , by George ! I will suffer none from any man ! but , by Gad , Colonel ! give I leave to tell you that you be the most quarrelsome man I ever see in my life . call a disabled officer of my regiment for he be disabled , be not   you , Grace ? call he a hog before I ! you withdraw it , sir you withdraw it ? " 
 " be this some infernal conspiracy in which you be all league against I ? " shout the Colonel . " it would seem as if I be drunk , and not you , as you all be . I withdraw nothing . I apologise for nothing . by heaven ! I will meet one or half a dozen of you in your turn , young or old , drunk or sober . " 
 " I do not wish to hear myself call more name , " cry Mr. George Warrington . " this affair can proceed , sir , without any further insult on your part . when will it please you to give I the meeting ? " 
 " the soon the well , sir ! " say the Colonel , fume with rage . 
 " the soon the well , " hiccupped Captain Grace , with many oath needless to print   in those day , oath be the customary garnish of all gentleman 's conversation   and he rise staggering from his seat , and reel towards his sword , which he have lay by the door , and fall as he reach the weapon . " the soon the well ! " the poor tipsy wretch again cry out from the ground , wave his weapon and knock his own hat over his eye . 
 " at any rate , this gentleman 's business will keep cool till to - morrow , " the militia Colonel say , turn to the other king 's officer . " you will hardly bring your man out to - day , Captain Waring ? " 
 " I confess that neither his hand nor mine be particularly steady , " say Waring . 
 " mine be ! " cry Mr. Warrington , glare at his enemy . 
 his comrade of former day be as hot and as savage . " be it so with what weapon , sir ? " Washington say sternly . 
 " not with small - sword , Colonel . we can beat you with they . you know that from our old bout . pistol have well be the word . " 
 " as you please , George Warrington and God forgive you , George ! God pardon you , Harry ! for bring I into this quarrel , " say the Colonel , with a face full of sadness and gloom . 
 Harry hang his head , but George continue with perfect calmness : " I , sir ? it be not I who call name , who talk of a cane , who insult a gentleman in a public place before gentleman of the army . it be not the first time you have choose to take I for a negro , and talk of the whip for I . " 
 the Colonel start back , turn very red , and as if strike by a sudden remembrance . 
 " great heaven , George ! be it that boyish quarrel you be still recall ? " 
 " who make you the overseer of Castlewood ? " say the boy , grind his tooth . " I be not your slave , George Washington , and I never will be . I hat you then , and I hate you now . and you have insult I , and I be a gentleman , and so be you . be that not enough ? " 
 " too much , only too much , " say the Colonel , with a genuine grief on his face , and at his heart . " do you bear malice too , Harry ? I have not think this of thee ! " 
 " I stand by my brother , " say Harry , turn away from the Colonel 's look , and grasp George 's hand . the sadness on their adversary 's face do not depart . " Heaven be good to we ! ' tis all clear now , " he mutter to himself . " the time to write a few letter , and I be at your service , Mr. Warrington , " he say . 
 " you have your own pistol at your saddle . I do not ride out with any ; but will send Sady back for mine . that will give you time enough , Colonel Washington ? " 
 " plenty of time , sir . " and each gentleman make the other a low bow , and , put his arm in his brother 's , George walk away . the virginian officer look towards the two unlucky captain , who be by this time helpless with liquor . Captain Benson , the master of the tavern , be prop the hat of one of they over his head . 
 " it be not altogether their fault , Colonel , " say my landlord , with a grim look of humour . " Jack Firebrace and Tom Humbold of Spotsylvania be here this morning , chant horse with them . and Jack and Tom get them to play card ; and they do not   win the british Captains do not . and Jack and Tom challenge they to drink for the honour of Old England , and they do not   win at that game , neither , much . they be kind , free - handed fellow when they be sober , but they be a pretty pair of fool they be . " 
 " Captain Benson , you be an old frontier man , and an officer of ours , before you turn farmer and taverner . you will help I in this matter with yonder young gentleman ? " say the Colonel . 
 " I will stand by and see fair play , Colonel . I will not   have no hand in it , beyond see fair play . Madam Esmond have help I many a time , tend my poor wife in her lying - in , and doctor our Betty in the fever . you be not   a - go to be very hard with they poor boy ? though I see them both shoot : the fair one hunt well , as you know , but the old one be a wonder at an ace of spade . " 
 " will you be pleased to send my man with my valise , Captain , into any private room which you can spare I ? I must write a few letter before this business come on . God grant it be well over ! " and the Captain lead the Colonel into almost the only other room of his house , call , with many oath , to a pack of negro servant , to disperse thence , who be chatter loudly among one another , and no doubt discuss the quarrel which have just take place . Edwin , the Colonel 's man , return with his master 's portmanteau , and as he look from the window , he see Sady , George Warrington 's negro , gallop away upon his errand , doubtless , and in the direction of Castlewood . the Colonel , young and naturally hot - headed , but the most courteous and scrupulous of man , and ever keep his strong passion under guard , could not but think with amazement of the position in which he find , himself , and of the three , perhaps four enemy , who appear suddenly before he , menace his life . how have this strange series of quarrel be bring about ? he have ride away a few hour since from Castlewood , with his young companion , and , to all seem , they be perfect friend . a shower of rain send they into a tavern , where there be a couple of recruiting officer , and they be not seat for half an hour at a social table , but he have quarrel with the whole company , call this one name , agree to meet another in combat , and threaten chastisement to a third , the son of his most intimate friend ! 




 CHAPTER XI . wherein the two Georges prepare for blood 

 the Virginian Colonel remain in one chamber of the tavern , occupy with gloomy preparation for the ensue meeting ; his adversary in the other room think fit to make his testamentary disposition , too , and dictate , by his obedient brother and secretary , a grandiloquent letter to his mother , of whom , and by that writing , he take a solemn farewell . she would hardly , he suppose , pursue the scheme which she have in view   a peculiar satirical emphasis be lay upon the scheme which she have in view , after the event of that morning , should he fall , as , probably , would be the case . 
 " my dear , dear George , do not   say that ! " cry the affrighted secretary . 
 " ' as probably will be the case , ' " George persist with great majesty . " you know what a good shot Colonel George be , Harry . I , myself , be pretty fair at a mark , and ' tis probable that one or both of we will drop . ' I scarcely suppose you will carry out the intention you have at present in view . ' " this be utter in a tone of still great bitterness than George have use even in the previous phrase . Harry weep as he take it down . 
 " you see I say nothing ; Madame Esmond 's name do not even appear in the quarrel . do you not remember in our grandfather 's life of himself , how he say that Lord Castlewood fight Lord Mohun on a pretext of a quarrel at card ? and never so much as hint at the lady 's name , who be the real cause of the duel ? I take my hint , I confess , from that , Harry . our mother be not compromise in the why , child , what have you be write , and who teach thee to spell ? " Harry have write the last word " in view , " in vew , and a great blot of salt water from his honest , boyish eye may have obliterate some other bad spelling . 
 " I can not   think about the spelling now , Georgy , " whimper George 's clerk . " I be too miserable for that . I begin to think , perhaps it be all nonsense , perhaps Colonel George never " 
 " never mean to take possession of Castlewood ; never give himself air , and patronise we there ; never advise my mother to have I flog , never intend to marry she ; never insult I , and be insult before the king 's officer ; never write to his brother to say we should be the well for his parental authority ? the paper be there , " cry the young man , slap his breast - pocket , " and if anything happen to I , Harry Warrington , you will find it on my corse ! " 
 " write yourself , Georgy , I can not   write , " say Harry , dig his fist into his eye , and smear over the whole composition , bad spelling and all , with his elbow . 
 on this , George , take another sheet of paper , sate down at his brother 's place , and produce a composition in which he introduce the long word , the grand Latin quotation , and the most profound satire of which the youthful scribe be master . he desire that his negro boy , Sady , should be set free ; that his horace , a choice of his book , and , if possible , a suitable provision should be make for his affectionate tutor , Mr. Dempster ; that his silver fruit - knife , his music - book , and harpsichord , should be give to little Fanny Mountain ; and that his brother should take a lock of his hair , and wear it in memory of his ever fond and faithfully attach George . and he seal the document with the seal of arm that his grandfather have wear . 
 " the watch , of course , will be your , " say George , take out his grandfather 's gold watch , and look at it . " why , two hour and a - half be go ! ' tis time that Sady should be back with the pistol . take the watch , Harry dear . " 
 " it be no good ! " cry out Harry , fling his arm round his brother . " if he fight you , I will fight he , too . if he kill my Georgy , he , he shall have a shot at I ! " and the poor lad utter more than one of those expression , which be say peculiarly to affect record angel , who have to take they down at celestial chancery . 
 meanwhile , General Braddock 's new aide - de - camp have write five letter in his large resolute hand , and seal they with his seal . one be to his mother , at Mount Vernon ; one to his brother ; one be address M. C. only ; and one to his Excellency , Major - General Braddock . " and one , young gentleman , be for your mother , Madam Esmond , " say the boy ' informant . 
 again the record angel have to fly off with a violent expression , which part from the lip of George Warrington . the chancery previously mention be crowd with such case , and the messenger must have be for ever on the wing . but I fear for young George and his oath there be no excuse ; for it be an execration utter from a heart full of hatred , and rage , and jealousy . 
 it be the landlord of the tavern who communicate these fact to the young man . the Captain have put on his old militia uniform to do honour to the occasion , and inform the boy that the Colonel be walk up and down the garden a - wait for them , and that the Reg'lars be a'most sober , too , by this time . 
 a plot of ground near the Captain 's log - house have be enclose with shingle , and clear for a kitchen - garden ; there indeed pace Colonel Washington , his hand behind his back , his head bow down , a grave sorrow on his handsome face . the negro servant be crowd at the paling , and look over . the officer under the porch have waken up also , as their host remark . Captain Waring be walk , almost steadily , under the balcony form by the slop porch and roof of the wooden house ; and Captain Grace be loll over the railing , with eye which star very much , though perhaps they do not see very clearly . Benson 's be a famous rendezvous for cock - fight , horse - match , boxing , and wrestling - match , such as bring the virginian country - folk together . there have be many brawl at Benson 's , and man who come thither sound and sober , have go thence with rib break and eye gouge out . and squire , and farmer , and negro , all participate in the sport . 
 there , then , stalk the tall young Colonel , plunge in dismal meditation . there be no way out of his scrape , but the usual cruel one , which the law of honour and the practice of the country order . goad into fury by the impertinence of a boy , he have use insult word . the young man have ask for reparation . he be shocked to think that George Warrington 's jealousy and revenge should have rankle in the young fellow so long but the wrong have be the Colonel 's , and he be bind to pay the forfeit . 
 a great hallooing and shouting , such as negro use , who love noise at all time , and especially delight to yell and scream when gallop on horseback , be now hear at a distance , and all the head , woolly and powdered , be turn in the direction of this outcry . it come from the road over which our traveller have themselves pass three hour before , and presently the clattering of a horse 's hoof be hear , and now Mr. Sady make his appearance on his foaming horse , and actually fire a pistol off in the midst of a prodigious uproar from his woolly brother . then he fire another pistol off , to which noise Sady 's horse , which have carry Harry Warrington on many a hunt , be perfectly accustom ; and now he be in the courtyard , surround by a score of his bawl comrade , and be descend amidst flutter fowl and turkey , kick horse and shriek frantic pig ; and brother - negroes crowd round he , to whom he instantly begin to talk and chatter . 
 " Sady , sir , come here ! " roar out Master Harry . 
 " Sady , come here ! confound you ! " shout Master George .   again the record angel be in requisition , and have to be off on one of his endless errand to the register office .   " come directly , mas'r , " say Sady , and resume his conversation with his woolly brother . he grin . he take the pistol out of the holster . he snap the lock . he point they at a grunter , which plunge through the farmyard . he point down the road , over which he have just gallop , and towards which the woolly head again turn . he say again , " Comin ' , mas'r . everybody a - comin ' . " and now , the gallop of other horse be hear . and who be yonder ? little Mr. Dempster , spur and dig into his pony ; and that lady in a riding - habit on Madam Esmond 's little horse , can it be Madam Esmond ? no . it be too stout . as I live it be Mrs. Mountain on Madam 's grey ! 
 " o Lor ! o Golly ! hoop ! here dey come ! hurray ! " a chorus of negro rise up . " here dey be ! " Dr. Dempster and Mrs. Mountain have clatter into the yard , have jump from their horse , have elbow through the negro , have rush into the house , have run through it and across the porch , where the british officer be sit in muzzy astonishment ; have run down the stair to the garden where George and Harry be walk , their tall enemy stalk opposite to they ; and almost ere George Warrington have have time sternly to say , " what do you do here , madam ? " Mrs. Mountain have fling her arm round his neck and cry : " oh , George , my darling ! it be a mistake ! it be a mistake , and be all my fault ! " 
 " what be a mistake ? " ask George , majestically separate himself from the embrace . 
 " what be it , Mounty ? " cry Harry , all of a tremble . 
 " that paper I take out of his portfolio , that paper I pick up , child ; where the Colonel say he be go to marry a widow with two child . who should it be but you , child , and who should it be but your mother ? " 
 " well ? " 
 " well , it be it be not your mother . it be that little widow Custis whom the Colonel be go to marry . he would always take a rich one ; I know he would . it be not Mrs. Rachel Warrington . he tell Madam so to - day , just before he be go away , and that the marriage be to come off after the campaign . and and your mother be furious , boy . and when Sady come for the pistol , and tell the whole house how you be go to fight , I tell he to fire the pistol off ; and I gallop after he , and I have   nearly break my poor old bone in come to you . " 
 " I have a mind to break Mr. Sady 's , " growl George . " I specially enjoin the villain not to say a word . " 
 " thank God he do , brother ! " say poor Harry . " thank God he do ! " 
 " what will Mr. Washington and those gentleman think of my servant tell my mother at home that I be go to fight a duel ? " ask Mr. George , still in wrath . 
 " you have show your proof before , George , " say Harry , respectfully . " and , thank Heaven , you be not go to fight our old friend , our grandfather 's old friend . for it be a mistake and there be no quarrel now , dear , be there ? you be unkind to he under a wrong impression . " 
 " I certainly act under a wrong impression , " own George , " but " 
 " George ! George Washington ! " Harry here cry out , spring over the cabbage - garden towards the bowling - green , where the Colonel be stalk , and though we can not hear he , we see he , with both his hand out , and with the eagerness of youth , and with a hundred blunder , and with love and affection thrilling in his honest voice we imagine the lad tell his tale to his friend . 
 there be a custom in those day which have disappear from our manner now , but which then linger . when Harry have finish his artless story , his friend the Colonel take he fairly to his arm , and hold he to his heart : and his voice falter as he say , " thank God , thank God for this ! " 
 " oh , George , " say Harry , who feel now how he love his friend with all his heart , " how I wish I be go with you on the campaign ! " the other press both the boy 's hand , in a grasp of friendship , which each know never would slacken . 
 then the Colonel advance , gravely hold out his hand to Harry 's eld brother . perhaps Harry wonder that the two do not embrace as he and the Colonel have just do . but , though hand be join , the salutation be only formal and stern on both side . 
 " I find I have do you a wrong , Colonel Washington , " George say , " and must apologise , not for the error , but for much of my late behaviour which have result from it . " 
 " the error be mine ! it be I who find that paper in your room , and show it to George , and be jealous of you , Colonel . all woman be jealous , " cry Mrs. Mountain . 
 " ' tis a pity you could not have keep your eye off my paper , madam , " say Mr. Washington . " you will permit I to say so . a great deal of mischief have come because I choose to keep a secret which concerned only myself and another person . for a long time George Warrington 's heart have be black with anger against I , and my feeling towards he have , I own , scarce be more friendly . all this pain might have be spar to both of we , have my private paper only be read by those for whom they be write . I shall say no more now , lest my feeling again should betray I into hasty word . Heaven bless thee , Harry ! Farewell , George ! and take a true friend 's advice , and try and be less ready to think evil of your friend . we shall meet again at the camp , and will keep our weapon for the enemy . gentleman ! if you remember this scene to - morrow , you will know where to find I . " and with a very stately bow to the english officer , the Colonel leave the abash company , and speedily ride away . 




 CHAPTER XII . news from the Camp 

 we must fancy that the parting between the brother be over , that George have take his place in Mr. Braddock 's family , and Harry have return home to Castlewood and his duty . his heart be with the army , and his pursuit at home offer the boy no pleasure . he do not care to own how deep his disappointment be , at be oblige to stay under the homely , quiet roof , now more melancholy than ever since George be away . Harry pass his brother 's empty chamber with an avert face ; take George 's place at the head of the table , and sigh as he drink from his silver tankard . Madam Warrington call the toast of " the king " stoutly every day ; and , on Sundays , when Harry read the service , and pray for all traveller by land and by water , she say , " we beseech Thee to hear we , " with a peculiar solemnity . she insist on talk about George constantly , but quite cheerfully , and as if his return be certain . she walk into his vacant room , with head upright , and no outward sign of emotion . she see that his book , linen , paper , etc . , be arrange with care ; talk of he with a very special respect , and specially appealing to the old servant at meal , and so forth , regard thing which be to be do " when Mr. George come home . " Mrs. Mountain be constantly on the whimper when George 's name be mention , and Harry 's face wear a look of the most ghastly alarm ; but his mother 's be invariably grave and sedate . she make more blunder at piquet and backgammon than you would expect from she ; and the servant find she awake and dressed , however early they may rise . she have pray Mr. Dempster to come back into residence at Castlewood . she be not severe or haughty   as she will not certainly be   with any of the party , but quiet in her talk with they , and gentle in assertion and reply . she be for ever talk of her father and his campaign , who come out of they all with no very severe wound to hurt he ; and so she hop and trust will her eld son . 
 George write frequent letter home to his brother , and , now the army be on its march , compile a rough journal , which he forward as occasion serve . this document be peruse with great delight and eagerness by the youth to whom it be address , and more than once read out in family council , on the long summer night , as Madam Esmond sit upright at her tea - table   she never condescend to use the back of a chair   as little Fanny Mountain be busy with her sewing , as Mr. Dempster and Mrs. Mountain sit over their card , as the hush old servant of the house move about silently in the gloaming , and listen to the word of the young master . Hearken to Harry Warrington read out his brother 's letter ! as we look at the slim character on the yellow page , fondly keep and put aside , we can almost fancy he alive who write and who read it and yet , lo ! they be as if they never have be ; their portrait faint image in frame of tarnished gold . be they real once , or be they mere phantasm ? do they live and die once ? do they love each other as true brother , and loyal gentleman ? can we hear their voice in the past ? sure I know Harry 's , and yonder he sit in the warm summer evening , and read his young brother 's simple story : 
 " it must be own that the province be act scurvily by his Majesty King George II . , and his representative here be in a flame of fury . Virginia be bad enough , and poor Maryland not much well , but Pennsylvania be bad of all . we pray they to send we troop from home to fight the French ; and we promise to maintain the troop when they come . we not only do not   keep our promise , and make scarce any provision for our defender , but our people insist upon the most exorbitant price for their cattle and store , and actually cheat the soldier who be come to fight their battle . no wonder the General swear , and the troop be sulky . the delay have be endless . owe to the failure of the several province to provide their promise store and mean of locomotion , week and month have elapse , during which time , no doubt , the French have be strengthen themselves on our frontier and in the fort they have turn we out of . though there never will be any love lose between I and Colonel Washington , it must be own that your favourite   I be not jealous , Hal   be a brave man and a good officer . the family respect he very much , and the General be always ask his opinion . indeed , he be almost the only man who have see the Indians in their war - paint , and I own I think he be right in fire upon mon . Jumonville last year . 
 " there be to be no more suite to that other quarrel at Benson 's Tavern than there be to the propose battle between Colonel W. and a certain young gentleman who shall be nameless . Captain Waring wish to pursue it on come into camp , and bring the message from Captain Grace , which your friend , who be as bold as Hector , be for take up , and employ a brother aide - de - camp , Colonel Wingfield , on his side . but when Wingfield hear the circumstance of the quarrel , how it have arise from Grace be drunk , and be foment by war be tipsy , and how the two 44th gentleman have choose to insult a militia officer , he swear that Colonel Washington should not meet the 44th man ; that he would carry the matter straightway to his Excellency , who would bring the two captain to a court - martial for brawl with the militia , and drunkenness , and indecent behaviour , and the captain be fain to put up their toasting - iron , and swallow their wrath . they be good - natured enough out of their cup , and eat their humble - pie with very good appetite at a reconciliation dinner which Colonel W. have with the 44th , and where he be as perfectly stupid and correct as Prince Prettyman need be . hang he ! he have no fault , and that be why I dislike he . when he marry that widow ah I ! what a dreary life she will have of it . " 
 " I wonder at the taste of some man , and the effrontery of some woman , " say Madam Esmond , lay her teacup down . " I wonder at any woman who have be marry once , so forget herself as to marry again ! do not   you , Mountain ? " 
 " monstrous ! " say Mountain , with a queer look . 
 Dempster keep his eye steadily fix on his glass of punch . Harry look as if he be choke with laughter , or with some other conceal emotion , but his mother say , " go on , Harry ! continue with your brother 's journal . he write well : but , ah , will he ever be able to write like my papa ? " 
 Harry resume : " we keep the strict order here in camp , and the order against drunkenness and ill - behaviour on the part of the man be very severe . the roll of each company be call at morning , noon , and night , and a return of the absent and disorderly be give in by the officer to the command officer of the regiment , who have to see that they be properly punish . the man be punish , and the drummer be always at work . oh , Harry , but it make one sick to see the first blood draw from a great strong white back , and to hear the piteous yell of the poor fellow . " 
 " oh , horrid ! " say Madam Esmond . 
 " I think I should have murder Ward if he have flog I . thank Heaven he get off with only a crack of the ruler ! the man , I say , be look after carefully enough . I wish the officer be . the Indians have just break up their camp , and retire in dudgeon , because the young officer be for ever drink with the squaw and and hum ha . " here Mr. Harry pause , as not care to proceed with the narrative , in the presence of little Fanny , very likely , who sit primly in her chair by her mother 's side , work her little sampler . 
 " pass over that about the odious tipsy creature , " say Madam . and Harry commence , in a loud tone , a much more satisfactory statement : " each regiment have Divine Service perform at the head of its colour every Sunday . the General do everything in the power of mortal man to prevent plundering , and to encourage the people round about to bring in provision . he have declare soldier shall be shoot who dare to interrupt or molest the market - people . he have order the price of provision to be raise a penny a pound , and have lend money out of his own pocket to provide the camp . altogether , he be a strange compound , this General . he flog his man without mercy , but he give without stint . he swear most tremendous oath in conversation , and tell story which Mountain would be shock to hear " 
 " why I ? " ask Mountain ; " and what have I to do with the General 's silly story ? " 
 " never mind the story ; and go on , Harry , " cry the mistress of the house . 
 " would be shock to hear after dinner ; but he never miss service . he adore his Great Duke , and have his name constantly on his lip . our two regiment both serve in Scotland , where I dare say Mr. Dempster know the colour of their facing . " 
 " we see the tail of their coat , as well as their facing , " growl the little Jacobite tutor . 
 " Colonel Washington have have the fever very smartly , and have hardly be well enough to keep up with the march . have he not well go home and be nurse by his widow ? when either of we be ill , we be almost as good friend again as ever . but I feel somehow as if I can not   forgive he for have wrong he . good Powers ! how I have be hat he for these month past ! oh , Harry ! I be in a fury at the tavern the other day , because Mountain come up so soon , and put an end to our difference . we ought to have burn a little gunpowder between we , and clear the air . but though I do not   love he , as you do , I know he be a good soldier , a good officer , and a brave , honest man ; and , at any rate , shall love he none the bad for not want to be our stepfather . " 
 " a stepfather , indeed ! " cry Harry 's mother . " why , jealousy and prejudice have perfectly madden the poor child ! do you suppose the Marquis of Esmond 's daughter and heiress could not have find other stepfather for her son than a mere provincial surveyor ? if there be any more such allusion in George 's journal , I beg you skip them , Harry , my dear . about this piece of folly and blundering , there hath be quite talk enough already . " 
 " ' tis a pretty sight , " Harry continue , read from his brother 's journal , " to see a long line of redcoat , thread through the wood or take their ground after the march . the care against surprise be so great and constant , that we defy prowl Indians to come unawares upon we , and our advanced sentry and savage have on the contrary fall in with the enemy and take a scalp or two from they . they be such cruel villain , these French and their paint ally , that we do not think of show they mercy . only think , we find but yesterday a little boy scalp but yet alive in a lone house , where his parent have be attack and murder by the savage enemy , of whom so great be his indignation at their cruelty our General have offer a reward of five pound for all the indian scalp bring in . 
 " when our march be over , you should see our camp , and all the care bestow on it . our baggage and our General 's tent and guard be place quite in the centre of the camp . we have outlying sentry by two , by three , by ten , by whole company . at the least surprise , they be instruct to run in on the main body and rally round the tent and baggage , which be so arrange themselves as to be a strong fortification . Sady and I , you must know , be march on foot now , and my horse be carry baggage . the Pennsylvanians send such rascally animal into camp that they speedily give in . what good horse be leave , ' twa our duty to give up : and Roxana have a couple of pack upon she back instead of her young master . she know I right well , and whinny when she see I , and I walk by her side , and we have many a talk together on the march . 
 " July 4 . to guard against surprise , we be all warn to pay especial attention to the beat of the drum ; always halt when they hear the long roll beat , and march at the beat of the long march . we be more on the alert regard the enemy now . we have our advanced picket double , and two sentry at every post . the man on the advanced picket be constantly under arm , with fix bayonet , all through the night , and relieve every two hour . the half that be relieve lie down by their arm , but be not suffer to leave their picket . ' tis evident that we be draw very near to the enemy now . this packet go out with the General 's to Colonel Dunbar 's camp , who be thirty mile behind we ; and will be carry thence to Frederick , and thence to my honoured mother 's house at Castlewood , to whom I send my duty , with kind remembrance , as to all friend there , and bow much love I need not say to my dear brother from his affectionate GEORGE E. WARRINGTON . " 
 the whole land be now lie parch and scorch in the July heat . for ten day no news have come from the column advance on the Ohio . their march , though it toil but slowly through the painful forest , must bring they ere long up with the enemy ; the troop , lead by consummate captain , be accustom now to the wilderness , and not afraid of surprise . every precaution have be take against ambush . it be the outlying enemy who be discover , pursue , destroy , by the vigilant scout and skirmisher of the british force . the last news hear be that the army have advance considerably beyond the ground of Mr. Washington 's discomfiture on the previous year , and two day after must be within a day 's march of the french fort . about take it no fear be entertain ; the amount of the french reinforcement from Montreal be know . Mr. Braddock , with his two veteran regiment from Britain , and their ally of Virginia and Pennsylvania , be more than a match for any troop that could be collect under the white flag . 
 such continue to be the talk , in the sparse town of our virginian province , at the gentry 's house , and the rough roadside tavern , where people meet and canvass the war . the few messenger who be send back by the General report well of the main force . ' twa think the enemy would not stand or defend himself at all . have he intend to attack , he might have seize a dozen occasion for assault our troop at pass through which they have be allow to go entirely free . so George have give up his favourite mare , like a hero as he be , and be march afoot with the line ? Madam Esmond vow that he should have the good horse in Virginia or Carolina in place of Roxana . there be horse enough to be have in the province , and for money . it be only for the King 's service that they be not forthcoming . 
 although at their family meeting and repast the inmate of Castlewood always talk cheerfully , never anticipate any but a triumphant issue to the campaign , or acknowledge any feeling of disquiet , yet , it must be own they be mighty uneasy when at home , quit it ceaselessly , and for ever on the trot from one neighbour 's house to another in quest of news . it be prodigious how quickly report run and spread . when , for instance , a certain note border warrior , call Colonel Jack , have offer himself and his huntsman to the General , who have decline the ruffian 's term or his proffered service , the defection of Jack and his man be the talk of thousand of tongue immediately . the house negro , in their midnight gallop about the country , in search of junketing or sweetheart , bring and spread news over amazingly wide district . they have a curious knowledge of the incident of the march for a fortnight at least after its commencement . they know and laugh at the cheat practise on the army , for horse , provision , and the like ; for a good bargain over the foreigner be not an unfrequent or unpleasant practice among New Yorkers , Pennsylvanians , or marylander ; though ' tis know that american folk have become perfectly artless and simple in later time , and never grasp , and never overreach , and be never selfish now . for three week after the army 's departure , the thousand report regard it be cheerful ; and when our Castlewood friend meet at their supper , their tone be confident and their news pleasant . 
 but on the 10th of July a vast and sudden gloom spread over the province . a look of terror and doubt seem to fall upon every face . affrighted negro wistfully eye their master and retire , and hum and whisper with one another . the fiddle cease in the quarter : the song and laugh of those cheery black folk be hush . right and left , everybody 's servant be on the gallop for news . the country tavern be throng with horseman , who drink and curse and brawl at the bar , each bring his gloomy story . the army have be surprised . the troop have fall into an ambuscade , and have be cut up almost to a man . all the officer be take down by the french marksman and the savage . the General have be wound , and carry off the field in his sash . four day afterwards the report be that the General be dead , and scalp by a French Indian . 
 ah , what a scream poor Mrs. Mountain give , when Gumbo bring this news from across the James River , and little Fanny spring cry to her mother 's arm ! " Lord God Almighty , watch over we , and defend my boy ! " say Mrs. Esmond , sink down on her knee , and lift her rigid hand to Heaven . the gentleman be not at home when this rumour arrive , but they come in an hour or two afterwards , each from his hunt for news . the scot tutor do not dare to look up and meet the widow 's agonising look . Harry Warrington be as pale as his mother . it might not be true about the manner of the General 's death but he be dead . the army have be surprise by Indians , and have flee , and be kill without see the enemy . an express have arrive from Dunbar 's camp . fugitive be pour in there . should he go and see ? he must go and see . he and stout little Dempster arm themselves and mount , take a couple of mount servant with they . 
 they follow the northward track which the expeditionary army have hew out for itself , and at every step which bring they near to the scene of action , the disaster of the fearful day seem to magnify . the day after the defeat a number of the miserable fugitive from the fatal battle of the 9th July have reach Dunbar 's camp , fifty mile from the field . Thither poor Harry and his companion ride , stop straggler , ask news , give money , get from one and all the same gloomy tale a thousand man be slay two - third of the officer be down all the General 's aide - de - camp be hit . be hit ? but be they kill ? those who fall never rise again . the tomahawk do its work upon they . o brother , brother ! all the fond memory of their youth , all the dear remembrance of their childhood , the love and the laughter , the tender romantic vow which they have pledge to each other as lad , be recall by Harry with pang inexpressibly keen . wounded man look up and be soften by his grief : rough woman melt as they see the woe write on the handsome young face : the hardy old tutor could scarcely look at he for tear , and grieve for he even more than for his dear pupil who lie dead under the savage indian knife . 




 CHAPTER XIII . Profitless Quest 

 at every step which Harry Warrington take towards Pennsylvania , the report of the british disaster be magnify and confirm . those two famous regiment which have fight in the scottish and continental war , have flee from an enemy almost unseen , and their boasted discipline and valour have not enable they to face a band of savage and a few french infantry . the unfortunate commander of the expedition have show the utmost bravery and resolution . four time his horse have be shoot under he . twice he have be wound , and the last time of the mortal hurt which end his life three day after the battle . More than one of Harry 's informant describe the action to the poor lad , the passage of the river , the long line of advance through the wilderness , the firing in front , the vain struggle of the man to advance , and the artillery to clear the way of the enemy ; then the ambush fire from behind every bush and tree , and the murderous fusillade , by which at least half of the expeditionary force have be shoot down . but not all the General 's suite be kill , Harry hear . one of his aide - de - camp , a virginian gentleman , be ill of fever and exhaustion at Dunbar 's camp . 
 one of they but which ? to the camp Harry hurry , and reach it at length . it be George Washington Harry find stretch in a tent there , and not his brother . a sharp pain than that of the fever Mr. Washington declare he feel , when he see Harry Warrington , and could give he no news of George . 
 Mr. Washington do not dare to tell Harry all . for three day after the fight his duty have be to be near the General . on the fatal 9th of July , he have see George go to the front with order from the chief , to whose side he never return . after Braddock himself die , the aide - de - camp have find mean to retrace his course to the field . the corps which remain there be strip and horribly mutilate . one body he bury which he think to be George Warrington 's . his own illness be increase , perhaps occasion , by the anguish which he undergo in his search for the unhappy young volunteer . 
 " ah , George ! if you have love he you would have find he dead or alive , " Harry cry out . nothing would satisfy he but that he , too , should go to the ground and examine it . with money he procure a guide or two . he ford the river at the place where the army have pass over : he go from one end to the other of the dreadful field . it be no long haunt by Indians now . the bird of prey be feed on the mangle fester carcase . save in his own grandfather , lie very calm , with a sweet smile on his lip , Harry have never yet see the face of death . the horrible spectacle of mutilation cause he to turn away with shudder and loathing . what news could the vacant wood , or those fester corps lie under the tree , give the lad of his lost brother ? he be for go , unarmed and with a white flag , to the french fort , whither , after their victory , the enemy have return ; but his guide refuse to advance with he . the French might possibly respect they , but the Indians would not . " keep your hair for your lady mother , my young gentleman , " say the guide . " ' tis enough that she lose one son in this campaign . " 
 when Harry return to the english encampment at Dunbar 's , it be his turn to be down with the fever . delirium set in upon he , and he lie some time in the tent and on the bed from which his friend have just rise convalescent . for some day he do not know who watch he ; and poor Dempster , who have tend he in more than one of these malady , think the widow must lose both her child ; but the fever be so far subdue that the boy be enable to rally somewhat , and get to horseback . Mr. Washington and Dempster both escort he home . it be with a heavy heart , no doubt , that all three beheld once more the gate of Castlewood . 
 a servant in advance have be send to announce their coming . first come Mrs. Mountain and her little daughter , welcome Harry with many tear and embrace , but she scarce give a nod of recognition to Mr. Washington ; and the little girl cause the young officer to start , and turn deadly pale , by come up to he with her hand behind she , and ask , " why have you not bring George back too ? " Harry do not hear . the sob and caress of his good friend and nurse luckily keep he from listen to little Fanny . 
 Dempster be graciously receive by the two lady . " whatever could be do , we know you would do , Mr. Dempster , " say Mrs. Mountain , give he her hand . " make a curtsey to Mr. Dempster , Fanny , and remember , child , to be grateful to all who have be friendly to our benefactor . will it please you to take any refreshment before you ride , Colonel Washington ? " 
 Mr. Washington have have a sufficient ride already , and count as certainly upon the hospitality of Castlewood , as he would upon the shelter of his own house . 
 " the time to feed my horse , and a glass of water for myself , and I will trouble Castlewood hospitality no far , " Mr. Washington say . 
 " sure , George , you have your room here , and my mother be above - stair get it ready ! " cry Harry . " that poor horse of yours stumble with you , and can not   go far this evening . " 
 " hush ! your mother will not   see he , child , " whisper Mrs. Mountain . 
 " not see George ? why , he be like a son of the house , " cry Harry . 
 " she have well not see he . I do not   meddle any more in family matter , child : but when the Colonel 's servant ride in , and say you be come , Madam Esmond leave this room , my dear , where she be sit read Drelincourt , and say she feel she could not see Mr. Washington . will you go to she ? " Harry take his friend 's arm , and excuse himself to the Colonel , to whom he say he would return in a few minute , he leave the parlour in which they have assemble , and go to the upper room , where Madam Esmond be . 
 he be hasten across the corridor , and , with an avert head , pass by one especial door , which he do not like to look at , for it be that of his brother 's room ; but as he come to it , Madam Esmond issue from it , and fold he to her heart , and lead he in . a settee be by the bed , and a book of psalm lay on the coverlet . all the rest of the room be exactly as George have leave it . 
 " my poor child ! how thin thou art grow how haggard you look ! never mind . a mother 's care will make thee well again . ' twa nobly do to go and brave sickness and danger in search of your brother . have other be as faithful , he might be here now . never mind , my Harry ; our hero will come back to we , I know he be not dead . one so good , and so brave , and so gentle , and so clever as he be , I know be not lose to we altogether . "   perhaps Harry think within himself that his mother have not always be accustom so to speak of her eld son .   " dry up thy tear , my dear ! he will come back to we , I know he will come . " and when Harry press she to give a reason for her belief , she say she have see her father two night run in a dream , and he have tell she that her boy be a prisoner among the Indians . 
 Madam Esmond 's grief have not prostrate she as Harry 's have when first it fall upon he ; it have rather stir and animate she : her eye be eager , her countenance angry and revengeful . the lad wonder almost at the condition in which he find his mother . 
 but when he beseech she to go downstairs , and give a hand of welcome to George Washington , who have accompany he , the lady 's excitement painfully increase . she say she should shudder at touch his hand . she declare Mr. Washington have take her son from she , she could not sleep under the same roof with he . 
 " he give I his bed when I be ill , mother ; and if our George be alive , how have George Washington a hand in his death ? ah ! please God it be only as you say , " cry Harry , in bewilderment . 
 " if your brother return , as return he will , it will not be through Mr. Washington 's help , " say Madam Esmond . " he neither defend George on the field , nor would he bring he out of it . " 
 " but he tend I most kindly in my fever , " interpose Harry . " he be yet ill when he give up his bed to I , and be think only of his friend , when any other man would have think only of himself . " 
 " a friend ! a pretty friend ! " sneer the lady . " of all his Excellency 's aide - de - camp , my gentleman be the only one who come back unwounded . the brave and noble fall , but he , to be sure , be unhurt . I confide my boy to he , the pride of my life , whom he will defend with his , forsooth ! and he leave my George in the forest , and bring I back himself ! oh , a pretty welcome I must give he ! " 
 " no gentleman , " cry Harry , warmly , " be ever refuse shelter under my grandfather 's roof . " 
 " oh no no gentleman ! " exclaim the little widow ; " let we go down , if you like , son , and pay our respect to this one . will you please to give I your arm ? " and take an arm which be very little able to give her support , she walk down the broad stair , and into the apartment where the Colonel sate . 
 she make he a ceremonious curtsey , and extend one of the little hand , which she allow for a moment to rest in his . " I wish that our meeting have be happy , Colonel Washington , " she say . 
 " you do not grieve more than I do that it be otherwise , madam , " say the Colonel . 
 " I might have wish that the meeting have be spar , that I might not have keep you from friend whom you be naturally anxious to see , that my boy 's indisposition have not detain you . home and his good nurse Mountain , and his mother and our good Doctor Dempster , will soon restore he . ' twa scarce necessary , Colonel , that you , who have so many affair on your hand , military and domestic , should turn doctor too . " 
 " Harry be ill and weak , and I think it be my duty to ride by he , " falter the Colonel . 
 " you yourself , sir , have go through the fatigue and danger of the campaign in the most wonderful manner , " say the widow , curtsey again , and look at he with her impenetrable black eye . 
 " I wish to Heaven , madam , some one else have come back in my place ! " 
 " Nay , sir , you have tie which must render your life more than ever valuable and dear to you , and duty to which , I know , you must be anxious to betake yourself . in our present deplorable state of doubt and distress , Castlewood can be a welcome place to no stranger , much less to you , and so I know , sir , you will be for leave we ere long . and you will pardon I if the state of my own spirit oblige I for the most part to keep my chamber . but my friend here will bear you company as long as you favour we , whilst I nurse my poor Harry upstairs . mountain , you will have the cedar - room on the ground - floor ready for Mr. Washington , and anything in the house be at his command . Farewell , sir . will you be pleased to present my compliment to your mother , who will be thankful to have her son safe and sound out of the war , as also to my young friend Martha Custis , to whom and to whose child I wish every happiness . come , my son ! " and with these word , and another freeze curtsey , the pale little woman retreat , look steadily at the Colonel , who stand dumb on the floor . 
 Strong as Madam Esmond 's belief appear to be respect her son 's safety , the house of Castlewood naturally remain sad and gloomy . she might forbid mourning for herself and family ; but her heart be in black , whatever face the resolute little lady persist in wear before the world . to look for her son , be hop against hope . no authentic account of his death have indeed arrive , and no one appear who have see he fall ; but hundred more have be so stricken on that fatal day , with no eye to behold their last pang , save those of the lurk enemy and the comrade die by their side . a fortnight after the defeat , when Harry be absent on his quest , George 's servant , Sady , reappear wounded and maim at Castlewood . but he could give no coherent account of the battle , only of his flight from the centre , where he be with the baggage . he have no news of his master since the morning of the action . for many day Sady lurk in the negro quarter away from the sight of Madam Esmond , whose anger he do not dare to face . that lady 's few neighbour speak of she as labour under a delusion . so strong be it , that there be time when Harry and the other member of the little Castlewood family be almost bring to share in it . it seem nothing strange to she , that her father out of another world should promise she her son 's life . in this world or the next , that family sure must be of consequence , she think . nothing have ever yet happen to her son , no accident , no fever , no important illness , but she have a prevision of it . she could enumerate half a dozen instance , which , indeed , her household be oblige more or less to confirm , how , when anything have happen to the boy at ever so great a distance , she have know of their mishap and its consequence . no , George be not dead ; George be a prisoner among the Indians ; George would come back and rule over Castlewood ; as sure , as sure as his Majesty would send a great force from home to recover the tarnish glory of the british arm , and to drive the French out of the Americas . 
 as for Mr. Washington , she would never with her own goodwill behold he again . he have promise to protect George with his life . why be her son go and the Colonel alive ? how dare he to face she after that promise , and appear before a mother without her son ? she trust she know her duty . she bear illwill to no one : but as an Esmond , she have a sense of honour , and Mr. Washington have forfeit her in let her son out of his sight . he have to obey superior order   some one perhaps object ? Psha ! a promise be a promise . he have promise to guard George 's life with his own , and where be her boy ? and be not the Colonel   a pretty Colonel , indeed !   sound and safe ? do not tell I that his coat and hat have shot through they !   this be her answer to another humble plea in Mr. Washington 's behalf .   can not   I go into the study this instant and fire two shot with my papa 's pistol through this paduasoy skirt , and should I be kill ? she laugh at the notion of death result from any such operation ; nor be her laugh very pleasant to hear . the satire of people who have little natural humour be seldom good sport for bystander . I think dull man 's faceticae be mostly cruel . 
 so , if Harry want to meet his friend , he have to do so in secret , at court - house , tavern , or various place of resort ; or in their little town , where the provincial gentry assemble . no man of spirit , she vow , could meet Mr. Washington after his base desertion of her family . she be exceedingly excited when she hear that the Colonel and her son absolutely have meet . what a heart must Harry have to give his hand to one whom she consider as little well than George 's murderer ! " for shame to say so ! for shame upon you , ungrateful boy , forget the dear , noblest , most perfect of brother , for that tall , gawky , fox - hunting Colonel , with his horrid oath ! how can he be George 's murderer , when I say my boy be not dead ? he be not dead , because my instinct never deceive I : because , as sure as I see his picture now before I , only ' tis not near so noble or so good as he use to look , so surely two night run do my papa appear to I in my dream . you doubt about that , very likely ? ' tis because you never love anybody sufficiently , my poor Harry ; else you might have leave to see they in dream , as have be vouchsafe to some . " 
 " I think I love George , mother , " cry Harry . " I have often pray that I might dream about he , and I do not . " 
 " how you can talk , sir , of love George , and then go and meet your Mr. Washington at horse - race , I can not   understand ! can you , Mountain ? " 
 " we can not   understand many thing in our neighbour ' character . I can understand that our boy be unhappy , and that he do not get strength , and that he be do no good here , in Castlewood , or mop at the tavern and court - house with horse - couper and idle company , " grumble Mountain in reply to her patroness ; and , in truth , the dependant be right . 
 there be not only grief in the Castlewood House , but there be disunion . " I can not tell how it come , " say Harry , as he bring the story to an end , which we have narrate in the last two number , and which he confide to his new - find english relative , Madame de Bernstein ; " but since that fatal day of July , last year , and my return home , my mother never have be the same woman . she seem to love none of we as she use . she be for ever praise George , and yet she do not seem as if she like he much when he be with we . she hath plunge , more deeply than ever , into her book of devotion , out of which she only manage to extract grief and sadness , as I think . such a gloom have fall over our wretched virginian house of Castlewood , that we all grow ill , and pale as ghost , who inhabit it . Mountain tell I , madam , that , for night , my mother would not close her eye . I have have she at my bedside , look so ghastly , that I have start from my own sleep , fancy a ghost before I . by one mean or other she have work herself into a state of excitement which if not delirium , be akin to it . I be again and again strike down by the fever , and all the Jesuits ' bark in America could not cure I . we have a tobacco - house and some land about the new town of Richmond , in our province , and go thither , as Williamsburg be no wholesomer than our own place ; and there I mend a little , but still do not get quite well , and the physician strongly counsel a sea - voyage . my mother , at one time , have thought of come with I , but "   and here the lad blush and hang his head down   " we do not agree very well , though I know we love each other very heartily , and ' twa determined that I should see the world for myself . so I take passage in our ship from the James River , and be land at Bristol . and ' twa only on the 9th of July , this year , at sea , as have be agree between I and Madam Esmond , that I put mourn on for my dear brother . " 
 so that little mistress of the Virginian Castlewood , for whom , I be sure , we have all the great respect , have the knack of render the people round about her uncomfortable ; quarrel with those she love well , and exercise over they her wayward jealousy and imperious humour , until they be not sorry to leave she . here be money enough , friend enough , a good position , and the respect of the world ; a house store with all manner of plenty , and good thing , and poor Harry Warrington be glad to leave they all behind he . happy ! who be happy ? what good in a stall ox for dinner every day , and no content therewith ? be it good to be love and plague by those you love , or to have an easy , comfortable indifference at home ; to follow your fancy , live there unmoleste , and die without cause any painful regret or tear ? 
 to be sure , when her boy be go , Madam Esmond forget all these little tiff and difference . to hear her speak of both her child , you would fancy they be perfect character , and have never cause she a moment 's worry or annoyance . these go , Madam fall naturally upon Mrs. Mountain and her little daughter , and worry and annoy they . but woman bear with hard word more easily than man , be more ready to forgive injury , or , perhaps , to dissemble anger . let we trust that Madam Esmond 's dependant find their life tolerable , that they give her ladyship sometimes as good as they get , that if they quarrel in the morning they be reconcile at night , and sate down to a tolerably friendly game at card and an amicable dish of tea . 
 but , without the boy , the great house of Castlewood be dreary to the widow . she leave an overseer there to manage her estate , and only pay the place an occasional visit . she enlarge and beautify her house in the pretty little city of Richmond , which begin to grow daily in importance . she have company there , and card - assembly , and preacher in plenty ; and set up her little throne there , to which the gentlefolk of the province be welcome to come and bow . all her domestic negro , who love society as negro will do , be delighted to exchange the solitude of Castlewood for the gay and merry little town ; where , for a time , and while we pursue Harry Warrington 's progress in Europe , we leave the good lady . 




 CHAPTER XIV . Harry in England 

 when the famous Trojan wanderer narrate his escape and adventure to Queen Dido , her Majesty , as we read , take the very great interest in the fascinating story - teller who tell his peril so eloquently . a history ensue , more pathetic than any of the previous occurrence in the life of Pius Aeneas , and the poor princess have reason to rue the day when she listen to that glib and dangerous orator . Harry Warrington have not pious Aeneas 's power of speech , and his elderly aunt , we may presume , be by no mean so soft - hearted as the sentimental Dido ; but yet the lad 's narrative be touching , as he deliver it with his artless eloquence and cordial voice ; and more than once , in the course of his story , Madam Bernstein find herself move to a softness to which she have very seldom before allow herself to give way . there be not many fountain in that desert of a life not many sweet , refresh resting - place . it have be a long loneliness , for the most part , until this friendly voice come and sound in her ear and cause her heart to beat with strange pang of love and sympathy . she dot on this lad , and on this sense of compassion and regard so new to she . save once , faintly , in very very early youth , she have feel no tender sentiment for any human being . such a woman would , no doubt , watch her own sensation very keenly , and must have smile after the appearance of this boy , to mark how her pulse rise above their ordinary beat . she long after he . she feel her cheek flush with happiness when he come near . her eye greet he with welcome , and follow he with fond pleasure . " ah , if she could have have a son like that , how she would have love he ! " " wait , " say Conscience , the dark scoffer mock within she , " wait , Beatrix Esmond ! you know you will weary of this inclination , as you have of all . you know , when the pass fancy have subside , that the boy may perish , and you will not   have a tear for he ; or talk , and you weary of his story ; and that your lot in life be to be lonely lonely . " well ? suppose life be a desert ? there be halting - place and shade , and refreshing water ; let we profit by they for to - day . we know that we must march when to - morrow come , and tramp on our destiny onward . 
 she smile inwardly , whilst follow the lad 's narrative , to recognise in his simple tale about his mother , trait of family resemblance . Madam Esmond be very jealous ? yes , that Harry own . she be fond of Colonel Washington ? she like he , but only as a friend , Harry declare . a hundred time he have hear his mother vow that she have no other feeling towards he . he be ashamed to have to own that he himself have be once absurdly jealous of the Colonel . " well , you will see that my half - sister will never forgive he , " say Madam Beatrix . " and you need not be surprised , sir , at woman take a fancy to man young than themselves ; for do not   I dote upon you ; and do not   all these Castlewood people crevent with jealousy ? " 
 however great might be their jealousy of Madame de Bernstein 's new favourite , the family of Castlewood allow no feeling of illwill to appear in their language or behaviour to their young guest and kinsman . after a couple of day ' stay in the ancestral house , Mr. Harry Warrington have become Cousin Harry with young and middle - aged . especially in Madame Bernstein 's presence , the Countess of Castlewood be most gracious to her kinsman , and she take many amiable private opportunity of inform the Baroness how charming the young Huron be , of vaunt the elegance of his manner and appearance , and wonder how , in his distant province , the child should ever have learn to be so polite ? 
 these note of admiration or interrogation , the Baroness take with equal complacency   speak parenthetically , and , for his own part , the present chronicler can not help put in a little respectful remark here , and signify his admiration of the conduct of lady towards one another , and of the thing which they say , which they forbear to say , and which they say behind each other 's back . with what smile and curtsey they stab each other ! with what compliment they hate each other ! with what determination of long - suffering they will not   be offend ! with what innocent dexterity they can drop the drop of poison into the cup of conversation , hand round the goblet , smile , to the whole family to drink , and make the dear , domestic circle miserable !   I burst out of my parenthesis . I fancy my Baroness and Countess smile at each other a hundred year ago , and give each other the hand or the cheek , and call each other , my dear , my dear creature , my dear Countess , my dear Baroness , my dear sister even , when they be most ready to fight . 
 " you wonder , my dear Maria , that the boy should be so polite ? " cry Madame de Bernstein . " his mother be breed up by two very perfect gentlefolk . Colonel Esmond have a certain grave courteousness , and a grand manner , which I do not see among the gentleman nowadays . " 
 " eh , my dear , we all of we praise our own time ! my grandmamma use to declare there be nothing like Whitehall and Charles the Second . " 
 " my mother see King James the Second 's court for a short while , and though not a court - educate person , as you know , her father be a country clergyman yet be exquisitely well - breed . the Colonel , her second husband , be a person of great travel and experience , as well as of learn , and have frequent the fine company of Europe . they could not go into their retreat and leave their good manner behind they , and our boy have have they as his natural inheritance . " 
 " Nay , excuse I , my dear , for think you too partial about your mother . she could not have be that perfection which your filial fondness imago . she leave off like her daughter my dear creature , you have own that she do and I can not fancy a complete woman who have a cold heart . no , no , my dear sister - in - law ! manner be very requisite , no doubt , and , for a country parson 's daughter , your mamma be very well I have see many of the cloth who be very well . Mr. Sampson , our chaplain , be very well . Dr. Young be very well . Mr. Dodd be very well ; but they have not the true air as how should they ? I protest , I beg pardon ! I forget my lord bishop , your ladyship 's first choice . but , as I say before , to be a complete woman , one must have , what you have , what I may say and bless Heaven for , I think I have a good heart . without the affection , all the world be vanity , my love ! I protest I only live , exist , eat , drink , rest , for my sweet , sweet child ! for my wicked Willy , for my self - willed Fanny , dear naughty love ! "   she rapturously kiss a bracelet on each arm which contain the miniature representation of those two young person .   " yes , Mimi ! yes , Fanchon ! you know I do , you dear , dear little thing ! and if they be to die , or you be to die , your poor mistress would die too ! " Mimi and Fanchon , two quiver italian greyhound , jump into their lady 's arm , and kiss her hand , but respect her cheek , which be cover with rouge . " no , my dear ! for nothing do I bless Heaven so much   though it put I to excruciate torture very often   as for have endow I with sensibility and a feeling heart ! " 
 " you be full of feeling , dear Anna , " say the Baroness . " you be celebrate for your sensibility . you must give a little of it to our american nephew cousin I scarce know his relationship . " 
 " Nay , I be here but as a guest in Castlewood now . the house be my Lord Castlewood 's , not mine , or his lordship be whenever he shall choose to claim it . what can I do for the young Virginian that have not be do ? he be charming . be we even jealous of he for be so , my dear ? and though we see what a fancy the Baroness de Bernstein have take for he , do your ladyship 's nephew and niece your real nephew and niece cry out ? my poor child might be mortify , for indeed , in a few hour , the charming young man have make as much way as my poor thing have be able to do in all their life : but be they angry ? willy hath take he out to ride . this morning , be not Maria play the harpsichord whilst my Fanny teach he the minuet ? ' twas a charming young group , I assure you , and it bring tear into my eye to look at the young creature . poor lad ! we be as fond of he as you be , dear Baroness ! " 
 now , Madame de Bernstein have happen , through her own ear or her maid 's , to overhear what really take place in consequence of this harmless little scene . Lady Castlewood have come into the room where the young people be thus engage in amusing and instruct themselves , accompany by her son William , who arrive in his boot from the kennel . 
 " Bravi , bravi ! oh , charming ! " say the Countess , clap her hand , nod with one of her good smile to Harry Warrington , and dart a look at his partner , which my Lady Fanny perfectly understand ; and so , perhaps , do my Lady Maria at her harpsichord , for she play with redoubled energy , and nod her wave curl , over the chord . 
 " infernal young Choctaw ! be he teach Fanny the war - dance ? and be Fan go to try her trick upon he now ? " ask Mr. William , whose temper be not of the good . 
 and that be what Lady Castlewood 's look say to Fanny . " be you go to try your trick upon he now ? " 
 she make Harry a very low curtsey , and he blush , and they both stop dancing , somewhat disconcert . Lady Maria rise from the harpsichord and walk away . 
 " Nay , go on dancing , young people ! do not   let I spoil sport , and let I play for you , " say the Countess ; and she sate down to the instrument and play . 
 " I do not   know how to dance , " say Harry , hang his head down , with a blush that the Countess 's fine carmine could not equal . 
 " and Fanny be teach you ? go on teach he , dearest Fanny ! " 
 " go on , do ! " say William , with a sidelong growl . 
 " I I have rather not show off my awkwardness in company , " add Harry , recover himself . " when I know how to dance a minuet , be sure I will ask my cousin to walk one with I . " 
 " that will be very soon , dear Cousin Warrington , I be certain , " remark the Countess , with her most gracious air . 
 " what game be she hunt now ? " think Mr. William to himself , who can not penetrate his mother 's way ; and that lady , fondly call her daughter to her elbow , leave the room . 
 they be no soon in the tapestried passage lead away to their own apartment , but Lady Castlewood 's bland tone entirely change . " you booby ! " she begin to her adore Fanny . " you double idiot ! what be you go to do with the Huron ? you do not   want to marry a creature like that , and be a squaw in a wigwam ? " 
 " do not , mamma ! " gasp Lady Fanny . Mamma be pinch her ladyship 's arm black - and - blue . " I be sure our cousin be very well , " Fanny whimper , " and you say so yourself . " 
 " very well ! yes ; and heir to a swamp , a negro , a log - cabin and a barrel of tobacco ! my Lady Frances Esmond , do you remember what your ladyship 's rank be , and what your name be , and who be your ladyship 's mother , when , at three day ' acquaintance , you commence dance a pretty dance , indeed with this brat out of Virginia ? " 
 " Mr. Warrington be our cousin , " plead Lady Fanny . 
 " a creature come from nobody know where be not your cousin ! how do we know he be your cousin ? he may be a valet who have take his master 's portmanteau , and run away in his postchaise . " 
 " but Madame de Bernstein say he be our cousin , " interpose Fanny ; " and he be the image of the Esmonds . " 
 " Madame de Bernstein have her like and dislike , take up people and forget people ; and she choose to profess a mighty fancy for this young man . because she like he to - day , be that any reason why she should like he to - morrow ? before company , and in your aunt 's presence , your ladyship will please to be as civil to he as necessary ; but , in private , I forbid you to see he or encourage he . " 
 " I do not   care , madam , whether your ladyship forbid I or not ! " cry out Lady Fanny , work up to a pitch of revolt . 
 " very good , Fanny ! then I speak to my lord , and we return to Kensington . if I can not   bring you to reason , your brother will . " 
 at this juncture the conversation between mother and daughter stop , or Madame de Bernstein 's informer have no further mean of hear or report it . 
 it be only in after day that she tell Harry Warrington a part of what she know . at present he but see that his kinsfolk receive he not unkindly . Lady Castlewood be perfectly civil to he ; the young lady pleasant and please ; my Lord Castlewood , a man of cold and haughty demeanour , be not more reserved towards Harry than to any of the rest of the family ; Mr. William be ready to drink with he , to ride with he , to go to race with he , and to play card with he . when he propose to go away , they one and all press he to stay . Madame de Bernstein do not tell he how it arise that he be the object of such eager hospitality . he do not know what scheme he be serve or disarrange , whose or what anger he be create . he fancy he be welcome because those around he be his kinsman , and never think that those could be his enemy out of whose cup he be drink , and whose hand he be press every night and morning . 




 CHAPTER XV . a Sunday at Castlewood 

 the second day after Harry 's arrival at Castlewood be a Sunday . the chapel appertain to the castle be the village church . a door from the house communicate with a great state pew which the family occupy , and here after due time they all take their place in order , whilst a rather numerous congregation from the village fill the seat below . a few ancient dusty banner hang from the church roof ; and Harry please himself in imagine that they have be bear by retainer of his family in the Commonwealth war , in which , as he know well , his ancestor have take a loyal and distinguished part . within the altar - rail be the effigy of the Esmond of the time of King James the First , the common forefather of all the group assemble in the family pew . Madame de Bernstein , in her quality of Bishop 's widow , never fail in attendance , and conduct her devotion with a gravity almost as exemplary as that of the ancestor yonder , in his square beard and red gown , for ever kneel on his stone hassock before his great marble desk and book , under his emblazon shield of arm . the clergyman , a tall , high - colour , handsome young man , read the service in a lively , agreeable voice , give almost a dramatic point to the chapter of scripture which he read . the music be good one of the young lady of the family touch the organ and would have be well but for an interruption and something like a burst of laughter from the servant ' pew , which be occasion by Mr. Warrington 's lacquey Gumbo , who , know the air give out for the psalm , begin to sing it in a voice so exceedingly loud and sweet , that the whole congregation turn towards the african warbler ; the parson himself put his handkerchief to his mouth , and the liveried gentleman from London be astonish out of all propriety . please , perhaps , with the sensation which he have create , Mr. Gumbo continue his performance until it become almost a solo , and the voice of the clerk himself be silence . for the truth be , that though Gumbo hold on to the book , along with pretty Molly , the porter 's daughter , who have be the first to welcome the stranger to Castlewood , he sing and recite by ear and not by note , and could not read a syllable of the verse in the book before he . 
 this choral performance over , a brief sermon in due course follow , which , indeed , Harry think a deal too short . in a lively , familiar , strike discourse the clergyman describe a scene of which he have be witness the previous week the execution of a horse - stealer after assize . he describe the man and his previous good character , his family , the love they bear one another , and his agony at part from they . he depict the execution in a manner startle , terrible , and picturesque . he do not introduce into his sermon the scripture phraseology , such as Harry have be accustom to hear it from those somewhat calvinistic preacher whom his mother love to frequent , but rather speak as one man of the world to other sinful people , who might be likely to profit by good advice . the unhappy man just go , have begin as a farmer of good prospect ; he have take to drinking , card - playing , horse - racing , cock - fighting , the vice of the age ; against which the young clergyman be generously indignant . then he have get to poach and to horse - stealing , for which he suffer . the divine rapidly draw striking and fearful picture of these rustic crime . he startle his hearer by show that the Eye of the Law be watch the poacher at midnight , and set trap to catch the criminal . he gallop the steal horse over highway and common , and from one county into another , but show Retribution ever gallop after , seize the malefactor in the country fair , carry he before the justice , and never unlock his manacle till he drop they at the gallow - foot . Heaven be pitiful to the sinner ! the clergyman act the scene . he whisper in the criminal 's ear at the cart . he drop his handkerchief on the clerk 's head . Harry start back as that handkerchief drop . the clergyman have be talk for more than twenty minute . Harry could have hear he for an hour more , and think he have not be five minute in the pulpit . the gentlefolk in the great pew be very much enliven by the discourse . once or twice , Harry , who could see the pew where the house servant sate , remark these very attentive ; and especially Gumbo , his own man , in an attitude of intense consternation . but the smockfrock do not seem to heed , and clamp out of church quite unconcerned . Gaffer Brown and Gammer Jones take the matter as it come , and the rosy - cheeked , red - cloak village lass sate under their broad hat entirely unmoved . my lord , from his pew , nod slightly to the clergyman in the pulpit , when that divine 's head and wig surge up from the cushion . 
 " Sampson have be strong to - day , " say his lordship . " he have assault the Philistines in great force . " 
 " beautiful , beautiful ! " say Harry . 
 " bet five to four it be his Assize sermon . he have be over to Winton to preach , and to see those dog , " cry William . 
 the organist have play the little congregation out into the sunshine . only Sir Francis Esmond , temp . Jac . I. , still kneel on his marble hassock , before his prayer - book of stone . Mr. Sampson come out of his vestry in his cassock , and nod to the gentleman still linger in the great pew . 
 " come up , and tell we about those dog , " say Mr. William , and the divine nod a laugh assent . 
 the gentleman pass out of the church into the gallery of their house , which connect they with that sacred building . Mr. Sampson make his way through the court , and presently join they . he be present by my lord to the virginian cousin of the family , Mr. Warrington : the chaplain bow very profoundly , and hop Mr. Warrington would benefit by the virtuous example of his european kinsman . be he relate to Sir Miles Warrington of Norfolk ? Sir Miles be Mr. Warrington 's father 's eld brother . what a pity he have a son ! ' twas a pretty estate , and Mr. Warrington look as if he would become a baronetcy , and a fine estate in Norfolk . 
 " tell I about my uncle , " cry Virginian Harry . 
 " tell we about those dog ! " say English Will , in a breath . 
 " two more jolly dog , two more drunken dog , save your presence , Mr. Warrington , than Sir Miles and his son , I never see . Sir Miles be a staunch friend and neighbour of Sir Robert 's . he can drink down any man in the county , except his son and a few more . the other dog about which Mr. William be anxious , for Heaven hath make he a prey to dog and all kind of bird , like the Greeks in the Iliad " 
 " I know that line in the Iliad , " say Harry , blushing . " I only know five more , but I know that one . " and his head fall . he be think , " ah , my dear brother George know all the Iliad and all the odyssey , and almost every book that be ever write besides ! " 
 " what on earth "   only he mention a place under the earth   " be you talk about now ? " ask Will of his reverence . 
 the chaplain revert to the dog and their performance . he think Mr. William 's dog be more than a match for they . from dog they go off to horse . Mr. William be very eager about the Six Year Old Plate at Huntingdon . " have you bring any news of it , Parson ? " 
 " the odd be five to four on Brilliant against the field , " say the parson , gravely , " but , mind you , Jason be a good horse . " 
 " whose horse ? " ask my lord . 
 " Duke of Ancaster 's . by Cartouche out of Miss Langley , " say the divine . " have you horse - race in Virginia , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " have not   we ! " cry Harry ; " but oh ! I long to see a good english race ! " 
 " do you do you bet a little ? " continue his reverence . 
 " I have do such a thing , " reply Harry with a smile . 
 " I will take Brilliant even against the field , for pony with you , cousin ! " shout out Mr. William . 
 " I will give or take three to one against Jason ! " say the clergyman . 
 " I do not   bet on horse I do not   know , " say Harry , wonder to hear the chaplain now , and remember his sermon half an hour before . 
 " had not   you well write home , and ask your mother ? " say Mr. William , with a sneer . 
 " will , Will ! " call out my lord , " our cousin Warrington be free to bet , or not , as he like . have a care how you venture on either of they , Harry Warrington . Will be an old file , in spite of his smooth face , and as for Parson Sampson , I defy our ghostly enemy to get the well of he . " 
 " he and all his work , my lord ! " say Mr. Sampson , with a bow . 
 Harry be highly indignant at this allusion to his mother . " I will tell you what , cousin will , " he say , " I be in the habit of manage my own affair in my own way , without ask any lady to arrange they for I . and I be use to make my own bet upon my own judgment , and do not   need any relation to select they for I , thank you . but as I be your guest , and , no doubt , you want to show I hospitality , I will take your bet there . and so Done and do . " 
 " do , " say will , look askance . 
 " of course it be the regular odd that be in the paper which you give I , cousin ? " 
 " well , no , it be not , " growl Will . " the odd be five to four , that be the fact , and you may have them , if you like . " 
 " Nay , cousin , a bet be a bet ; and I take you , too , Mr. Sampson . " 
 " three to one against Jason . I lie it . very good , " say Mr. Sampson . 
 " be it to be pony too , Mr. Chaplain ? " ask Harry with a superb air , as if he have Lombard Street in his pocket . 
 " no , no . thirty to ten . it be enough for a poor priest to win . " 
 " here go a great slice out of my quarter 's hundred , " think Harry . " well , I shall not   let these englishman fancy that I be afraid of they . I do not   begin , but for the honour of Old Virginia I will not   go back . " 
 these pecuniary transaction arrange , William Esmond go away scowl towards the stable , where he love to take his pipe with the groom ; the brisk parson go off to pay his court to the lady , and partake of the Sunday dinner which would presently be serve . Lord Castlewood and Harry remain for a while together . since the Virginian 's arrival my lord have scarcely speak with he . in his manner he be perfectly friendly , but so silent that he would often sit at the head of his table , and leave it without utter a word . 
 " I suppose yonder property of yours be a fine one by this time ? " say my lord to Harry . 
 " I reckon it be almost as big as an English county , " answer Harry , " and the land 's as good , too , for many thing . " Harry would not have the Old Dominion , nor his share in it , underrated . 
 " indeed ! " say my lord , with a look of surprise . " when it belong to my father it do not yield much . " 
 " pardon I , my lord . you know how it belong to your father , " cry the youth , with some spirit . " it be because my grandfather do not choose to claim his right . "   this matter be discuss in the Author 's previous work , the Memoirs of Colonel Esmond . 
 " of course , of course , " say my lord , hastily . 
 " I mean , cousin , that we of the virginian house owe you nothing but our own , " continue Harry Warrington ; " but our own , and the hospitality which you be now show I . " 
 " you be heartily welcome to both . you be hurt by the betting just now ? " 
 " well , " reply the lad , " I be sort o ' hurt . your welcome , you see , be different to our welcome , and that be the fact . at home we be glad to see a man , hold out a hand to he , and give he of our good . here you take we in , give we beef and claret enough , to be sure , and do not   seem to care when we come , or when we go . that be the remark which I have be make since I have be in your lordship 's house ; I can not   help tell it out , you see , now ' tis on my mind ; and I think I be a little easy now I have say it . " and with this , the excited young fellow knock a billiard - ball across the table , and then laugh , and look at his eld kinsman . 
 " A la bonne heure ! we be cold to the stranger within and without our gate . we do not   take Mr. Harry Warrington into our arm , and cry when we see our cousin . we do not   cry when he go away but do we pretend ? " 
 " no , you do not . but you try to get the well of he in a bet , " say Harry , indignantly . 
 " be there no such practice in Virginia , and do not   sport man there try to overreach one another ? what be that story I hear you tell our aunt , of the british officer and Tom somebody of Spotsylvania ! " 
 " that be fair ! " cry Harry . " that is , it be usual practice , and a stranger must look out . I do not   mind the parson ; if he win , he may have , and welcome . but a relation ! to think that my own blood cousin want money out of I ! " 
 " a Newmarket man would get the well of his father . my brother have be on the turf since he ride over to it from Cambridge . if you play at card with he and he will if you will let he he will beat you if he can . " 
 " well , I be ready ! " cry Harry . " I will play any game with he that I know , or I will jump with he , or I will ride with he , or I will row with he , or I will wrestle with he , or I will shoot with he there now . " 
 the senior be greatly entertain , and hold out his hand to the boy . " anything , but do not   fight with he , " say my lord . 
 " if I do , I will whip he ! hang if I do not ! " cry the lad . but a look of surprise and displeasure on the nobleman 's part recall he to well sentiment . " a hundred pardon , my lord ! " he say , blush very red , and seize his cousin 's hand . " I talk of ill manner , be angry and hurt just now ; but ' tis doubly ill - mannered of I to show my anger , and boast about my prowess to my own host and kinsman . it be not the practice with we Americans to boast , believe I , it be not . " 
 " you be the first I ever meet , " say my lord , with a smile , " and I take you at your word . and I give you fair warning about the card , and the betting , that be all , my boy . " 
 " leave a Virginian alone ! we be a match for most man , we be , " resume the boy . 
 Lord Castlewood do not laugh . his eyebrow only arch for a moment , and his grey eye turn towards the ground . " so you can bet fifty guineas , and afford to lose they ? so much the well for you , cousin . those great virginian estate yield a great revenue , do they ? " 
 " More than sufficient for all of we for ten time as many as we be now , " reply Harry .   " what , he be pump I , " think the lad . 
 " and your mother make her son and heir a handsome allowance ? " 
 " as much as ever I choose to draw , my lord ! " cry Harry . 
 " Peste ! I wish I have such a mother ! " cry my lord . " but I have only the advantage of a stepmother , and she draw I . there be the dinner - bell . shall we go into the eating - room ? " and take his young friend 's arm , my lord lead he to the apartment where that meal be wait . 
 Parson Sampson form the delight of the entertainment , and amuse the lady with a hundred agreeable story . besides be chaplain to his lordship , he be a preacher in London , at the new chapel in Mayfair , for which my Lady Whittlesea   so well know in the reign of George I.   have leave an endowment . he have the choice story of all the club and coterie the very late news of who have run away with whom the last bon - mot of Mr. Selwyn the last wild bet of March and Rockingham . he know how the old king have quarrel with Madame Walmoden , and the Duke be suspect of have a new love ; who be in favour at Carlton House with the Princess of Wales , and who be hang last Monday , and how well he behave in the cart . my lord 's chaplain pour out all this intelligence to the amuse lady and the delighted young provincial , season his conversation with such plain term and lively joke as make Harry stare , who be newly arrive from the colony , and unused to the elegance of London life . the lady , old and young , laugh quite cheerfully at the lively joke . do not be frightened , ye fair reader of the present day ! we be not go to outrage your sweet modesty , or call blush on your maiden cheek . but ' tis certain that their ladyship at Castlewood never once think of be shock , but sate listen to the parson 's funny tale , until the chapel bell , clink for afternoon service , summon his reverence away for half an hour . there be no sermon . he would be back in the drinking of a bottle of Burgundy . Mr. Will call a fresh one , and the chaplain toss off a glass ere he run out . 
 Ere the half - hour be over , Mr. Chaplain be back again bawl for another bottle . this discuss , they join the lady , and a couple of card - table be set out , as , indeed , they be for many hour every day , at which the whole of the family party engage . Madame de Bernstein could beat any one of her kinsfolk at piquet , and there be only Mr. Chaplain in the whole circle who be at all a match for her ladyship . 
 in this easy manner the Sabbath - day pass . the evening be beautiful , and there be talk of adjourn to a cool tankard and a game of whist in a summer - house ; but the company vote to sit indoor , the lady declare they think the aspect of three honour in their hand , and some good court - card , more beautiful than the lovely scene of nature ; and so the sun go behind the elm , and still they be at their card ; and the rook come home caw their evensong , and they never stir except to change partner ; and the chapel clock toll hour after hour unheeded , so delightfully be they spend over the pasteboard ; and the moon and star come out ; and it be nine o'clock , and the groom of the chamber announce that supper be ready . 
 whilst they sate at that meal , the postboy 's twang horn be hear , as he trot into the village with his letter - bag . my lord 's bag be bring in presently from the village , and his letter , which he put aside , and his newspaper which he read . he smile as he come to a paragraph , look at his virginian cousin , and hand the paper over to his brother Will , who by this time be very comfortable , have have pretty good luck all the evening , and a great deal of liquor . 
 " read that , will , " say my lord . 
 Mr. William take the paper , and , read the sentence point out by his brother , utter an exclamation which cause all the lady to cry out . 
 " gracious heaven , William ! what have happen ? " cry one or the other fond sister . 
 " mercy , child , why do you swear so dreadfully ? " ask the young man 's fond mamma . 
 " what be the matter ? " inquire Madame de Bernstein , who have fall into a doze after her usual modicum of punch and beer . 
 " read it , Parson ! " say Mr. William , thrust the paper over to the chaplain , and look as fierce as a Turk . 
 " Bit , by the Lord ! " roar the chaplain , dash down the paper . 
 " Cousin Harry , you be in luck , " say my lord , take up the sheet , and read from it . " the Six Year Old Plate at Huntingdon be win by Jason , beat Brilliant , Pytho , and ginger . the odd be five to four on Brilliant against the field , three to one against Jason , seven to two against Pytho , and twenty to one against Ginger . " 
 " I owe you a half - year 's income of my poor living , Mr. Warrington , " groan the parson . " I will pay when my noble patron settle with I . " 
 " a curse upon the luck ! " growl Mr. William ; " that come of bet on a Sunday , " and he seek consolation in another great bumper . 
 " Nay , cousin Will . it be but in jest , " cry Harry . " I can not   think of take my cousin 's money . " 
 " curse I , sir , do you suppose , if I lose , I can not   pay ? " ask Mr. William ; " and that I want to be beholden to any man alive ? that be a good joke . be not   it , Parson ? " 
 " I think I have hear well , " say the clergyman ; to which William reply , " hang it , let we have another bowl . " 
 let we hope the lady do not wait for this last replenishment of liquor , for it be certain they have have plenty already during the evening . 




 CHAPTER XVI . in which Gumbo show skill with the Old English Weapon 

 our young Virginian have win these sum of money from his cousin and the chaplain , be in duty bind to give they a chance of recover their money , and I be afraid his mamma and other sound moralist would scarcely approve of his way of life . he play at card a great deal too much . besides the daily whist or quadrille with the lady , which set in soon after dinner at three o'clock , and last until supper - time , there occur game involve the gain or loss of very considerable sum of money , in which all the gentleman , my lord include , take part . since their Sunday 's conversation , his lordship be more free and confidential with his kinsman than he have previously be , bet with he quite affably , and engage he at backgammon and piquet . Mr. William and the pious chaplain like a little hazard ; though this diversion be enjoy on the sly , and unknown to the lady of the house , who have exact repeat promise from cousin will that he would not lead the Virginian into mischief , and that he would himself keep out of it . so will promise as much as his aunt or his mother choose to demand from he , give they his word that he would never play no , never ; and when the family retire to rest , Mr. Will would walk over with a dice - box and a rum - bottle to cousin Harry 's quarter , where he , and Hal , and his reverence would sit and play until daylight . 
 when Harry give to Lord Castlewood those flourish description of the maternal estate in America , he have not wish to mislead his kinsman , or to boast , or to tell falsehood , for the lad be of a very honest and truth - tell nature ; but , in his life at home , it must be own that the young fellow have have acquaintance with all sort of queer company , horse - jockey , tavern lounger , gambling and sporting man , of whom a great number be find in his native colony . a land aristocracy , with a population of negro to work their field , and cultivate their tobacco and corn , have little other way of amusement than in the hunting - field , or over the card and the punch - bowl . the hospitality of the province be unbounded : every man 's house be his neighbour 's ; and the idle gentlefolk ride from one mansion to another , find in each pretty much the same sport , welcome , and rough plenty . the virginian squire have often a barefooted valet , and a cobbled saddle ; but there be plenty of corn for the horse , and abundance of drink and venison for the master within the tumble - down fence , and behind the crack window of the hall . Harry have sleep on many a straw mattress , and engage in endless jolly night - bout over claret and punch in crack bowl till morning come , and it be time to follow the hound . his poor brother be of a much more sober sort , as the lad own with contrition . so it be that nature make folk ; and some love book and tea , and some like Burgundy and a gallop across country . our young fellow 's taste be speedily make visible to his friend in England . none of they be partial to the Puritan discipline ; nor do they like Harry the bad for not be the least of a milksop . manner , you see , be loose a hundred year ago ; tongue be vastly more free - and - easy ; name be name , and thing be do , which we should screech now to hear mention . yes , madam , we be not as our ancestor be . ought we not to thank the Fates that have improve our moral so prodigiously , and make we so eminently virtuous ? 
 so , keep a shrewd keen eye upon people round about he , and fancy , not incorrectly , that his cousin be disposed to pump he , Harry Warrington have think fit to keep his own counsel regard his own affair , and in all game of chance or matter of sport be quite a match for the three gentleman into whose company he have fall . even in the noble game of billiard he could hold his own after a few day ' play with his cousin and their revered pastor . his grandfather love the game , and have over from Europe one of the very few table which exist in his Majesty 's province of Virginia . nor , though Mr. Will could beat he at the commencement , could he get undue odd out of the young gamester . after their first bet , Harry be on his guard with Mr. Will , and cousin William own , not without respect , that the American be his match in most thing , and his well in many . but though Harry play so well that he could beat the parson , and soon be the equal of Will , who of course could beat both the girl , how come it , that in the contest with these , especially with one of they , Mr. Warrington frequently come off second ? he be profoundly courteous to every being who wear a petticoat ; nor have that traditional politeness yet leave his country . all the woman of the Castlewood establishment love the young gentleman . the grim housekeeper be mollify by he : the fat cook greet he with blowsy smile ; the ladies'-maid , whether of the French or the english nation , smirk and giggle in his behalf ; the pretty porter 's daughter at the lodge have always a kind word in reply to his . Madame de Bernstein take note of all these thing , and , though she say nothing , watch carefully the boy 's disposition and behaviour . 
 who can say how old Lady Maria Esmond be ? book of the peerage be not so many in those day as they be in our blessed time , and I can not tell to a few year , or even a lustre or two . when will use to say she be five - and - thirty , he be abusive , and , besides , be always give to exaggeration . Maria be Will 's half - sister . she and my lord be child of the late Lord Castlewood 's first wife , a german lady , whom , ' tis know , my lord marry in the time of Queen Anne 's war . Baron Bernstein , who marry Maria 's Aunt Beatrix , Bishop Tusher 's widow , be also a German , a hanoverian nobleman , and relative of the first Lady Castlewood . if my Lady Maria be bear under George I. , and his Majesty George II . have be thirty year on the throne , how could she be seven - and - twenty , as she tell Harry Warrington she be ? " I be old , child , " she use to say . she use to call Harry " child " when they be alone . " I be a hundred year old . I be seven - and - twenty . I might be your mother almost . " to which Harry would reply , " your ladyship might be the mother of all the cupid , I be sure . you do not   look twenty , on my word you do Dot ! " 
 Lady Maria look any age you like . she be a fair beauty with a dazzle white and red complexion , an abundance of fair hair which flow over her shoulder , and beautiful round arm which show to uncommon advantage when she play at billiard with cousin Harry . when she have to stretch across the table to make a stroke , that youth catch glimpse of a little ankle , a little clocked stocking , and a little black satin slipper with a little red heel , which fill he with unutterable rapture , and make he swear that there never be such a foot , ankle , clocked stocking , satin slipper in the world . and yet , oh , you foolish Harry ! your mother 's foot be ever so much more slender , and half an inch short , than Lady Maria 's . but , somehow , boy do not look at their mamma ' slipper and ankle with rapture . 
 no doubt Lady Maria be very kind to Harry when they be alone . before her sister , aunt , stepmother , she make light of he , call he a simpleton , a chit , and who know what trivial name ? behind his back , and even before his face , she mimic his accent , which smack somewhat of his province . Harry blush and correct the faulty intonation , under his english monitresse . his aunt pronounce that they would soon make he a pretty fellow . 
 Lord Castlewood , we have say , become daily more familiar and friendly with his guest and relative . till the crop be off the ground there be no sporting , except an occasional cock - match at Winchester , and a bull - baiting at Hexton Fair . Harry and will ride off to many jolly fair and race round about the young Virginian be present to some of the county family the henley of the Grange , the Crawleys of Queen 's Crawley , the Redmaynes of Lionsden , and so forth . the neighbour come in their great heavy coach , and pass two or three day in country fashion . More of they would have come , but for the fear all the Castlewood family have of offend Madame de Bernstein . she do not like country company ; the rustical society and conversation annoy she . " we shall be merry when my aunt leave we , " the young folk own . " we have cause , as you may imagine , for be very civil to she . you know what a favourite she be with our papa ? and with reason . she get he his earldom , be very well indeed at Court at that time with the King and Queen . she command here naturally , perhaps a little too much . we be all afraid of she : even my eld brother stand in awe of she , and my stepmother be much more obedient to she than she ever be to my papa , whom she rule with a rod of iron . but Castlewood be merry when our aunt be not here . at least we have much more company . you will come to we in our gay day , Harry , will not   you ? of course you will : this be your home , sir . I be so pleased oh , so pleased when my brother say he consider it be your home ! " 
 a soft hand be hold out after this pretty speech , a pair of very well preserve blue eye look exceedingly friendly . Harry grasp his cousin 's hand with ardour . I do not know what privilege of cousinship he would not like to claim , only he be so timid . they call the english selfish and cold . he at first think his relative be so : but how mistaken he be ! how kind and affectionate they be , especially the Earl , and dear , dear Maria ! how he wish he could recall that letter which he have write to Mrs. Mountain and his mother , in which he hint that his welcome have be a cold one ! the Earl his cousin be everything that be kind , have promise to introduce he to London society , and present he at Court , and at White 's . he be to consider Castlewood as his english home . he have be most hasty in his judgment regard his relative in Hampshire . all this , with many contrite expression , he write in his second despatch to Virginia . and he add , for it hath be hint that the young gentleman do not spell at this early time with especial accuracy , " my cousin , the Lady Maria , be a perfect Angle . " 
 " Ille praeter omne angulus ridet , " mutter little Mr. Dempster , at home in Virginia . 
 " the child can not   be fall in love with his angle , as he call she ! " cry out Mountain . 
 " Pooh , pooh ! my niece Maria be forty ! " say Madam Esmond . " I perfectly well recollect she when I be at home a great , gawky , carroty creature , with a foot like a pair of bellow . " where be truth , forsooth , and who knoweth it ? be Beauty beautiful , or be it only our eye that make it so ? do Venus squint ? have she get a splay - foot , red hair , and a crooked back ? anoint my eye , good Fairy Puck , so that I may ever consider the Beloved Object a paragon ! above all , keep on anoint my mistress 's dainty peeper with the very strong ointment , so that my noddle may ever appear lovely to she , and that she may continue to crown my honest ear with fresh rose ! 
 now , not only be Harry Warrington a favourite with some in the drawing - room , and all the lady of the servants'-hall , but , like master like man , his valet Gumbo be very much admire and respect by very many of the domestic circle . Gumbo have a hundred accomplishment . he be famous as a fisherman , huntsman , blacksmith . he could dress hair beautifully , and improve himself in the art under my lord 's own swiss gentleman . he be great at cook many of his virginian dish , and learn many new culinary secret from my lord 's french man . we have hear how exquisitely and melodiously he sing at church ; and he sing not only sacred but secular music , often invent air and compose rude word after the habit of his people . he play the fiddle so charmingly , that he set all the girl dance in Castlewood Hall , and be ever welcome to a gratis mug of ale at the Three Castles in the village , if he would but bring his fiddle with he . he be good - natured and love to play for the village child : so that Mr. Warrington 's negro be a universal favourite in all the Castlewood domain . 
 now it be not difficult for the servants'-hall folk to perceive that Mr. Gumbo be a liar , which fact be undoubted in spite of all his good quality . for instance , that day at church , when he pretend to read out of Molly 's psalm - book , he sing quite other word than those which be down in the book , of which he could not decipher a syllable . and he pretend to understand music , whereupon the swiss valet bring he some , and Master Gumbo turn the page upside down . these instance of long - bow practice daily occur , and be patent to all the Castlewood household . they know Gumbo be a liar , perhaps not think the bad of he for this weakness ; but they do not know how great a liar he be , and believe he much more than they have any reason for do , and because , I suppose , they like to believe he . 
 whatever might be his feeling of wonder and envy on first view the splendour and comfort of Castlewood , Mr. Gumbo keep his sentiment to himself , and examine the place , park , appointment , stable , very coolly . the horse , he say , be very well , what there be of they ; but at Castlewood in Virginia they have six time as many , and let I see , fourteen eighteen groom to look after they . Madam Esmond 's carriage be much fine than my lord 's , great deal more gold on the panel . as for her garden , they cover acre , and they grow every kind of flower and fruit under the sun . pineapple and peach ? pineapple and peach be so common , they be give to pig in his country . they have twenty forty gardener , not white gardener , all black gentleman , like hisself . in the house be twenty forty gentleman in livery , besides woman - servant never could remember how many woman - servant , dere be so many : tink dere be fifty woman - servant all Madam Esmond 's property , and worth ever so many hundred piece of eight apiece . how much be a piece of eight ? big than a guinea , a piece of eight be . Tink , Madam Esmond have twenty thirty thousand guineas a year , have whole room full of gold and plate . come to England in one of her ship ; have ever so many ship , Gumbo can not   count how many ship ; and estate , cover all over with tobacco and negro , and reach out for a week 's journey . be Master Harry heir to all this property ? of course , now Master George be kill and scalp by the Indians . Gumbo have kill ever so many Indians , and try to save Master George , but he be Master Harry 's boy , and Master Harry be as rich , oh , as rich as ever he like . he wear black now , because Master George be dead ; but you should see his chest full of gold clothe , and lace , and jewel at Bristol . of course , Master Harry be the rich man in all Virginia , and might have twenty sixty servant ; only he like travel with one good , and that one , it need scarcely be say , be Gumbo . 
 this story be not invent at once , but gradually elicit from Mr. Gumbo , who might have utter some trifling contradiction during the progress of the narrative , but by the time he have tell his tale twice or thrice in the servants'-hall or the butler 's private apartment , he be pretty perfect and consistent in his part , and know accurately the number of slave Madam Esmond keep , and the amount of income which she enjoy . the truth be , that as four or five black be require to do the work of one white man , the domestic in american establishment be much more numerous than in our ; and , like the house of most other virginian landed proprietor , Madam Esmond 's mansion and stable swarm with negro . 
 Mr. Gumbo 's account of his mistress 's wealth and splendour be carry to my lord by his lordship 's man , and to Madame de Bernstein and my lady by their respective waiting - woman , and , we may be sure , lose nothing in the telling . a young gentleman in England be not the less liked because he be repute to be the heir to vast wealth and possession ; when Lady Castlewood come to hear of Harry 's prodigious expectation , she repent of her first cool reception of he , and of have pinch her daughter 's arm till it be black - and - blue for have be extend towards the youth in too friendly a manner . be it too late to have he back into those fair arm ? Lady Fanny be welcome to try , and resume the dancing - lesson . the Countess would play the music with all her heart . but , how provoking ! that odious , sentimental Maria would always insist upon be in the room ; and , as sure as Fanny walk in the garden or the park , so sure would her sister come trail after she . as for Madame de Bernstein , she laugh , and be amuse at the story of the prodigious fortune of her virginian relative . she know her half - sister 's man of business in London , and very likely be aware of the real state of Madame Esmond 's money matter ; but she do not contradict the rumour which Gumbo and his fellow - servant have set afloat ; and be not a little divert by the effect which these report have upon the behaviour of the Castlewood family towards their young kinsman . 
 " hang he ! be he so rich , Molly ? " say my lord to his eld sister . " then good - bye to our chance with your aunt . the Baroness will be sure to leave he all her money to spite we , and because he do not   want it . nevertheless , the lad be a good lad enough , and it be not his fault be rich , you know . " 
 " he be very simple and modest in his habit for one so wealthy , " remark Maria . 
 " rich people often be so , " say my lord . " if I be rich , I often think I would be the great miser , and live in rag and on a crust . depend on it there be no pleasure so enduring as money - getting . it grow on you , and increase with old age . but because I be as poor as Lazarus , I dress in purple and fine linen , and fare sumptuously every day . " 
 Maria go to the book - room and get the history of Virginia , by R. B. Gent and read therein what an admirable climate it be , and how all kind of fruit and corn grow in that province , and what noble river be those of Potomac and Rappahannoc , abound in all sort of fish . and she wonder whether the climate would agree with she , and whether her aunt would like she ? and Harry be sure his mother would adore she , so would mountain . and when he be ask about the number of his mother 's servant , he say , they certainly have more servant than be see in England he do not know how many . but the negro do not do near as much work as english servant do hence the necessity of keep so great a number . as for some other of Gumbo 's detail which be bring to he , he laugh and say the boy be wonderful as a romancer , and in tell such story he suppose be try to speak out for the honour of the family . 
 so Harry be modest as well as rich ! his denial only serve to confirm his relative ' opinion regard his splendid expectation . More and more the Countess and the lady be friendly and affectionate with he . More and more Mr. will bet with he , and want to sell he bargain . Harry 's simple dress and equipage only serve to confirm his friend ' idea of his wealth . to see a young man of his rank and mean with but one servant , and without horse or a carriage of his own what modesty ! when he go to London he would cut a well figure ? of course he would . Castlewood would introduce he to the good society in the capital , and he would appear as he ought to appear at St. James 's . no man could be more pleasant , wicked , lively , obsequious than the worthy chaplain , Mr. Sampson . how proud he would be if he could show his young friend a little of London life ! if he could warn rogue off he , and keep he out of the way of harm ! Mr. Sampson be very kind : everybody be very kind . Harry like quite well the respect that be pay to he . as Madam Esmond 's son he think perhaps it be his due : and take for grant that he be the personage which his family imagine he to be . how should he know well , who have never as yet see any place but his own province , and why should he not respect his own condition when other people respect it so ? so all the little knot of people at Castlewood House , and from these the people in Castlewood village , and from thence the people in the whole county , choose to imagine that Mr. Harry Esmond Warrington be the heir of immense wealth , and a gentleman of very great importance , because his negro valet tell lie about he in the servants'-hall . 
 Harry 's aunt , Madame de Bernstein , after a week or two , begin to tire of Castlewood and the inhabitant of that mansion , and the neighbour who come to visit they . this clever woman tired of most thing and people soon or later . so she take to nodding and sleep over the chaplain 's story , and to doze at her whist and over her dinner , and to be very snappish and sarcastic in her conversation with her Esmond nephew and niece , hit out blow at my lord and his brother the jockey , and my lady , widow and unmarried , who wince under her scornful remark , and bear they as they good might . the cook , whom she have so praise on first come , now give she no satisfaction ; the wine be cork ; the house be damp , dreary , and full of draught ; the door would not shut , and the chimney be smoky . she begin to think the Tunbridge water be very necessary for she , and order the doctor , who come to she from the neighbouring town of Hexton , to order those water for her benefit . 
 " I wish to heaven she would go ! " growl my lord , who be the most independent member of his family . " she may go to Tunbridge , or she may go to Bath , or she may go to Jericho , for I . " 
 " Shall Fanny and I come with you to Tunbridge , dear baroness ? " ask Lady Castlewood of her sister - in - law . 
 " not for world , my dear ! the doctor order I absolute quiet , and if you come I should have the knocker go all day , and Fanny 's lover would never be out of the house , " answer the Baroness , who be quite weary of Lady Castlewood 's company . 
 " I wish I could be of any service to my aunt ! " say the sentimental Lady Maria , demurely . 
 " my good child , what can you do for I ? you can not play piquet so well as my maid , and I have hear all your song till I be perfectly tired of they ! one of the gentleman might go with I : at least make the journey , and see I safe from highwayman . " 
 " I be sure , ma'am , I shall be glad to ride with you , " say Mr. Will . 
 " oh , not you ! I do not   want you , William , " cry the young man 's aunt . " why do not you offer , and where be your american manner , you ungracious Harry Warrington ? do not   swear , Will , Harry be much well company than you be , and much well ton too , sir . " 
 " Tong , indeed ! confound his tong , " growl envious Will to himself . 
 " I dare say I shall be tired of he , as I be of other folk , " continue the Baroness . " I have scarcely see Harry at all in these last day . you shall ride with I to Tunbridge , Harry ! " 
 at this direct appeal , and to no one 's wonder more than that of his aunt , Mr. Harry Warrington blush , and hem and ha'd and at length say , " I have promise my cousin Castlewood to go over to Hexton Petty Sessions with he to - morrow . he think I should see how the Courts here be conduct and and the partridge - shooting will soon begin , and I have promise to be here for that , ma'am . " say which word , Harry Warrington look as red as a poppy , whilst Lady Maria hold her meek face downward , and nimbly ply her needle . 
 " you actually refuse to go with I to Tunbridge Wells ? " call out Madame Bernstein , her eye lighten , and her face flush up with anger , too . 
 " not to ride with you , ma'am ; that I will do with all my heart ; but to stay there I have promise ... " 
 " enough , enough , sir ! I can go alone , and do not   want your escort , " cry the irate old lady , and rustle out of the room . 
 the Castlewood family look at each other with wonder . will whistle . Lady Castlewood glance at Fanny , as much as to say , his chance be over . Lady Maria never lift up her eye from her tambour - frame . 




 CHAPTER XVII . on the Scent 

 Young Harry Warrington 's act of revolt come so suddenly upon Madame de Bernstein , that she have no other way of reply to it , than by the prompt outbreak of anger with which we leave she in the last chapter . she dart two fierce glance at Lady Fanny and her mother as she quit the room . Lady Maria over her tambour - frame escape without the least notice , and scarcely lift up her head from her embroidery , to watch the aunt retreating , or the look which mamma - in - law and sister throw at one another . 
 " so , in spite of all , you have , madam ? " the maternal look seem to say . 
 " have what ? " ask Lady Fanny 's eye . but what good in look innocent ? she look puzzle . she do not look one - tenth part as innocent as Maria . have she be guilty , she would have look not guilty much more cleverly ; and would have take care to study and compose a face so as to be ready to suit the plea . whatever be the expression of Fanny 's eye , mamma glare on she as if she would have like to tear they out . 
 but Lady Castlewood could not operate upon the said eye then and there , like the barbarous monster in the stage - direction in King Lear . when her ladyship be go to tear out her daughter 's eye , she would retire smile , with an arm round her dear child 's waist , and then gouge she in private . 
 " so you do not   fancy go with the old lady to Tunbridge Wells ? " be all she say to Cousin Warrington , wear at the same time a perfectly well - breed simper on her face . 
 " and small blame to our cousin ! " interpose my lord .   the face over the tambour - frame look up for one instant .   " a young fellow must not have it all idle and holiday . let he mix up something useful with his pleasure , and go to the fiddle and pump - room at Tunbridge or the bath later . Mr. Warrington have to conduct a great estate in America : let he see how our in England be carry on . will hath show he the kennel and the stable ; and the game in vogue , which I think , cousin , you seem to play as well as your teacher . after harvest we will show he a little English fowling and shooting : in winter we will take he out a - hunting . though there have be a coolness between we and our aunt - kinswoman in Virginia , yet we be of the same blood . Ere we send our cousin back to his mother , let we show he what an english gentleman 's life at home be . I should like to read with he as well as sport with he , and that be why I have be press he of late to stay and bear I company . " 
 my lord speak with such perfect frankness that his mother - in - law and half - brother and sister could not help wonder what his meaning could be . the three last - name person often hold little conspiracy together , and cabal or grumble against the head of the house . when he adopt that frank tone , there be no fathom his meaning : often it would not be discover until month have pass . he do not say , " this be true , " but , " I mean that this statement should be accept and believe in my family . " it be then a thing convenue , that my Lord Castlewood have a laudable desire to cultivate the domestic affection , and to educate , amuse , and improve his young relative ; and that he have take a great fancy to the lad , and wish that Harry should stay for some time near his lordship . 
 " what be Castlewood 's game now ? " ask William of his mother and sister as they disappear into the corridor . " stop ! by George , I have it ! " 
 " what , William ? " 
 " he intend to get he to play , and to win the Virginia estate back from he . that be what it be ! " 
 " but the lad have not get the Virginia estate to pay , if he lose , " remark mamma . 
 " if my brother have not some scheme in view , may I be . " 
 " Hush ! of course he have a scheme in view . but what be it ? " 
 " he can not   mean Maria Maria be as old as Harry 's mother , " muse Mr. William . 
 " Pooh ! with her old face and sandy hair and freckle skin ! impossible ! " cry Lady Fanny , with somewhat of a sigh . 
 " of course , your ladyship have a fancy for the Iroquois , too ! " cry mamma . 
 " I trust I know my station and duty well , madam ! if I have like he , that be no reason why I should marry he . your ladyship hath teach I as much as that . " 
 " my Lady Fanny ! " 
 " I be sure you marry our papa without like he . you have tell I so a thousand time ! " 
 " and if you do not love our father before marriage , you certainly do not fall in love with he afterwards , " break in Mr. William , with a laugh . " Fan and I remember how our honour parent use to fight . do not   we , Fan ? and our brother Esmond keep the peace . " 
 " do not   recall those dreadful low scene , William ! " cry mamma . " when your father take too much drink , he be like a madman ; and his conduct should be a warning to you , sir , who be fond of the same horrid practice . " 
 " I be sure , madam , you be not much the happy for marry the man you do not like , and your ladyship 's title hath bring very little along with it , " whimper out Lady Fanny . " what be the use of a coronet with the jointure of a tradesman 's wife ? how many of they be rich than we be ? there be come lately to live in our Square , at Kensington , a grocer 's widow from London Bridge , whose daughter have three gown where I have one ; and who , though they be wait on but by a man and a couple of maid , I know eat and drink a thousand time well than we do with our scrap of cold meat on our plate , and our great flaunting , trapesing , impudent , lazy lacquey ! " 
 " he ! he ! glad I dine at the palace , and not at home ! " say Mr. Will .   Mr. Will , through his aunt 's interest with Count Puffendorff , Groom of the Royal   and Serene Electoral   Powder - Closet , have one of the many small place at Court , that of Deputy Powder . 
 " why should I not be happy without any title except my own ? " continue Lady Frances . " many people be . I dare say they be even happy in America . " 
 " yes ! with a mother - in - law who be a perfect Turk and Tartar , for all I hear with indian war - whoop howl all around you and with a danger of lose your scalp , or of be eat up by a wild beast every time you go to church . " 
 " I would not   go to church , " say Lady Fanny . 
 " you would go with anybody who ask you , Fan ! " roar out Mr. will : " and so would old Maria , and so would any woman , that be the fact . " and will laugh at his own wit . 
 " pray , good folk , what be all your merriment about ? " here ask Madame Bernstein , peep in on her relative from the tapestried door which lead into the gallery where their conversation be hold . 
 will tell she that his mother and sister have be have a fight   which be not a novelty , as Madame Bernstein know , because Fanny want to marry their cousin , the wild Indian , and my lady Countess would not let she . Fanny protest against this statement . since the very first day when her mother have tell she not to speak to the young gentleman , she have scarcely exchange two word with he . she know her station well . she do not want to be scalp by wild Indians , or eat up by bear . 
 Madame de Bernstein look puzzle . " if he be not stay for you , for whom be he stay ? " she ask . " at the house to which he have be carry , you have take care not to show he a woman that be not a fright or in the nursery ; and I think the boy be too proud to fall in love with a dairymaid , Will . " 
 " Humph ! that be a matter of taste , ma'am , " say Mr. William , with a shrug of his shoulder . 
 " of Mr. William Esmond 's taste , as you say ; but not of yonder boy 's . the esmond of his grandfather 's nurture , sir , would not go a - courting in the kitchen . " 
 " well , ma'am , every man to his taste , I say again . a fellow might go far and fare bad than my brother 's servants'-hall , and besides Fan , there be only the maid or old Maria to choose from . " 
 " Maria ! impossible ! " and yet , as she speak the very word , a sudden thought cross Madame Bernstein 's mind , that this elderly Calypso might have captivate her young Telemachus . she call to mind half a dozen instance in her own experience of young man who have be infatuate by old woman . she remember how frequent Harry Warrington 's absence have be of late absence which she attribute to his love for field sport . she remember how often , when he be absent , Maria Esmond be away too . walk in cool avenue , whispering in garden temple , or behind clipt hedge , casual squeeze of the hand in twilight corridor , or sweet glance and ogle in meeting on the stair , a lively fancy , an intimate knowledge of the world , very likely a considerable personal experience in early day , suggest all these possibility and chance to Madame de Bernstein , just as she be say that they be impossible . 
 " Impossible , ma'am ! I do not   know , " will continue . " my mother warn Fan off he . " 
 " oh , your mother do warn Fanny off ? " 
 " certainly , my dear Baroness ! " 
 " do not   she ? do not   she pinch Fanny 's arm black - and - blue ? do not   they fight about it ? " 
 " Nonsense , William ! for shame , William ! " cry both the implicate lady in a breath . 
 " and now , since we have hear how rich he be , perhaps it be sour grape , that be all . and now , since he be warn off the young bird , perhaps he be hunt the old one , that be all . impossible why impossible ? you know old Lady Suffolk , ma'am ? " 
 " William , how can you speak about Lady Suffolk to your aunt ? " 
 a grin pass over the countenance of the young gentleman . " because Lady Suffolk be a special favourite at Court ? well , other folk have succeed she . " 
 " Sir ! " cry Madame de Bernstein , who may have have her reason to take offence . 
 " so they have , I say ; or who , pray , be my Lady Yarmouth now ? and do not   old Lady Suffolk go and fall in love with George Berkeley , and marry he when she be ever so old ? Nay , ma'am , if I remember right and we hear a deal of town - talk at our table Harry Estridge go mad about your ladyship when you be somewhat rise twenty ; and would have change your name a third time if you would but have let he . " 
 this allusion to an adventure of her own later day , which be , indeed , pretty notorious to all the world , do not anger Madame de Bernstein , like Will be former hint about his aunt have be a favourite at George the Second 's Court ; but , on the contrary , set she in good - humour . 
 " Au fait , " she say , musing , as she play a pretty little hand on the table , and no doubt think about mad young Harry Estridge ; " ' tis not impossible , William , that old folk , and young folk , too , should play the fool . " 
 " but I can not   understand a young fellow be in love with Maria , " continue Mr. William , " however he might be with you , ma'am . that be oter shose , as our french tutor use to say . you remember the Count , ma'am ; he ! he ! and so do Maria ! " 
 " William ! " 
 " and I dare say the Count remember the bastinado Castlewood have give to he . a confound french dancing - master call himself a count , and dare to fall in love in our family ! whenever I want to make myself uncommonly agreeable to old Maria , I just say a few word of parly voo to she . she know what I mean . " 
 " have you abuse she to your cousin , Harry Warrington ? " ask Madame de Bernstein . 
 " well I know she be always abuse I and I have say my mind about she , " say will . 
 " oh , you idiot ! " cry the old lady . " who but a gaby ever speak ill of a woman to her sweetheart ? he will tell she everything , and they both will hate you . " 
 " the very thing , ma'am ! " cry Will , burst into a great laugh . " I have a sort of a suspicion , you see , and two day ago , as we be rid together , I tell Harry Warrington a bit of my mind about Maria ; why should not   I , I say ? she be always abuse I , be not   she , Fan ? and your favourite turn as red as my plush waistcoat wonder how a gentleman could malign his own flesh and blood , and , tremble all over with rage , say I be no true Esmond . " 
 " why do not   you chastise he , sir , as my lord do the dancing - master ? " cry Lady Castlewood . 
 " well , mother , you see that at quarter - staff there be two stick use , " reply Mr. William ; " and my opinion be , that Harry Warrington can guard his own head uncommonly well . perhaps that be one of the reason why I do not offer to treat my cousin to a caning . and now you say so , ma'am , I know he have tell Maria . she have be look battle , murder , and sudden death at I ever since . all which show " and here he turn to his aunt . 
 " all which show what ? " 
 " that I think we be on the right scent ; and that we have   find Maria the old fox ! " and the ingenuous youth here clap his hand to his mouth , and give a loud halloo . 
 how far have this pretty intrigue go ? now be the question . Mr. Will say , that at her age , Maria would be for conduct matter as rapidly as possible , not have much time to lose . there be not a great deal of love lose between Will and his half - sister . 
 " who would sift the matter to the bottom ? scold one party or the other be of no avail . threat only serve to aggravate people in such case . I never be in danger but once , young people , " say Madame de Bernstein , " and I think that be because my poor mother contradict I . if this boy be like other of his family , the more we oppose he , the more entete he will be ; and we shall never get he out of his scrape . " 
 " Faith , ma'am , suppose we leave he in it ? " grumble Will . " Old Maria and I do not   love each other too much , I grant you ; but an English earl 's daughter be good enough for an american tobacco - planter , when all be say and do . " 
 here his mother and sister break out . they would not hear of such a union . to which will answer , " you be like the dog in the manger . you do not   want the man yourself , Fanny " 
 " I want he , indeed ! " cry Lady Fanny , with a toss of her head . 
 " then why grudge he to Maria ? I think Castlewood want she to have he . " 
 " why grudge he to Maria , sir ? " cry Madame de Bernstein , with great energy . " do you remember who the poor boy be , and what your house owe to his family ? his grandfather be the good friend your father ever have , and give up this estate , this title , this very castle , in which you be conspire against the friendless virginian lad , that you and yours might profit by it . and the reward for all this kindness be , that you all but shut the door on the child when he knock at it , and talk of marry he to a silly elderly creature who might be his mother ! he shall not   marry she . " 
 " the very thing we be say and think , my dear baroness ! " interpose Lady Castlewood . " our part of the family be not eager about the match , though my lord and Maria may be . " 
 " you would like he for yourself , now that you hear he be rich and may be rich , young people , mind you that , " cry Madam Beatrix , turn upon the other woman . 
 " Mr. Warrington may be ever so rich , madam , but there be no need why your ladyship should perpetually remind we that we be poor , " break in Lady Castlewood , with some spirit . " at least there be very little disparity in Fanny 's age and Mr. Harry 's ; and you surely will be the last to say that a lady of our name and family be not good enough for any gentleman bear in Virginia or elsewhere . " 
 " let fanny take an english gentleman , Countess , not an American . with such a name and such a mother to help she , and with all her good look and accomplishment , sure , she can not   fail of find a man worthy of she . but from what I know about the daughter of this house , and what I imagine about our young cousin , I be certain that no happy match could be make between they . " 
 " what do my aunt know about I ? " ask Lady Fanny , turn very red . 
 " only your temper , my dear . you do not   suppose that I believe all the tittle - tattle and scandal which one can not help hear in town ? but the temper and early education be sufficient . only fancy one of you condemn to leave St. James 's and the Mall , and live in a plantation surround by savage ! you would die of ennui , or worry your husband 's life out with your ill - humour . you be bear , lady , to ornament court not wigwam . let this lad go back to his wilderness with a wife who be suit to he . " 
 the other two lady declare in a breath that , for their part , they desire no well , and , after a few more word , go on their way , while Madame de Bernstein , lift up her tapestried door , retire into her own chamber . she see all the scheme now ; she admire the way of woman , call a score of little circumstance back to mind . she wonder at her own blindness during the last few day , and that she should not have perceive the rise and progress of this queer little intrigue . how far have it go ? be now the question . be Harry 's passion of the serious and tragical sort , or a mere fire of straw which a day or two would burn out ? how deeply be he commit ? she dread the strength of Harry 's passion , and the weakness of Maria 's . a woman of her age be so desperate , Madame Bernstein may have think , that she will make any effort to secure a lover . scandal , bah ! she will retire and be a princess in Virginia , and leave the folk in England to talk as much scandal as they choose . 
 be there always , then , one thing which woman do not tell to one another , and about which they agree to deceive each other ? do the concealment arise from deceit or modesty ? a man , as soon as he feel an inclination for one of the other sex , seek for a friend of his own to whom he may impart the delightful intelligence . a woman   with more or less skill   burie her secret away from her kind . for day and week past , have not this old Maria make fool of the whole house , Maria , the butt of the family ? 
 I forbear to go into too curious inquiry regard the Lady Maria 's antecedent . I have my own opinion about Madame Bernstein 's . a hundred year ago people of the great world be not so straitlaced as they be now , when everybody be good , pure , moral , modest ; when there be no skeleton in anybody 's closet ; when there be no scheming ; no slurring over old story ; when no girl try to sell herself for wealth , and no mother abet she . suppose my Lady Maria try to make her little game , wherein be her ladyship 's great eccentricity ? 
 on these point no doubt the Baroness de Bernstein thought , as she commune with herself in her private apartment . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . an Old Story 

 as my Lady Castlewood and her son and daughter pass through one door of the saloon where they have all be seat , my Lord Castlewood depart by another issue ; and then the demure eye look up from the tambour - frame on which they have persist hitherto in examine the innocent violet and jonquil . the eye look up at Harry Warrington , who stand at an ancestral portrait under the great fireplace . he have gather a great heap of blush   those flower which bloom so rarely after gentlefolk ' springtime , and with they ornament his honest countenance , his cheek , his forehead , nay , his youthful ear . 
 " why do you refuse to go with our aunt , cousin ? " ask the lady of the tambour frame . 
 " because your ladyship bid I stay , " answer the lad . 
 " I bid you stay ! La ! child ! what one say in fun , you take in earnest ! be all you virginian gentleman so obsequious as to fancy every idle word a lady say be a command ? Virginia must be a pleasant country for our sex if it be so ! " 
 " you say when when we walk in the terrace two night since , o heaven ! " cry Harry , with a voice tremble with emotion . 
 " ah , that sweet night , cousin ! " cry the Tambour - frame . 
 " Whe whe when you give I this rise from your own neck , " roar out Harry , pull suddenly a crumpled and decay vegetable from his waistcoat " which I will never part with with , no , by heaven , whilst this heart continue to beat ! you say , ' Harry , if your aunt ask you to go away , you will go , and if you go , you will forget I . ' do not   you say so ? " 
 " all man forget ! " say the Virgin , with a sigh . 
 " in this cold selfish country they may , cousin , not in ours , " continue Harry , yet in the same state of exaltation " I have rather have lose an arm almost than refuse the old lady . I tell you it go to my heart to say no to she , and she so kind to I , and who have be the mean of introduce I to to o heaven ! " 
  here a kick to an intervene spaniel , which fly yelp from before the fire , and a rapid advance on the tambour - frame .   " look here , cousin ! if you be to bid I jump out of yonder window , I should do it ; or murder , I should do it . " 
 " La ! but you need not squeeze one 's hand so , you silly child ! " remark Maria . 
 " I can not   help it we be so in the south . where my heart be , I can not   help speak my mind out , cousin and you know where that heart be ! ever since that evening that o heaven ! I tell you I have hardly sleep since I want to do something to distinguish myself to be ever so great . I wish there be giant , Maria , as I have read of in in book , that I could go and fight them . I wish you be in distress , that I might help you , somehow . I wish you want my blood , that I might spend every drop of it for you . and when you tell I not to go with Madame Bernstein ... " 
 " I tell thee , child ? never . " 
 " I think you tell I . you say you know I prefer my aunt to my cousin , and I say then what I say now , ' Incomparable Maria ! I prefer thee to all the woman in the world and all the angel in Paradise and I would go anywhere , be it to dungeon , if you order I ! ' and do you think I would not stay anywhere , when you only desire that I should be near you ? " he add , after a moment 's pause . 
 " man always talk in that way that be , that is , I have hear so , " say the spinster , correct herself ; " for what should a country - breed woman know about you creature ? when you be near we , they say you be all rapture and flame and promise and I do not   know what ; when you be away , you forget all about we . " 
 " but I think I never want to go away as long as I live , " groan out the young man . " I have tired of many thing ; not book and that , I never care for study much , but game and sport which I use to be fond of when I be a boy . before I see you , it be to be a soldier I most desire ; I tear my hair with rage when my poor dear brother go away instead of I on that expedition in which we lose he . but now , I only care for one thing in the world , and you know what that be . " 
 " you silly child ! do not   you know I be almost old enough to be ... ? " 
 " I know I know ! but what be that to I ? have not   your br ... well , never mind who , some of them - tell I story against you , and do not   they show I the Family Bible , where all your name be down , and the date of your birth ? " 
 " the coward ! who do that ? " cry out Lady Maria . " Dear Harry , tell I who do that ? be it my mother - in - law , the grasping , odious , abandon , brazen harpy ? do you know all about she ? how she marry my father in his cup the horrid hussey ! and ... " 
 " indeed it be not   Lady Castlewood , " interpose the wonder Harry . 
 " then it be my aunt , " continue the infuriate lady . " a pretty moralist , indeed ! a bishop 's widow , forsooth , and I should like to know whose widow before and afterwards . why , Harry , she intrigue : with the Pretender , and with the Court of Hanover , and , I dare say , would with the Court of Rome and the Sultan of Turkey if she have have the mean . do you know who her second husband be ? a creature who ... " 
 " but our aunt never speak a word against you , " break in Harry , more and more amazed at the nymph 's vehemence . 
 she check her anger . in the inquisitive countenance opposite to she she think she read some alarm as to the temper which she be exhibit . 
 " well , well ! I be a fool , " she say . " I want thee to think well of I , Harry ! " 
 a hand be somehow put out and seize and , no doubt , kiss by the rapturous youth . " Angel ! " he cry , look into her face with his eager , honest eye . 
 two fish - pool irradiate by a pair of star would not kindle to great warmth than do those elderly orb into which Harry pour his gaze . nevertheless , he plunge into their blue depth , and fancy he see heaven in their calm brightness . so that silly dog   of whom Aesop or the Spelling - book use to tell we in youth   behold a beef - bone in the pond , and snap at it , and lose the beef - bone he be carry . o absurd cur ! he see the beefbone in his own mouth reflect in the treacherous pool , which dimple , I dare say , with ever so many smile , coolly suck up the meat , and return to its usual placidity . ah ! what a heap of wreck lie beneath some of those quiet surface ! what treasure we have drop into they ! what chase golden dish , what precious jewel of love , what bone after bone , and sweetest heart 's flesh ! do not some very faithful and unlucky dog jump in bodily , when they be swallow up head and tail entirely ? when some woman come to be drag , it be a marvel what will be find in the depth of they . Cavete , cane ! have a care how ye lap that water . what do they want with we , the mischievous siren slut ? a green - eyed Naiad never rest until she have inveigle a fellow under the water ; she sing after he , she dance after he ; she wind round he , glitter tortuously ; she warble and whisper dainty secret at his cheek , she kiss his foot , she leer at he from out of her rush : all her bed sigh out , " come , sweet youth ! Hither , hither , rosy Hylas ! " pop go Hylas .   surely the fable be renew for ever and ever ?   have his captivator any pleasure ? Doth she take any account of he ? no more than a fisherman landing at Brighton do of one out of a hundred thousand herring .... the last time . Ulysses row by the Sirens ' bank , he and his man do not care though a whole shoal of they be sing and comb their long lock . Young Telemachus be for jump overboard : but the tough old crew hold the silly , bawl lad . they be deaf , and could not hear his bawling nor the sea - nymph ' singing . they be dim of sight , and do not see how lovely the witch be . the stale , old , leer witch ! away with ye ! I dare say you have paint your cheek by this time ; your wretched old song be as out of fashion as Mozart , and it be all false hair you be comb ! 
 in the last sentence you see Lector Benevolus and Scriptor Doctissimus figure as tough old Ulysses and his tough old Boatswain , who do not care a quid of tobacco for any Siren at Sirens ' point ; but Harry Warrington be green Telemachus , who , be sure , be very unlike the soft youth in the good Bishop of Cambray 's twaddling story . he do not see that the siren paint the lash from under which she ogle he ; will put by into a box when she have do the ringlet into which she would inveigle he ; and if she eat he , as she propose to do , will crunch his bone with a new set of grinder just from the dentist 's , and warrant for mastication . the song be not stale to Harry Warrington , nor the voice crack or out of tune that sing it . but but oh , dear I , Brother Boatswain ! do not   you remember how pleasant the opera be when we first hear it ? Cosi fan tutti be its name Mozart 's music . now , I dare say , they have other word , and other music , and other singer and fiddler , and another great crowd in the pit . well , well , Cosi fan tutti be still upon the bill , and they be go on sing it over and over and over . 
 any man or woman with a pennyworth of brain , or the like precious amount of personal experience , or who have read a novel before , must , when Harry pull out those fade vegetable just now , have go off into a digression of his own , as the writer confess for himself he be diverge whilst he have be write the last brace of paragraph . if he see a pair of lover whisper in a garden alley or the embrasure of a window , or a pair of glance shoot across the room from Jenny to the artless Jessamy , he fall to musing on former day when , etc . etc . these thing follow each other by a general law , which be not as old as the hill , to be sure , but as old as the people who walk up and down they . when , I say , a lad pull a bunch of amputated and now decompose green from his breast and fall to kiss it , what be the use of say much more ? as well tell the market - gardener 's name from whom the slip - rose be buy the watering , clipping , trimming , manuring , the plant have undergo as tell how Harry Warrington come by it . Rose , elle a vecu la vie des rose , have be trim , have be water , have be pot , have be stick , have be cut , wear , give away , transfer to yonder boy 's pocket - book and bosom , accord to the law and fate appertain to rose . 
 and how come Maria to give it to Harry ? and how do he come to want it and to prize it so passionately when he get the bit of rubbish ? be not one story as stale as the other ? be not they all alike ? what be the use , I say , of tell they over and over ? Harry value that rise because Maria have ogle he in the old way ; because she have happen to meet he in the garden in the old way ; because he have take her hand in the old way ; because they have whisper to one another behind the old curtain   the gap old rag , as if everybody could not peep through it ! ; because , in this delicious weather , they have happen to be early riser and go into the park ; because dear Goody Jenkins in the village happen to have a bad knee , and my lady Maria go to read to she , and give her calves'-foot jelly , and because somebody , of course , must carry the basket . whole chapter might have be write to chronicle all these circumstance , but a quoi bon ? the incident of life , and love - making especially , I believe to resemble each other so much , that I be surprised , gentleman and lady , you read novel any more . Psha ! of course that rise in young Harry 's pocket - book have grow , and have bud , and have bloom , and be now rot , like other rose . I suppose you will want I to say that the young fool kiss it next ? of course he kiss it . what be lip make for , pray , but for smile and simpering , and   possibly   humbug , and kissing , and opening to receive mutton - chop , cigar , and so forth ? I can not write this part of the story of our Virginians , because Harry do not dare to write it himself to anybody at home , because , if he write any letter to Maria   which , of course , he do , as they be in the same house , and might meet each other as much as they like , they be destroy ; because he afterwards choose to be very silent about the story , and we can not   have it from her ladyship , who never tell the truth about anything . but cui bono ? I say again . what be the good of tell the story ? my gentle reader , take your story : take mine . to - morrow it shall be Miss Fanny 's , who be just walk away with her doll to the schoolroom and the governess   poor victim ! she have a version of it in her desk : and next day it shall be Baby 's , who be bawl out on the stair for his bottle . 
 Maria might like to have and exercise power over the young Virginian ; but she do not want that Harry should quarrel with his aunt for her sake , or that Madame de Bernstein should be angry with she . Harry be not the Lord of Virginia yet : he be only the Prince , and the Queen might marry and have other Princes , and the law of primogeniture might not be establish in Virginia , qu'en savait elle ? my lord her brother and she have exchange no word at all about the delicate business . but they understand each other , and the Earl have a way of understand thing without speak . he know his Maria perfectly well : in the course of a life of which not a little have be spend in her brother 's company and under his roof , Maria 's disposition , way , trick , fault , have come to be perfectly understand by the head of the family ; and she would find her little scheme check or aid by he , as to his lordship seem good , and without need of any word between they . thus three day before , when she happen to be go to see that poor dear old Goody , who be ill with the sore knee in the village   and when Harry Warrington happen to be walk behind the elm on the green too , my lord with his dog about he , and his gardener walk after he , cross the court , just as Lady Maria be trip to the gate - house and his lordship call his sister , and say : " molly , you be go to see Goody Jenkins . you be a charitable soul , my dear . give Gammer Jenkins this half - crown for I unless our cousin , Warrington , have already give her money . a pleasant walk to you . let she want for nothing . " and at supper , my lord ask Mr. Warrington many question about the poor in Virginia , and the mean of maintain they , to which the young gentleman give the good answer he might . his lordship wish that in the old country there be no more poor people than in the new : and recommend Harry to visit the poor and people of every degree , indeed , high and low in the country to look at the agriculture , in the city at the manufacture and municipal institution to which edify advice Harry accede with become modesty and few word , and Madame Bernstein nod approval over her piquet with the chaplain . next day , Harry be in my lord 's justice - room : the next day he be out ever so long with my lord on the farm and come home , what do my lord do , but look in on a sick tenant ? I think Lady Maria be out on that day , too ; she have be read good book to that poor dear Goody Jenkins , though I do not   suppose Madame Bernstein ever think of ask about her niece . 
 " CASTLEWOOD , HAMPSHIRE , ENGLAND , August 5 , 1757 . 
 " MY dear mountain at first , as I write , I do not like Castlewood , nor my cousin there , very much . now , I be use to their way , and we begin to understand each other much well . with my duty to my mother , tell she , I hope , that consider her ladyship 's great kindness to I , Madam Esmond will be reconcile to her half - sister , the Baroness de Bernstein . the Baroness , you know , be my Grandmamma 's daughter by her first husband , Lord Castlewood   only Grandpapa really be the real lord ; however , that be not his , that is , the other Lord Castlewood 's fault , you know , and he be very kind to Grandpapa , who always speak most kindly of he to we as you know . 
 " madame the Baroness Bernstein first marry a clergyman , Reverend Mr. Tusher , who be so learned and good , and such a favourite of his Majesty , as be my aunt too , that he be make a Bishop . when he die , our gracious King continue his friendship to my aunt ; who marry a hanoverian nobleman , who occupy a post at the Court and , I believe , leave the Baroness very rich . my cousin , my Lord Castlewood , tell I so much about she , and I be sure I have find from she the great kindness and affection . 
 " the   Dowiger   Countess Castlewood and my cousin Will and Lady Fanny have be describe per last , that go by the Falmouth packet on the 20th ult . the lady be not change since then . I and Cousin will be very good friend . we have ride out a good deal . we have have some famous cocking match at Hampton and Winton . my cousin be a sharp blade , but I think I have show he that we in Virginia know a thing or two . reverend Mr. Sampson , chaplain of the famaly , most excellent preacher , without any biggatry . 
 " the kindness of my cousin the Earl improve every day , and by next year 's ship I hope my mother will send his lordship some of our good roll tobacco   for tennant   and hamms . he be most charatable to the poor . his sister , Lady Maria , equally so . she sit for hour read good book to the sick : she be most beloved in the village . " 
 " nonsense ! " say a lady to whom Harry submit his precious manuscript . " why do you flatter I , cousin ? " 
 " you be belove in the village and out of it , " say Harry , with a knowing emphasis , " and I have flatter you , as you call it , a little more still , far on . " 
 " there be a sick old woman there , whom Madam Esmond would like , a most raligious , good , old lady . 
 " Lady Maria go very often to read to she ; which , she say , give her comfort . but though her ladyship hath the sweetest voice , both in speak and singeing   she play the church organ , and singe there most beautifully , I can not think Gammer Jenkins can have any comfort from it , be very deaf , by reason of her great age . she have her memory perfectly , however , and remember when my honour Grandmother Rachel Lady Castlewood live here . she say , my Grandmother be the good woman in the whole world , give she a cow when she be marry , and cure her husband , Gaffer Jenkins , of the collect , which he use to have very bad . I suppose it be with the Pills and Drops which my honour Mother put up in my box , when I leave dear Virginia . have never be ill since , have have no use for the pill . Gumbo hath , eat and drink a great deal too much in the Servants ' Hall . the next angel to my Grandmother   N.B. I think I spelt angel wrong per last , Gammer Jenkins say , be Lady Maria , who send her duty to her Aunt in Virginia , and remember she , and my Grandpapa and Grandmamma when they be in Europe , and she be a little girl . you know they have Grandpapa 's picture here , and I live in the very room which he have , and which be to be call mine , my Lord Castlewood say . 
 " have no more to say , at present , I close with good love and duty to 
 my honoured Mother , and with respect to Mr. Dempster , and a kiss for 
 Fanny , and kind remembrance to Old Gumbo , Nathan , Old and Young Dinah , 
 and the pointer dog and slut , and all friend , from their well - wisher 

 " HENRY ESMOND WARRINGTON . " 
 " have write and send my duty to my Uncle Warrington in Norfolk . no anser as yet . " 
 " I hope the spelling be right , cousin ? " ask the author of the letter , from the critic to whom he show it . 
 " ' tis quite well enough spell for any person of fashion , " answer Lady Maria , who do not choose to be examine too closely regard the orthography . 
 " one word ' Angel , ' I know , I spelt wrong in write to my mamma , but I have learn a way of spell it right , now . " 
 " and how be that , sir ? " 
 " I think ' tis by look at you , cousin ; " say which word , Mr. Harry make her ladyship a low bow , and accompany the bow by one of his good blush , as if he be offer she a bow and a bouquet . 




 CHAPTER XIX . contain both Love and luck 

 at the next meal , when the family party assemble , there be not a trace of displeasure in Madame de Bernstein 's countenance , and her behaviour to all the company , Harry include , be perfectly kind and cordial . she praise the cook this time , declare the fricassee be excellent , and that there be no eel anywhere like those in the Castlewood moat ; would not allow that the wine be cork , or hear of such extravagance as open a fresh bottle for a useless old woman like she ; give Madam Esmond Warrington , of Virginia , as her toast , when the new wine be bring , and hop Harry have bring away his mamma 's permission to take back an english wife with he . he do not remember his grandmother ; she , Madame de Bernstein 's , dear mother ? the Baroness amuse the company with numerous story of her mother , of her beauty and goodness , of her happiness with her second husband , though the wife be so much old than Colonel Esmond . to see they together be delightful , she have hear . their attachment be celebrate all through the country . to talk of disparity in marriage be vain after that . my Lady Castlewood and her two child hold their peace whilst Madame Bernstein prattle . Harry be enrapture , and Maria surprise . Lord Castlewood be puzzle to know what sudden freak or scheme have occasion this prodigious amiability on the part of his aunt ; but do not allow the slight expression of solicitude or doubt to appear on his countenance , which wear every mark of the most perfect satisfaction . 
 the Baroness 's good - humour infect the whole family ; not one person at table escape a gracious word from she . in reply to some compliment to Mr. Will , when that artless youth utter an expression of satisfaction and surprise at his aunt 's behaviour , she frankly say : " Complimentary , my dear ! of course I be . I want to make up with you for have be exceedingly rude to everybody this morning . when I be a child , and my father and mother be alive , and live here , I remember I use to adopt exactly the same behaviour . if I have be naughty in the morning , I use to try and coax my parent at night . I remember in this very room , at this very table oh , ever so many hundred year ago ! so coax my father , and mother , and your grandfather , Harry Warrington ; and there be eel for supper , as we have have they to - night , and it be that dish of collared eel which bring the circumstance back to my mind . I have be just as wayward that day , when I be seven year old , as I be to - day , when I be seventy , and so I confess my sin , and ask to be forgive , like a good girl . " 
 " I absolve your ladyship ! " cry the chaplain , who make one of the party . 
 " but your reverence do not know how cross and ill - temper I be . I scold my sister , Castlewood : I scold her child , I box Harry Warrington 's ear : and all because he would not go with I to Tunbridge Wells . " 
 " but I will go , madam ; I will ride with you with all the pleasure in life , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " you see , Mr. Chaplain , what good , dutiful child they all be . ' twa I alone who be cross and peevish . oh , it be cruel of I to treat they so ! Maria , I ask your pardon , my dear . " 
 " sure , madam , you have do I no wrong , " say Maria to this humble suppliant . 
 " indeed , I have , a very great wrong , child ! because I be weary of myself , I tell you that your company would be wearisome to I . you offer to come with I to Tunbridge , and I rudely refuse you . " 
 " Nay , ma'am , if you be sick , and my presence annoy you ... 
 " but it will not annoy I ! you be most kind to say that you would come . I do , of all thing , beg , pray , entreat , implore , command that you will come . " 
 my lord fill himself a glass , and sip it . most utterly unconscious do his lordship look . this , then , be the meaning of the previous comedy . 
 " anything which can give my aunt pleasure , I be sure , will delight I , " say Maria , try to look as happy as possible . 
 " you must come and stay with I , my dear , and I promise to be good and good - humour . my dear lord , you will spare your sister to I ? " 
 " Lady Maria Esmond be quite of age to judge for herself about such a matter , " say his lordship , with a bow . " if any of we can be of use to you , madam , you sure ought to command we . " which sentence , be interpret , no doubt mean , " plague take the old woman ! she be take Maria away in order to separate she from this young Virginian . " 
 " oh , Tunbridge will be delightful ! " sigh Lady Maria . 
 " Mr. Sampson will go and see Goody Jones for you , " my lord continue . 
 Harry draw picture with his finger on the table . what delight have he not be speculate on ? what walk , what rid , what interminable conversation , what delicious shrubbery and sweet sequester summer - house , what pore over music - book , what moonlight , what billing and cooing , have he not imagine ! yes , the day be come . they be all depart my Lady Castlewood to her friend , Madame Bernstein to her water and he be to be leave alone with his divine charmer alone with her and unutterable rapture ! the thought of the pleasure be madden . that these people be all go away . that he be to be leave to enjoy that heaven to sit at the foot of that angel and kiss the hem of that white robe . o Gods ! ' twa too great bliss to be real ! " I know it could not   be , " think poor Harry . " I know something would happen to take she from I . " 
 " but you will ride with we to Tunbridge , nephew Warrington , and keep we from the highwayman ? " say Madame de Bernstein . 
 Harry Warrington hop the company do not see how red he grow . he try to keep his voice calm and without tremor . yes , he would ride with their ladyship , and he be sure they need fear no danger . danger ! Harry feel he would rather like danger than not . he would slay ten thousand highwayman if they approach his mistress 's coach . at least , he would ride by that coach , and now and again see her eye at the window . he might not speak to she , but he should be near she . he should press the blessed hand at the inn at night , and feel it repose on his as he lead she to the carriage at morning . they would be two whole day go to Tunbridge , and one day or two he might stay there . be not the poor wretch who be leave for execution at newgate thankful for even two or three day of respite ? 
 you see , we have only indicate , we have not choose to describe , at length , Mr. Harry Warrington 's condition , or that utter depth of imbecility into which the poor young wretch be now plunge . some boy have the complaint of love favourably and gently . other , when they get the fever , be sick unto death with it ; or , recover , carry the mark of the malady down with they to the grave , or to remotest old age . I say , it be not fair to take down a young fellow 's word when he be rag in that delirium . suppose he be in love with a woman twice as old as himself ; have we not all read of the young gentleman who commit suicide in consequence of his fatal passion for Mademoiselle Ninon de l'Enclos who turn out to be his grandmother ? suppose thou art make an ass of thyself , young Harry Warrington , of Virginia ! be there not people in England who heehaw too ? kick and abuse he , you who have never bray ; but bear with he , all honest fellow - cardophagi : long - eared messmate , recognise a brother - donkey ! 
 " you will stay with we for a day or two at the Wells , " Madame Bernstein continue . " you will see we put into our lodging . then you can return to Castlewood and the partridge - shooting , and all the fine thing which you and my lord be to study together . " 
 Harry bow an acquiescence . a whole week of heaven ! life be not altogether a blank , then . 
 " and as there be sure to be plenty of company at the Wells , I shall be able to present you , " the lady graciously add . 
 " Company ! ah ! I shall not   need company , " sigh out Harry . " I mean that I shall be quite content in the company of you two lady , " he add , eagerly ; and no doubt Mr. Will wonder at his cousin 's taste . 
 as this be to be the last night of cousin Harry 's present visit to Castlewood , cousin will suggest that he , and his reverence , and Warrington should meet at the quarter of the latter and make up account , to which process , Harry , be a considerable winner in his play transaction with the two gentleman , have no objection . accordingly , when the lady retire for the night , and my lord withdraw as his custom be to his own apartment , the three gentleman all find themselves assemble in Mr. Harry 's little room before the punch - bowl , which be Will 's usual midnight companion . 
 but Will 's method of settling account be by produce a couple of fresh pack of card , and offer to submit Harry 's debt to the process of be double or acquit . the poor chaplain have no more ready cash than Lord Castlewood 's young brother . Harry Warrington want to win the money of neither . would he give pain to the brother of his adore Maria , or allow any one of her near kinsfolk to tax he with any want of generosity or forbearance ? he be ready to give they their revenge , as the gentleman propose . up to midnight he would play with they for what stake they choose to name . and so they set to work , and the dice - box be rattle and the card shuffle and deal . 
 very likely he do not think about the card at all . very likely he be think ; " at this moment , my beloved one be sit with her beauteous golden lock outspread under the finger of her maid . happy maid ! now she be on her knee , the sainted creature , address prayer to that Heaven which be the abode of angel like she . now she have sink to rest behind her damask curtain . oh , bless , bless she ! " " you double we all round ? I will take a card upon each of my two . thank you , that will do a ten now , upon the other , a queen , two natural vingt - et - uns , and as you double we you owe I so - and - so . " 
 I imagine volley of oath from Mr. William , and brisk pattering of imprecation from his reverence , at the young Virginian 's luck . he win because he do not want to win . Fortune , that notoriously coquettish jade , come to he , because he be think of another nymph , who possibly be as fickle . Will and the chaplain may have play against he , solicitous constantly to increase their stake , and suppose that the wealthy Virginian wish to let they recover all their losing . but this be by no means Harry Warrington 's notion . when he be at home he have take a part in score of such game as these   whereby we may be lead to suppose that he keep many little circumstance of his life mum from his lady mother , and have learn to play and pay . and as he practise fair play towards his friend he expect it from they in return . 
 " the luck do seem to be with I , cousin , " he say , in reply to some more oath and growl of Will , " and I be sure I do not want to press it ; but you do not   suppose I be go to be such a fool as to fle it away altogether ? I have quite a heap of your promise on paper by this time . if we be to go on playing , let we have the dollar on the table , if you please ; or , if not the money , the worth of it . " 
 " always the way with you rich man , " grumble Will . " never lend except on security always win because you be rich . " 
 " Faith , cousin , you have be of late for ever fling my rich into my face . I have enough for my want and for my creditor . " 
 " oh , that we could all say as much ! " groan the chaplain . " how happy we , and how happy the dun would be ! what have we get to play against our conqueror ? there be my new gown , Mr. Warrington . will you set I five piece against it ? I have but to preach in stuff if I lose . stop ! I have a Chrysostom , a Foxe 's Martyrs , a Baker 's Chronicle , and a cow and her calf . what shall we set against these ? " 
 " I will bet one of cousin Will 's note for twenty pound , " cry Mr. Warrington , produce one of those document . 
 " or I have my brown mare , and will back her red against your honour 's note of hand , but against ready money . " 
 " I have my horse . I will back my horse against you for fifty , " bawl out Will . 
 Harry take the offer of both gentleman . in the course of ten minute the horse and the bay mare have both change owner . Cousin William swear more fiercely than ever . the parson dash his wig to the ground , and emulate his pupil in the loudness of his objurgation . Mr. Harry Warrington be quite calm , and not the least elated by his triumph . they have ask he to play , and he have play . he know he should win . o beloved slumber angel ! he think , be I not sure of victory when you be kind to I ? he be look out from his window towards the casement on the opposite side of the court , which he know to be her . he have forget about his victim and their groan , and ill - luck , ere they cross the court . under yonder brilliant flickering star , behind yonder casement where the lamp be burn faintly , be his joy , and heart , and treasure . 




 CHAPTER XX . Facilis Descensus 

 Whilst the good old Bishop of Cambray , in his romance lately mention , describe the disconsolate condition of Calypso at the departure of Ulysses , I forget whether he mention the grief of Calypso 's lady 's maid on take leave of Odysseus 's own gentleman . the menial must have weep together in the kitchen precinct whilst the master and mistress take a last wild embrace in the drawing - room ; they must have hang round each other in the fore - cabin , whilst their principal break their heart in the grand saloon . when the bell ring for the last time , and Ulysses 's mate bawl , " now ! any one for shore ! " Calypso and her female attendant must have both walk over the same plank , with beat heart and stream eye ; both must have wave pocket - handkerchief   of far different value and texture , as they stand on the quay , to their friend on the depart vessel , whilst the people on the land , and the crew crowd in the ship 's bow , shout hip , hip , huzzay   or whatever may be the equivalent Greek for the salutation   to all engage on that voyage . but the point to be remember be , that if Calypso ne pouvait se consoler , Calypso 's maid ne pouvait se consoler non plus . they have to walk the same plank of grief , and feel the same pang of separation ; on their return home , they might not use pocket - handkerchief of the same texture and value , but the tear , no doubt , be as salt and plentiful which one shed in her marble hall , and the other pour forth in the servant ' ditto . 
 not only do Harry Warrington leave Castlewood a victim to love , but Gumbo quit the same premise a prey to the same delightful passion . his wit , accomplishment , good - humour , his skill in dancing , cookery , and music , have endear he to the whole female domestic circle . More than one of the man might be jealous of he , but the lady all be with he . there be no such objection to the poor black man then in England as have obtain since among white - skin people . Theirs be a condition not perhaps of equality , but they have a sufferance and a certain grotesque sympathy from all ; and from woman , no doubt , a kindness much more generous . when Ledyard and Parke , in Blackmansland , be persecute by the man , do they not find the black woman pitiful and kind to they ? woman be always kind towards our sex . what   mental   negro do they not cherish ? what   moral   hunchback do they not adore ? what leper , what idiot , what dull driveller , what misshapen monster   I speak figuratively   do they not fondle and cuddle ? Gumbo be treat by the woman as kindly as many people no well than himself : it be only the man in the servants'-hall who rejoice at the virginian lad 's departure . I should like to see he take leave . I should like to see molly housemaid steal to the terrace - garden in the grey dawn to cull a wistful posy . I should like to see Betty kitchenmaid cut off a thick lock of her chestnut ringlet which she propose to exchange for a woolly token from young Gumbo 's pate . of course he say he be regum progeny , a descendant of ashantee king . in Caffraria , Connaught and other place now inhabit by hereditary bondsman , there must have be vast number of these potent sovereign in former time , to judge from their descendant now extant . 
 at the morning announce for Madame de Bernstein 's departure , all the numerous domestic of Castlewood crowd about the door and passage , some to have a last glimpse of her ladyship 's man and the fascinating Gumbo , some to take leave of her ladyship 's maid , all to waylay the Baroness and her nephew for parting fee , which it be the custom of that day largely to distribute among household servant . one and the other give liberal gratuity to the liveried society , to the gentleman in black and ruffle , and to the swarm of female attendant . Castlewood be the home of the Baroness 's youth ; and as for her honest Harry , who have not only live at free charge in the house , but have win horse and money or promise of money from his cousin and the unlucky chaplain , he be naturally of a generous turn , and feel that at this moment he ought not to stint his benevolent disposition . " my mother , I know , " he think , " will wish I to be liberal to all the retainer of the Esmond family . " so he scatter about his gold piece to right and leave , and as if he have be as rich as Gumbo announce he to be . there be no one who come near he but have a share in his bounty . from the major - domo to the shoeblack , Mr. Harry have a peace - offering for they all . to the grim housekeeper in her still - room , to the feeble old porter in his lodge , he distribute some token of his remembrance . when a man be in love with one woman in a family , it be astonish how fond he become of every person connect with it . he ingratiate himself with the maid ; he be bland with the butler ; he interest himself about the footman ; he run on errand for the daughter ; he give advice and lend money to the young son at college ; he pat little dog which he would kick otherwise ; he smile at old story which would make he break out in yawn , be they utter by any one but papa ; he drink sweet port wine for which he would curse the steward and the whole committee of a club ; he bear even with the cantankerous old maiden aunt ; he beat time when darle little Fanny perform her piece on the piano ; and smile when wicked , lively little Bobby upset the coffee over his shirt . 
 Harry Warrington , in his way , and accord to the custom of that age , have for a brief time past   by which I conclude that only for a brief time have his love be declare and accept   give to the Castlewood family all these artless testimony of his affection for one of they . Cousin will should have win back his money and welcome , or have win as much of Harry 's own as the lad could spare . nevertheless , the lad , though a lover , be shrewd , keen , and fond of sport and fair play , and a judge of a good horse when he see one . have play for and win all the money which will have , besides a great number of Mr. Esmond 's valuable autograph , Harry be very well pleased to win Will 's brown horse that very quadrupe which have nearly push he into the water on the first evening of his arrival at Castlewood . he have see the horse 's performance often , and in the midst of all his passion and romance , be not sorry to be possess of such a sound , swift , well - breed hunter and roadster . when he have gaze at the star sufficiently as they shine over his mistress 's window , and put her candle to bed , he repair to his own dormitory , and there , no doubt , think of his Maria and his horse with youthful satisfaction , and how sweet it would be to have one pillione on the other , and to make the tour of all the island on such an animal with such a pair of white arm round his waist . he fall asleep ruminating on these thing , and meditate a million of blessing on his Maria , in whose company he be to luxuriate at least for a week more . 
 in the early morning poor Chaplain Sampson send over his little black mare by the hand of his groom , footman , and gardener , who weep and bestow a great number of kiss on the beast 's white nose as he hand he over to Gumbo . Gumbo and his master be both affect by the fellow 's sensibility ; the negro servant show his sympathy by weeping , and Harry by produce a couple of guineas , with which he astonish and speedily comfort the chaplain 's boy . then Gumbo and the late groom lead the beast away to the stable , have command to bring he round with Mr. William 's horse after breakfast , at the hour when Madam Bernstein 's carriage be order . 
 so courteous be he to his aunt , or so grateful for her departure , that the master of the house even make his appearance at the morning meal , in order to take leave of his guest . the lady and the chaplain be present the only member of the family absent be will : who , however , leave a note for his cousin , in which will state , in exceedingly bad spelling , that he be oblige to go away to Salisbury Races that morning , but that he have leave the horse which his cousin win last night , and which Tom , Mr. Will 's groom , would hand over to Mr. Warrington 's servant . will 's absence do not prevent the rest of the party from drink a dish of tea amicably , and in due time the carriage roll into the courtyard , the servant pack they with the Baroness 's multiply luggage , and the moment of departure arrive . 
 a large open landau contain the stout Baroness and her niece ; a couple of man - servant mount on the box before they with pistol and blunderbuss ready in event of a meeting with highwayman . in another carriage be their ladyship ' maid , and another servant in guard of the trunk , which , vast and numerous as they be , be as nothing compare to the enormous baggage - train accompany a lady of the present time . Mr. Warrington 's modest valise be place in this second carriage under the maid 's guardianship , and Mr. Gumbo propose to ride by the window for the chief part of the journey . 
 my lord , with his stepmother and Lady Fanny , accompany their kinswoman to the carriage step , and bade her farewell with many dutiful embrace . her Lady Maria follow in a riding - dress , which Harry Warrington think the most become costume in the world . a host of servant stand around , and beg Heaven bless her ladyship . the Baroness 's departure be know in the village , and score of the folk there stand wait under the tree outside the gate , and huzzaye and wave their hat as the ponderous vehicle roll away . 
 Gumbo be go for Mr. Warrington 's horse , as my lord , with his arm under his young guest 's , pace up and down the court . " I hear you carry away some of our horse out of Castlewood ? " my lord say . 
 Harry blush . " a gentleman can not refuse a fair game at the card , " he say . " I never want to play , nor would have play for money have not my cousin William force I . as for the chaplain , it go to my heart to win from he , but he be as eager as my cousin . " 
 " I know I know ! there be no blame to you , my boy . at Rome you can not   help do as Rome do ; and I be very glad that you have be able to give Will a lesson . he be mad about play would gamble his coat off his back and I and the family have have to pay his debt ever so many time . may I ask how much you have win of he ? " 
 " well , some eighteen piece the first day or two , and his note for a hundred and twenty more , and the brown horse , sixty that make nigh upon two hundred . but , you know , cousin , all be fair , and it be even against my will that we play at all . will ai not   a match for I , my lord that be the fact . indeed he be not . " 
 " he be a match for most people , though , " say my lord . " his brown horse , I think you say ? " 
 " yes . his brown horse Prince William , out of Constitution . you do not   suppose I would set he sixty against his bay , my lord ? " 
 " oh , I do not   know . I see will rid out this morning ; most likely I do not remark what horse he be on . and you win the black mare from the parson ? " 
 " for fourteen . he will mount Gumbo very well . why do not the rascal come round with the horse ? " Harry 's mind be away to lovely Maria . he long to be trot by her side . 
 " when you get to Tunbridge , cousin Harry , you must be on the look - out against sharp player than the chaplain and will . there be all sort of queer company at the Wells . " 
 " a Virginian learn pretty well to take care of himself , my lord , say Harry , with a know nod . 
 " so it seem ! I recommend my sister to thee , Harry . although she be not a baby in year , she be as innocent as one . thou wilt see that she come to no mischief ? " 
 " I will guard she with my life , my lord ! " cry Harry . 
 " thou art a brave fellow . by the way , cousin , unless you be very fond of Castlewood , I would in your case not be in a great hurry to return to this lonely , tumble - down old house . I want myself to go to another place I have , and shall scarce be back here till the partridge - shooting . go you and take charge of the woman , of my sister and the Baroness , will you ? " 
 " indeed I will , " say Harry , his heart beat with happiness at the thought . 
 " and I will write thee word when you shall bring my sister back to I . here come the horse . have you bid adieu to the Countess and Lady Fanny ? they be kiss their hand to you from the music - room balcony . " 
 Harry run up to bid these lady a farewell . he make that ceremony very brief , for he be anxious to be off to the charmer of his heart ; and come downstairs to mount his newly - get steed , which Gumbo , himself astride on the parson 's black mare , hold by the rein . 
 there be Gumbo on the black mare , indeed , and hold another horse . but it be a bay horse , not a brown a bay horse with broken knee an aged , wear - out quadrupe . 
 " what be this ? " cry Harry . 
 " your honour 's new horse , " say the groom , touch his cap . 
 " this brute ? " exclaim the young gentleman , with one or more of those expression then in use in England and Virginia . " go and bring I round Prince William , Mr. William 's horse , the brown horse . " 
 " Mr. William have ride Prince William this morning away to Salisbury Races . his last word be , ' Sam , saddle my bay horse , Cato , for Mr. Warrington this morning . he be Mr. Warrington 's horse now . I sell he to he last night . ' and I know your honour be bountiful : you will consider the groom . " 
 my lord could not help break into a laugh at these word of Sam the groom , whilst Harry , for his part , indulge in a number more of those remark which politeness do not admit of our inserting here . 
 " Mr. William say he never could think of part with the Prince under a hundred and twenty , " say the groom , look at the young man . 
 Lord Castlewood only laugh the more . " will have be too much for thee , Harry Warrington . " 
 " too much for I , my lord ! so may a fellow with loaded dice throw six , and be too much for I . I do not call this betting , I call it ch " 
 " Mr. Warrington ! spare I bad word about my brother , if you please . depend on it , I will take care that you be right . farewell . ride quickly , or your coach will be at Farnham before you ; " and wave he an adieu , my lord enter into the house , whilst Harry and his companion ride out of the courtyard . the young Virginian be much too eager to rejoin the carriage and his charmer , to remark the unutterable love and affection which Gumbo shoot from his fine eye towards a young creature in the porter 's lodge . 
 when the youth be go , the chaplain and my lord sate down to finish their breakfast in peace and comfort . the two lady do not return to this meal . 
 " that be one of Will 's confound rascally trick , " say my lord . " if our cousin break Will 's head I should not wonder . " 
 " he be use to the operation , my lord , and yet , " add the chaplain , with a grin , " when we be play last night , the colour of the horse be not mention . I could not escape , have but one : and the black boy have ride off on he . the young virginian play like a man , to do he justice . " 
 " he win because he do not care about lose . I think there can be little doubt but that he be very well to do . his mother 's law - agent be my lawyer , and they write that the property be quite a principality , and grow rich every year . " 
 " if it be a kingdom I know whom Mr. Warrington would make queen of it , " say the obsequious chaplain . 
 " who can account for taste , parson ? " ask his lordship , with a sneer . " all man be so . the first woman I be in love with myself be forty ; and as jealous as if she have be fifteen . it run in the family . Colonel Esmond   he in scarlet and the breastplate yonder   marry my grandmother , who be almost old enough to be his . if this lad choose to take out an elderly princess to Virginia , we must not balk he . " 
 " ' twere a consummation devoutly to be wish ! " cry the chaplain . " have I not well go to Tunbridge Wells myself , my lord , and be on the spot , and ready to exercise my sacred function in behalf of the young couple ? " 
 " you shall have a pair of new nag , parson , if you do , " say my lord . and with this we leave they peaceable over a pipe of tobacco after breakfast . 
 Harry be in such a haste to join the carriage that he almost forget to take off his hat , and acknowledge the cheer of the Castlewood villager : they all like the lad , whose frank cordial way and honest face get he a welcome in most place . legend be still extant in Castlewood , of his grandparent , and how his grandfather , Colonel Esmond , might have be Lord Castlewood , but would not . Old Lockwood at the gate often tell of the Colonel 's gallantry in Queen Anne 's war . his feat be exaggerated , the behaviour of the present family be contrast with that of the old lord and lady : who might not have be very popular in their time , but be well folk than those now in possession . Lord Castlewood be a hard landlord : perhaps more disliked because he be know to be poor and embarrassed than because he be severe . as for Mr. Will , nobody be fond of he . the young gentleman have have many brawl and quarrel about the village , have receive and give broken head , have bill in the neighbouring town which he could not or would not pay ; have be arraign before the magistrate for tamper with village girl , and waylay and cudgel by injured husband , father , sweetheart . a hundred year ago his character and action might have be describe at length by the painter of manner ; but the Comic Muse , nowadays , do not lift up Molly Seagrim 's curtain ; she only indicate the presence of some one behind it , and pass on primly , with expression of horror , and a fan before her eye . the village have hear how the young virginian squire have beat Mr. Will at riding , at jump , at shooting , and finally at card - playing , for everything be know ; and they respect Harry all the more for this superiority . above all , they admire he on account of the reputation of enormous wealth which Gumbo have make for his master . this fame have travel over the whole county , and be precede he at this moment on the box of Madame Bernstein 's carriage , from which the valet , as they descend at the inn to bait , spread astounding report of the young Virginian 's rank and splendour . he be a prince in his own country . he have gold mine , diamond mine , fur , tobacco , who know what , or how much ? no wonder the honest Britons cheer he and respect he for his prosperity , as the noble - hearted fellow always do . I be surprised city corporation do not address he , and offer gold box with the freedom of the city he be so rich . ah , a proud thing it be to be a Briton , and think that there be no country where prosperity be so much respect as in our ; and where success receive such constant affecting testimonial of loyalty ! 
 so , leave the villager bawl , and their hat toss in the air , Harry spur his sorry beast , and gallop , with Gumbo behind he , until he come up with the cloud of dust in the midst of which his charmer 's chariot be envelop . penetrate into this cloud , he find himself at the window of the carriage . the Lady Maria have the back seat to herself ; by keep a little behind the wheel , he could have the delight of see her divine eye and smile . she hold a finger to her lip . Madame Bernstein be already doze on her cushion . Harry do not care to disturb the old lady . to look at his cousin be bliss enough for he . the landscape around he might be beautiful , but what do he heed it ? all the sky and tree of summer be as nothing compare to yonder face ; the hedgerow bird sing no such sweet music as her sweet monosyllable . 
 the Baroness 's fat horse be accustom to short journey , easy pace , and plenty of feeding ; so that , ill as Harry Warrington be mount , he could , without much difficulty , keep pace with his elderly kinswoman . at two o'clock they bait for a couple of hour for dinner . Mr. Warrington pay the landlord generously . what price could be too great for the pleasure which he enjoy in be near his adore Maria , and have the blissful chance of a conversation with she , scarce interrupt by the soft breathing of Madame de Bernstein , who , after a comfortable meal , indulge in an agreeable half - hour 's slumber ? in voice soft and low , Maria and her young gentleman talk over and over again those delicious nonsense which people in Harry 's condition never tire of hearing and uttering . 
 they be go to a crowded watering - place , where all sort of beauty and fashion would be assemble ; timid Maria be certain that amongst the young beauty , Harry would discover some , whose charm be far more worthy to occupy his attention , than any her homely face and figure could boast of . by all the god , Harry vow that Venus herself could not tempt he from her side . it be he who for his part have occasion to fear . when the young man of fashion beheld his peerless Maria they would crowd round her car ; they would cause she to forget the rough and humble american lad who know nothing of fashion or wit , who have only a faithful heart at her service . 
 Maria smile , she cast her eye to heaven , she vow that Harry know nothing of the truth and fidelity of woman ; it be his sex , on the contrary , which proverbially be faithless , and which delight to play with poor female heart . a scuffle ensue ; a clatter be hear among the knife and fork of the dessert ; a glass tumble over and break . an " oh ! " escape from the innocent lip of Maria , the disturbance have be cause by the broad cuff of Mr. Warrington 's coat , which have be stretch across the table to seize Lady Maria 's hand , and have upset the wine - glass in so do . surely nothing could be more natural , or indeed necessary , than that Harry , upon hear his sex 's honour impeach , should seize upon his fair accuser 's hand , and vow eternal fidelity upon those charming finger ? 
 what a part they play , or use to play , in love - making , those hand ! how quaintly they be squeeze at that period of life ! how they be push into conversation ! what absurd vow and protest be palm off by their aid ! what good can there be in pull and press a thumb and four finger ? I fancy I see Alexis laugh , who be haply read this page by the side of Araminta . to talk about thumb indeed ! ... Maria look round , for her part , to see if Madame Bernstein have be awaken by the crash of glass ; but the old lady slumber quite calmly in her arm - chair , so her niece think there can be no harm in yield to Harry 's gentle pressure . 
 the horse be put to : Paradise be over at least until the next occasion . when my landlord enter with the bill , Harry be stand quite at a distance from his cousin , look from the window at the cavalcade gather below . Madame Bernstein wake up from her slumber , smile and quite unconscious . with what profound care and reverential politeness Mr. Warrington hand his aunt to her carriage ! how demure and simple look Lady Maria as she follow ! away go the carriage , in the midst of a profoundly bow landlord and waiter ; of country - folk gather round the blaze inn - sign ; of shopman gaze from their homely little door ; of boy and market - folk under the colonnade of the old town - hall ; of lounger along the gable street . " it be the famous Baroness Bernstein . that be she , the old lady in the capuchin . it be the rich young American who be just come from Virginia , and be worth million and million . well , sure , he might have a well horse . " the cavalcade disappear , and the little town lapse into its usual quiet . the landlord go back to his friend at the club , to tell how the great folk be go to sleep at the Bush , at Farnham , to - night . 
 the inn dinner have be plentiful , and all the three guest of the inn have do justice to the good cheer . Harry have the appetite natural to his period of life . Maria and her aunt be also not indifferent to a good dinner : Madame Bernstein have have a comfortable nap after her , which have no doubt help she to bear all the good thing of the meal the meat pie , and the fruit pie , and the strong ale , and the heady port wine . she recline at ease on her seat of the landau , and look back affably , and smile at Harry and exchange a little talk with he as he ride by the carriage side . but what ail the beloved being who sate with she back to the horse ? her complexion , which be exceedingly fair , be far ornament with a pair of red cheek , which Harry take to be natural rose .   you see , madam , that your surmise regard the Lady Maria 's conduct with her cousin be quite wrong and uncharitable , and that the timid lad have make no such experiment as you suppose , in order to ascertain whether the rose be real or artificial . a kiss , indeed ! I blush to think you should imagine that the present writer could indicate anything so shocking !   Maria 's bright red cheek , I say still , continue to blush as it seem with a strange metallic bloom : but the rest of her face , which have use to rival the lily in whiteness , become of a jonquil colour . her eye star round with a ghastly expression . Harry be alarm at the agony depict in the charmer 's countenance ; which not only exhibit pain , but be exceedingly unbecoming . Madame Bernstein also at length remark her niece 's indisposition , and ask she if sit backwards in the carriage make her ill , which poor Maria confess to be the fact . on this , the eld lady be force to make room for her niece on her own side , and , in the course of the drive to Farnham , utter many gruff , disagreeable , sarcastic remark to her fellow - traveller , indicate her great displeasure that Maria should be so impertinent as to be ill on the first day of a journey . 
 when they reach the Bush Inn at Farnham , under which name a famous inn have stand in Farnham town for these three hundred year the dear invalid retire with she maid to her bedroom : scarcely glance a piteous look at Harry as she retreat , and leave the lad 's mind in a strange confusion of dismay and sympathy . those yellow , yellow cheek , those livid wrinkle eyelid , that ghastly red how ill his bless Maria look ! and not only how ill , but how away , horrible thought , unmanly suspicion ! he try to shut the idea out from his mind . he have little appetite for supper , though the jolly baroness partook of that repast as if she have have no dinner ; and certainly as if she have no sympathy with her invalid niece . 
 she send her major - domo to see if Lady Maria would have anything from the table . the servant bring back word that her ladyship be still very unwell , and decline any refreshment . 
 " I hope she intend to be well to - morrow morning , " cry Madame Bernstein , rap her little hand on the table . " I hate people to be ill in an inn , or on a journey . will you play piquet with I , Harry ? " 
 Harry be happy to be able to play piquet with his aunt . " that absurd Maria ! " say Madame Bernstein , drink from a great glass of negus , ' she take liberty with herself . she never have a good constitution . she be forty - one year old . all her upper tooth be false , and she can not   eat with they . thank Heaven , I have still get every tooth in my head . how clumsily you deal , child ! " 
 deal clumsily indeed ! have a dentist be extract Harry 's own grinder at that moment , would he have be expect to mind his card and deal they neatly ? when a man be lay on the rack at the inquisition , be it natural that he should smile and speak politely and coherently to the grave , quiet inquisitor ? beyond that little question regard the card , Harry 's Inquisitor do not show the small disturbance . her face indicate neither surprise , nor triumph , nor cruelty . Madame Bernstein do not give one more stab to her niece that night : but she play at card , and prattle with Harry , indulge in her favourite talk about old time , and parting from he with great cordiality and good - humour . very likely he do not heed her story . very likely other thought occupy his mind . Maria be forty - one year old , Maria have false . oh , horrible , horrible ! have she a false eye ? have she false hair ? have she a wooden leg ? I envy not that boy 's dream that night . 
 Madame Bernstein , in the morning , say she have sleep as sound as a top . she have no remorse , that be clear .   some folk be happy and easy in mind when their victim be stab and do for .   Lady Maria make her appearance at the breakfast - table , too . her ladyship 's indisposition be fortunately over : her aunt congratulate she affectionately on her good look . she sate down to her breakfast . she look appealingly in Harry 's face . he remark , with his usual brilliancy and originality , that he be very glad her ladyship be well . why , at the tone of his voice , do she start , and again gaze at he with frightened eye ? there sate the Chief Inquisitor , smile , perfectly calm , eat ham and muffin . o poor writhing , rack - rent victim ! o stony inquisitor ! o Baroness Bernstein ! it be cruel ! cruel ! 
 Round about Farnham the hop be gloriously green in the sunshine , and the carriage drive through the rich , most beautiful country . Maria insist upon take her old seat . she thank her dear aunt . it would not in the least incommode she now . she gaze , as she have do yesterday , in the face of the young knight rid by the carriage side . she look for those answer signal which use to be light up in yonder two window , and tell that love be burn within . she smile gently at he , to which token of regard he try to answer with a sickly grin of recognition . miserable youth ! those be not false tooth he see when she smile . he think they be , and they tear and lacerate he . 
 and so the day speed on sunshiny and brilliant overhead , but all over cloud for Harry and Maria . he see nothing : he think of Virginia : he remember how he have be in love with Parson Broadbent 's daughter at Jamestown , and how quickly that business have end . he long vaguely to be at home again . a plague on all these cold - hearted english relation ! do they not all mean to trick he ? be they not all scheme against he ? have not that confound will cheat he about the horse ? 
 at this very juncture , Maria give a scream so loud and shrill that Madame Bernstein wake , that the coachman pull his horse up , and the footman beside he spring down from his box in a panic . 
 " let I out ! let I out ! " scream Maria . " let I go to he ! let I go to he ! " 
 " what be it ? " ask the Baroness . 
 it be that Will 's horse have come down on his knee and nose , have send his rider over his head , and Mr. Harry , who ought to have know well , be lie on his own face quite motionless . 
 Gumbo , who have be dally with the maid of the second carriage , clatter up , and mingle his howl with Lady Maria 's lamentation . Madame Bernstein descend from her landau , and come slowly up , tremble a good deal . 
 " he be dead he be dead ! " sob Maria . 
 " do not   be a goose , Maria ! " her aunt say . " ring at that gate , some one ! " 
 will 's horse have gather himself up and stand perfectly quiet after his feat : but his late rider give not the slight sign of life . 




 CHAPTER XXI . samaritan 

 lest any tender - hearted reader should be in alarm for Mr. Harry Warrington 's safety , and fancy that his break - kneed horse have carry he altogether out of this life and history , let we set her mind easy at the beginning of this chapter by assure she that nothing very serious have happen . how can we afford to kill off our hero , when they be scarcely out of their teen , and we have not reach the age of manhood of the story ? we be in mourn already for one of our Virginians , who have come to grief in America ; surely we can not kill off the other in England ? no , no . Heroes be not despatch with such hurry and violence unless there be a cogent reason for make away with they . be a gentleman to perish every time a horse come down with he , not only the hero , but the author of this chronicle would have go under ground , whereas the former be but sprawl outside it , and will be bring to life again as soon as he have be carry into the house where Madame de Bernstein 's servant have ring the bell . 
 and to convince you that at least this young of the Virginians be still alive , here be an authentic copy of a letter from the lady into whose house he be take after his fall from Mr. Will be brute of a break - kneed horse , and in whom he appear to have find a kind friend : 
  " to MRS . ESMOND WARRINGTON , of castlewood 

  " at her House at Richmond , in Virginia 
 " if Mrs. Esmond Warrington of Virginia can call to mind twenty - three year ago , when Miss Rachel Esmond be at Kensington Boarding School , she may perhaps remember Miss Molly Benson , her class - mate , who have forget all the little quarrel which they use to have together   in which Miss Molly be very often in the wrong , and only remember the generous , high - spirit , sprightly , Miss Esmond , the Princess Pocahontas , to whom so many of our school - fellow pay court . 
 " dear madam ! I can not forget that you be dear Rachel once upon a time , as I be your dearest molly . though we part not very good friend when you go home to Virginia , yet you know how fond we once be . I still , Rachel , have the gold etui your papa give I when he come to our speech - day at Kensington , and we two perform the quarrel of Brutus and Cassius out of Shakspeare ; and ' twa only yesterday morning I be dream that we be both call up to say our lesson before the awful Miss Hardwood , and that I do not know it , and that as usual Miss Rachel Esmond go above I . how well remember those old day be ! how young we grow as we think of they ! I remember our walk and our exercise , our good king and Queen as they walk in Kensington Gardens , and their court follow they , whilst we of Miss Hardwood 's school curtsey in a row . I can tell still what we have for dinner on each day of the week , and point to the place where your garden be , which be always so much well keep than mine . so be Miss Esmond 's chest of drawer a model of neatness , whilst mine be in a sad condition . do you remember how we use to tell story in the dormitory , and Madame Hibou , the french governess , would come out of bed and interrupt we with her hoot ? have you forget the poor dancing - master , who tell we he have be waylay by assassin , but who be beat , it appear , by my lord your brother 's footman ? my dear , your cousin , the Lady Maria Esmond   her papa be , I think , but Viscount Castlewood in those time , have just be on a visit to this house , where you may be sure I do not recall those sad time to her remembrance , about which I be now chatter to Mrs. Esmond . 
 " her ladyship have be stay here , and another relative of your , the Baroness of Bernstein , and the two lady be both go on to Tunbridge Wells ; but another and dearer relative still remain in my house , and be sound asleep , I trust , in the very next room , and the name of this gentleman be Mr. Henry Esmond Warrington . now , do you understand how you come to hear from an old friend ? do not be alarm , dear madam ! I know you be think at this moment , ' my boy be ill . that be why Miss Molly Benson write to I . ' no , my dear ; Mr. Warrington be ill yesterday , but to - day he be very comfortable ; and our doctor , who be no less a person than my dear husband , Colonel Lambert , have blood he , have set his shoulder , which be dislocate , and pronounce that in two day more Mr. Warrington will be quite ready to take the road . 
 " I fear I and my girl be sorry that he be so soon to be well . yesterday evening , as we be at tea , there come a great ringing at our gate , which disturb we all , as the bell very seldom sound in this quiet place , unless a pass beggar pull it for charity ; and the servant , run out , return with the news , that a young gentleman , who have a fall from his horse , be lie lifeless on the road , surround by the friend in whose company he be travel . at this , my Colonel   who be sure the most Samaritan of man !   hasten away , to see how he can serve the fallen traveller , and presently , with the aid of the servant , and follow by two lady , bring into the house such a pale , lifeless , beautiful , young man ! ah , my dear , how I rejoice to think that your child have find shelter and succour under my roof ! that my husband have save he from pain and fever , and have be the mean of restore he to you and health ! we shall be friend again now , shall we not ? I be very ill last year , and ' twa even think I should die . do you know , that I often think of you then , and how you have part from I in anger so many year ago ? I begin then a foolish note to you , which I be too sick to finish , to tell you that if I go the way appoint for we all , I should wish to leave the world in charity with every single be I have know in it . 
 " your cousin , the Right Honourable Lady Maria Esmond , show a great deal of maternal tenderness and concern for her young kinsman after his accident . I be sure she hath a kind heart . the Baroness de Bernstein , who be of an advanced age , could not be expect to feel so keenly as we young people ; but be , nevertheless , very much move and interested until Mr. Warrington be restore to consciousness , when she say she be anxious to get on towards Tunbridge , whither she be bind , and be afraid of all thing to lie in a place where there be no doctor at hand . my Aesculapius laughingly say , he would not offer to attend upon a lady of quality , though he would answer for his young patient . indeed , the Colonel , during his campaign , have have plenty of practice in accident of this nature , and I be certain , be we to call in all the faculty for twenty mile round , Mr. Warrington could get no well treatment . so , leave the young gentleman to the care of I and my daughter , the Baroness and her ladyship take their leave of we , the latter very loth to go . when he be well enough , my Colonel will ride with he as far as Westerham , but on his own horse , where an old army - comrade of Mr. Lambert 's reside . and , as this letter will not take the post for Falmouth until , by God 's blessing , your son be well and perfectly restore , you need be under no sort of alarm for he whilst under the roof of , madam , your affectionate , humble servant , MARY LAMBERT . 
 " P.S. Thursday . 
 " I be glad to hear   Mr. Warrington 's coloured gentleman hath inform our people of the gratify circumstance   that Providence hath bless Mrs. Esmond with such vast wealth , and with an heir so likely to do credit to it . our present mean be amply sufficient , but will be small when divide amongst our survivor . ah , dear madam ! I have hear of your calamity of last year . though the Colonel and I have rear many child   five , we have lose two , and a mother 's heart can feel for your ! I own to you , mine yearn to your boy to - day , when   in a manner inexpressibly affect to I and Mr. Lambert   he mention his dear brother . ' tis impossible to see your son , and not to love and regard he . I be thankful that it have be our lot to succour he in his trouble , and that in receive the stranger within our gate we should be give hospitality to the son of an old friend . " 
 Nature have write a letter of credit upon some man 's face , which be honour almost wherever present . Harry Warrington 's countenance be so stamp in his youth . his eye be so bright , his cheek so red and healthy , his look so frank and open , that almost all who behold he , nay , even those who cheat he , trust he . nevertheless , as we have hint , the lad be by no mean the artless stripling he seem to be . he be know enough with all his blushing cheek ; perhaps more wily and wary than he grow to be in after - age . sure , a shrewd and generous man   who have lead an honest life and have no secret blush for his conscience   grow simple as he grow old ; arrive at his sum of right by more rapid process of calculation ; learn to eliminate false argument more readily , and hit the mark of truth with less previous trouble of aim , and disturbance of mind . or be it only a senile delusion , that some of our vanity be cure with our grow year , and that we become more just in our perception of our own and our neighbour 's shortcoming ? ... I would humbly suggest that young people , though they look pretty , have large eye , and not near so many wrinkle about their eyelid , be often as artful as some of their elder . what little monster of cunne your frank schoolboy be ! how they cheat mamma ! how they hoodwink papa ! how they humbug the housekeeper ! how they cringe to the big boy for whom they fag at school ! what a long lie and five year ' hypocrisy and flattery be their conduct towards Dr. Birch ! and the little boy ' sister ? be they any well , and be it only after they come out in the world that the little darling learn a trick or two ? 
 you may see , by the above letter of Mrs. Lambert , that she , like all good woman   and , indeed , almost all bad woman , be a sentimental person ; and , as she look at Harry Warrington lay in her good bed , after the Colonel have bleed he and clap in his shoulder , as hold by her husband 's hand she behold the lad in a sweet slumber , murmur a faint inarticulate word or two in his sleep , a faint blush quiver on his cheek , she own he be a pretty lad indeed , and confess with a sort of compunction that neither of her two boy Jack who be at Oxford , and Charles who be just go back to school after the bartlemytide holiday be half so handsome as the Virginian . what a good figure the boy have ! and when papa bleed he , his arm be as white as any lady 's ! 
 " yes , as you say , Jack might have be as handsome but for the small - pox : and as for Charley " " always take after his papa , my dear Molly , " say the Colonel , look at his own honest face in a little look - glass with a cut border and a japanned frame , by which the chief guest of the worthy gentleman and lady have survey their patch and powder , or shave their hospitable beard . 
 " do I say so , my love ? " whisper Mrs. Lambert , look rather scared . 
 " no ; but you think so , Mrs. Lambert . " 
 " how can you tell one 's thought so , Martin ? " ask the lady . 
 " because I be a conjurer , and because you tell they yourself , my dear , " answer her husband . " do not   be frighten : he will not   wake after that draught I give he . because you never see a young fellow but you be compare he with your own . because you never hear of one but you be think which of our girl he shall fall in love with and marry . " 
 " do not   be foolish , sir , " say the lady , put a hand up to the Colonel 's lip . they have softly trodden out of their guest 's bedchamber by this time , and be in the adjoining dressing - closet , a snug little wainscote room look over garden , with India curtain , more Japan chest and cabinet , a treasure of china , and a most refreshing odour of fresh lavender . 
 " you can not   deny it , Mrs. Lambert , " the Colonel resume ; " as you be look at the young gentleman just now , you be think to yourself which of my girl will he marry ? shall it be Theo , or shall it be hester ? and then you think of Lucy who be at boarding - school . " 
 " there be no keep anything from you , Martin Lambert , " sigh the wife . 
 " there be no keep it out of your eye , my dear . what be this burn desire all you woman have for sell and marry your daughter ? we man do not   wish to part with them . I be sure , for my part , I should not like yonder young fellow half as well if I think he intend to carry one of my darling away with he . " 
 " sure , Martin , I have be so happy myself , " say the fond wife and mother , look at her husband with her very good eye , " that I must wish my girl to do as I have do , and be happy , too ! " 
 " then you think good husband be common , Mrs. Lambert , and that you may walk any day into the road before the house and find one shoot out at the gate like a sack of coal ? " 
 " be not   it providential , sir , that this young gentleman should be throw over his horse 's head at our very gate , and that he should turn out to be the son of my old schoolfellow and friend ? " ask the wife . " there be something more than accident in such case , depend upon that , Mr. Lambert ! " 
 " and this be the stranger you see in the candle three night run , I suppose ? " 
 " and in the fire , too , sir ; twice a coal jump out close by Theo . you may sneer , sir , but these thing be not to be despise . do I not see you distinctly come back from Minorca , and dream of you at the very day and hour when you be wound in Scotland ? " 
 " how many time have you see I wound , when I have not a scratch , my dear ? how many time have you see I ill when I have no sort of hurt ? you be always prophesy , and ' twere very hard on you if you be not sometimes right . come ! let we leave our guest asleep comfortably , and go down and give the girl their french lesson . " 
 so say , the honest gentleman put his wife 's arm under his , and they descend together the broad oak staircase of the comfortable old hall , round which hang the effigy of many foregone lambert , worthy magistrate , soldier , country gentleman , as be the Colonel whose acquaintance we have just make . the Colonel be a gentleman of pleasant , waggish humour . the french lesson which he and his daughter con together be a scene out of Monsieur Moliere 's comedy of " Tartuffe , " and papa be pleased to be very facetious with Miss Theo , by call her Madam , and by treat she with a great deal of mock respect and ceremony . the girl read together with their father a scene or two of his favourite author   nor be they less modest in those day , though their tongue be a little more free , and papa be particularly arch and funny as he read from Orgon 's part in that celebrate play : 
  " ORGON . 
  or sus , nous voila bien . J'ai , Mariane , en vous 
  Reconnu de tout temp un esprit assez doux , 
  Et de tout temp aussi vous m'avez ete chere . 

  MARIANE . 
  Je suis fort redevable a cet amour de pere . 

  ORGON . 
  Fort bien . Que dite - vous de Tartuffe notre hote ? 

  MARIANE . 
  Qui ? Moi ? 

  ORGON . 
  Vous . Voyez bien comme vous repondrez . 

  MARIANE . 
  Helas ! J'en dirai , moi , tout ce que vous voudrez ! 
  Mademoiselle Mariane laugh and blush in spite of herself , whilst read this line . 
  ORGON . 
  C'est parler sagement . dite - moi donc , ma fille , 
  Qu'en toute sa personne un haut merite brille , 
  Qu'il touche votre coeur , et qu'il vous seroit doux 
  De le voir par man choix devenir votre epoux ! " 
 " have we not read the scene prettily , Elmire ? " say the Colonel , laughing , and turn round to his wife . 
 Elmira prodigiously admire Orgon 's reading , and so do his daughter , and almost everything besides which Mr. Lambert say or do . Canst thou , o friendly reader , count upon the fidelity of an artless and tender heart or two , and reckon among the blessing which Heaven hath bestow on thee the love of faithful woman ! purify thine own heart , and try to make it worthy theirs . on thy knee , on thy knee , give thank for the blessing award thee ! all the prize of life be nothing compare to that one . all the reward of ambition , wealth , pleasure , only vanity and disappointment grasp at greedily and fight for fiercely , and , over and over again , find worthless by the weary winner . but love seem to survive life , and to reach beyond it . I think we take it with we past the grave . do we not still give it to those who have leave we ? may we not hope that they feel it for we , and that we shall leave it here in one or two fond bosom , when we also be go ? 
 and whence , or how , or why , pray , this sermon ? you see I know more about this Lambert family than you do to whom I be just present they : as how should you who never hear of they before ! you may not like my friend ; very few people do like stranger to whom they be present with an outrageous flourish of praise on the part of the introducer . you say   quite naturally , what ? be this all ? be these the people he be so fond of ? why , the girl be not a beauty the mother be good - natured , and may have be good - look once , but she have no trace of it now and , as for the father , he be quite an ordinary man . grant but do not   you acknowledge that the sight of an honest man , with an honest , love wife by his side , and surround by love and obedient child , present something very sweet and affect to you ? if you be make acquainted with such a person , and see the eager kindness of the fond face round about he , and that pleasant confidence and affection which beam from his own , do you mean to say you be not touch and gratify ? if you happen to stay in such a man 's house , and at morning or evening see he and his child and domestic gather together in a certain name , do you not join humbly in the petition of those servant , and close they with a reverent amen ? that first night of his stay at Oakhurst , Harry Warrington , who have have a sleep potion , and be awake sometimes rather feverish , think he hear the Evening Hymn , and that his dear brother George be sing it at home , in which delusion the patient go off again to sleep . 




 CHAPTER XXII . in hospital 

 sinking into a sweet slumber , and lull by those harmonious sound , our young patient pass a night of pleasant unconsciousness , and awake in the morning to find a summer sun stream in at the window , and his kind host and hostess smile at his bed - curtain . he be ravenously hungry , and his doctor permit he straightway to partake of a mess of chicken , which the doctor 's wife tell he have be prepare by the hand of one of her daughter . 
 one of her daughter ? a faint image of a young person of two young person with red cheek and black wave lock , smile round his couch , and suddenly depart thence , soon after he have come to himself , arise in the young man 's mind . then , then , there return the remembrance of a female lovely , it be true , but more elderly certainly considerably old and with f . oh , horror and remorse ! he writhe with anguish , as a certain recollection cross he . an immense gulf of time gap between he and the past . how long be it since he have hear that those pearl be artificial , that those golden lock be only pinchbeck ? a long , long time ago , when he be a boy , an innocent boy . now he be a man , quite an old man . he have be bleed copiously ; he have a little fever ; he have have nothing to eat for very many hour ; he have a sleeping - draught , and a long , deep slumber after . 
 " what be it , my dear child ? " cry kind Mrs. Lambert , as he start . 
 " nothing , madam ; a twinge in my shoulder , " say the lad . " I speak to my host and hostess ? sure you have be very kind to I . " 
 " we be old friend , Mr. Warrington . my husband , Colonel Lambert , know your father , and I and your mamma be schoolgirl together at Kensington . you be no strange to we when your aunt and cousin tell we who you be . " 
 " be they here ? " ask Harry , look a little blank . 
 " they must have lain at Tunbridge Wells last night . they send a horseman from Reigate yesterday for news of you . " 
 " ah ! I remember , " say Harry , look at his bandaged arm . 
 " I have make a good cure of you , Mr. Warrington . and now Mrs. Lambert and the cook must take charge of you . " 
 " Nay ; Theo prepare the chicken and rice , Mr. Lambert , " say the lady . " will Mr. Warrington get up after he have have his breakfast ? we will send your valet to you . " 
 " if howling prove fidelity , your man must be a most fond , attach creature , " say Mr. Lambert . 
 " he let your baggage travel off after all in your aunt 's carriage , " say Mrs. Lambert . " you must wear my husband 's linen , which , I dare say , be not so fine as your . " 
 " Pish , my dear ! my shirt be good shirt enough for any Christian , " cry the Colonel . 
 " they be Theo 's and hester 's work , " say mamma . at which her husband arch his eyebrow and look at she . " and Theo hath rip and sew your sleeve to make it quite comfortable for your shoulder , " the lady add . 
 " what beautiful rose ! " cry Harry , look at a fine China vase full of they that stand on the toilet - table , under the japan - frame glass . 
 " my daughter Theo cut they this morning . well , Mr. Lambert ? she do cut they ! " 
 I suppose the Colonel be think that his wife introduce Theo too much into the conversation , and trod on Mrs. Lambert 's slipper , or pull her robe , or otherwise nudge she into a sense of propriety . 
 " and I fancy I hear some one sing the Evening Hymn very sweetly last night or be it only a dream ? " ask the young patient . 
 " Theo again , Mr. Warrington ! " say the Colonel , laugh . " my servant say your negro man begin to sing it in the kitchen as if he be a church organ . " 
 " our people sing it at home , sir . my grandpapa use to love it very much . his wife 's father be a great friend of good Bishop Ken , who write it ; and and my dear brother use to love it too ; " say the boy , his voice drop . 
 it be then , I suppose , that Mrs. Lambert feel inclined to give the boy a kiss . his little accident , illness and recovery , the kindness of the people round about he , have soften Harry Warrington 's heart , and open it to well influence than those which have be bring to bear on it for some six week past . he be breathe a purer air than that tainted atmosphere of selfishness , and worldliness , and corruption , into which he have be plunge since his arrival in England . sometimes the young man 's fate , or choice , or weakness , lead he into the fellowship of the giddy and vain ; happy he , whose lot make he acquaint with the wise company , whose lamp be trim , and whose pure heart keep modest watch . 
 the pleased matron leave her young patient devour Miss Theo 's mess of rice and chicken , and the Colonel seat by the lad 's bedside . gratitude to his hospitable entertainer , and contentment after a comfortable meal , cause in Mr. Warrington a very pleasant condition of mind and body . he be ready to talk now more freely than usually be his custom ; for , unless excite by a strong interest or emotion , the young man be commonly taciturn and cautious in his converse with his fellow , and be by no mean of an imaginative turn . of book our youth have be but a very remiss student , nor be his remark on such simple work as he have read , very profound or valuable ; but regard dog , horse , and the ordinary business of life , he be a far well critic ; and , with any person interested in such subject , converse on they freely enough . 
 Harry 's host , who have considerable shrewdness , and experience of book , and cattle , and man , be pretty soon able to take the measure of his young guest in the talk which they now have together . it be now , for the first time , the Virginian learn that Mrs. Lambert have be an early friend of his mother 's , and that the Colonel 's own father have serve with Harry 's grandfather , Colonel Esmond , in the famous war of Queen Anne . he find himself in a friend 's country . he be soon at ease with his honest host , whose manner be quite simple and cordial , and who look and seem perfectly a gentleman , though he wear a plain fustian coat , and a waistcoat without a particle of lace . 
 " my boy be both away , " say Harry 's host , " or they would have show you the country when you get up , Mr. Warrington . now you can only have the company of my wife and her daughter . Mrs. Lambert hath tell you already about one of they , Theo , our eld , who make your broth , who cut your rose , and who mend your coat . she be not such a wonder as her mother imagine she to be : but little Theo be a smart little housekeeper , and a very good and cheerful lass , though her father say it . " 
 " it be very kind of Miss Lambert to take so much care for I , " say the young patient . 
 " she be no kinder to you than to any other mortal , and doth but her duty . " here the Colonel smile . " I laugh at their mother for praise our child , " he say , " and I think I be as foolish about they myself . the truth be , God hath give we very good and dutiful child , and I see no reason why I should disguise my thankfulness for such a blessing . you have never a sister , I think ? " 
 " no , sir , I be alone now , " Mr. Warrington say . 
 " ay , truly , I ask your pardon for my thoughtlessness . your man hath tell our people what befell last year . I serve with Braddock in Scotland ; and hope he mend before he die . a wild fellow , sir , but there be a fund of truth about the man , and no little kindness under his rough swaggering manner . your black fellow talk very freely about his master and his affair . I suppose you permit he these freedom as he rescue you " 
 " rescue I ? " cry Mr. Warrington . 
 " from ever so many Indians on that very expedition . my Molly and I do not know we be go to entertain so prodigiously wealthy a gentleman . he saith that half Virginia belong to you ; but if the whole of North America be your , we could but give you our good . " 
 " those negro boy , sir , lie like the father of all lie . they think it be for our honour to represent we as ten time as rich as we be . my mother have what would be a vast estate in England , and be a very good one at home . we be as well off as most of our neighbour , sir , but no well ; and all our splendour be in Mr. Gumbo 's foolish imagination . he never rescue I from an Indian in his life , and would run away at the sight of one , as my poor brother 's boy do on that fatal day when he fall . " 
 " the brave man will do so at unlucky time , " say the Colonel . " I myself see the good troop in the world run at Preston , before a ragged mob of Highland savage . " 
 " that be because the Highlanders fight for a good cause , sir . " 
 " do you think , " ask Harry 's host , " that the French Indians have the good cause in the fight of last year ? " 
 " the scoundrel ! I would have the scalp of every murderous redskin among them ! " cry Harry , clench his fist . " they be rob and invade the british territory , too . but the Highlanders be fight for their king . " 
 " we , on our side , be fight for our king ; and we end by win the battle , " say the Colonel , laugh . 
 " ah ! " cry Harry ; " if his Royal Highness the Prince have not turn back at Derby , your king and mine , now , would be his Majesty King James the Third ! " 
 " who make such a Tory of you , Mr. Warrington ? " ask Lambert . 
 " Nay , sir , the Esmonds be always loyal ! " answer the youth . " have we live at home , and twenty year soon , brother and I often and often agree that our head would have be in danger . we certainly would have stake they for the king 's cause . " 
 " yours be well on your shoulder than on a pole at Temple Bar . I have see they there , and they do not   look very pleasant , Mr. Warrington . " 
 " I shall take off my hat , and salute they , whenever I pass the gate , " cry the young man , " if the king and the whole court be stand by ! " 
 " I doubt whether your relative , my Lord Castlewood , be as staunch a supporter of the king over the water , " say Colonel Lambert , smile : " or your aunt , the Baroness of Bernstein , who leave you in our charge . whatever her old partiality may have be , she have repent of they ; she have rally to our side , land her nephew in the Household , and look to find a suitable match for her niece . if you have Tory opinion , Mr. Warrington , take an old soldier 's advice , and keep they to yourself . " 
 " why , sir , I do not think that you will betray I ! " say the boy . 
 " not i , but other might . you do not talk in this way at Castlewood ? I mean the old Castlewood which you have just come from . " 
 " I might be safe amongst my own kinsman , surely , sir ! " cry Harry . 
 " Doubtless . I would not say no . but a man 's own kinsman can play he slippery trick at time , and he find himself none the well for trust they . I mean no offence to you or any of your family ; but lacquey have ear as well as their master , and they carry about all sort of story . for instance , your black fellow be ready to tell all he know about you , and a great deal more besides , as it would appear . " 
 " hath he tell about the break - kneed horse ? " cry out Harry , turn very red . 
 " to say truth , my groom seem to know something of the story , and say it be a shame a gentleman should sell another such a brute ; let alone a cousin . I be not here to play the Mentor to you , or to carry about servant ' tittle - tattle . when you have see more of your cousin , you will form your own opinion of they ; meanwhile , take an old soldier 's advice , I say again , and be cautious with whom you deal , and what you say . " 
 very soon after this little colloquy , Mr. Lambert 's guest rise , with the assistance of Gumbo , his valet , to whom he , for the hundredth time at least , promise a sound can if ever he should hear that Gumbo have venture to talk about his affair again in the servants'-hall , which prohibition Gumbo solemnly vow and declare he would for ever obey ; but I dare say he be chatter the whole of the Castlewood secret to his new friend of Colonel Lambert 's kitchen ; for Harry 's hostess certainly hear a number of story concern he which she could not prevent her housekeeper from tell ; though of course I would not accuse that worthy lady , or any of her sex or our , of undue curiosity regard their neighbour ' affair . but how can you prevent servant talk , or listen when the faithful attach creature talk to you ? 
 Mr. Lambert 's house stand on the outskirt of the little town of Oakhurst , which , if he but travel in the right direction , the patient reader will find on the road between Farnham and Reigate , and Madame Bernstein 's servant naturally pull at the first bell at hand , when the young Virginian meet with his mishap . a few hundred yard far , be the long street of the little old town , where hospitality might have be find under the great swing ensign of a couple of tun , and medical relief be to be have , as a blaze gilt pestle and mortar indicate . but what surgeon could have minister more cleverly to a patient than Harry 's host , who tend he without a fee , or what Boniface could make he more comfortably welcome ? 
 two tall gate , each surmount by a couple of heraldic monster , lead from the highroad up to a neat , broad stone terrace , whereon stand Oakhurst House ; a square brick building , with window face with stone , and many high chimney , and a tall roof surmount by a fair balustrade . behind the house stretch a large garden , where there be plenty of room for cabbage as well as rose to grow ; and before the mansion , separate from it by the highroad , be a field of many acre , where the Colonel 's cow and horse be at grass . over the centre window be a carve shield support by the same monster who prance or ramp upon the entrance - gate ; and a coronet over the shield . the fact be , that the house have be originally the jointure - house of Oakhurst Castle , which stand hard by , its chimney and turret appear over the surround wood , now bronze with the dark foliage of summer . Mr. Lambert 's be the great house in Oakhurst town ; but the Castle be of more importance than all the town put together . the Castle and the jointure - house have be friend of many year ' date . their father have fight side by side in Queen Anne 's war . there be two small piece of ordnance on the terrace of the jointure - house , and six before the Castle , which have be take out of the same privateer , which Mr. Lambert and his kinsman and commander , Lord Wrotham , have bring into harwich in one of their voyage home from Flanders with despatch from the great Duke . 
 his toilet complete with Mr. Gumbo 's aid , his fair hair neatly dress by that artist , and his open ribbone sleeve and wound shoulder support by a handkerchief which hang from his neck , Harry Warrington make his way out of the sick - chamber , precede by his kind host , who lead he first down a broad oak stair , round which hang many pike and musket of ancient shape , and so into a square marble - paved room , from which the living - room of the house branch off . there be more arm in this hall - pike and halbert of ancient date , pistol and jack - boot of more than a century old , that have do service in Cromwell 's war , a tattered french guidon which have be bear by a french gendarme at Malplaquet , and a pair of cumbrous Highland broadsword , which , have be carry as far as Derby , have be fling away on the fatal field of Culloden . here be breastplate and black morion of Oliver 's trooper , and portrait of stern warrior in buff jerkin and plain band and short hair . " they fight against your grandfather and King Charles , Mr. Warrington , " say Harry 's host . " I do not   hide that . they ride to join the Prince of Orange at Exeter . we be Whigs , young gentleman , and something more . John Lambert , the Major - General , be a kinsman of our house , and we be all more or less partial to short hair and long sermon . you do not seem to like either ? " indeed , Harry 's face manifest sign of anything but pleasure whilst he examine the portrait of the parliamentary hero . " be not alarmed , we be very good Churchmen now . my eld son will be in order ere long . he be now travel as governor to my Lord Wrotham 's son in Italy , and as for our woman , they be all for the Church , and carry I with them . every woman be a Tory at heart . Mr. Pope say a rake , but I think t'other be the more charitable word . come , let we go see they , " and , fling open the dark oak door , Colonel Lambert lead his young guest into the parlour where the lady be assemble . 
 " here be Miss Hester , " say the Colonel , " and this be Miss Theo , the soup - maker , the tailoress , the harpsichord - player , and the songstress , who set you to sleep last night . make a curtsey to the gentleman , young lady ! oh , I forget , and Theo be the mistress of the rose which you admire a short while since in your bedroom . I think she have keep some of they in her cheek . " 
 in fact , Miss Theo be make a profound curtsey and blush most modestly as her papa speak . I be not go to describe her person , though we shall see a great deal of she in the course of this history . she be not a particular beauty . Harry Warrington be not over head and ear in love with she at an instant 's warning , and faithless to to that other individual with whom , as we have see , the youth have lately be smite . Miss Theo have kind eye and a sweet voice ; a ruddy freckle cheek and a round white neck , on which , out of a little cap such as miss wear in those time , fall rich curl cluster of dark brown hair . she be not a delicate or sentimental - look person . her arm , which be wear bare from the elbow like other lady ' arm in those day , be very jolly and red . her foot be not so miraculously small but that you could see they without a telescope . there be nothing waspish about her waist . this young person be sixteen year of age , and look old . I do not   know what call she have to blush so when she make her curtsey to the stranger . it be such a deep ceremonial curtsey as you never see at present . she and her sister both make these " cheese " in compliment to the new comer , and with much stately agility . 
 as Miss Theo rise up out of this salute , her papa tap she under the chin   which be of the double sort of chin , and laughingly hum out the line which he have read the day . " eh bien ! que dite - vous , ma fille , de notre hote ? " 
 " Nonsense , Mr. Lambert ! " cry mamma . 
 " Nonsense be sometimes the good kind of sense in the world , " say Colonel Lambert . his guest look puzzle . 
 " be you fond of nonsense ? " the Colonel continue to Harry , see by the boy 's face that the latter have no great love or comprehension of his favourite humour . " we consume a vast deal of it in this house . Rabelais be my favourite reading . my wife be all for Mr. Fielding and Theophrastus . I think theo prefer Tom Brown , and Mrs. Hetty here love Dean Swift . " 
 " our papa be talk what he love , " say Miss Hetty . 
 " and what be that , miss ? " ask the father of his second daughter . 
 " sure , sir , you say yourself it be nonsense , " answer the young lady , with a saucy toss of her head . 
 " which of they do you like well , Mr. Warrington ? " ask the honest Colonel . 
 " which of whom , sir ? " 
 " the Curate of Meudon , or the Dean of St. Patrick 's , or honest Tom , or Mr. Fielding ? " 
 " and what be they , sir ? " 
 " they ! why , they write book . " 
 " indeed , sir . I never hear of either one of them , " say Harry , hang down his head . " I fear my book - learning be neglect at home , sir . my brother have read every book that ever be write , I think . he could have talk to you about them for hour together . " 
 with this little speech Mrs. Lambert 's eye turn to her daughter , and Miss Theo cast hers down and blush . 
 " never mind , honesty be well than book any day , Mr. Warrington ! " cry the jolly Colonel . " you may go through the world very honourably without read any of the book I have be talk of , and some of they might give you more pleasure than profit . " 
 " I know more about horse and dog than Greek and Latin , sir . we most of we do in Virginia , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " you be like the Persians ; you can ride and speak the truth . " 
 " be the Prussians very good on horseback , sir ? I hope I shall see their king and a campaign or two , either with them or against them , " remark Colonel Lambert 's guest . why do Miss Theo look at her mother , and why do that good woman 's face assume a sad expression ? 
 why ? because young lass be breed in humdrum country town , do you suppose they never indulge in romance ? because they be modest and have never quit mother 's apron , do you suppose they have no thought of their own ? what happen in spite of all those precaution which the King and Queen take for their darling princess , those dragon , and that impenetrable forest , and that castle of steel ? the fairy prince penetrate the impenetrable forest , find the weak point in the dragon 's scale armour , and get the well of all the ogre who guard the castle of steel . away go the princess to he . she know he at once . her bandbox and portmanteaux be fill with her good clothe and all her jewel . she have be ready ever so long . 
 that be in fairy tale , you understand where the blessed hour and youth always arrive , the ivory horn be blow at the castle gate ; and far off in her beauteous bower the princess hear it , and start up , and know that there be the right champion . he be always ready . look ! how the giant ' head tumble off as , falchion in hand , he gallop over the bridge on his white charger ! how should that virgin , lock up in that inaccessible fortress , where she have never see any man that be not eighty , or humpbacke , or her father , know that there be such being in the world as young man ? I suppose there be an instinct . I suppose there be a season . I never speak for my part to a fairy princess , or hear as much from any unenchanted or enchanting maiden . Ne'er a one of they have ever whisper she pretty little secret to I , or perhaps confess they to herself , her mamma , or her near and dearest confidante . but they will fall in love . their little heart be constantly throb at the window of expectancy on the lookout for the champion . they be always hear his horn . they be for ever on the tower look out for the hero . Sister Ann , Sister Ann , do you see he ? surely ' tis a knight with curl mustachio , a flash scimitar , and a suit of silver armour . oh no ! it be only a costermonger with his donkey and a pannier of cabbage ! Sister Ann , Sister Ann , what be that cloud of dust ? oh , it be only a farmer 's man drive a flock of pig from market . Sister Ann , Sister Ann , who be that splendid warrior advance in scarlet and gold ? he near the castle , he clear the drawbridge , he lift the ponderous hammer at the gate . ah I , he knock twice ! ' tis only the postman with a double letter from Northamptonshire ! so it be we make false start in life . I do not   believe there be any such thing know as first love not within man 's or woman 's memory . no male or female remember his or her first inclination any more than his or her own christening . what ? you fancy that your sweet mistress , your spotless spinster , your blank maiden just out of the schoolroom , never care for any but you ? and she tell you so ? oh , you idiot ! when she be four year old she have a tender feeling towards the Buttons who bring the coal up to the nursery , or the little sweep at the crossing , or the music - master , or never mind whom . she have a secret longing towards her brother 's schoolfellow , or the third charity boy at church , and if occasion have serve , the comedy enact with you have be perform along with another . I do not mean to say that she confess this amatory sentiment , but that she have it . lay down this page , and think how many and many and many a time you be in love before you select the present Mrs. Jones as the partner of your name and affection ! 
 so , from the way in which Theo hold her head down , and exchange look with her mother , when poor unconscious Harry call the Persians the Prussians , and talk of serve a campaign with they , I make no doubt she be feel ashamed , and think within herself , " be this the hero with whom my mamma and I have be in love for these twenty - four hour , and whom we have endow with every perfection ? how beautiful , pale , and graceful he look yesterday as he lie on the ground ! how his curl fall over his face ! how sad it be to see his poor white arm , and the blood trickle from it when papa bleed he ! and now he be well and amongst we , he be handsome certainly , but oh , be it possible he be he be stupid ? " when she light the lamp and look at he , do Psyche find Cupid out ; and be that the meaning of the old allegory ? the wing of love drop off at this discovery . the fancy can no more soar and disport in skyey region , the beloved object cease at once to be celestial , and remain plod on earth , entirely unromantic and substantial . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . holiday 

 Mrs. Lambert 's little day - dream be over . Miss Theo and her mother be oblige to confess in their heart that their hero be but an ordinary mortal . they utter few word on the subject , but each know the other 's thought as people who love each other do ; and mamma , by an extra tenderness and special caressing manner towards her daughter , seek to console she for her disappointment . " never mind , my dear " the maternal kiss whisper on the filial cheek " our hero have turn out to be but an ordinary mortal , and none such be good enough for my Theo . Thou shalt have a real husband ere long , if there be one in England . why , I be scarce fifteen when your father see I at the Bury Assembly , and while I be yet at school , I use to vow that I never would have any other man . if Heaven give I such a husband the good man in the whole kingdom sure it will bless my child equally , who deserve a king if she fancy he ! " indeed , I be not sure that Mrs. Lambert who , of course , know the age of the Prince of Wales , and be aware how handsome and good a young prince he be do not expect that he too would come rid by her gate , and perhaps tumble down from his horse there , and be take into the house , and be cure , and cause his royal grandpapa to give Martin Lambert a regiment , and fall in love with Theo . 
 the Colonel for his part , and his second daughter , Miss Hetty , be on the laugh , scornful , unbelieve side . Mamma be always match - making . indeed , Mrs. Lambert be much addicted to novel , and cry her eye out over they with great assiduity . no coach ever pass the gate , but she expect a husband for her girl would alight from it and ring the bell . as for Miss Hetty , she allow her tongue to wag in a more than usually saucy way : she make a hundred sly allusion to their guest . she introduce Prussia and Persia into their conversation with abominable pertness and frequency . she ask whether the present King of Prussia be call the Shaw or the Sophy , and how far it be from Ispahan to Saxony , which his Majesty be at present invading , and about which war papa be so busy with his map and his newspaper ? she bring down the Persian Tales from her mamma 's closet , and lay they slily on the table in the parlour where the family sate . she would not marry a persian prince for her part ; she would prefer a gentleman who might not have more than one wife at a time . she call our young Virginian Theo 's gentleman , Theo 's prince . she ask her mamma if she wish she , Hetty , to take the other visitor , the black prince , for herself ? indeed , she rally her sister and her mother unceasingly on their sentimentality , and would never stop until she have make they angry , when she would begin to cry herself , and kiss they violently one after the other , and coax they back into good - humour . Simple Harry Warrington , meanwhile , know nothing of all the joke , the tear , quarrel , reconciliation , hymeneal plan , and so forth , of which he be the innocent occasion . a hundred allusion to the Prussians and Persians be shoot at he , and those parthian arrow do not penetrate his hide at all . a Shaw ? a Sophy ? very likely he think a Sophy be a lady , and would have deem it the height of absurdity that a man with a great black beard should have any such name . we fall into the midst of a quiet family : we drop like a stone , say , into a pool , we be perfectly compact and cool , and little know the flutter and excitement we make there , disturb the fish , frighten the duck , and agitate the whole surface of the water . how should Harry know the effect which his sudden appearance produce in this little , quiet , sentimental family ? he think quite well enough of himself on many point , but be diffident as yet regard woman , be of that age when young gentleman require encouragement and to be bring forward , and have be bring up at home in very modest and primitive relation towards the other sex . so Miss Hetty 's joke play round the lad , and he mind they no more than so many summer gnat . it be not that he be stupid , as she certainly think he : he be simple , too much occupy with himself and his own honest affair to think of other . why , what tragedy , comedy , interlude , intrigue , farce , be go on under our nose in friend ' drawing - room where we visit every day , and we remain utterly ignorant , self - satisfy , and blind ! as these sister sate and comb their flow ringlet of night , or talk with each other in the great bed where , accord to the fashion of the day , they lay together , how should Harry know that he have so great a share in their thought , joke , conversation ? three day after his arrival , his new and hospitable friend be walk with he in my Lord Wrotham 's fine park , where they be free to wander ; and here , on a piece of water , they come to some swan , which the young lady be in the habit of feed with bread . as the bird approach the young woman , Hetty say , with a queer look at her mother and sister , and then a glance at her father , who stand by , honest , happy , in a red waistcoat , Hetty say : " Mamma 's swan be something like these , papa . " 
 " what swan , my dear ? " say mamma . 
 " something like , but not quite . they have short neck than these , and be , score of they , on our common , " continue Miss Hetty . " I see Betty pluck one in the kitchen this morning . we shall have it for dinner , with apple - sauce and " 
 " do not   be a little goose ! " say Miss Theo . 
 " and sage and onion . do you love swan , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " I shoot three last winter on our river , " say the virginian gentleman . " our be not such white bird as these they eat very well , though . " the simple youth have not the slight idea that he himself be an allegory at that very time , and that Miss Hetty be narrate a fable regard he . in some exceedingly recondite latin work I have read that , long before Virginia be discover , other folk be equally dull of comprehension . 
 so it be a premature sentiment on the part of Miss Theo that little tender flutter of the bosom which we have acknowledge she feel on first behold the Virginian , so handsome , pale , and bleed . this be not the great passion which she know her heart could feel . like the bird , it have waken and begin to sing at a false dawn . hop back to thy perch , and cover thy head with thy wing , thou tremulous little fluttering creature ! it be not yet light , and roosting be as yet well than sing . Anon will come morning , and the whole sky will redden , and you shall soar up into it and salute the sun with your music . 
 one little phrase , some three - and - thirty line back , perhaps the fair and suspicious reader have remark : " three day after his arrival , Harry be walk with , " etc . etc . if he could walk which it appear he could do perfectly well what business have he to be walk with anybody but Lady Maria Esmond on the Pantiles , Tunbridge Wells ? his shoulder be set : his health be entirely restore : he have not even a change of coat , as we have see , and be oblige to the Colonel for his raiment . surely a young man in such a condition have no right to be linger on at Oakhurst , and be bind by every tie of duty and convenience , by love , by relationship , by a gentle heart wait for he , by the washerwoman finally , to go to Tunbridge . why do he stay behind , unless he be in love with either of the young lady   and we say he be not   ? could it be that he do not want to go ? hath the gracious reader understand the meaning of the mystic S with which the last chapter commence , and in which the designer have feebly endeavour to depict the notorious Sinbad the Sailor , surmount by that odious old man of the sea ? what if Harry Warrington should be that sailor , and his fate that choke , deadening , inevitable old man ? what if for two day past he have feel those knee throttle he round the neck ? if his fell aunt 's purpose be answer , and if his late love be kill as dead by her poisonous communication as fair Rosamond be by her royal and legitimate rival ? be Hero then light the lamp up , and get ready the supper , whilst Leander be sit comfortably with some other party , and never in the least thinking of take to the water ? ever since that coward 's blow be strike in Lady Maria 's back by her own relative , surely kind heart must pity her ladyship . I know she have fault ay , and wear false hair and false never mind what . but a woman in distress , shall we not pity she a lady of a certain age , be we go to laugh at she because of her year ? between her old aunt and her unhappy delusion , be sure my Lady Maria Esmond be have no very pleasant time of it at Tunbridge Wells . there be no one to protect she . Madam Beatrix have she all to herself . Lady Maria be poor , and hope for money from her aunt . Lady Maria have a secret or two which the old woman know , and brandish over she . I for one be quite melt and grow soft - hearted as I think of she . imagine she alone , and a victim to that old woman ! paint to yourself that antique Andromeda   if you please we will allow that rich flow head of hair to fall over her shoulder   chain to a rock on Mount Ephraim , and give up to that dragon of a Baroness ! Succour , Perseus ! come quickly with thy wing foot and flash falchion ! Perseus be not in the least hurry . the dragon have her will of Andromeda for day after day . 
 Harry Warrington , who would not have allow his dislocated and mend shoulder to keep he from go out hunting , remain day after day contentedly at Oakhurst , with each day find the kindly folk who welcome he more to his liking . perhaps he have never , since his grandfather 's death , be in such good company . his lot have lain amongst fox - hunt virginian squire , with whose society he have put up very contentedly , rid their horse , live their life , and share their punch - bowl . the lady of his own and mother 's acquaintance be very well breed , and decorous , and pious , no doubt , but somewhat narrow - minded . it be but a little place , his home , with its pompous way , small etiquette and punctilio , small flattery , small conversation and scandal . until he have leave the place , some time after , he do not know how narrow and confine his life have be there . he be free enough personally . he have dog and horse , and might shoot and hunt for score of mile round about : but the little lady - mother domineer at home , and when there he have to submit to her influence and breathe her air . 
 here the lad find himself in the midst of a circle where everything about he be incomparably gayer , bright , and more free . he be live with a man and woman who have see the world , though they live retire from it , who have both of they happen to enjoy from their early time the use not only of good book , but of good company those live book , which be such pleasant and sometimes such profitable reading . society have this good at least : that it lessen our conceit , by teach we our insignificance , and make we acquaint with our better . if you be a young person who read this , depend upon it , sir or madam , there be nothing more wholesome for you than to acknowledge and to associate with your superior . if I could , I would not have my son Thomas first Greek and latin prize boy , first oar , and cock of the school . well for his soul 's and body 's welfare that he should have a good place , not the first a fair set of competitor round about he , and a good thrashing now and then , with a hearty shake afterwards of the hand which administer the beating . what honest man that can choose his lot would be a prince , let we say , and have all society walk backwards before he , only obsequious household - gentleman to talk to , and all mankind mum except when your High Mightiness ask a question and give permission to speak ? one of the great benefit which Harry Warrington receive from this family , before whose gate Fate have shoot he , be to begin to learn that he be a profoundly ignorant young fellow , and that there be many people in the world far well than he know himself to be . Arrogant a little with some folk , in the company of his superior he be magnanimously docile . we have see how faithfully he admire his brother at home , and his friend , the gallant young Colonel of Mount Vernon : of the gentleman , his kinsman at Castlewood , he have feel himself at least the equal . in his new acquaintance at Oakhurst he find a man who have read far more book than Harry could pretend to judge of , who have see the world and come unwounde out of it , as he have out of the danger and battle which he have confront , and who have goodness and honesty write on his face and breathe from his lip , for which quality our brave lad have always an instinctive sympathy and predilection . 
 as for the woman , they be the kind , merriest , most agreeable he have as yet know . they be pleasanter than Parson Broadbent 's black - eyed daughter at home , whose laugh carry as far as a gun . they be quite as well - breed as the Castlewood lady , with the exception of Madam Beatrix   who , indeed , be as grand as an empress on some occasion . but somehow , after a talk with Madam Beatrix , and vast amusement and interest in her story , the lad would come away as with a bitter taste in his mouth , and fancy all the world wicke round about he . they be not in the least squeamish ; and laugh over page of Mr. Fielding , and cry over volume of Mr. Richardson , contain joke and incident which would make Mrs. Grundy 's hair stand on end , yet their merry prattle leave no bitterness behind it : their tale about this neighbour and that be droll , not malicious ; the curtsey and salutation with which the folk of the little neighbouring town receive they , how kindly and cheerful ! their bounty how cordial ! of a truth it be good to be with good people . how good Harry Warrington do not know at the time , perhaps , or until subsequent experience show he contrast , or cause he to feel remorse . here be a tranquil , sunshiny day of a life that be to be agitate and stormy a happy hour or two to remember . not much happen during the happy hour or two . it be only sweet sleep , pleasant waking , friendly welcome , serene pastime . the gate of the old house seem to shut the wicked world out somehow , and the inhabitant within to be well , and purer , and kinder than other people . he be not in love ; oh no ! not the least , either with saucy Hetty or generous Theodosia but when the time come for go away , he fasten on both their hand , and feel an immense regard for they . he think he should like to know their brother , and that they must be fine fellow ; and as for Mrs. Lambert , I believe she be as sentimental at his departure as if he have be the last volume of Clarissa Harlowe . 
 " he be very kind and honest , " say Theo , gravely , as , look from the terrace , they see he and their father and servant rid away on the road to Westerham . 
 " I do not   think he stupid at all now , " say little Hetty ; " and , mamma , I think , he be very like a swan indeed . " 
 " it feel just like one of the boy go to school , " say mamma . 
 " just like it , " say Theo , sadly . 
 " I be glad he have get papa to ride with he to Westerham , " resume Miss Hetty , " and that he buy Farmer Briggs 's horse . I do not   like his go to those Castlewood people . I be sure that Madame Bernstein be a wicked old woman . I expect to see she ride away on her crooked stick . " 
 " Hush , Hetty ! " 
 " do you think she would float if they try she in the pond , as poor old mother hely do at Elmhurst ? the other old woman seem fond of he I mean the one with the fair tour . she look very melancholy when she go away ; but Madame Bernstein whisk she off with her crutch , and she be oblige to go . I do not   care , Theo . I know she be a wicked woman . you think everybody good , you do , because you never do anything wrong yourself . " 
 " my Theo be a good girl , " say the mother , look fondly at both her daughter . 
 " then why do we call she a miserable sinner ? " 
 " we be all so , my love , " say mamma . 
 " what , papa too ? you know you do not   think so , " cry Miss Hester . and to allow this be almost more than Mrs. Lambert could afford . 
 " what be that you tell John to give to Mr. Warrington 's black man ? " 
 Mamma own , with some shamefacedness , it be a bottle of her cordial water and a cake which she have bid Betty make . " I feel quite like a mother to he , my dear , I can not   help own it , and you know both our boy still like one of our cake to take to school or college with they . " 




 CHAPTER XXIV . from Oakhurst to tunbridge 

 have her lily handkerchief in token of adieu to the depart traveller , Mrs. Lambert and her girl watch they pace leisurely on the first few hundred yard of their journey , and until such time as a tree - clump corner of the road hide they from the lady ' view . behind that clump of lime the good matron have many a time watch those she love well disappear . husband depart to battle and danger , son to school , each after the other have go on his way behind yonder green tree , return as it please Heaven 's will at his good time , and bring pleasure and love back to the happy little family . besides their own instinctive nature   which to be sure aid wonderfully in the matter , the leisure and contemplation attendant upon their home life serve to foster the tenderness and fidelity of our woman . the man go , there be all day to think about they , and to - morrow and to - morrow when there certainly will be a letter and so on . there be the vacant room to go look at , where the boy sleep last night , and the impression of his carpet bag be still on the bed . there be his whip hang up in the hall , and his fishing - rod and basket mute memorial of the brief bygone pleasure . at dinner there come up that cherry - tart , half of which our darling eat at two o'clock in spite of his melancholy , and with a choking little sister on each side of he . the evening prayer be say without that young scholar 's voice to utter the due response . midnight and silence come , and the good mother lie wakeful , think how one of the dear accustomed brood be away from the nest . morn break , home and holiday have pass away , and toil and labour have begin for he . so those rustle lime form , as it be , a screen between the world and our lady of the house at Oakhurst . kind - hearted Mrs. Lambert always become silent and thoughtful , if by chance she and her girl walk up to the tree in the absence of the man of the family . she say she would like to carve their name up on the grey silver trunk , in the midst of true - lover ' knot , as be then the kindly fashion ; and Miss Theo , who have an exceeding elegant turn that way , make some verse regard the tree , which she delighted parent transmit to a periodical of those day . 
 " now we be out of sight of the lady , " say Colonel Lambert , give a parting salute with his hat , as the pair of gentleman trot past the lime in question . " I know my wife always watch at her window until we be round this corner . I hope we shall have you see the tree and the house again , Mr. Warrington ; and the boy be at home , mayhap there will be well sport for you . " 
 " I never want to be happy , sir , than I have be , " reply Mr. Warrington ; " and I hope you will let I say , that I feel as if I be leave quite old friend behind I . " 
 " the friend at whose house we shall sup to - night hath a son , who be an old friend of our family , too ; and my wife , who be an inveterate marriage - monger , would have make a match between he and one of my girl , but that the Colonel hath choose to fall in love with somebody else . " 
 " ah ! " sigh Mr. Warrington . 
 " other folk have do the same thing . there be brave fellow before Agamemnon . " 
 " I beg your pardon , sir . be the gentleman 's name Aga ? I do not quite gather it , " meekly inquire the young traveller . 
 " no , his name be James Wolfe , " cry the Colonel , smile . " he be a young fellow still , or what we call so , be scarce thirty year old . he be the young lieutenant - colonel in the army , unless , to be sure , we except a few score of our nobility , who take rank before we common folk . " 
 " of course of course ! " say the Colonel 's young companion with true colonial notion of aristocratic precedence . 
 " and I have see he command captain , and very brave captain , who be thirty year his senior , and who have neither his merit nor his good fortune . but , lucky as he hath be , no one envy his superiority , for , indeed , most of we acknowledge that he be our superior . he be belove by every man of our old regiment and know every one of they . he be a good scholar as well as a consummate soldier , and a master of many language . " 
 " ah , sir ! " say Harry Warrington , with a sigh of great humility ; " I feel that I have neglect my own youth sadly ; and be come to England but an ignoramus . have my dear brother be alive , he would have represent our name and our colony , too , well than I can do . George be a scholar ; George be a musician ; George could talk with the most learn people in our country , and I make no doubt would have hold his own here . do you know , sir , I be glad to have come home , and to you especially , if but to learn how ignorant I be . " 
 " if you know that well , ' tis a great gain already , " say the Colonel , with a smile . 
 " at home , especially of late , and since we lose my brother , I use to think myself a mighty fine fellow , and have no doubt that the folk round about flatter I . I be wise now , that is , I hope I be , though perhaps I be wrong , and only brag again . but you see , sir , the gentry in our colony do not   know very much , except about dog and horse , and bet and game . I wish I know more about book , and less about they . " 
 " Nay . dog and horse be very good book , too , in their way , and we may read a deal of truth out of them . some man be not make to be scholar , and may be very worthy citizen and gentleman in spite of their ignorance . what call have all of we to be especially learn or wise , or to take a first place in the world ? his Royal Highness be commander , and Martin Lambert be colonel , and Jack Hunt , who rid behind yonder , be a private soldier , and be now a very honest , worthy groom . so as we all do our good in our station , it matter not much whether that be high or low . Nay , how do we know what be high and what be low ? and whether Jack 's currycomb , or my epaulet , or his Royal Highness 's baton , may not turn out to be pretty equal ? when I begin life , et militavi non sine never mind what I dream of success and honour ; now I think of duty , and yonder folk , from whom we part a few hour ago . let we trot on , else we shall not reach Westerham before nightfall . " 
 at Westerham the two friend be welcome by their host , a stately matron , an old soldier , whose recollection and service be of five - and - forty year back , and the son of this gentleman and lady , the Lieutenant - Colonel of Kingsley 's regiment , that be then station at Maidstone , whence the Colonel have come over on a brief visit to his parent . Harry look with some curiosity at this officer , who , young as he be , have see so much service , and obtain a character so high . there be little of the beautiful in his face . he be very lean and very pale ; his hair be red , his nose and cheek - bone be high ; but he have a fine courtesy towards his elder , a cordial greeting towards his friend , and an animation in conversation which cause those who hear he to forget , even to admire , his homely look . 
 Mr. Warrington be go to Tunbridge ? their James would bear he company , the lady of the house say , and whisper something to Colonel Lambert at supper , which occasion smile and a knowing wink or two from that officer . he call for wine , and toast " Miss Lowther . " " with all my heart , " cry the enthusiastic Colonel James , and drain his glass to the very last drop . Mamma whisper her friend how James and the lady be go to make a match , and how she come of the famous Lowther family of the North . 
 " if she be the daughter of King Charlemagne , " cry Lambert , ' she be not too good for James Wolfe , or for his mother 's son . " 
 " Mr. Lambert would not say so if he know she , " the young Colonel declare . 
 " oh , of course , she be the priceless pearl , and you be nothing , " cry mamma . " no . I be of Colonel Lambert 's opinion ; and , if she bring all Cumberland to you for a jointure , I should say it be my James 's due . that be the way with them , Mr. Warrington . we tend our child through fever , and measle , and whooping - cough , and small - pox ; we send they to the army and can not   sleep at night for thinking ; we break our heart at part with them , and have they at home only for a week or two in the year , or maybe ten year , and , after all our care , there come a lass with a pair of bright eye , and away go our boy , and never care a fig for we afterwards . " 
 " and pray , my dear , how do you come to marry James 's papa ? " say the eld Colonel Wolfe . " and why do not   you stay at home with your parent ? " 
 " because James 's papa be gouty , and want somebody to take care of he , I suppose ; not because I like he a bit , " answer the lady : and so with much easy talk and kindness the evening pass away . 
 on the morrow , and with many expression of kindness and friendship for his late guest , Colonel Lambert give over the young Virginian to Mr. Wolfe 's charge , and turn his horse 's head homeward , while the two gentleman speed towards Tunbridge Wells . Wolfe be in a hurry to reach the place , Harry Warrington be , perhaps , not quite so eager : nay , when Lambert ride towards his own home , Harry 's thought follow he with a great deal of longing desire to the parlour at Oakhurst , where he have spend three day in happy calm . Mr. Wolfe agree in all Harry 's enthusiastic praise of Mr. Lambert , and of his wife , and of his daughter , and of all that excellent family . " to have such a good name , and to live such a life as Colonel Lambert 's , " say Wolfe , ' seem to I now the height of human ambition . " 
 " and glory and honour ? " ask Warrington , " be those nothing ? and would you give up the winning of they ? " 
 " they be my dream once , " answer the Colonel , who have now different idea of happiness , " and now my desire be much more tranquil . I have follow arm ever since I be fourteen year of age . I have see almost every kind of duty connect with my calling . I know all the garrison town in this country , and have have the honour to serve wherever there have be work to be do during the last ten year . I have do pretty near the whole of a soldier 's duty , except , indeed , the command of an army , which can hardly be hop for by one of my year ; and now , methink , I would like quiet , book to read , a wife to love I , and some child to dandle on my knee . I have imagine some such Elysium for myself , Mr. Warrington . true love be well than glory ; and a tranquil fireside , with the woman of your heart seat by it , the great good the god can send to we . " 
 Harry imagine to himself the picture which his comrade call up . he say " yes , " in answer to the other 's remark ; but , no doubt , do not give a very cheerful assent , for his companion observe upon the expression of his face . 
 " you say ' yes ' as if a fireside and a sweetheart be not particularly to your taste . " 
 " why , look you , Colonel , there be other thing which a young fellow might like to enjoy . you have have sixteen year of the world : and I be but a few month away from my mother 's apron - string . when I have see a campaign or two , or six , as you have : when I have distinguish myself like Mr. Wolfe , and make the world talk of I , I then may think of retire from it . " 
 to these remark , Mr. Wolfe , whose heart be full of a very different matter , reply by break out in a further encomium of the joy of marriage ; and a special rhapsody upon the beauty and merit of his mistress a theme intensely interesting to himself , though not so , possibly , to his hearer , whose view regard a married life , if he permit himself to entertain any , be somewhat melancholy and despondent . a pleasant afternoon bring they to the end of their ride ; nor do any accident or incident accompany it , save , perhaps , a mistake which Harry Warrington make at some few mile ' distance from Tunbridge Wells , where two horseman stop they , whom Harry be for charge , pistol in hand , suppose they to be highwayman . Colonel Wolfe , laughing , bade Mr. Warrington reserve his fire , for these folk be only innkeeper ' agent , and not robber   except in their calling . Gumbo , whose horse run away with he at this particular juncture , be bring back after a great deal of bawl on his master 's part , and the two gentleman ride into the little town , alight at their inn , and then separate , each in quest of the lady whom he have come to visit . 
 Mr. Warrington find his aunt instal in handsome lodging , with a guard of London lacquey in her anteroom , and to follow her chair when she go abroad . she receive he with the utmost kindness . his cousin , my Lady Maria , be absent when he arrive : I do not   know whether the young gentleman be unhappy at not see she : or whether he disguise his feeling , or whether Madame de Bernstein take any note regard they . 
 a beau in a rich figured suit , the first speciman of the kind Harry have see , and two dowager with voluminous hoop and plenty of rouge , be on a visit to the Baroness when her nephew make his bow to she . she introduce the young man to these personage as her nephew , the young Croesus out of Virginia , of whom they have hear . she talk about the immensity of his estate , which be as large as Kent ; and , as she have read , infinitely more fruitful . she mention how her half - sister , Madam Esmond , be call Princess Pocahontas in her own country . she never tired in her praise of mother and son , of their rich and their good quality . the beau shake the young man by the hand , and be delighted to have the honour to make his acquaintance . the lady praise he to his aunt so loudly that the modest youth be fain to blush at their compliment . they go away to inform the Tunbridge society of the news of his arrival . the little place be soon buzz with account of the wealth , the good breeding , and the good look of the Virginian . 
 " you could not have come at a well moment , my dear , " the Baroness say to her nephew , as her visitor depart with many curtsey and congee . " those three individual have the most active tongue in the Wells . they will trumpet your good quality in every company where they go . I have introduce you to a hundred people already , and , Heaven help I ! have tell all sort of fib about the geography of Virginia in order to describe your estate . it be a prodigious large one , but I be afraid I have magnify it . I have fill it with all sort of wonderful animal , gold mine , spice ; I be not sure I have not say diamond . as for your negro , I have give your mother army of they , and , in fact , represent she as a sovereign princess reign over a magnificent dominion . so she have a magnificent dominion : I can not tell to a few hundred thousand pound how much her yearly income be , but I have no doubt it be a very great one . and you must prepare , sir , to be treat here as the heir - apparent of this royal lady . do not let your head be turn . from this day forth you be go to be flatter as you have never be flatter in your life . " 
 " and to what end , ma'am ? " ask the young gentleman . " I see no reason why I should be repute so rich , or get so much flattery . " 
 " in the first place , sir , you must not contradict your old aunt , who have no desire to be make a fool of before her company . and as for your reputation , you must know we find it here almost ready - make on our arrival . a London newspaper have somehow hear of you , and come out with a story of the immense wealth of a young gentleman from Virginia lately land , and a nephew of my Lord Castlewood . immensely wealthy you be , and can not   help yourself . all the world be eager to see you . you shall go to church to - morrow morning , and see how the whole congregation will turn away from its book and prayer , to worship the golden calf in your person . you would not have have I undeceive they , would you , and speak ill of my own flesh and blood ? " 
 " but how be I better by this reputation for money ? " ask Harry . 
 " you be make your entry into the world , and the gold key will open most of its door to you . to be think rich be as good as to be rich . you need not spend much money . People will say that you hoard it , and your reputation for avarice will do you good rather than harm . you will see how the mother will smile upon you , and the daughter will curtsey ! do not   look surprised ! when I be a young woman myself I do as all the rest of the world do , and try to better myself by more than one desperate attempt at a good marriage . your poor grandmother , who be a saint upon earth to be sure , bat a little jealousy , use to scold I , and call I worldly . worldly , my dear ! so be the world worldly ; and we must serve it as it serve we ; and give it nothing for nothing . Mr. Henry Esmond Warrington I can not   help love the two first name , sir , old woman as I be , and that I tell you on come here or to London , would have be nobody . our protection would have help he but little . our family have little credit , and , entre nous , not much reputation . I suppose you know that Castlewood be more than suspect in ' 45 , and hath since ruin himself by play ? " 
 Harry have never hear about Lord Castlewood or his reputation . 
 " he never have much to lose , but he have lose that and more : his wretched estate be eat up with mortgage . he have be at all sort of scheme to raise money : my dear , he have be so desperate at time , that I do not think my diamond be safe with he ; and have travel to and from Castlewood without they . terrible , be not   it , to speak so of one 's own nephew ? but you be my nephew , too , and not spoil by the world yet , and I wish to warn you of its wickedness . I hear of your play - doing with Will and the chaplain , but they could do you no harm , nay , I be tell you have the well of they . have you play with Castlewood , you would have have no such luck : and you would have play , have not an old aunt of yours warn my Lord Castlewood to keep his hand off you . " 
 " what , ma'am , do you interfere to preserve I ? " 
 " I keep his clutch off from you : be thankful that you be come out of that ogre 's den with any flesh on your bone ! my dear , it have be the rage and passion of all our family . my poor silly brother play ; both his wife play , especially the last one , who have little else to live upon now but her nightly assembly in London , and the money for the card . I would not trust she at Castlewood alone with you : the passion be too strong for they , and they would fall upon you , and fleece you ; and then fall upon each other , and fight for the plunder . but for his place about the Court my poor nephew hath nothing , and that be Will 's fortune , too , sir , and Maria 's and her sister 's . " 
 " and be they , too , fond of the card ? " 
 " no ; to do poor Molly justice , gaming be not her passion : but when she be amongst they in London , little Fanny will bet her eye out of her head . I know what the passion be , sir : do not look so astonished ; I have have it , as I have the measle when I be a child . I be not cure quite . for a poor old woman there be nothing leave but that . you will see some high play at my card - table to - night . Hush ! my dear . it be that I want , and without which I mop so at Castlewood ! I could not win of my niece or their mother . they would not pay if they lose . ' tis good to warn you , my dear , in time , lest you should be shock by the discovery . I can not   live without the card , there be the truth ! " 
 a few day before , and while stay with his Castlewood relative , Harry , who love card , and cock - fighting , and bet , and every conceivable sport himself , would have laugh very likely at this confession . amongst that family into whose society he have fall , many thing be laugh at , over which some folk look grave . faith and honour be laugh at ; pure life be disbelieve ; selfishness be proclaim as common practice ; sacred duty be sneeringly speak of , and vice flippantly condone . these be no Pharisees : they profess no hypocrisy of virtue , they fling no stone at discover sinner : they smile , shrug their shoulder , and pass on . the member of this family do not pretend to be a whit well than their neighbour , whom they despise heartily ; they live quite familiarly with the folk about whom and whose wife they tell such wicked , funny story ; they take their share of what pleasure or plunder come to hand , and live from day to day till their last day come for they . of course there be no such people now ; and human nature be very much change in the last hundred year . at any rate , card - playing be greatly out of mode : about that there can be no doubt : and very likely there be not six lady of fashion in London who know the difference between Spadille and Manille . 
 " how dreadfully dull you must have find those humdrum people at that village where we leave you but the savage be very kind to you , child ! " say Madame de Bernstein , pat the young man 's cheek with her pretty old hand . 
 " they be very kind ; and it be not at all dull , ma'am , and I think they be some of the good people in the world , " say Harry , with his face flush up . his aunt 's tone jar upon he . he could not bear that any one should speak or think lightly of the new friend whom he have find . he do not want they in such company . 
 the old lady , imperious and prompt to anger , be about to resent the check she have receive , but a second thought make her pause . " those two girl , " she think , " a sick - bed an interesting stranger of course he have be fall in love with one of they . " Madame Bernstein look round with a mischievous glance at Lady Maria , who enter the room at this juncture . 




 CHAPTER XXV . New Acquaintances 

 Cousin Maria make her appearance , attend by a couple of gardener 's boy bear basket of flower , with which it be propose to decorate Madame de Bernstein 's drawing - room against the arrival of her ladyship 's company . three footman in livery , gorgeously laced with worst , set out twice as many card - table . a major - domo in black and a bag , with fine laced ruffle ; and look as if he ought to have a sword by his side , follow the lacquey bear fasce of wax candle , which he place a pair on each card - table , and in the silver sconce on the wainscote wall that be now gild with the slanting ray of the sun , as be the prospect of the green common beyond , with its rock and clump of tree and house twinkle in the sunshine . group of many - colour figure in hoop and powder and brocade saunter over the green , and dapple the plain with their shadow . on the other side from the Baroness 's window you see the Pantiles , where a perpetual fair be hold , and hear the clatter and buzzing of the company . a band of music be here perform for the benefit of the visitor to the Wells . Madame Bernstein 's chief sitting - room might not suit a recluse or a student , but for those who like bustle , gaiety , a bright cross light , and a view of all that be go on in the cheery busy place , no lodging could be pleasanter . and when the window be light up , the passenger walk below be aware that her ladyship be at home and hold a card - assembly , to which an introduction be easy enough . by the way , in speak of the past , I think the night - life of society a hundred year since be rather a dark life . there be not one wax - candle for ten which we now see in a lady 's drawing - room : let alone gas and the wondrous new illumination of club . horrible gutter tallow smoke and stunk in passage . the candle - snuffer be a notorious officer in the theatre . see Hogarth 's picture : how dark they be , and how his feast be , as it be , begrime with tallow ! in " marriage a la Mode , " in Lord Viscount Squanderfield 's grand saloon , where he and his wife be sit yawn before the horror - stricken steward when their party be over there be but eight candle one on each card - table , and half a dozen in a brass chandelier . if Jack Briefless convoke his friend to oyster and beer in his chamber , Pump Court , he would have twice as many . let we comfort ourselves by think that Louis Quatorze in all his glory hold his revel in the dark , and bless Mr. Price and other luciferous benefactor of mankind , for banish the abominable mutton of our youth . 
 so Maria with her flower   herself the fairest flower , pop her rose , sweet - williams , and so forth , in vas here and there , and adorn the apartment to the good of her art . she linger fondly over this bowl and that dragon jar , cast but sly timid glance the while at young cousin Harry , whose own blush would have become any young woman , and you might have think that she possibly intend to outstay her aunt ; but that Baroness , seat in her arm - chair , her crooked tortoiseshell stick in her hand , point the servant imperiously to their duty ; rat one and the other soundly : Tom for have a darn in his stocking ; John for have grease his lock too profusely out of the candle - box ; and so forth keep a stern domination over they . another remark concern poor jeame of a hundred year ago : Jeames sleep two in a bed , four in a room , and that room a cellar very likely , and he wash in a trough such as you would hardly see anywhere in London now out of the barrack of her Majesty 's Foot Guards . 
 if Maria hop a present interview , her fond heart be disappoint . " where be you go to dine , Harry ? " ask Madame de Bernstein . " my niece Maria and I shall have a chicken in the little parlour I think you should go to the good ordinary . there be one at the White Horse at three , we shall hear his bell in a minute or two . and you will understand , sir , that you ought not to spare expense , but behave like Princess Pocahontas 's son . your trunk have be take over to the lodging I have engage for you . it be not good for a lad to be always hang about the apron of two old woman . be it , Maria ? " 
 " no , " say her ladyship , drop her meek eye ; whilst the other lady 's glare in triumph . I think Andromeda have be a good deal expose to the Dragon in the course of the last five or six day : and if Perseus have cut the latter 's cruel head off he would have commit not unjustifiable monstricide . but he do not bare sword or shield ; he only look mechanically at the lacquey in tawny and blue as they creak about the room . 
 " and there be good mercer and tailor from London always here to wait on the company at the Wells . you have well see they , my dear , for your suit be not of the very last fashion a little lace " 
 " I can not   go out of mourning , ma'am , " say the young man , look down at his sable . 
 " Ho , sir , " cry the lady , rustle up from her chair and rise on her cane , " wear black for your brother till you be as old as Methuselah , if you like . I be sure I do not   want to prevent you . I only want you to dress , and to do like other people , and make a figure worthy of your name . " 
 " Madam , " say Mr. Warrington with great state , " I have not do anything to disgrace it that I know . " 
 why do the old woman stop and give a little start as if she have be strike ? let bygone be bygone . she and the boy have a score of little passage of this kind in which sword be cross and thrust rapidly deal or parry . she like Harry none the bad for his courage in face she . " sure a little fine linen than that shirt you wear will not be a disgrace to you , sir , " she say , with rather a forced laugh . 
 Harry bow and blush . it be one of the homely gift of his Oakhurst friend . he feel pleased somehow to think he wear it ; think of the new friend , so good , so pure , so simple , so kindly , with immense tenderness , and feel , while invest in this garment , as if evil could not touch he . he say he would go to his lodging , and make a point of return array in the good linen he have . 
 " come back here , sir , " say Madame Bernstein , " and if our company have not arrive , Maria and I will find some ruffle for you ! " and herewith , under a footman 's guidance , the young fellow walk off to his new lodging . 
 Harry find not only handsome and spacious apartment provide for he , but a groom in attendance wait to be engage by his honour , and a second valet , if he be inclined to hire one to wait upon Mr. Gumbo . Ere he have be many minute in his room , emissarie from a London tailor and bootmaker wait he with the card and compliment of their employer , Messrs. Regnier and Tull ; the good article in his modest wardrobe be lay out by Gumbo , and the fine linen with which his thrifty virginian mother have provide he . vision of the snow - surround home in his own country , of the crackling log and the trim quiet lady work by the fire , rise up before he . for the first time a little thought that the homely clothe be not quite smart enough , the home - work linen not so fine as it might be , cross the young man 's mind . that he should be ashamed of anything belong to he or to Castlewood ! that be strange . the simple folk there be only too well satisfied with all thing that be do , or say , or produce at Castlewood ; and Madam Esmond , when she send her son forth on his travel , think no young nobleman need be well provide . the clothe might have fit well and be of a later fashion , to be sure but still the young fellow present a comely figure enough when he issue from his apartment , his toilet over ; and Gumbo call a chair , march beside it , until they reach the ordinary where the young gentleman be to dine . 
 here he expect to find the beau whose acquaintance he have make a few hour before at his aunt 's lodging , and who have indicate to Harry that the White Horse be the most modish place for dining at the Wells , and he mention his friend 's name to the host : but the landlord and waiter lead he into the room with many smile and bow assure his honour that his honour do not need any other introduction than his own , help he to hang up his coat and sword on a peg , ask he whether he would drink Burgundy , Pontac , or champagne to his dinner , and lead he to a table . 
 though the most fashionable ordinary in the village , the White Horse do not happen to be crowd on this day . Monsieur Barbeau , the landlord , inform Harry that there be a great entertainment at Summer Hill , which have take away most of the company ; indeed , when Harry enter the room , there be but four other gentleman in it . two of these guest be drink wine , and have finish their dinner : the other two be young man in the midst of their meal , to whom the landlord , as he pass , must have whisper the name of the new - comer , for they look at he with some appearance of interest , and make he a slight bow across the table as the smile host bustle away for Harry 's dinner . 
 Mr. Warrington return the salute of the two gentleman , who bid he welcome to Tunbridge , and hop he would like the place upon well acquaintance . then they smile and exchange waggish look with each other , of which Harry do not understand the meaning , nor why they cast knowing glance at the two other guest over their wine . 
 one of these person be in a somewhat tarnish velvet coat with a huge queue and bag , and voluminous ruffle and embroidery . the other be a little beetle - browe , hook - nose , high - shoulder gentleman , whom his opposite companion address as milor , or my lord , in a very high voice . my lord , who be sip the wine before he , barely glanced at the new - comer , and then address himself to his own companion . 
 " and so you know the nephew of the old woman the Croesus who come to arrive ? " 
 " you be throw out there , Jack ! " say one young gentleman to the other . 
 " never could manage the lingo , " say Jack . the two elder have begin to speak in the french language . 
 " but assuredly , my dear lord ! " say the gentleman with the long queue . 
 " you have show energy , my dear Baron ! he have be here but two hour . my people tell I of he only as I come to dinner . " 
 " I know he before ! I have meet he often in London with the Baroness and my lord , his cousin , " say the Baron . 
 a smoking soup for Harry here come in , bear by the smile host . " Behold , sir ! behold a potage of my fashion ! " say my landlord , lay down the dish and whispering to Harry the celebrated name of the nobleman opposite . Harry thank Monsieur Barbeau in his own language , upon which the foreign gentleman , turn round , grin most graciously at Harry , and say , " fous bossedez notre langue barfaidement , monsieur . " Mr. Warrington have never hear the french language pronounce in that manner in Canada . he bow in return to the foreign gentleman . 
 " tell I more about the Croesus , my good Baron , " continue his lordship , speak rather superciliously to his companion , and take no notice of Harry , which perhaps somewhat nettle the young man . 
 " what will you , that I tell you , my dear lord ? Croesus be a youth like other youth ; he be tall , like other youth ; he be awkward , like other youth ; he have black hair , as they all have who come from the Indies . lodging have be take for he at Mrs. Rose 's toy - shop . " 
 " I have lodging there too , " think Mr. Warrington . " who be Croesus they be talk of ? how good the soup be ! " 
 " he travel with a large retinue , " the Baron continue , " four servant , two postchaise , and a pair of outrider . his chief attendant be a black man who save his life from the savage in America , and who will not hear , on any account , of be make free . he persist in wear mourning for his eld brother from whom he inherit his principality . " 
 " could anything console you for the death of your , Chevalier ? " cry out the eld gentleman . 
 " Milor ! his property might , " say the Chevalier , " which you know be not small . " 
 " your brother live on his patrimony which you have tell I be immense you by your industry , my dear Chevalier . " 
 " Milor ! " cry the individual address as Chevalier . 
 " by your industry or your esprit , how much more noble ! shall you be at the Baroness 's to - night ? she ought to be a little of your parent , Chevalier ? " 
 " again I fail to comprehend your lordship , " say the other gentleman , rather sulkily . 
 " why , she be a woman of great wit she be of noble birth she have undergo strange adventure she have but little principle   there you happily have the advantage of she . but what care we man of the world ? you intend to go and play with the young Creole , no doubt , and get as much money from he as you can . by the way , Baron , suppose he should be a guet - apen , that young Creole ? suppose our excellent friend have invent he up in London , and bring he down with his character for wealth to prey upon the innocent folk here ? " 
 " J'y ai souvent pense , milor , " say the little Baron , place his finger to his nose very knowingly , " that Baroness be capable of anything . " 
 " a Baron a Baroness , que voulez - vous , my friend ? I mean the late lamented husband . do you know who he be ? " 
 " intimately . a more notorious villain never deal a card . at Venice , at Brussels , at Spa , at Vienna the gaol of every one of which place he know . I know the man , my lord . " 
 " I think you would . I see he at the Hague , where I first have the honour of meet you , and a more disreputable rogue never enter my door . a minister must open they to all sort of people , Baron , spy , sharper , ruffian of every sort . " 
 " Parbleu , milor , how you treat they ! " say my lord 's companion . 
 " a man of my rank , my friend of the rank I hold then of course , must see all sort of people entre autre your acquaintance . what his wife could want with such a name as his I can not   conceive . " 
 " apparently , it be well than the lady 's own . " 
 " effectively ! so I have hear of my friend Paddy change clothe with the scarecrow . I do not   know which name be the most distinguish , that of the English bishop or the german baron . " 
 " my lord , " cry the other gentleman , rise and lay his hand on a large star on his coat , " you forget that I , too , be a Baron and a Chevalier of the Holy Roman " 
 " order of the Spur ! not in the least , my dear knight and baron ! you will have no more wine ? we shall meet at Madame de Bernstein 's to - night . " the knight and baron quit the table , feel in his embroider pocket , as if for money to give the waiter , who bring he his great laced hat , and wave that menial off with a hand surround by large ruffle and blazing ring , he stalk away from the room . 
 it be only when the person address as my lord have begin to speak of the bishop 's widow and the german baron 's wife that Harry Warrington be aware how his aunt and himself have be the subject of the two gentleman 's conversation . Ere the conviction have settle itself on his mind , one of the speaker have quit the room , and the other , turn to a table at which two gentleman sate , say , " what a little sharp it be ! everything I say about Bernstein relate mutato nomine to he . I know the fellow to be a spy and a rogue . he have change his religion I do not   know how many time . I have he turn out of the Hague myself when I be ambassador , and I know he be can in Vienna . " 
 " I wonder my Lord Chesterfield associate with such a villain ! " call out Harry from his table . the other couple of diner look at he . to his surprise the nobleman so address go on talk . 
 " there can not be a more fieffe coquin than this Poellnitz . why , Heaven be thank , he have actually leave I my snuff - box ! you laugh ? the fellow be capable of take it . " and my lord think it be his own satire at which the young man be laugh . 
 " you be quite right , sir , " say one of the two diner , turn to Mr. Warrington , " though , save your presence , I do not   know what business it be of your . my lord will play with anybody who will set he . do not   be alarm , he be as deaf as a post , and do not hear a word that you say ; and that be why my lord will play with anybody who will put a pack of card before he , and that be the reason why he consort with this rogue . " 
 " Faith , I know other nobleman who be not particular as to their company , " say Mr. Jack . 
 " do you mean because I associate with you ? I know my company , my good friend , and I defy most man to have the well of I . " 
 not have pay the least attention to Mr. Warrington 's angry interruption , my lord opposite be talk in his favourite French with Monsieur Barbeau , the landlord , and graciously compliment he on his dinner . the host bow again and again ; be enchant that his Excellency be satisfy : have not forget the art which he have learn when he be a young man in his Excellency 's kingdom of Ireland . the salmi be to my lord 's liking ? he have just serve a dish to the young american seigneur who sate opposite , the gentleman from Virginia . 
 " to whom ? " my lord 's pale face become red for a moment , as he ask this question , and look towards Harry Warrington , opposite to he . 
 " to the young gentleman from Virginia who have just arrive , and who perfectly possess our beautiful language ! " say Mr. Barbeau , think to kill two bird , as it be , with this one stone of a compliment . 
 " and to whom your lordship will be answerable for language reflect upon my family , and utter in the presence of these gentleman , " cry out Mr. Warrington , at the top of his voice , determine that his opponent should hear . 
 " you must go and call into his ear , and then he may perchance hear you , " say one of the young guest . 
 " I will take care that his lordship shall understand my meaning , one way or other , " Mr. Warrington say , with much dignity ; " and will not suffer calumny regard my relative to be utter by he or any other man ! " 
 Whilst Harry be speak , the little nobleman opposite to he do not hear he , but have time sufficient to arrange his own reply . he have rise , pass his handkerchief once or twice across his mouth , and lay his slim finger on the table . " Sir , " say he , " you will believe , on the word of a gentleman , that I have no idea before whom I be speak , and it seem that my acquaintance , Monsieur de Poellnitz , know you no well than myself . have I know you , believe I that I should have be the last man in the world to utter a syllable that should give you annoyance ; and I tender you my regret and apology , before my Lord March and Mr. Morris here present . " 
 to these word , Mr. Warrington could only make a bow , and mumble out a few word of acknowledgment : which speech have make believe to hear , my lord make Harry another very profound bow , and say he should have the honour of wait upon Mr. Warrington at his lodging , salute the company , and go away . 




 CHAPTER XXVI . in which we be at a very Great Distance from Oakhurst 

 within the precinct of the White Horse Tavern , and come up to the window of the eating - room , be a bowling - green , with a table or two , where guest might sit and partake of punch or tea . the three gentleman have come to an end of their dinner about the same time , Mr. Morris propose that they should adjourn to the Green , and there drink a cool bottle . " Jack Morris would adjourn to the Dust Hole , as a pretext for a fresh drink , " say my lord . on which Jack say he suppose each gentleman have his own favourite way of go to the deuce . his weakness , he own , be a bottle . 
 " my Lord Chesterfield 's deuce be deuce - ace , " say my Lord March . " his lordship can not   keep away from the card or dice . " 
 " my Lord March have not one devil , but several devil . he love gamble , he love horse - racing , he love bet , he love drink , he love eat , he love money , he love woman ; and you have fall into bad company , Mr. Warrington , when you light upon his lordship . he will play you for every acre you have in Virginia . " 
 " with the great pleasure in life , Mr. Warrington ! " interpose my lord . 
 " and for all your tobacco , and for all your spice , and for all your slave , and for all your oxen and ass , and for everything that be your . " 
 " shall we begin now ? Jack , you be never without a dice - box or a bottle - screw . I will set Mr. Warrington for what he like . " 
 " unfortunately , my lord , the tobacco , and the slave , and the ass , and the oxen , be not mine , as yet . I be just of age , and my mother , scarce twenty year old , have quite as good chance of long life as I have . " 
 " I will bet you that you survive she . I will pay you a sum now against four time the sum to be pay at her death . I will set you a fair sum over this table against the reversion of your estate in Virginia at the old lady 's departure . what do you call your place ? " 
 " Castlewood . " 
 " a principality , I hear it be . I will bet that its value have be exaggerate ten time at least amongst the quidnunc here . how come you by the name of Castlewood ? you be relate to my lord ? oh , stay : I know , my lady , your mother , descend from the real head of the house . he take the lose side in ' 15 . I have have the story a dozen time from my old duchess . she know your grandfather . he be friend of Addison and Steele , and Pope and Milton , I dare say , and the bigwig . it be a pity he do not stay at home , and transport the other branch of the family to the plantation . " 
 " I have just be stay at Castlewood with my cousin there , " remark Mr. Warrington . 
 " Hm ! do you play with he ? he be fond of pasteboard and bone . " 
 " never , but for sixpence and a pool of commerce with the lady . " 
 " so much the well for both of you . but you play with Will Esmond if he be at home ? I will lay ten to one you play with Will Esmond . " 
 Harry blush , and own that of an evening his cousin and he have have a few game at card . 
 " and Tom Sampson , the chaplain , " cry Jack Morris , " be he of the party ? I wager that Tom make a third , and the Lord deliver you from Tom and Will Esmond together ! " 
 " Nay ; the truth be , I win of both of they , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " and they pay you ? well , miracle will never cease ! " 
 " I do not say anything about miracle , " remark Mr. Harry , smile over his wine . 
 " and you do not   tell tale out of school the volto sciolto hey , Mr. Warrington ? " say my lord . 
 " I beg your pardon , " say downright Harry , " French be the only language besides my own of which I know a little . " 
 " my Lord March have learn italian at the Opera , and a pretty penny his lesson have cost he , " remark Jack Morris . " we must show he the Opera must not   we , March ? " 
 " must we , Morris ? " say my lord , as if he only half like the other 's familiarity . 
 both of the two gentleman be dress alike , in small scratch - wig without powder , in blue frock with plate button , in buckskin and riding - boot , in little hat with a narrow cord of lace , and no outward mark of fashion . 
 " I do not   care about the Opera much , my lord , " say Harry , warm with his wine ; " but I should like to go to Newmarket , and long to see a good english hunting - field . " 
 " we will show you Newmarket and the hunting - field , sir . can you ride pretty well ? " 
 " I think I can , " Harry say ; " and I can shoot pretty well , and jump some . " 
 " what be your weight ? I bet you we weigh even , or I weigh most . I bet you Jack Morris beat you at bird or a mark , at five - and - twenty pace . I bet you I jump far than you on flat ground , here on this green . " 
 " I do not   know Mr. Morris 's shooting I never see either gentleman before but I take your bet , my lord , at what you please , " cry Harry , who by this time be more than warm with Burgundy . 
 " pony on each ! " cry my lord . 
 " done and do ! " cry my lord and Harry together . the young man think it be for the honour of his country not to be ashamed of any bet make to he . 
 " we can try the last bet now , if your foot be pretty steady , " say my lord , spring up , stretch his arm and limb , and look at the crisp , dry grass . he draw his boot off , then his coat and waistcoat , buckle his belt round his waist , and fling his clothe down to the ground . 
 Harry have more respect for his garment . it be his good suit . he take off the velvet coat and waistcoat , fold they up daintily , and , as the two or three table round be slop with drink , go to place the clothe on a table in the eating - room , of which the window be open . 
 here a new guest have enter ; and this be no other than Mr. Wolfe , who be soberly eat a chicken and salad , with a modest pint of wine . Harry be in high spirit . he tell the Colonel he have a bet with my Lord March would Colonel Wolfe stand he half ? the Colonel say he be too poor to bet . would he come out and see fair play ? that he would with all his heart . Colonel Wolfe set down his glass , and stalk through the open window after his young friend . 
 " who be that tallow - face put with the carroty hair ? " say Jack Morris , on whom the Burgundy have have its due effect . 
 Mr. Warrington explain that this be Lieutenant - Colonel Wolfe , of the 20th regiment . 
 " your humble servant , gentleman ! " say the Colonel , make the company a rigid military bow . 
 " never see such a figure in my life ! " cry Jack Morris . " do you March ? " 
 " I beg your pardon , I think you say March ? " say the Colonel , look very much surprised . 
 " I be the Earl of March , sir , at Colonel Wolfe 's service , " say the nobleman , bow . " my friend , Mr. Morris , be so intimate with I , that , after dinner , we be quite like brother . " 
 why be not all Tunbridge Wells by to hear this ? think Morris . and he be so delighted that he shout out , " two to one on my lord ! " 
 " do ! " call out Mr. Warrington ; and the enthusiastic Jack be oblige to cry " do ! " too . 
 " take he , Colonel , " Harry whisper to his friend . 
 but the Colonel say he could not afford to lose , and therefore could not hope to win . 
 " I see you have win one of our bet already , Mr. Warrington , " my Lord March remark . " I be tall than you by an inch or two , but you be broad round the shoulder . " 
 " Pooh , my dear will ! I bet you you weigh twice as much as he do ! " cry Jack Morris . 
 " Done , Jack ! " say my lord , laugh . " the bet be all pony . will you take he , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " no , my dear fellow one be enough , " say Jack . 
 " very good , my dear fellow , " say my lord ; " and now we will settle the other wager . " 
 have already array himself in his good silk stocking , black satin - net breech , and neat pump , Harry do not care to take off his shoe as his antagonist have do , whose heavy riding - boot and spur be , to be sure , little calculate for leap . they have before they a fine even green turf of some thirty yard in length , enough for a run and enough for a jump . a gravel walk run around this green , beyond which be a wall and gate - sign a field azure , bear the Hanoverian White Horse rampant between two skittle proper , and for motto the name of the landlord and of the animal depict . 
 my lord 's friend lay a handkerchief on the ground as the mark whence the leaper be to take their jump , and Mr. Wolfe stand at the other end of the grass - plat to note the spot where each come down . " my lord go first , " write Mr. Warrington , in a letter to Mrs. Mountain , at Castlewood , Virginia , still extant . " he be for have I take the lead ; but , remember the story about the Battel of Fontanoy which my dearest George use to tell , I say , ' Monseigneur le Comte , tirez le premier , s'il vous play . ' so he take his run in his stocken foot , and for the honour of Old Virginia , I have the gratafacation of beat his lordship by more than two foot viz . , two foot nine inch I jump twenty - one foot three inch , by the drawer 's measured tape , and his lordship only eighteen six . I have win from he about my weight before   which I know the moment I set my eye upon he . so he and Mr. Jack pay I these two bett . and with my good duty to my mother she will not be displeased with I , for I bett for the honor of the Old Dominion , and my opponent be a nobleman of the first quality , himself hold two erldome , and heir to a Duke . Betting be all the rage here , and the blood and young fellow of fashion be bet away from morning till night . 
 " I tell they and that be my mischief perhaps that there be a gentleman at home who could beat I by a good foot ; and when they ask who it be , and I say Col . G. Washington , of Mount Vernon as you know he can , and he be the only man in his county or mine that can do it Mr. Wolfe ask I ever so many question about Col . G. W. , and show that he have hear of he , and talk over last year 's unhappy campane as if he know every inch of the ground , and he know the name of all our river , only he call the Potowmac Pottamac , at which we have a good laugh at he . my Lord of March and Ruglen be not in the least ill - humour about lose , and he and his friend hand I note out of their pocket - book , which fill mine that be get very empty , for the vale to the servant at my cousin Castlewood 's house and buy a horse at Oakhurst have very nearly put I on the necessity of make another draft upon my honoured mother or her London or Bristol agent . " 
 these feat of activity over , the four gentleman now stroll out of the tavern garden into the public walk , where , by this time , a great deal of company be assemble : upon whom Mr. Jack , who be of a frank and free nature , with a loud voice , choose to make remark that be not always agreeable . and here , if my Lord March make a joke , of which his lordship be not spar , Jack roar , " oh , ho , ho ! oh , good Gad ! oh , my dear earl ! oh , my dear lord , you will be the death of I ! " " it seem as if he wish everybody to know , " write Harry sagaciously to Mrs. Mountain , " that his friend and companion be an Erl ! " 
 there be , indeed , a great variety of character who pass . M. Poellnitz , no finer dress than he have be at dinner , grin , and salute with his great laced hat and tarnished feather . then come by my Lord Chesterfield , in a pearl - colour suit , with his blue ribbon and star , and salute the young man in his turn . 
 " I will back the old boy for take his hat off against the whole kingdom , and France either , " say my Lord March . " he have never change the shape of that hat of his for twenty year . look at it . there it go again ! do you see that great , big , awkward , pock - mark , snuff - colour man , who hardly touch his clumsy beaver in reply . d his confound impudence do you know who that be ? " 
 " no , curse he ! who be it , March ? " ask Jack , with an oath . 
 " it be one Johnson , a Dictionary - maker , about whom my Lord Chesterfield write some most capital paper , when his dixonary be come out , to patronise the fellow . I know they be capital . I have   hear Horry Walpole say so , and he know all about that kind of thing . confound the impudent schoolmaster ! " 
 " hang he , he ought to stand in the pillory ! " roar Jack . 
 " that fat man he be walk with be another of your writing fellow , a printer , his name be Richardson ; he write Clarissa , you know . " 
 " great heaven ! my lord , be that the great Richardson ? be that the man who write Clarissa ? " call out Colonel Wolfe and Mr. Warrington , in a breath . 
 Harry run forward to look at the old gentleman toddle along the walk with a train of admire lady surround he . 
 " indeed , my very dear sir , " one be say , " you be too great and good to live in such a world ; but sure you be send to teach it virtue ! " 
 " ah , my Miss Mulso ! who shall teach the teacher ? " say the good , fat old man , raise a kind , round face skyward . " even he have his fault and error ! even his age and experience do not prevent he from stumbl - . Heaven bless my soul , Mr. Johnson ! I ask your pardon if I have tread on your corn . " 
 " you have do both , sir . you have tread on the corn , and receive the pardon , " say Mr. Johnson , and go on mumble some verse , sway to and fro , his eye turn towards the ground , his hand behind he , and occasionally endanger with his great stick the honest , meek eye of his companion - author . 
 " they do not see very well , my dear mulso , " he say to the young lady , " but such as they be , I would keep my lash from Mr. Johnson 's cudgel . your servant , sir . " here he make a low bow , and take off his hat to Mr. Warrington , who shrink back with many blush , after salute the great author . the great author be accustom to be adore . a gentler wind never puff mortal vanity . enraptured spinster fling tea - leaf round he , and incense he with the coffee - pot . matron kiss the slipper they have work for he . there be a halo of virtue round his nightcap . all Europe have thrill , pant , admire , tremble , wept , over the page of the immortal little , kind , honest man with the round paunch . Harry come back quite glowing and proud at have a bow from he . " ah ! " say he , " my lord , I be glad to have see he ! " 
 " seen he ! why , dammy , you may see he any day in his shop , I suppose ? " say Jack , with a laugh . 
 " my brother declare that he , and Mr. Fielding , I think , be the name , be the great genius in England ; and often use to say , that when we come to Europe , his first pilgrimage would be to Mr. Richardson , " cry Harry , always impetuous , honest , and tender , when he speak of the dear friend . 
 " your brother speak like a man , " cry Mr. Wolfe , too , his pale face likewise flush up . " I would rather be a man of genius , than a peer of the realm . " 
 " every man to his taste , Colonel , " say my lord , much amuse . " your enthusiasm I do not   mean anything personal refresh I , on my honour it do . " 
 " so it do I by gad perfectly refresh I , " cry Jack 
 " so it do Jack you see it actually refresh Jack ! I say , Jack , which would you rather be ? a fat old printer , who have write a story about a confounded girl and a fellow that ruin she , or a peer of Parliament with ten thousand a year ? " 
 " March my Lord March , do you take I for a fool ? " say Jack , with a tearful voice . " have I do anything to deserve this language from you ? " 
 " I would rather win honour than honours : I would rather have genius than wealth . I would rather make my name than inherit it , though my father 's , thank God , be an honest one , " say the young Colonel . " but pardon I , gentleman , " and here make , they a hasty salutation , he run across the parade towards a young and elderly lady and a gentleman , who be now advance . 
 " it be the beautiful Miss Lowther . I remember now , " say my lord . " see ! he take her arm ! the report be , he be engage to she . " 
 " you do not   mean to say such a fellow be engage to any of the Lowthers of the North ? " cry out Jack . " curse I , what be the world come to , with your printer , and your half - pay ensign , and your schoolmaster , and your infernal nonsense ? " 
 the Dictionary - maker , who have show so little desire to bow to my Lord Chesterfield , when that famous nobleman courteously salute he , be here see to take off his beaver , and bow almost to the ground , before a florid personage in a large round hat , with band and a gown , who make his appearance in the Walk . this be my Lord Bishop of Salisbury , wear complacently the blue riband and badge of the Garter , of which Noble Order his lordship be prelate . 
 Mr. Johnson stand , hat in hand , during the whole time of his conversation with Dr. Gilbert ; who make many flattering and benedictory remark to Mr. Richardson , declare that he be the supporter of virtue , the preacher of sound moral , the mainstay of religion , of all which point the honest printer himself be perfectly convinced . 
 do not let any young lady trip to her grandpapa 's bookcase in consequence of this eulogium , and rashly take down Clarissa from the shelf . she would not care to read the volume , over which her pretty ancestress weep and thrill a hundred year ago ; which be commend by divine from pulpit and belaude all Europe over . I wonder , be our woman more virtuous than their grandmother , or only more squeamish ? if the former , then Miss Smith of New York be certainly more modest than Miss Smith of London , who still do not scruple to say that table , piano , and animal have leg . oh , my faithful , good old Samuel Richardson ! hath the news yet reach thee in Hades that thy sublime novel be huddle away in corner , and that our daughter may no more read Clarissa than Tom Jones ? go up , Samuel , and be reconcile with thy brother - scribe , whom in life thou didst hate so . I wonder whether a century hence the novel of to - day will be hide behind lock and wire , and make pretty little maiden blush ? 
 " who be yonder queer person in the high headdress of my grandmother 's time , who stop and speak to Mr. Richardson ? " ask Harry , as a fantastically dress lady come up , and perform a curtsey and a compliment to the bow printer . 
 Jack Morris nervously strike Harry a blow in the side with the butt end of his whip . Lord March laugh . 
 " yonder queer person be my gracious kinswoman , Katharine , Duchess of Dover and Queensberry , at your service , Mr. Warrington . she be a beauty price ! she be change now , be not   she ? what an old Gorgon it be ! she be a great patroness of your book - man and when that old frump be young , they actually make verse about she . " 
 the Earl quit his friend for a moment to make his bow to the old Duchess , Jack Morris explain to Mr. Warrington how , at the Duke 's death , my Lord of March and Ruglen would succeed to his cousin 's dukedom . 
 " I suppose , " say Harry , simply , " his lordship be here in attendance upon the old lady ? " 
 Jack burst into a loud laugh . 
 " oh yes ! very much ! exactly ! " say he . " why , my dear fellow , you do not   mean to say you have not   hear about the little opera - dancer ? " 
 " I be but lately arrive in England , Mr. Morris , " say Harry , with a smile , " and in Virginia , I own , we have not hear much about the little opera - dancer . " 
 luckily for we , the secret about the little opera - dancer never be reveal , for the young man 's conversation be interrupt by a lady in a cardinal cape , and a hat by no mean unlike those lovely headpiece which have return into vogue a hundred year after the date of our present history , who make a profound curtsey to the two gentleman and receive their salutation in return . she stop opposite to Harry ; she hold out her hand , rather to his wonderment : 
 " have you so soon forget I , Mr. Warrington ? " she say . 
 Off go Harry 's hat in an instant . he start , blush , stammer , and call out Good Heavens ! as if there have be any celestial wonder in the circumstance ! it be Lady Maria come out for a walk . he have not be think about she . she be , to say truth , for the moment so utterly out of the young gentleman 's mind , that she sudden re - entry there and appearance in the body startle Mr. Warrington 's faculty , and cause those guilty blush to crowd into his cheek . 
 no . he be not even think of she ! a week ago a year , a hundred year ago it seem he would not have be surprised to meet she anywhere . appear from amidst darkle shrubbery , glide over green garden terrace , loiter on stair or corridor , hover even in his dream , all day or all night , bodily or spiritually , he have be accustom to meet she . a week ago his heart use to beat . a week ago , and at the very instant when he jump out of his sleep , there be her idea smile on he . and it be only last Tuesday that his love be stab and slay , and he not only have leave off mourn for she , but have forget she ! 
 " you will come and walk with I a little ? " she say . " or would you like the music well ? I dare say you will like the music well . " 
 " you know , " say Harry , " I do not   care about any music much , except " he be think of the evening hymn " except of your playing . " he turn very red again as he speak , he feel he be perjure himself horribly . 
 the poor lady be agitate herself by the flutter and agitation which she see in her young companion . gracious Heaven ! could that tremor and excitement mean that she be mistaken , and that the lad be still faithful ? " give I your arm , and let we take a little walk , " she say , wave round a curtsey to the other two gentleman : " my aunt be asleep after her dinner . " Harry could not but offer the arm , and press the hand that lie against his heart . Maria make another fine curtsey to Harry 's bow companion , and walk off with her prize . in her grief , in her rage , in the pain and anguish of wrong and desertion , how a woman remember to smile , curtsey , caress , dissemble ! how resolutely they discharge the social propriety ; how they have a word , or a hand , or a kind little speech or reply for the pass acquaintance who cross unknowe the path of the tragedy , drop a light airy remark or two   happy self - satisfy rogue !   and pass on . he pass on , and think that woman be rather pleased with what I say . " that joke I make be rather neat . I do really think Lady Maria look rather favourably at I , and she be a dev'lish fine woman , begad she be ! " o you wiseacre ! such be Jack Morris 's observation and case as he walk away lean on the arm of his noble friend , and think the whole Society of the Wells be look at he . he have make some exquisite remark about a particular run of card at Lady Flushington 's the night before , and Lady Maria have reply graciously and neatly , and so away go Jack perfectly happy . 
 the absurd creature ! I declare we know nothing of anybody   but that for my part I know well and well every day . you enter smile to see your new acquaintance , Mrs. A. and her charming family . you make your bow in the elegant drawing - room of Mr. and Mrs. B. ? I tell you that in your course through life you be for ever put your great clumsy foot upon the mute invisible wound of bleed tragedy . Mrs. B. 's closet for what you know be stuff with skeleton . look there under the sofa - cushion . be that merely Missy 's doll , or be it the limb of a stifle Cupid peep out ? what do you suppose be those ash smoulder in the grate ? very likely a suttee have be offer up there just before you come in : a faithful heart have be burn out upon a callous corpse , and you be look on the cineri doloso . you see B. and his wife receive their company before dinner . gracious power ! do you know that that bouquet which she wear be a signal to Captain C. , and that he will find a note under the little bronze shakespeare on the mantelpiece in the study ? and with all this you go up and say some uncommonly neat thing   as you fancy   to Mrs. B. about the weather   clever dog ! , or about Lady E. 's last party   fashionable buck ! , or about the dear child in the nursery   insinuate rogue ! . Heaven and earth , my good sir , how can you tell that B. be not go to pitch all the child out of the nursery window this very night , or that his lady have not make an arrangement for leave they , and run off with the Captain ? how do you know that those footman be not disguised bailiff ? that yonder large - look butler   really a skeleton   be not the pawnbroker 's man ? and that there be not skeleton rotis and entree under every one of the cover ? look at their foot peep from under the tablecloth . mind how you stretch out your own lovely little slipper , madam , lest you knock over a rib or two . remark the death's - head moth flutter among the flower . see , the pale winding - sheet gleam in the wax - candle ! I know it be an old story , and especially that this preacher have yell vanita vanitatum five hundred time before . I can not   help always fall upon it , and cry out with particular loudness and wailing , and become especially melancholy , when I see a dead love tie to a live love . ha ! I look up from my desk , across the street : and there come in Mr. and Mrs. D. from their walk in Kensington Gardens . how she hang on he ! how jolly and happy he look , as the child frisk round ! my poor dear benighted Mrs. D. , there be a Regent 's Park as well as a Kensington Gardens in the world . go in , fond wretch ! smilingly lie before he what you know he like for dinner . show he the child 's copy and the report of their master . go with Missy to the piano , and play your artless duet together ; and fancy you be happy ! 
 there go Harry and Maria take their evening walk on the common , away from the village which be wake up from its after - dinner siesta , and where the people be begin to stir and the music to play . with the music Maria know Madame de Bernstein will waken : with the candle she must be back to the tea - table and the card . never mind . here be a minute . it may be my love be dead , but here be a minute to kneel over the grave and pray by it . he certainly be not think about she : he be startle and do not even know she . he be laugh and talk with Jack Morris and my Lord March . he be twenty year young than she . never mind . to - day be to - day in which we be all equal . this moment be ours . come , let we walk a little way over the heath , Harry . she will go , though she feel a deadly assurance that he will tell she all be over between they , and that he love the dark - haired girl at Oakhurst . 




 CHAPTER XXVII . Plenus Opus Aleae 

 " let I hear about those child , child , whom I see run about at the house where they take you in , poor dear boy , after your dreadful fall ? " say Maria , as they pace the common . " oh , that fall , Harry ! I think I should have die when I see it ! you need not   squeeze one 's arm so . you know you do not   care for I ? " 
 " the people be the very good , kind , dearest people I have ever meet in the world , " cry Mr. Warrington . " Mrs. Lambert be a friend of my mother when she be in Europe for her education . Colonel Lambert be a most accomplished gentleman , and have see service everywhere . he be in Scotland with his Royal Highness , in Flanders , at Minorca . no natural parent could be kind than they be to I . how can I show my gratitude to they ? I want to make they a present : I must make they a present , " say Harry , clap his hand into his pocket , which be fill with the crisp spoil of Morris and March . 
 " we can go to the toy - shop , my dear , and buy a couple of doll for the child , " say Lady Maria . " you would offend the parent by offer anything like payment for their kindness . " 
 " Dolls for Hester and Theo ! why , do you think a woman be not woman till she be forty , Maria ? "   the arm under Harry 's here give a wince perhaps , ever so slight a wince .   " I can tell you Miss Hester by no means consider herself a child , and Miss Theo be old than her sister . they know ever so many language . they have read book oh ! pile and pile of book ! they play on the harpsichord and sing together admirable ; and theo compose , and sing song of her own . " 
 " indeed ! I scarcely see they . I think they be child . they look quite childish . I have no idea they have all these perfection , and be such wonder of the world . " 
 " that be just the way with you woman ! at home , if I or George praise a woman , Mrs. Esmond , and Mountain , too , would be sure to find fault with she ! " cry Harry . 
 " I be sure I would find fault with no one who be kind to you , Mr. Warrington , " sigh Maria , " though you be not angry with I for envy they because they have to take care of you when you be wound and ill whilst I I have to leave you ? " 
 " you dear good Maria ! " 
 " no , Harry ! I be not dear and good . there , sir , you need not   be so press in your attention . look ! there be your black man walk with a score of other wretch in livery . the horrid creature be go to fuddle at the tea - garden , and get tipsy like their master . that dreadful Mr. Morris be perfectly tipsy when I come to you , and frighten you so . " 
 " I have just win great bet from both of they . what shall I buy for you , my dear cousin ? " and Harry narrate the triumph which he have just achieve . he be in high spirit : he laugh , he brag a little . " for the honour of Virginia I be determined to show they what jumping be , " he say . " with a little practice I think I could leap two foot far . " 
 Maria be pleased with the victory of her young champion . " but you must beware about play , child , " she say . " you know it hath be the ruin of our family . my brother Castlewood , will , our poor father , our aunt , Lady Castlewood herself , they have all be victim to it : as for my Lord March , he be the most dreadful gambler and the most successful of all the nobility . " 
 " I do not   intend to be afraid of he , nor of his friend Mr. Jack Morris neither , " say Harry , again finger the delightful note . " what do you play at Aunt Bernstein 's ? Cribbage , all - four , brag , whist , commerce , piquet , quadrille ? I be ready at any of them . what o'clock be that strike sure ' tis seven ! " 
 " and you want to begin now , " say the plaintive Maria . " you do not   care about walk with your poor cousin . not long ago you do . " 
 " hey ! youth be youth , cousin ! " cry Mr. Harry , toss up his head , " and a young fellow must have his fling ! " and he strut by his partner 's side , confident , happy , and eager for pleasure . not long ago he do like to walk with she . only yesterday , he like to be with Theo and hester , and good Mrs. Lambert ; but pleasure , life , gaiety , the desire to shine and to conquer , have also their temptation for the lad , who seize the cup like other lad , and do not care to calculate on the headache in store for the morning . whilst he and his cousin be talk , the fiddle from the open orchestra on the Parade make a great tuning and squeaking , preparatory to their usual evening concert . Maria know her aunt be awake again , and that she must go back to her slavery . Harry never ask about that slavery , though he must have know it , have he take the trouble to think . he never pity his cousin . he be not think about she at all . yet when his mishap befall he , she have be wound far more cruelly than he be . he have scarce ever be out of her thought , which of course she have have to bury under smile hypocrisy , as be the way with her sex . I know , my dear Mrs. Grundy , you think she be an old fool ? ah ! do you suppose fool ' cap do not cover grey hair , as well as jet or auburn ? bear gently with our elderly fredaine , o you Minerva of a woman ! or perhaps you be so good and wise that you do not   read novel at all . this I know , that there be late crop of wild oat , as well as early harvest of they ; and   from observation of self and neighbour   I have an idea that the avena fatua grow up to the very last day of the year . 
 like worldly parent anxious to get rid of a troublesome child , and go out to their evening party , Madame Bernstein and her attendant have put the sun to bed , whilst it be as yet light , and have draw the curtain over it , and be busy about their card and their candle , and their tea and negus , and other refreshment . one chair after another land lady at the Baroness 's door , more or less paint , patch , brocade . to these come gentleman in gala raiment . Mr. Poellnitz 's star be the large , and his coat the most embroider of all present . my Lord of March and Ruglen , when he make his appearance , be quite change from the individual with whom Harry have make acquaintance at the White Horse . his tight brown scratch be exchange for a neatly curl feather top , with a bag and grey powder , his jockey - dress and leather breech replace by a rich and elegant french suit . Mr. Jack Morris have just such another wig and a suit of stuff as closely as possible resemble his lordship 's . Mr. Wolfe come in attendance upon his beautiful mistress , Miss Lowther , and her aunt who love card , as all the world do . when my Lady Maria Esmond make her appearance , ' tis certain that her look belie Madame Bernstein 's account of she . her shape be very fine , and her dress show a great deal of it . her complexion be by nature exceed fair , and a dark frille ribbon , clasp by a jewel , round her neck , enhance its snowy whiteness . her cheek be not red than those of other lady present , and the rose be pretty openly purchase by everybody at the perfumery - shop . an artful patch or two , it be suppose , add to the lustre of her charm . her hoop be not large than the iron contrivance which lady of the present day hang round their person ; and we may pronounce that the costume , if absurd in some point , be pleasing altogether . suppose our lady take to wear of bangle and nose - ring ? I dare say we should laugh at the ornament , and not dislike they , and lover would make no difficulty about lift up the ring to be able to approach the rosy lip underneath . 
 as for the Baroness de Bernstein , when that lady take the pain of make a grand toilette , she appear as an object , handsome still , and magnificent , but melancholy , and even somewhat terrifying to behold . you read the past in some old face , while some other lapse into mere meekness and content . the fire go quite out of some eye , as the crow' - foot pucker round they ; they flash no long with scorn , or with anger , or love ; they gaze , and no one be melt by their sapphire glance ; they look , and no one be dazzle . my fair young reader , if you be not so perfect a beauty as the peerless Lindamira , queen of the ball ; if , at the end of it , as you retire to bed , you meekly own that you have have but two or three partner , whilst Lindamira have have a crowd round she all night console yourself with think that , at fifty , you will look as kind and pleasant as you appear now at eighteen . you will not have to lay down your coach - and - six of beauty and see another step into it , and walk yourself through the rest of life . you will have to forgo no long - accustomed homage ; you will not witness and own the depreciation of your smile . you will not see fashion forsake your quarter ; and remain all dust , gloom , cobwebs within your once splendid saloon , and placard in your sad window , gaunt , lonely , and to let ! you may not have know any grandeur , but you will not   feel any desertion . you will not have enjoy million , but you will have escape bankruptcy . " our hostess , " say my Lord Chesterfield to his friend in a confidential whisper , of which the utterer do not in the least know the loudness , " put I in mind of Covent Garden in my youth . then it be the court end of the town , and inhabit by the high fashion . now , a nobleman 's house be a gaming - house , or you may go in with a friend and call for a bottle . " 
 " hey ! a bottle and a tavern be good thing in their way , " say my Lord March , with a shrug of his shoulder . " I be not bear before the Georges come in , though I intend to live to a hundred . I never know the Bernstein but as an old woman ; and if she ever have beauty , hang I if I know how she spend it . " 
 " no , hang I , how do she spend it ? " laugh out Jack Morris . 
 " here be a table ! shall we sit down and have a game ? do not   let the Frenchman come in . he will not   pay . Mr. Warrington , will you take a card ? " Mr. Warrington and my Lord Chesterfield find themselves partner against Mr. Morris and the Earl of March . " you have come too late , Baron , " say the eld nobleman to the other nobleman who be advance . " we have make our game . what , have you forget Mr. Warrington of Virginia the young gentleman whom you meet in London ? " 
 " the young gentleman whom I meet at Arthur 's Chocolate House have black hair , a little cocked nose , and be by no mean so fortunate in his personal appearance as Mr. Warrington , " say the Baron , with much presence of mind . " Warrington , Dorrington , Harrington ? we of the continent can not retain your insular name . I certify that this gentleman be not the individual of whom I speak at dinner . " and , glance kindly upon he , the old beau sidle away to a farth end of the room , where Mr. Wolfe and Miss Lowther be engage in deep conversation in the embrasure of a window . here the Baron think fit to engage the Lieutenant - Colonel upon the prussian manual exercise , which have lately be introduce into King George II . 's army a subject with which Mr. Wolfe be thoroughly familiar , and which no doubt would have interest he at any other moment but that . nevertheless the old gentleman utter his criticism and opinion , and think he perfectly charm the two person to whom he communicate they . 
 at the commencement of the evening the Baroness receive her guest personally , and as they arrive engage they in talk and introductory courtesy . but as the room and table fill , and the party be make up , Madame de Bernstein become more and more restless , and finally retreat with three friend to her own corner , where a table specially reserve for she be occupy by her major - domo . and here the old lady sate down resolutely , never change her place or quit her game till cock - crow . the charge of receive the company devolve now upon my Lady Maria , who do not care for card , but dutifully do the honour of the house to her aunt 's guest , and often rustle by the table where her young cousin be engage with his three friend . 
 " come and cut the card for we , " say my Lord March to her ladyship as she pass on one of her wistful visit . " cut the card and bring we luck , Lady Maria ! we have have none to - night , and Mr. Warrington be win everything . " 
 " I hope you be not play high , Harry ? " say the lady , timidly . 
 " oh no , only sixpence , " cry my lord , deal . 
 " only sixpence , " echo Mr. Morris , who be Lord March 's partner . but Mr. Morris must have be very keenly alive to the value of sixpence , if the loss of a few such coin could make his round face look so dismal . my Lord Chesterfield sate opposite Mr. Warrington , sort his card . no one could say , by inspect that calm physiognomy , whether good or ill fortune be attend his lordship . 
 some word , not altogether indicative of delight , slip out of Mr. Morris 's lip , on which his partner cry out , " hang it , Morris , play your card , and hold your tongue ! " consider they be only play for sixpence , his lordship , too , be strangely affect . 
 Maria , still fondly linger by Harry 's chair , with her hand at the back of it , could see his card , and that a whole covey of trump be range in one corner . she have not take away his luck . she be pleased to think she have cut that pack which have deal he all those pretty trump . as Lord March be deal , he have say in a quiet voice to Mr. Warrington , " the bet as before , Mr. Warrington , or shall we double it ? " 
 " anything you like , my lord , " say Mr. Warrington , very quietly . 
 " we will say , then , shilling . " 
 " yes , shilling , " say Mr. Warrington , and the game proceed . 
 the end of the day 's , and some succeed day ' sport may be gather from the follow letter , which be never deliver to the person to whom it be address , but find its way to America in the paper of Mr. Henry Warrington : 
 " TUNBRIDGE WELLS , August 10 , 1756 . 
 " DEAR GEORGE as White 's two bottle of Burgundy and a pack of card constitute all the joy of your life , I take for grant that you be in London at this moment , prefer smoke and faro to fresh air and fresh haystack . this will be deliver to you by a young gentleman with whom I have lately make acquaintance , and whom you will be charm to know . he will play with you at any game for any stake , up to any hour of the night , and drink any reasonable number of bottle during the play . Mr. Warrington be no other than the Fortunate Youth about whom so many story have be tell in the Public Advertiser and other print . he have an estate in Virginia as big as Yorkshire , with the incumbrance of a mother , the reign sovereign ; but , as the country be unwholesome , and fever plentiful , let we hope that Mrs. Esmond will die soon , and leave this virtuous lad in undisturbed possession . she be aunt of that polisson of a Castlewood , who never pay his play - debt , unless he be more honourable in his dealing with you than he have be with I . Mr. W. be de bonne race . we must have he of our society , if it be only that I may win my money back from he . 
 " he have have the devil 's luck here , and have be win everything , whilst his old card - play beldam of an aunt have be lose . a few night ago , when I first have the ill - luck to make his acquaintance , he beat I in jump   have practise the art amongst the savage , and run away from bear in his native wood ; he win bet off I and Jack Morris about my weight ; and at night , when we sit down to play , at old Bernstein 's , he win from we all round . if you can settle our last Epsom account please hand over to Mr. Warrington 350 pound , which I still owe he , after pretty well empty my pocket - book . Chesterfield have drop six hundred to he , too ; but his lordship do not wish to have it know , have swear to give up play and live cleanly . Jack Morris , who have not be hit as hard as either of we , and can afford it quite as well , for the fat chuff have no house nor train to keep up , and all his misbegotten father 's money in hand , roar like a bull of Bashan about his loss . we have a second night 's play , en petit comite , and Barbeau serve we a fair dinner in a private room . Mr. Warrington hold his tongue like a gentleman , and none of we have talk about our loss ; but the whole place do , for we . yesterday the Cattarina look as sulky as thunder , because I would not give she a diamond necklace , and say I refuse she because I have lose five thousand to the Virginian . my old Duchess of Q. have the very same story , besides know to a fraction what Chesterfield and Jack have lose . 
 " Warrington treat the company to breakfast and music at the room ; and you should have see how the woman tear he to piece . that fiend of a Cattarina ogle he out of my vis - a - vis , and under my very nose , yesterday , as we be drive to Penshurst , and I have no doubt have send he a billet - doux ere this . he shoot Jack Morris all to piece at a mark : we shall try he with partridge when the season come . 
 " he be a fortunate fellow , certainly . he have youth   which be not deboshe by evil course in Virginia , as ours be in England ; he have good health , good look , and good luck . 
 " in a word , Mr. Warrington have win our money in a very gentlemanlike manner ; and , as I like he , and wish to win some of it back again , I put he under your worship 's saintly guardianship . adieu ! I be go to the North , and shall be back for Doncaster . 
 " your ever , dear George , 
 " M. et R. " 
 " to George Augustus Selwyn , Esq . , at White 's Chocolate House , St. James 's Street . " 




 CHAPTER XXVIII . the way of the World 

 our young Virginian find himself , after two or three day at Tunbridge Wells , by far the most important personage in that merry little watering - place . no nobleman in the place inspire so much curiosity . my Lord Bishop of Salisbury himself be scarce treat with more respect . People turn round to look after Harry as he pass , and country - folk star at he as they come into market . at the room , matron encourage he to come round to they , and find mean to leave he alone with their daughter , most of whom smile upon he . everybody know , to an acre and a shilling , the extent of his virginian property , and the amount of his income . at every tea - table in the Wells , his winning at play be tell and calculate . wonderful be the knowledge which our neighbour have of our affair ! so great be the interest and curiosity which Harry inspire , that people even smile upon his servant , and take Gumbo aside and treat he with ale and cold meat , in order to get news of the young Virginian . Mr. Gumbo fatten under the diet , become a lead member of the Society of Valets in the place , and lie more enormously than ever . no party be complete unless Mr. Warrington attend it . the lad be not a little amused and astonish by this prosperity , and bear his new honour pretty well . he have be breed at home to think too well of himself , and his present good fortune no doubt tend to confirm his self - satisfaction . but he be not too much elated . he do not brag about his victory or give himself any particular air . in engage in play with the gentleman who challenge he , he have act up to his queer code of honour . he feel as if he be bind to meet they when they summon he , and that if they invite he to a horse - race , or a drinking - bout , or a match at card , for the sake of Old Virginia he must not draw back . Mr. Harry find his new acquaintance ready to try he at all these sport and contest . he have a strong head , a skilful hand , a firm seat , an unflinche nerve . the representative of Old Virginia come off very well in his friendly rivalry with the mother - country . 
 Madame de Bernstein , who get her fill of card every night , and , no doubt , repair the ill - fortune of which we hear in the last chapter , be delighted with her nephew 's victory and reputation . he have shoot with Jack Morris and beat he ; he have ride a match with Mr. Scamper and win it . he play tennis with Captain Batts , and , though the boy have never try the game before , in a few day he hold his own uncommonly well . he have engage in play with those celebrate gamester , my Lords of Chesterfield and March ; and they both bear testimony to his coolness , gallantry , and good breeding . at his book Harry be not brilliant certainly ; but he could write as well as a great number of man of fashion ; and the naivete of his ignorance amuse the old lady . she have read book in her time , and could talk very well about they with bookish people : she have a relish for humour and delight in Moliere and Mr. Fielding , but she love the world far well than the library , and be never so interested in any novel but that she would leave it for a game of card . she superintend with fond pleasure the improvement of Harry 's toilette : rummage out fine lace for his ruffle and shirt , and find a pretty diamond - brooch for his frill . he attain the post of prime favourite of all her nephew and kinsfolk . I fear Lady Maria be only too well pleased at the lad 's success , and do not grudge he his superiority over her brother ; but those gentleman must have quake with fear and envy when they hear of Mr. Warrington 's prodigious success , and the advance which he have make in their wealthy aunt 's favour . 
 after a fortnight of Tunbridge , Mr. Harry have become quite a personage . he know all the good company in the place . be it his fault if he become acquainted with the bad likewise ? be he very wrong in take the world as he find it , and drink from that sweet sparkle pleasure - cup , which be fill for he to the brim ? the old aunt enjoy his triumph , and for her part only bid he pursue his enjoyment . she be not a rigorous old moralist , nor , perhaps , a very wholesome preceptress for youth . if the Cattarina write he billet - doux , I fear Aunt Bernstein would have bid he accept the invitation : but the lad have bring with he from his colonial home a stock of modesty which he still wear along with the honest homespun linen . Libertinism be rare in those thinly - people region from which he come . the vice of great city be scarce know or practise in the rough town of the american continent . Harry Warrington blush like a girl at the daring talk of his new european associate : even Aunt Bernstein 's conversation and joke astound the young Virginian , so that the worldly old woman would call he Joseph , or simpleton . 
 but , however innocent he be , the world give he credit for be as bad as other folk . how be he to know that he be not to associate with that saucy Cattarina ? he have see my Lord March drive she about in his lordship 's phaeton . Harry think there be no harm in give she his arm , and parade openly with she in the public walk . she take a fancy to a trinket at the toy - shop ; and , as his pocket be full of money , he be delighted to make she a present of the locket , which she covet . the next day it be a piece of lace : again Harry gratify she . the next day it be something else : there be no end to Madame Cattarina 's fancy : but here the young gentleman stop , turn off her request with a joke and a laugh . he be shrewd enough , and not reckless or prodigal , though generous . he have no idea of purchase diamond drop for the petulant little lady 's pretty ear . 
 but who be to give he credit for his Modesty ? Old Bernstein insist upon believe that her nephew be play Don Juan 's part , and supplant my Lord March . she insist the more when poor Maria be by ; love to stab the tender heart of that spinster , and enjoy her niece 's piteous silence and discomfiture . 
 " why , my dear , " say the Baroness , " boy will be boy , and I do not   want Harry to be the first milksop in his family ! " the bread which Maria eat at her aunt 's expense choke she sometimes . o I , how hard and indigestible some woman know how to make it ! 
 Mr. Wolfe be for ever come over from Westerham to pay court to the lady of his love ; and , know that the Colonel be entirely engage in that pursuit , Mr. Warrington scarcely expect to see much of he , however much he like that officer 's conversation and society . it be different from the talk of the ribald people round about Harry . Mr. Wolfe never speak of card , or horse ' pedigree ; or brag of his performance in the hunting - field ; or boast of the favour of woman ; or retail any of the innumerable scandal of the time . it be not a good time . that old world be more dissolute than ours . there be an old king with mistress openly in his train , to whom the great folk of the land do honour . there be a nobility , many of whom be mad and reckless in the pursuit of pleasure ; there be a looseness of word and act which we must note , as faithful historian , without go into particular , and needlessly shocking honest reader . our young gentleman have light upon some of the wild of these wild people , and have find an old relative who live in the very midst of the rout . 
 Harry then do not remark how Colonel Wolfe avoid he , or when they casually meet , at first , notice the Colonel 's cold and alter demeanour . he do not know the story that be tell of he . who do know the story that be tell of he ? who make they ? who be the father of those wondrous lie ? Poor Harry do not know the reputation he be get ; and that , whilst he be rid his horse and play his game and take his frolic , he be pass amongst many respectable person for be the most abandon and profligate and godless of young man . 
 Alas , and alas ! to think that the lad whom we like so , and who be so gentle and quiet when with we , so simple and so easily pleased , should be a harden profligate , a spendthrift , a confirm gamester , a frequenter of abandon woman ! these story come to honest Colonel Lambert at Oakhurst : first one bad story , then another , then crowd of they , till the good man 's kind heart be quite fill with grief and care , so that his family see that something annoy he . at first he would not speak on the matter at all , and put aside the wife 's fond query . Mrs. Lambert think a great misfortune have happen ; that her husband have be ruin ; that he have be order on a dangerous service ; that one of the boy be ill , disgrace , dead ; who can resist an anxious woman , or escape the cross - examination of the conjugal pillow ? Lambert be oblige to tell a part of what he know about Harry Warrington . the wife be as much grieve and amazed as her husband have be . from papa 's and mamma 's bedroom the grief , after be stifle for a while under the bed - pillow there , come downstairs . theo and Hester take the complaint after their parent , and have it very bad . o kind , little , wound heart ! at first Hester turn red , fly into a great passion , clench her little fist , and vow she would not believe a word of the wicked story ; but she end by believe they . scandal almost always do master people ; especially good and innocent people . oh , the serpent they have nurse by their fire ! oh , the wretched , wretched boy ! to think of his walk about with that horrible paint Frenchwoman , and give her diamond necklace , and parade his shame before all the society at the Wells ! the three lady have cry over the story , and the father be deeply move by it , take the parson into their confidence . in vain he preach at church next Sunday his favourite sermon about scandal , and inveigh against our propensity to think evil . we repent we promise to do so no more ; but when the next bad story come about our neighbour we believe it . so do those kind , wretche Oakhurst folk believe what they hear about poor Harry Warrington . 
 Harry Warrington meanwhile be a great deal too well pleased with himself to know how ill his friend be think of he , and be pursue a very idle and pleasant , if unprofitable , life , without have the least notion of the hubbub he be create , and the dreadful repute in which he be hold by many good man . come out from a match at tennis with Mr. Batts , and please with his play and all the world , Harry overtake Colonel Wolfe , who have be on one of his visit to the lady of his heart . Harry hold out his hand , which the Colonel take , but the latter 's salutation be so cold , that the young man could not help remark it , and especially note how Mr. Wolfe , in return for a fine bow from Mr. Batts 's hat , scarcely touch his own with his forefinger . the tennis Captain walk away look somewhat disconcert , Harry remain behind to talk with his friend of Westerham . Mr. Wolfe walk by he for a while , very erect , silent , and cold . 
 " I have not see you these many day , " say Harry . 
 " you have have other companion , " remark Mr. Wolfe , curtly . 
 " but I have rather be with you than any of they , " cry the young man . 
 " indeed I might be well company for you than some of they , " say the other . 
 " be it Captain Batts you mean ? " ask Harry . 
 " he be no favourite of mine , I own ; he bear a rascally reputation when he be in the army , and I doubt have not mend it since he be turn out . you certainly might find a well friend than Captain Batts . pardon the freedom which I take in say so , " say Mr. Wolfe , grimly . 
 " Friend ! he be no friend : he only teach I to play tennis : he be hand - in - glove with my lord , and all the people of fashion here who play . " 
 " I be not a man of fashion , " say Mr. Wolfe . 
 " my dear Colonel , what be the matter ? have I anger you in any way ? you speak almost as if I have , and I be not conscious of have do anything to forfeit your regard , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " I will be free with you , Mr. Warrington , " say the Colonel , gravely , " and tell you with frankness that I do not   like some of your friend ! " 
 " why , sure , they be man of the first rank and fashion in England , " cry Harry , not choose to be offend with his companion 's bluntness . 
 " exactly , they be man of too high rank and too great fashion for a hard - work poor soldier like I ; and if you continue to live with such , believe I , you will find number of we humdrum people can not   afford to keep such company . I be here , Mr. Warrington , pay my address to an honourable lady . I meet you yesterday openly walk with a french ballet - dancer , and you take off your hat . I must frankly tell you , that I have rather you would not take off your hat when you go out in such company . " 
 " Sir , " say Mr. Warrington , grow very red , " do you mean that I be to forgo the honour of Colonel Wolfe 's acquaintance altogether ? " 
 " I certainly shall request you to do so when you be in company with that person , " say Colonel Wolfe , angrily ; but he use a word not to be write at present , though Shakespeare put it in the mouth of Othello . 
 " great heaven ! what a shame it be to speak so of any woman ! " cry Mr. Warrington . " how dare any man say that that poor creature be not honest ? " 
 " you ought to know good , sir , " say the other , look at Harry with some surprise , " or the world belie you very much . " 
 " what ought I to know well ? I see a poor little french dancer who be come hither with her mother , and be order by the doctor to drink the water . I know that a person of my rank in life do not ordinarily keep company with people of her ; but really , Colonel Wolfe , be you so squeamish ? have I not hear you say that you do not value birth , and that all honest people ought to be equal ? why should I not give this little unprotected woman my arm ? there be scarce half a dozen people here who can speak a word of her language . I can talk a little French , and she be welcome to it ; and if Colonel Wolfe do not choose to touch his hat to I , when I be walk with she , by George he may leave it alone , " cry Harry , flush up . 
 " you do not   mean to say , " say Mr. Wolfe , eye he , " that you do not   know the woman 's character ? " 
 " of course , sir , she be a dancer , and , I suppose , no well or bad than her neighbour . but I mean to say that , have she be a duchess , or your grandmother , I could not   have respect she more . " 
 " you do not   mean to say that you do not win she at dice , from Lord March ? " 
 " at what ? " 
 " at dice , from Lord March . everybody know the story . not a person at the Wells be ignorant of it . I hear it but now , in the company of that good old Mr. Richardson , and the lady be say that you would be a character for a colonial Lovelace . " 
 " what on earth else have they say about I ? " ask Harry Warrington ; and such story as he know the Colonel tell . the most alarming account of his own wickedness and profligacy be lay before he . he be a corrupter of virtue , an habitual drunkard and gamester , a notorious blasphemer and freethinker , a fitting companion for my Lord March , finally , and the company into whose society he have fall . " I tell you these thing , " say Mr. Wolfe , " because it be fair that you should know what be say of you , and because I do heartily believe , from your manner of meet the last charge bring against you , that you be innocent of most of the other count . I feel , Mr. Warrington , that I , for one , have be do you a wrong ; and sincerely ask you to pardon I . " 
 of course , Harry be eager to accept his friend 's apology , and they shake hand with sincere cordiality this time . in respect of most of the charge bring against he , Harry rebut they easily enough : as for the play , he own to it . he think that a gentleman should not refuse a fair challenge from other gentleman , if his mean allow he : and he never would play beyond his mean . after win considerably at first , he could afford to play large stake , for he be play with other people 's money . play , he think , be fair , it certainly be pleasant . why , do not all England , except the Methodists , play ? have he not see the good company at the Wells over the card his aunt amongst they ? 
 Mr. Wolfe make no immediate comment upon Harry 's opinion as to the person who form the good company at the Wells , but he frankly talk with the young man , whose own frankness have win he , and warn he that the life he be lead might be the pleasant , but surely be not the most profitable of life . " it can not   be , sir , " say the Colonel , " that a man be to pass his day at horse - racing and tennis , and his night carouse or at card . sure , every man be make to do some work : and a gentleman , if he have none , must make some . do you know the law of your country , Mr. Warrington ? be a great proprietor , you will doubtless one day be a magistrate at home . have you travel over the country , and make yourself acquainted with its trade and manufacture ? these be fit thing for a gentleman to study , and may occupy he as well as a cock - fight or a cricket - match . do you know anything of our profession ? that , at least , you will allow , be a noble one ; and , believe I , there be plenty in it to learn , and suit , I should think , to you . I speak of it rather than of book and the learn profession , because , as far as I can judge , your genius do not lie that way . but honour be the aim of life , " cry Mr. Wolfe , " and every man can serve his country one way or the other . be sure , sir , that idle bread be the most dangerous of all that be eat ; that card and pleasure may be take by way of pastime after work , but not instead of work , and all day . and do you know , Mr. Warrington , instead of be the Fortunate Youth , as all the world call you , I think you be rather Warrington the Unlucky , for you be follow by daily idleness , daily flattery , daily temptation , and the Lord , I say , send you a good , deliverance out of your good fortune . " 
 but Harry do not like to tell his aunt that afternoon why it be he look so grave . he think he would not drink , but there be some jolly fellow at the ordinary who pass the bottle round ; and he mean not to play in the evening , but a fourth be want at his aunt 's table , and how could he resist ? he be the old lady 's partner several time during the night , and he have Somebody 's own luck to be sure ; and once more he see the dawn , and feast on chicken and champagne at sunrise . 




 CHAPTER XXIX . in which Harry continue to enjoy Otium sine Dignitate 

 Whilst there be card - player enough to meet she at her lodging and the assembly - room , Madame de Bernstein remain pretty contentedly at the Wells , scold her niece , and play her rubber . at Harry 's age almost all place be pleasant , where you can have lively company , fresh air , and your share of sport and diversion . even all pleasure be pleasant at twenty . we go out to meet it with alacrity , speculate upon its coming , and when its visit be announce , count the day until it and we shall come together . how very gently and coolly we regard it towards the close of Life 's long season ! Madam , do not   you recollect your first ball ; and do not your memory stray towards that happy past , sometimes , as you sit ornament the wall whilst your daughter be dance ? I , for my part , can remember when I think it be delightful to walk three mile and back in the country to dine with old Captain Jones . Fancy like to walk three mile , now , to dine with Jones and drink his half - pay port ! no doubt it be buy from the little country - town wine - merchant , and cost but a small sum ; but ' twa offer with a kindly welcome , and youth give it a flavour which no age of wine or man can impart to it nowadays . Viximus nuper . I be not disposed to look so severely upon young Harry 's conduct and idleness , as his friend the stern Colonel of the Twentieth Regiment . o bless idleness ! divine lazy nymph ! reach I a novel as I lie in my dressing - gown at three o'clock in the afternoon ; compound a sherry - cobbler for I , and bring I a cigar ! dear slatternly , smile enchantress ! they may assail thee with bad name swear thy character away , and call thee the Mother of Evil ; but , for all that , thou art the good company in the world ! 
 my Lord of March go away to the North ; and my Lord Chesterfield , find the Tunbridge water do no good to his deafness , return to his solitude at Blackheath ; but other gentleman remain to sport and take their pleasure , and Mr. Warrington have quite enough of companion at his ordinary at the White Horse . he soon learn to order a french dinner as well as the good man of fashion out of St. James 's ; could talk to Monsieur Barbeau , in Monsieur B. 's native language , much more fluently than most other folk , discover a very elegant and decide taste in wine , and could distinguish between Clos Vougeot and Romande with remarkable skill . he be the young king of the Wells , of which the general frequenter be easygoing man of the world , who be by no mean shock at that reputation for gallantry and extravagance which Harry have get , and which have so frighten Mr. Wolfe . 
 though our Virginian live amongst the reveller , and swam and sport in the same water with the loose fish , the boy have a natural shrewdness and honesty which keep he clear of the snare and bait which be commonly set for the unwary . he make very few foolish bet with the jolly idle fellow round about he , and the old hand find it difficult to take he in . he engage in game outdoors and in , because he have a natural skill and aptitude for they , and be good to hold almost any match with any fair competitor . he be scrupulous to play only with those gentleman whom he know , and always to settle his own debt on the spot . he would have make but a very poor figure at a college examination ; though he possess prudence and fidelity , keen , shrewd perception , great generosity , and dauntless personal courage . 
 and he be not without occasion for showing of what stuff he be make . for instance , when that unhappy little Cattarina , who have bring he into so much trouble , carry her importunity beyond the mark at which Harry think his generosity should stop , he withdraw from the advance of the Opera - House Siren with perfect coolness and skill , leave she to exercise her blandishment upon some more easy victim . in vain the mermaid 's hysterical mother wait upon Harry , and vow that a cruel bailiff have seize all her daughter 's good for debt , and that her venerable father be at present languishing in a London gaol . Harry declare that between himself and the bailiff there could be no dealing , and that because he have have the good fortune to become known to Mademoiselle Cattarina , and to gratify her caprice by present she with various trinket and knick - knack for which she have a fancy , he be not bind to pay the past debt of her family , and must decline be bail for her papa in London , or settle her outstanding account at Tunbridge . the Cattarina 's mother first call he a monster and an ingrate , and then ask he , with a veteran smirk , why he do not take pay for the service he have render to the young person ? at first , Mr. Warrington could not understand what the nature of the payment might be : but when that matter be explain by the old woman , the honest lad rise up in horror , to think that a woman should traffic in her child 's dishonour , tell she that he come from a country where the very savage would recoil from such a bargain ; and , have bow the old lady ceremoniously to the door , order Gumbo to mark she well , and never admit she to his lodging again . no doubt she retire breathing vengeance against the Iroquois : no Turk or Persian , she declare , would treat a lady so : and she and her daughter retreat to London as soon as their anxious landlord would let they . then Harry have his peril of gaming , as well as his peril of gallantry . a man who play at bowl , as the phrase be , must expect to meet with rubber . after dinner at the ordinary , have decline to play piquet any far with Captain Batts , and be roughly ask his reason for refuse , Harry fairly tell the Captain that he only play with gentleman who pay , like himself : but express himself so ready to satisfy Mr. Batts , as soon as their outstanding little account be settle , that the Captain declare himself satisfied d'avance , and straightway leave the Wells without pay Harry or any other creditor . also he have an occasion to show his spirit by beat a chairman who be rude to old Miss Whiffler one evening as she be go to the assembly : and find that the calumny regard himself and that unlucky opera - dancer be repeat by Mr. Hector Buckler , one of the fierce frequenter of the Wells , Mr. Warrington step up to Mr. Buckler in the pump - room , where the latter be regale a number of water - drinker with the very calumny , and publicly inform Mr. Buckler that the story be a falsehood , and that he should hold any person accountable to himself who henceforth utter it . so that though our friend , be at Rome , certainly do as Rome do , yet he show himself to be a valorous and worthy Roman ; and , hurlant avec les loup , be acknowledge by Mr. Wolfe himself to be as brave as the good of the wolf . 
 if that officer have tell Colonel Lambert the story which have give the latter so much pain , we may be sure that when Mr. Wolfe find his young friend be innocent , he take the first opportunity to withdraw the odious charge against he . and there be joy among the lambert , in consequence of the lad 's acquittal something , doubtless , of that pleasure , which be feel by high nature than our , at the recovery of sinner . never have the little family be so happy no , not even when they get the news of Brother Tom win his scholarship as when Colonel Wolfe ride over with the account of the conversation which he have with Harry Warrington . " hadst thou bring I a regiment , James , I think I should not have be well pleased , " say Mr. Lambert . Mrs. Lambert call to her daughter who be in the garden , and kiss they both when they come in , and cry out the good news to they . Hetty jump for joy , and Theo perform some uncommonly brilliant operation upon the harpsichord that night ; and when Dr. Boyle come in for his backgammon , he could not , at first , account for the illumination in all their face , until the three lady , in a happy chorus , tell he how right he have be in his sermon , and how dreadfully they have wrong that poor dear , good young Mr. Warrington . 
 " what shall we do , my dear ? " say the Colonel to his wife . " the hay be in , the corn will not   be cut for a fortnight , the horse have nothing to do . suppose we ... " and here he lean over the table and whisper in her ear . 
 " my dear Martin ! the very thing ! " cry Mrs. Lambert , take her husband 's hand and press it . 
 " what be the very thing , mother ? " cry young Charley , who be home for his Bartlemytide holiday . 
 " the very thing be to go to supper . Come , Doctor ! we will have a bottle of wine to - night , and drink repentance to all who think evil . " 
 " amen , " say the Doctor ; " with all my heart ! " and with this the worthy family go to their supper . 




 CHAPTER XXX . contain a Letter to Virginia 

 have repair one day to his accustomed dinner at the White Horse ordinary , Mr. Warrington be pleased to see amongst the face round the table the jolly , good - look countenance of Parson Sampson , who be regale the company when Harry enter , with story and bon - mot , which keep they in roar of laughter . though he have not be in London for some month , the parson have the late London news , or what pass for such with the folk at the ordinary : what be do in the King 's house at Kensington ; and what in the Duke 's in Pall Mall : how Mr. Byng be behave in prison , and who come to he : what be the odd at Newmarket , and who be the last reign toast in Covent Garden ; the jolly chaplain could give the company news upon all these point , news that might not be very accurate indeed , but be as good as if it be for the country gentleman who hear it . for suppose that my Lord Viscount Squanderfield be ruin himself for Mrs. Polly , and Sampson call she Mrs. Lucy ? that it be Lady Jane who be in love with the actor , and not Lady Mary ? that it be Harry Hilton , of the Horse Grenadiers , who have the quarrel with Chevalier Solingen , at Marybone Garden , and not Tommy Ruffler , of the Foot Guards ? the name and date do not matter much . provide the story be lively and wicked , their correctness be of no great importance ; and Mr. Sampson laugh and chatter away amongst his country gentleman , charm they with his spirit and talk , and drink his share of one bottle after another , for which his delighted auditory persist in call . a hundred year ago , the Abbe Parson , the clergyman who frequent the theatre , the tavern , the racecourse , the world of fashion , be no uncommon character in english society : his voice might be hear the loud in the hunting - field ; he could sing the jolly song at the Rose or the Bedford Head , after the play be over at Covent Garden , and could call a main as well as any at the gaming - table . 
 it may have be modesty , or it may have be claret , which cause his reverence 's rosy face to redden deeply , but when he see Mr. Warrington enter , he whisper " Maxima debetur " to the laugh country squire who sit next he in his drab coat and gold - lace red waistcoat , and rise up from his chair and run , nay , stumble forward , in his haste to greet the Virginian : " my dear sir , my very dear sir , my conqueror of spade , and club , and heart , too , I be delighted to see your honour look so fresh and well , " cry the chaplain . 
 Harry return the clergyman 's greeting with great pleasure : he be glad to see Mr. Sampson ; he could also justly compliment his reverence upon his cheerful look and rosy gill . 
 the squire in the drab coat know Mr. Warrington ; he make a place beside himself ; he call out to the parson to return to his seat on the other side , and to continue his story about Lord Ogle and the grocer 's wife in . where he do not say , for his sentence be interrupt by a shout and an oath address to the parson for treading on his gouty toe . 
 the chaplain ask pardon , hurriedly turn round to Mr. Warrington , and inform he , and the rest of the company indeed , that my Lord Castlewood send his affectionate remembrance to his cousin , and have give special order to he   Mr. Sampson   to come to Tunbridge Wells and look after the young gentleman 's moral ; that my Lady Viscountess and my Lady Fanny be go to Harrogate for the water ; that Mr. Will have win his money at Newmarket , and be go on a visit to my Lord Duke ; that molly the housemaid be cry her eye out about Gumbo , Mr. Warrington 's valet ; in fine , all the news of Castlewood and its neighbourhood . Mr. Warrington be belove by all the country round , Mr. Sampson tell the company , manage to introduce the name of some person of the very high rank into his discourse . " all Hampshire have hear of his success at Tunbridge , success of every kind , " say Mr. Sampson , look particularly arch ; my lord hop , their ladyship hop , Harry would not be spoil for his quiet Hampshire home . 
 the guest drop off one by one , leave the young Virginian to his bottle of wine and the chaplain . 
 " though I have have plenty , " say the jolly chaplain , " that be no reason why I should not have plenty more , " and he drink toast after toast , and bumper after bumper , to the amusement of Harry , who always enjoy his society . 
 by the time when Sampson have have his " plenty more , " Harry , too , be become specially generous , warm - hearted , and friendly . a lodge why should Mr. Sampson go to the expense of an inn , when there be a room at Harry 's quarter ? the chaplain 's trunk be order thither , Gumbo be bid to make Mr. Sampson comfortable most comfortable ; nothing would satisfy Mr. Warrington but that Sampson should go down to his stable and see his horse ; he have several horse now ; and when at the stable Sampson recognise his own horse which Harry have win from he ; and the fond beast whinny with pleasure , and rub his nose against his old master 's coat ; Harry rap out a brisk energetic expression or two , and vow by Jupiter that Sampson should have his old horse back again : he would give he to Sampson , that he would ; a gift which the chaplain accept by seize Harry 's hand , and bless he , by fling his arm round the horse 's neck , and weep for joy there , weep tear of bordeaux and gratitude . arm - in - arm the friend walk to Madame Bernstein 's from the stable , of which they bring the odour into her ladyship 's apartment . their flushed cheek and brighten eye show what their amusement have be . many gentleman 's cheek be in the habit of flush in those day , and from the same cause . 
 Madame Bernstein receive her nephew 's chaplain kindly enough . the old lady relish Sampson 's broad joke and rattle talk from time to time , as she like a highly - spice dish or a new entree compose by her cook , upon its two or three first appearance . the only amusement of which she do not grow tired , she own , be card . " the card do not   cheat , " she use to say . " a bad hand tell you the truth to your face : and there be nothing so flattering in the world as a good suite of trump . " and when she be in a good humour , and sit down to her favourite pastime , she would laughingly bid her nephew 's chaplain say grace before the meal . Honest Sampson do not at first care to take a hand at Tunbridge Wells . her ladyship 's play be too high for he , he would own , slap his pocket with a comical piteous look , and its content have already be hand over to the fortunate youth at Castlewood . like most person of her age , and indeed her sex , Madame Bernstein be not prodigal of money . I suppose it must have be from Harry Warrington , whose heart be overflow with generosity as his purse with guineas , that the chaplain procure a small stock of ready coin , with which he be presently enable to appear at the card - table . 
 our young gentleman welcome Mr. Sampson to his coin , as to all the rest of the good thing which he have gather about he . ' twa surprising how quickly the young Virginian adapt himself to the habit of life of the folk amongst whom he live . his suit be still black , but of the fine cut and quality . " with a star and ribbon , and his stocking down , and his hair over his shoulder , he would make a pretty Hamlet , " say the gay old Duchess Queensberry . " and I make no doubt he have be the death of a dozen Ophelias already , here and amongst the Indians , " she add , think not at all the bad of Harry for his suppose success among the fair . Harry 's lace and linen be as fine as his aunt could desire . he purchase fine shaving - plate of the toy - shop woman , and a couple of magnificent brocade bedgown , in which his worship loll at ease , and sip his chocolate of a morning . he have sword and walking - cane , and french watch with paint back and diamond setting , and snuff box enamel by artist of the same cunning nation . he have a levee of groom , jockey , tradesman , daily wait in his anteroom , and admit one by one to he and Parson Sampson , over his chocolate , by Gumbo , the groom of the chamber . we have no account of the number of man whom Mr. Gumbo now have under he . certain it be that no single negro could have take care of all the fine thing which Mr. Warrington now possess , let alone the horse and the postchaise which his honour have buy . also Harry instruct himself in the art which become a gentleman in those day . a french fencing - master , and a dancing - master of the same nation , reside at Tunbridge during that season when Harry make his appearance : these man of science the young Virginian sedulously frequent , and acquire considerable skill and grace in the peaceful and warlike accomplishment which they teach . Ere many week be over he could handle the foil against his master or any frequenter of the fencing - school , and , with a sigh , Lady Maria   who dance very elegantly herself   own that there be no gentleman at court who could walk a minuet more gracefully than Mr. Warrington . as for riding , though Mr. Warrington take a few lesson on the great horse from a riding - master who come to Tunbridge , he declare that their own virginian manner be well enough for he , and that he see no one amongst the fine folk and the jockey who could ride well than his friend Colonel George Washington of Mount Vernon . 
 the obsequious Sampson find himself in well quarter than he have enjoy for ever so long a time . he know a great deal of the world , and tell a great deal more , and Harry be delighted with his story , real or fancy . the man of twenty look up to the man of thirty , admire the latter 's old joke , stale pun , and tarnished anecdote , that be slop with the wine of a hundred dinner - table . Sampson 's town and college pleasantry be all new and charming to the young Virginian . a hundred year ago , no doubt there be no such people leave in the world now , there use to be grow man in London who love to consort with fashionable youth enter life ; to tickle their young fancy with merry story ; to act as Covent Garden Mentors and master of ceremony at the Round - house ; to accompany lad to the gaming - table , and perhaps have an understanding with the punter ; to drink lemonade to Master Hopeful 's Burgundy , and to stagger into the street with perfectly cool head when my young lord reel out to beat the watch . of this , no doubt , extinct race , Mr. Sampson be a speciman : and a great comfort it be to think   to those who choose to believe the statement   that in Queen Victoria 's reign there be no flatterer leave , such as exist in the reign of her royal great - grandfather , no parasite pander to the folly of young man ; in fact , that all the toad have be eat off the face of the island   except one or two that be find in stone , where they have lie perdus these hundred year , and the toad - eater have perish for lack of nourishment . 
 with some sauce , as I read , the above - mention animal be say to be exceedingly fragrant , wholesome , and savoury eating . indeed , no man could look more rosy and healthy , or flourish more cheerfully , than friend Sampson upon the diet . he become our young friend 's confidential leader , and , from the follow letter , which be preserve in the Warrington correspondence , it will be see that Mr. Harry not only have dance and fence master , but likewise a tutor , chaplain , and secretary : 
 to MRS . esmond WARRINGTON of castlewood at her HOUSE at RICHMOND , VIRGINIA 
 Mrs. Bligh 's Lodgings , Pantiles , Tunbridge Wells , 
 " August 25th , 1756 . 
 " HONOURED MADAM your honoured letter of 20 June , per Mr. Trail of Bristol , have be forward to I duly , and I have to thank your goodness and kindness for the good advice which you be pleased to give I , as also for the remembrance of dear home , which I shall love never the bad for have be to the home of our ancestor in England . 
 " I writ you a letter by the last monthly packet , inform my honoured mother of the little accident I have on the road hither , and of the kind friend who I find and whom take I in . since then I have be profiting of the fine weather and the good company here , and have make many friend among our nobility , whose acquaintance I be sure you will not be sorry that I should make . among their lordship I may mention the famous Earl of Chesterfield , late Ambassador to Holland , and Viceroy of the Kingdom of Ireland ; the Earl of March and Ruglen , who will be Duke of Queensberry at the death of his grace ; and her grace the Duchess , a celebrate beauty of the Queen 's time , when she remember my grandpapa at Court . these and many more person of the first fashion attend my aunt 's assembly , which be the most crowded at this crowded place . also on my way hither I stay at Westerham , at the house of an officer , Lieut.-Gen . Wolfe , who serve with my grandfather and General Webb in the famous war of the Duke of Marlborough . Mr. Wolfe have a son , Lieut.-Col . James Wolfe , engage to be married to a beautiful lady now in this place , Miss Lowther of the North and though but 30 year old he be look up to as much as any officer in the whole army , and have serve with honour under his Royal Highness the Duke wherever our arm have be employ . 
 " I thank my honoured mother for announce to I that a quarter 's allowance of 52l . 10 . will be pay I by Mr. Trail . I be in no present want of cash , and by practise a rigid economy , which will be necessary   as I do not disguise   for the maintenance of horse , Gumbo , and the equipage and apparel requisite for a young gentleman of good family , hope to be able to maintain my credit without unduly trespassing upon your . the linnen and clothe which I bring with I will with due care last for some year as you say . ' tis not quite so fine as wear here by person of fashion , and I may have to purchase a few very fine shirt for great day : but those I have be excellent for daily wear . 
 " I be thankful that I have be quite without occasion to use your excellent family pill . Gumbo hath take they with great benefit , who grow fat and saucy upon english beef , ale , and air . he send his humble duty to his mistress , and prays Mrs. Mountain to remember he to all his fellow - servant , especially Dinah and Lily , for whom he have buy posey - ring at Tunbridge Fair . 
 " besides partaking of all the pleasure of the place , I hope my honoured mother will believe that I have not be unmindful of my education . I have have master in fencing and dancing , and my Lord Castlewood 's chaplain , the Reverend Mr. Sampson , have come hither to drink the water , have be so good as to take a vacant room at my lodging . Mr. S. breakfast with I , and we read together of a morning he say that I be not quite such a dunce as I use to appear at home . we have read in Mr. Rapin 's history , Dr. Barrow 's sermon , and , for amusement , Shakspeare , Mr. Pope 's Homer , and   in French   the translation of an Arabian Work of Tales , very divert . several man of learn have be stay here besides the person of fashion ; and amongst the former be Mr. Richardson , the author of the famous book which you and Mountain and my dear brother use to love so . he be pleased when I tell he that his work be in your closet in Virginia , and beg I to convey his respectful compliment to my lady - mother . Mr. R. be a short fat man , with little of the fire of genius visible in his eye or person . 
 " my aunt and my cousin , the Lady Maria , desire their affectionate compliment to you , and with good regard for Mountain , to whom I enclose a note , I be , honour madam , your dutiful son , H. ESMOND WARRINGTON . " 
 note in Madam Esmond 's handwriting , 
 " from my son . receive October 15 at Richmond . send 16 jar preserve peach , 224 lbs . good tobacco , 24 fine ham , per Royal William of Liverpool , 8 jar peach , 12 ham for my nephew , the Rt . Honourable the Earl of Castlewood . 4 jar , 6 ham for the Baroness Bernstein , ditto ditto for Mrs. Lambert of Oakhurst , Surrey , and 1 2 cwt . tobacco . Packet of Infallible Family Pills for Gumbo . my papa 's large silver - gilt shoe - buckle for H. , and red silver - lace saddle - cloth . " 
 II .   enclose in no . I. 
 " for Mrs. Mountain . 
 " what do you mien , you silly old Mountain , by send an order for your poor old divadend dew at Xmas ? I would have you to know I do not   want your 7l . 10 , and have toar your order up into 1000 bitt . I have   plenty of money . but I be obleaged to you all same . a kiss to Fanny from your loving HARRY . " 
 note in Madam Esmond 's Handwriting 
 " this note , which I desire M. to show to I , prove that she hath a good heart , and that she wish to show her gratitude to the family , by give up her half - yearly divd .   on L500 3 per ct .   to my boy . hence I reprimand she very slightly for dare to send money to Mr. E. Warrington , unknown to his mother . note to Mountain not so well spelt as letter to I . 
 " Mem . to write to Revd . Mr. Sampson desire to know what theolog . book he read with H. Recommend Law , Baxter , Drelincourt . Request H. to say his catechism to Mr. S. , which he have never quite be able to master . by next ship peach   3 , tobacco 1 2 cwt . Hams for Mr. S. " 
 the mother of the Virginians and her son have long long since pass away . so how be we to account for the fact , that of a couple of letter send under one enclosure and by one packet , one should be well spell , and the other not entirely orthographical ? have Harry find some wonderful instructor , such as exist in the present lucky time , and who would improve his writing in six lesson ? my view of the case , after deliberately examine the two note , be this : no . 1 , in which there appear a trifling grammatical slip   " the kind , friend who I find and whom take I in " , must have be re - write from a rough copy which have probably undergo the supervision of a tutor or friend . the more artless composition , no . 2 , be not refer to the scholar who prepare no . 1 for the maternal eye , and to whose correction of " who " and " whom " Mr. Warrington do not pay very close attention . who know how he may have be disturb ? a pretty milliner may have attract Harry 's attention out of window a dancing bear with pipe and tabor may have pass along the common a jockey come under his window to show off a horse there ? there be some day when any of we may be ungrammatical and spell ill . finally , suppose Harry do not care to spell so elegantly for Mrs. Mountain as for his lady - mother , what affair be that of the present biographer , century , reader ? and as for your objection that Mr. Warrington , in the above communication to his mother , show some little hypocrisy and reticence in his dealing with that venerable person , I dare say , young folk , you in your time have write more than one prim letter to your papa and mamma in which not quite all the transaction of your life be narrate , or if narrate , be exhibit in the most favourable light for yourself I dare say , old folk ! you , in your time , be not altogether more candid . there must be a certain distance between I and my son Jacky . there must be a respectful , an amiable , a virtuous hypocrisy between we . I do not in the least wish that he should treat I as his equal , that he should contradict I , take my arm - chair , read the newspaper first at breakfast , ask unlimited friend to dine when I have a party of my own , and so forth . no ; where there be not equality there must be hypocrisy . continue to be blind to my fault ; to hush still as mice when I fall asleep after dinner ; to laugh at my old joke ; to admire my saying ; to be astonish at the impudence of those unbelieve reviewer ; to be dear filial humbug , o my child ! in my castle I be king . let all my royal household back before I . ' tis not their natural way of walk , I know : but a decorous , become , and modest behaviour highly agreeable to I . away from I they may do , nay , they do do , what they like . they may jump , skip , dance , trot , tumble over head and heel , and kick about freely , when they be out of the presence of my majesty . do not then , my dear young friend , be surprised at your mother and aunt when they cry out , " oh , it be highly immoral and improper of Mr. Warrington to be write home humdrum demure letter to his dear mamma , when he be play all sort of merry prank ! " but drop a curtsey , and say , " yes , dear grandmamma   or aunt , as may be , it be very wrong of he : and I suppose you never have your fun when you be young . " of course , she do not ! and the sun never shine , and the blossom never bud , and the blood never dance , and the fiddle never sing , in her spring - time . eh , Babet ! mon lait de poule et mon bonnet de nuit ! Ho , Betty ! my gruel and my slipper ! and go , ye frisky , merry little soul ! and dance , and have your merry little supper of cake and ale ! 




 CHAPTER XXXI . the Bear and the Leader 

 our candid reader know the real state of the case regard Harry Warrington and that luckless Cattarina ; but a number of the old lady at Tunbridge Wells suppose the Virginian to be as dissipate as any young english nobleman of the high quality , and Madame de Bernstein be especially incredulous about her nephew 's innocence . it be the old lady 's firm belief that Harry be lead not only a merry life , but a wicked one , and her wish be father to the thought that the lad might be no well than his neighbour . an old Roman herself , she like her nephew to do as Rome do . all the scandal regard Mr. Warrington 's Lovelace adventure she eagerly and complacently accept . we have see how , on one or two occasion , he give tea and music to the company at the Wells ; and he be so gallant and amiable to the lady   to lady of a much well figure and character than the unfortunate Cattarina , that Madame Bernstein cease to be disquiet regard the silly love affair which have have a commencement at Castlewood , and relax in her vigilance over Lady Maria . some folk many old folk be too selfish to interest themselves long about the affair of their neighbour . the Baroness have her trump to think of , her dinner , her twinge of rheumatism : and her suspicion regard Maria and Harry , lately so lively , now doze , and keep a careless , unobservant watch . she may have think that the danger be over , or she may have cease to care whether it exist or not , or that artful Maria , by her conduct , may have quite cajole , soothe , and misguide the old Dragon , to whose charge she be give over . at Maria 's age , nay , early indeed , maidens have learn to be very sly , and at Madame Bernstein 's time of life dragon be not so fierce and alert . they can not turn so readily , some of their old tooth have drop out , and their eye require more sleep than they need in day when they be more active , venomous , and dangerous . I , for my part , know a few female dragon , de par le monde , and , as I watch they and remember what they be , admire the soften influence of year upon these whilom destroyer of man- and woman - kind . their scale be so soft that any knight with a moderate power of thrust can strike they : their claw , once strong enough to tear out a thousand eye , only fall with a feeble pat that scarce raise the skin : their tongue , from their toothless old gum , dart a venom which be rather disagreeable than deadly . see they trail their languid tail , and crawl home to their cavern at roosting - time ! how weak be their power of do injury ! their maleficence how feeble ! how change be they since the brisk day when their eye shoot wicked fire ; their tongue spat poison ; their breath blasted reputation ; and they gobble up a daily victim at least ! 
 if the good folk at Oakhurst could not resist the testimony which be bring to they regard Harry 's ill - doing , why should Madame Bernstein , who in the course of her long day have have more experience of evil than all the Oakhurst family put together , be less credulous than they ? of course every single old woman of her ladyship 's society believe every story that be tell about Mr. Harry Warrington 's dissipated habit , and be ready to believe as much more ill of he as you please . when the little dancer go back to London , as she do , it be because that heartless Harry desert she . he desert she for somebody else , whose name be confidently give , whose name ? whose half - dozen name the society at Tunbridge Wells would whisper about ; where there congregate people of all rank and degree , woman of fashion , woman of reputation , of demi - reputation , of virtue , of no virtue , all mingle in the same room , dance to the same fiddle , drink out of the same glass at the Wells , and alike in search of health , or society , or pleasure . a century ago , and our ancestor , the most free or the most straitlace , meet together at a score of such merry place as that where our present scene lie , and dance , and frisk , and game , and drink at Epsom , Bath , Tunbridge , Harrogate , as they do at Homburg and Baden now . 
 Harry 's bad reputation , then , comfort his old aunt exceedingly , and ease her mind in respect to the boy 's passion for Lady Maria . so easy be she in her mind , that when the chaplain say he come to escort her ladyship home , Madame Bernstein do not even care to part from her niece . she prefer rather to keep she under her eye , to talk to she about her wicked young cousin 's wild extravagance , to whisper to she that boy would be boy , to confide to Maria her intention of get a proper wife for Harry , some one of a suitable age , some one with a suitable fortune , all which pleasantrie poor Maria have to bear with as much fortitude as she could muster . 
 there live , during the last century , a certain french duke and marquis , who distinguish himself in Europe , and America likewise , and have oblige posterity by leave behind he a choice volume of memoir , which the gentle reader be specially warn not to consult . have perform the part of Don Juan in his own country , in ours , and in other part of Europe , he have kindly note down the name of many court - beauty who fall victim to his power of fascination ; and very pleasant read no doubt it must be for the grandson and descendant of the fashionable person amongst whom our brilliant nobleman move , to find the name of their ancestress adorn M. le Duc 's sprightly page , and their frailty record by the candid writer who cause they . 
 in the course of the peregrination of this nobleman , he visit North America , and , as have be his custom in Europe , proceed straightway to fall in love . and curious it be to contrast the elegant refinement of european society , where , accord to monseigneur , he have but to lay siege to a woman in order to vanquish she , with the simple life and habit of the colonial folk , amongst whom this European enslaver of heart do not , it appear , make a single conquest . have he do so , he would as certainly have narrate his victory in Pennsylvania and New England , as he describe his success in this and his own country . traveller in America have cry out quite loudly enough against the rudeness and barbarism of transatlantic manner ; let the present writer give the humble testimony of his experience that the conversation of american gentleman be generally modest , and , to the good of his belief , the life of the woman pure . 
 we have say that Mr. Harry Warrington bring his colonial modesty along with he to the old country ; and though he could not help hear the free talk of the person amongst whom he live , and who be man of pleasure and the world , he sit pretty silent himself in the midst of their rattle ; never indulge in double entendre in his conversation with woman ; have no victory over the sex to boast of ; and be shy and awkward when he hear such narrated by other . 
 this youthful modesty Mr. Sampson have remark during his intercourse with the lad at Castlewood , where Mr. Warrington have more than once show himself quite uneasy whilst cousin will be tell some of his choice story ; and my lord have curtly rebuke his brother , bid he keep his joke for the usher 's table at Kensington , and not give needless offence to their kinsman . hence the exclamation of " Reverentia pueris , " which the chaplain have address to his neighbour at the ordinary on Harry 's first appearance there . Mr. Sampson , if he have not strength sufficient to do right himself , at least have grace enough not to offend innocent young gentleman by his cynicism . 
 the chaplain be touch by Harry 's gift of the horse ; and feel a genuine friendliness towards the lad . " you see , sir , " say he , " I be of the world , and must do as the rest of the world do . I have lead a rough life , Mr. Warrington , and can not   afford to be more particular than my neighbour . Video meliora , deteriora sequor , as we say at college . I have get a little sister , who be at boarding - school , not very far from here , and , as I keep a decent tongue in my head when I be talk with my little Patty , and expect other to do as much , sure I may try and do as much by you . " 
 the chaplain be loud in his praise of Harry to his aunt , the old baroness . she like to hear he praise . she be as fond of he as she could be of anything ; be pleased in his company , with his good look , his manly courageous bearing , his blush , which come so readily , his bright eye , his deep youthful voice . his shrewdness and simplicity constantly amuse she ; she would have weary of he long before , have he be clever , or learn , or witty , or other than he be . " we must find a good wife for he , Chaplain , " she say to Mr. Sampson . " I have one or two in my eye , who , I think , will suit he . we must set he up here ; he never will bear go back to his savage again , or to live with his little Methodist of a mother . " 
 now about this point Mr. Sampson , too , be personally anxious , and have also a wife in his eye for Harry . I suppose he must have have some conversation with his lord at Castlewood , whom we have hear express some intention of compliment his chaplain with a good living or other provision , in event of his be able to carry out his lordship 's wish regard a marriage for Lady Maria . if his good office could help that anxious lady to a husband , Sampson be ready to employ they : and he now wait to see in what most effectual manner he could bring his influence to bear . 
 Sampson 's society be most agreeable , and he and his young friend be intimate in the course of a few hour . the parson rejoice in high spirit , good appetite , good humour ; pretend to no sort of squeamishness , and indulge in no sanctify hypocritical conversation ; nevertheless , he take care not to shock his young friend by any needless outbreak of levity or immorality of talk , initiate his pupil , perhaps from policy , perhaps from compunction , only into the minor mystery , as it be ; and not tell he the secret with which the unlucky adept himself be only too familiar . with Harry , Sampson be only a brisk , lively , jolly companion , ready for any drinking bout , or any sport , a cock - fight , a shooting - match , a game at card , or a gallop across the common ; but his conversation be decent , and he try much more to amuse the young man , than to lead he astray . the chaplain be quite successful : he have immense animal spirit as well as natural wit , and aptitude as well as experience in that business of toad - eater which have be his calling and livelihood from his very early year , ever since he first enter college as a servitor , and cast about to see by whose mean he could make his fortune in life . that be but satire just now , when we say there be no toad - eater leave in the world . there be many man of Sampson 's profession now , doubtless ; nay , little boy at our public school be send thither at the early age , instruct by their parent , and put out apprentice to toad - eating . but the flattery be not so manifest as it use to be a hundred year since . young man and old have hanger - on , and lead captain , but they assume an appearance of equality , borrow money , or swallow their toad in private , and walk abroad arm - in - arm with the great man , and call he by his name without his title . in those good old time , when Harry Warrington first come to Europe , a gentleman 's toad - eater pretend to no air of equality at all ; openly pay court to his patron , call he by that name to other folk , go on his errand for he , any sort of errand which the patron might devise , call he sir in speak to he , stand up in his presence until bid to sit down , and flatter he ex officio . Mr. Sampson do not take the least shame in speak of Harry as his young patron , as a young virginian nobleman recommend to he by his other noble patron , the Earl of Castlewood . he be proud of appear at Harry 's side , and as his humble retainer , in public talk about he to the company , give order to Harry 's tradesman , from whom , let we hope , he receive a percentage in return for his recommendation , perform all the function of aide - de - camp other , if our young gentleman demand they from the obsequious divine , who have gaily discharge the duty of ami du prince to ever so many young man of fashion , since his own entrance into the world . it must be confess that , since his arrival in Europe , Mr. Warrington have not be uniformly lucky in the friendship which he have make . 
 " what a reputation , sir , they have make for you in this place ! " cry Mr. Sampson , come back from the coffee - house to his patron . " Monsieur de Richelieu be nothing to you ! " 
 " how do you mean , Monsieur de Richelieu ? never be at Minorca in my life , " say downright Harry , who have not hear of those victory at home , which make the french duke famous . 
 Mr. Sampson explain . the pretty widow Patcham who have just arrive be certainly desperate about Mr. Warrington : her way of go on at the room , the night before , prove that . as for Mrs. Hooper , that be a known case , and the Alderman have fetch his wife back to London for no other reason . it be the talk of the whole Wells . 
 " who say so ? " cry out Harry , indignantly . " I should like to meet the man who dare say so , and confound the villain ! " 
 " I should not like to show he to you , " say Mr. Sampson , laugh . " it might be the bad for he . " 
 " it be a shame to speak with such levity about the character of lady or of gentleman either , " continue Mr. Warrington , pace up and down the room in a fume . 
 " so I tell they , " say the chaplain , wag his head and look very much moved and very grave , though , if the truth be know , it have never come into his mind at all to be angry at hear charge of this nature against Harry . 
 " it be a shame , I say , to talk away the reputation of any man or woman as people do here . do you know , in our country , a fellow 's ear would not be safe ; and a little before I leave home , three brother shoot down a man , for have speak ill of their sister . " 
 " serve the villain right ! " cry Sampson . 
 " already they have have that calumny about I set a - go here , Sampson , about I and the poor little french dancing - girl . " 
 " I have hear , " say Mr. Sampson , shake powder out of his wig . 
 " wicked ; be not   it ? " 
 " abominable . " 
 " they say the very same thing about my Lord March . be not   it shameful ? " 
 " indeed it be , " say Mr. Sampson , preserve a face of wonderful gravity . 
 " I do not   know what I should do if these story be to come to my mother 's ear . it would break her heart , I do believe it would . why , only a few day before you come , a military friend of mine , Mr. Wolfe , tell I how the most horrible lie be circulate about I . good heaven ! what do they think a gentleman of my name and country can be capable of I a seducer of woman ? they might as well say I be a horse - stealer or a housebreaker . I vow if I hear any man say so , I will have his ear ! " 
 " I have read , sir , that the Grand Seignior of Turkey have bushel of ear sometimes send in to he , " say Mr. Sampson , laugh . " if you take all those that have hear scandal against you or other , what basketsful you would fill ! " 
 " and so I would , Sampson , as soon as look at them : any fellow 's who say a word against a lady or a gentleman of honour ! " cry the Virginian . 
 " if you will go down to the Well , you will find a harvest of them . I just come from there . it be the high tide of scandal . detraction be at its height . and you may see the nymphas discente and the aure satyrorum acutas , " cry the chaplain , with a shrug of his shoulder . 
 " that may be as you say , Sampson , " Mr. Warrington reply , " but if ever I hear any man speak against my character I will punish he . mark that . " 
 " I shall be very sorry for his sake , that I should ; for you will mark he in a way he will not   like , sir ; and I know you be a man of your word . " 
 " you may be sure of that , Sampson . and now shall we go to dinner , and afterwards to my Lady Trumpington 's tea ? " 
 " you know , sir , I can not   resist a card or a bottle , " say Mr. Sampson . " let we have the last first and then the first shall come last . " and with this the two gentleman go off to their accustomed place of refection . 
 that be an age in which wine - bibbing be more common than in our politer time ; and , especially since the arrival of General Braddock 's army in his native country , our young Virginian have acquire rather a liking for the filling of bumper and the calling of toast ; have hear that it be a point of honour among the officer never to decline a toast or a challenge . so Harry and his chaplain drink their claret in peace and plenty , naming , as the simple custom be , some favourite lady with each glass . 
 the chaplain have reason of his own for desire to know how far the affair between Harry and my Lady Maria have go ; whether it be advance , or whether it be end ; and he and his young friend be just warm enough with the claret to be able to talk with that great eloquence , that candour , that admirable friendliness , which good wine take in rather injudicious quantity inspire . o kindly harvest of the aquitanian grape ! o sunny bank of Garonne ! o friendly cave of Gledstane and Morol , where the dusky flask lie recondite ! may we not say a word of thank for all the pleasure we owe you ? be the Temperance man to be allow to shout in the public place ? be the Vegetarians to bellow " Cabbage for ever ? " and may we modest enophilist not sing the praise of our favourite plant ? after the drinking of good Bordeaux wine , there be a point   I do not say a pint   at which man arrive , when all the generous faculty of the soul be awaken and in full vigour ; when the wit brighten and break out in sudden flash ; when the intellect be keen ; when the pen - up word and confine thought get a night - rule , and rush abroad and disport themselves ; when the kindliest affection , come out and shake hand with mankind , and the timid Truth jump up naked out of his well and proclaim himself to all the world . how , by the kind influence of the wine - cup , we succour the poor and humble ! how bravely we rush to the rescue of the oppressed ! I say , in the face of all the pump which ever spout , that there be a moment in a bout of good wine at which , if a man could but remain , wit , wisdom , courage , generosity , eloquence , happiness be his ; but the moment pass , and that other glass somehow spoil the state of beatitude . there be a headache in the morning ; we be not go into Parliament for our native town ; we be not go to shoot those french officer who have be speak disrespectfully of our country ; and poor Jeremy Diddler call about eleven o'clock for another half - sovereign , and we be unwell in bed , and can not   see he , and send he empty away . 
 well , then , as they sate over their generous cup , the company have depart , and the bottle of claret be bring in by Monsieur Barbeau , the chaplain find himself in an eloquent state , with a strong desire for inculcate sublime moral precept whilst Harry be move by an extreme longing to explain his whole private history , and to impart all his present feeling to his new friend . mark that fact . why must a man say everything that come uppermost in his noble mind , because , forsooth , he have swallow a half - pint more wine than he ordinarily drink ? suppose I have commit a murder   of course I allow the sherry , and champagne at dinner , should I announce that homicide somewhere about the third bottle   in a small party of man   of claret at dessert ? of course : and hence the fidelity to water - gruel announce a few page back . 
 " I be glad to hear what your conduct have really be with regard to the Cattarina , Mr. Warrington ; I be glad from my soul , " say the impetuous chaplain . " the wine be with you . you have show that you can bear down calumny , and resist temptation . ah ! my dear sir , man be not all so fortunate . what famous good wine this be ! " and he suck up a glass with " a toast from you , my dear sir , if you please ? " 
 " I give you ' Miss Fanny Mountain , of Virginia , ' " say Mr. Warrington , fill a bumper as his thought fly straightway , ever so many thousand mile , to home . 
 " one of your american conquest , I suppose ? " say the chaplain . 
 " Nay , she be but ten year old , and I have never make any conquest at all in Virginia , Mr. Sampson , " say the young gentleman . 
 " you be like a true gentleman , and do not   kiss and tell , sir . " 
 " I neither kiss nor tell . it be not   the custom of our country , Sampson , to ruin girl , or frequent the society of low woman . we virginian gentleman honour woman : we do not   wish to bring they to shame , " cry the young toper , look very proud and handsome . " the young lady whose name I mention hath live in our family since her infancy , and I would shoot the man who do she a wrong ; by Heaven , I would ! " 
 " your sentiment do you honour ! let I shake hand with you ! I will shake hand with you , Mr. Warrington , " cry the enthusiastic Sampson . " and let I tell you ' tis the grasp of honest friendship offer you , and not merely the poor retainer pay court to the wealthy patron . no ! with such liquor as this , all man be equal ; faith , all man be rich , whilst it last ! and Tom Sampson be as wealthy with his bottle as your honour with all the acre of your principality ! " 
 " let we have another bottle of rich , " say Harry , with a laugh . " Encore du cachet jaune , mon bon Monsieur Barbeau ! " and exit Monsieur Barbeau to the cave below . 
 " another bottle of rich ! Capital , capital ! how beautifully you speak French , Mr. Harry ! " 
 " I do speak it well , " say Harry . " at least , when I speak , Monsieur Barbeau understand I well enough . " 
 " you do everything well , I think . you succeed in whatever you try . that be why they have fancy here you have win the heart of so many woman , sir . " 
 " there you go again about the woman ! I tell you I do not   like these story about woman . confound I , Sampson , why be a gentleman 's character to be blacken so ? " 
 " well , at any rate , there be one , unless my eye deceive I very much indeed , sir ! " cry the chaplain . 
 " whom do you mean ? " ask Harry , flush very red . 
 " Nay , I name no name . it be not   for a poor chaplain to meddle with his better ' doing , or to know their thought , " say Mr. Sampson . 
 " thought ! what thought , Sampson ? " 
 " I fancy I see , on the part of a certain lovely and respected lady at Castlewood , a preference exhibit . I fancy , on the side of a certain distinguished young gentleman , a strong liking manifest itself : but I may have be wrong , and ask pardon . " 
 " oh , Sampson , Sampson ! " break out the young man . " I tell you I be miserable . I tell you I have be long for some one to confide in , or ask advice of . you do know , then , that there have be something go on something between I and help Mr. Sampson , Monsieur Barbeau and and some one else ? " 
 " I have watch it this month past , " say the chaplain . 
 " confound I , sir , do you mean you have be a spy on I ? " say the other hotly . 
 " a spy ! you make little disguise of the matter , Mr. Warrington , and her ladyship be not   a much well hand at deceive . you be always together . in the shrubbery , in the walk , in the village , in the gallery of the house , you always find a pretext for be together , and plenty of eye besides mine watch you . " 
 " gracious power ! what do you see , Sampson ? " cry the lad . 
 " Nay , sir , ' tis forbid to kiss and tell . I say so again , " say the chaplain . 
 the young man turn very red . " oh , Sampson ! " he cry , " can I can I confide in you ? " 
 " Dearest sir dear generous youth you know I would shed my heart 's blood for you ! " exclaim the chaplain , squeeze his patron 's hand , and turn a brilliant pair of eye ceilingward . 
 " oh , Sampson ! I tell you I be miserable . with all this play and wine , whilst I have be here , I tell you I have be try to drive away care . I own to you that when we be at Castlewood there be thing pass between a certain lady and I . " 
 the parson give a slight whistle over his glass of Bordeaux . 
 " and they have   make I wretche , those thing have . I mean , you see , that if a gentleman have give his word , why , it be his word , and he must stand by it , you know . I mean that I think I love she , and so I do very much , and she be a most dear , kind , darling , affectionate creature , and very handsome , too , quite beautiful ; but then , you know , our age , Sampson ! think of our age , Sampson ! she be as old as my mother ! " 
 " who would never forgive you . " 
 " I do not   intend to let anybody meddle in my affair , not Madam Esmond nor anybody else , " cry Harry : " but you see , Sampson , she be old and , oh , hang it ! why do Aunt Bernstein tell I ? " 
 " tell you what ? " 
 " something I can not   divulge to anybody , something that torture I ! " 
 " not about the the " the chaplain pause : he be go to say about her ladyship 's little affair with the french dancing - master ; about other little anecdote affect her character . but he have not drunk wine enough to be quite candid , or too much , and be past the real moment of virtue . 
 " yes , yes , every one of them false every one of them ! " shriek out Harry . 
 " great power , what do you mean ? " ask his friend . 
 " these , sir , these ! " say Harry , beat a tattoo on his own white tooth . " I do not   know it when I ask she . I swear I do not   know it . oh , it be horrible it be horrible ! and it have cause I night of agony , Sampson . my dear old grandfather have a set a Frenchman at Charleston make they for he , and we use to look at them grin in a tumbler , and when they be out , his jaw use to fall in I never think she have them . " 
 " have what , sir ? " again ask the chaplain . 
 " confound it , sir , do not   you see I mean tooth ? " say Harry , rap the table . 
 " Nay , only two . " 
 " and how the devil do you know , sir ? " ask the young man , fiercely . 
 " I I have it from she maid . she have two tooth knock out by a stone which cut her lip a little , and they have be replace . " 
 " oh , Sampson , do you mean to say they be not   all sham one ? " cry the boy . 
 " but two , sir , at least so Peggy tell I , and she would just as soon have blab about the whole two - and - thirty the rest be as sound as your , which be beautiful . " 
 " and her hair , Sampson , be that all right , too ? " ask the young gentleman . 
 " ' tis lovely I have see that . I can take my oath to that . her ladyship can sit upon it ; and her figure be very fine ; and her skin be as white as snow ; and her heart be the kind that ever be ; and I know , that is I feel sure , it be very tender about you , Mr. Warrington . " 
 " oh , Sampson ! Heaven , Heaven bless you ! what a weight you have   take off my mind with those those never mind they ! oh , Sam ! how happy that be , no , no ob , how miserable I be ! she be as old as Madam Esmond by George she be she be as old as my mother . you would not   have a fellow marry a woman as old as his mother ? it be too bad : by George it be . it be too bad . " and here , I be sorry to say , Harry Esmond Warrington , Esquire , of Castlewood , in Virginia , begin to cry . the delectable point , you see , must have be pass several glass ago . 
 " you do not   want to marry she , then ? " ask the chaplain . 
 " what be that to you , sir ? I have   promise she , and an Esmond a Virginia Esmond mind that Mr. What's - your - name Sampson have but his word ! " the sentiment be noble , but deliver by Harry with rather a doubtful articulation . 
 " mind you , I say a Virginia Esmond , " continue poor Harry , lift up his finger . " I do not   mean the young branch here . I do not   mean Will , who rob I about the horse , and whose bone I will break . I give you Lady Maria Heaven bless she , and Heaven bless you , Sampson , and you deserve to be a bishop , old boy ! " 
 " there be letter between you , I suppose ? " say Sampson . 
 " Letters ! Dammy , she be always write I letter ! never let I into a window but she stick one in my cuff . letter ! that be a good idea ! look here ! here 's letter ! " and he throw down a pocket - book contain a heap of paper of the poor lady 's composition . 
 " those be letter , indeed . what a post - bag ! " say the chaplain . 
 " but any man who touch they die dy on the spot ! " shriek Harry , start from his seat , and reel towards his sword ; which he draw , and then stamp with his foot , and say , " ha ! ha ! " and then lunge at M. Barbeau , who skip away from the lunge behind the chaplain , who look rather alarmed . I know we could have have a much more exciting picture than either of those we present of Harry this month , and the lad , with his hair dishevel , rag about the room flamberge au vent , and pink the affright innkeeper and chaplain , would have afford a good subject for the pencil . but oh , to think of he stumble over a stool , and prostrate by an enemy who have steal away his brain ! come , Gumbo ! and help your master to bed ! 




 CHAPTER XXXII . in which a Family Coach be order 

 our pleasing duty now be to divulge the secret which Mr. Lambert whisper in his wife 's ear at the close of the antepenultimate chapter , and the publication of which cause such great pleasure to the whole of the Oakhurst family . as the hay be in , the corn not ready for cut , and by consequence the farm horse disengage , why , ask Colonel Lambert , should they not be put into the coach , and should we not all pay a visit to Tunbridge Wells , take friend Wolfe at Westerham on our way ? 
 Mamma embrace this proposal , and I dare say the honest gentleman who make it . all the child jump for joy . the girl go off straightway to get together their good calamancoe , paduasoy , falbala , furbelow , cape , cardinal , sack , negligee , solitaire , cap , ribbon , mantuas , clocked stocking , and high - heeled shoe , and I know not what article of toilet . Mamma 's good robe be take from the press , whence they only issue on rare , solemn occasion , retire immediately afterwards to lavender and seclusion ; the brave Colonel produce his laced hat and waistcoat and silver - hilte hanger ; Charley rejoice in a rasee holiday suit of his father 's , in which the Colonel have be marry , and which Mrs. Lambert cut up , not without a pang . ball and Dumpling have their tail and mane tie with ribbon , and Chump , the old white cart - horse , go as unicorn leader , to help the carriage - horse up the first hilly five mile of the road from Oakhurst to Westerham . the carriage be an ancient vehicle , and be believe to have serve in the procession which have bring George I. from Greenwich to London , on his first arrival to assume the sovereignty of these realm . it have belong to Mr. Lambert 's father , and the family have be in the habit of regard it , ever since they could remember anything , as one of the most splendid coach in the three kingdom . Brian , coachman , and must it also be own ? ploughman , of the Oakhurst family , have a place on the box , with Mr. Charley by his side . the precious clothe be pack in imperial on the roof . the Colonel 's pistol be put in the pocket of the carriage , and the blunderbuss hang behind the box , in reach of Brian , who be an old soldier . no highwayman , however , molest the convoy ; not even an innkeeper levy contribution on Colonel Lambert , who , with a slender purse and a large family , be not to be plunder by those or any other depredator on the king 's highway ; and a reasonable cheap modest lodging have be engage for they by young Colonel Wolfe , at the house where he be in the habit of put up , and whither he himself accompany they on horseback . 
 it happen that these lodging be opposite Madame Bernstein 's ; and as the Oakhurst family reach their quarter on a Saturday evening , they could see chair after chair discharge powdered beaux and patch and brocade beauty at the Baroness 's door , who be hold one of her many card - party . the sun be not yet down   for our ancestor begin their dissipation at early hour , and be at meat , drink , or card , any time after three o'clock in the afternoon until any time in the night or morning , and the young country lady and their mother from their window could see the various personage as they pass into the Bernstein rout . Colonel Wolfe tell the lady who most of the character be . ' twas almost as delightful as go to the party themselves , Hetty and Theo think , for they not only could see the guest arrive , but look into the Baroness 's open casement and watch many of they there . of a few of the personage we have before have a glimpse . when the Duchess of Queensberry pass , and Mr. Wolfe explain who she be , Martin Lambert be ready with a score of line about " Kitty , beautiful and young , " from his favourite Mat Prior . 
 " think that that old lady be once like you , girl ! " cry the Colonel . 
 " like we , papa ? well , certainly we never set up for be beauty ! " say Miss Hetty , toss up her little head . 
 " yes , like you , you little baggage ; like you at this moment , who want to go to that drum yonder : 
  ' inflame with rage at sad restraint 
  which wise mamma ordain , 
  and sorely vex to play the saint 
  Whilst wit and beauty reign . ' " 
 " we be never invite , papa ; and I be sure if there be no beauty more worth see than that , the wit can not   be much worth the hearing , " again say the satirist of the family . 
 " oh , but he be a rare poet , Mat Prior ! " continue the Colonel ; " though , mind you , girl , you will skip over all the poem I have mark with a cross . a rare poet ! and to think you should see one of his heroine ! ' fondness prevail , mamma give way '   she always will , Mrs. Lambert !  
  ' Fondness prevail , mamma give way , 
  Kitty at heart 's desire 
  obtain the chariot for a day , 
  and set the world on fire ! ' " 
 " I be sure it must have be very inflammable , " say mamma . 
 " so it be , my dear , twenty year ago , much more inflammable than it be now , " remark the Colonel . 
 " Nonsense , Mr. Lambert , " be mamma 's answer . 
 " look , look ! " cry Hetty , run forward and point to the little square , and the cover gallery , where be the door lead to Madame Bernstein 's apartment , and round which stand a crowd of street urchin , idler , and yokel , watch the company . 
 " it be Harry Warrington ! " exclaim Theo , wave a handkerchief to the young Virginian : but Warrington do not see Miss Lambert . the Virginian be walk arm - in - arm with a portly clergyman in a crisp rustle silk gown , and the two go into Madame de Bernstein 's door . 
 " I hear he preach a most admirable sermon here last Sunday , " say Mr. Wolfe ; " a little theatrical , but most striking and eloquent . " 
 " you seem to be here most Sundays , James , " say Mrs. Lambert . 
 " and Monday , and soon till Saturday , " add the Colonel . " see , Harry have beautify himself already , hath his hair in buckle , and I have no doubt be go to the drum too . " 
 " I have rather sit quiet generally of a Saturday evening , " say sober Mr. Wolfe ; " at any rate , away from card - playing and scandal ; but I own , dear Mrs. Lambert , I be under order . shall I go across the way and send Mr. Warrington to you ? " 
 " no , let he have his sport . we shall see he to - morrow . he will not   care to be disturb amidst his fine folk by we country - people , " say meek Mrs. Lambert . 
 " I be glad he be with a clergyman who preach so well , " say Theo , softly ; and her eye seem to say , you see , good people , he be not so bad as you think he , and as I , for my part , never believe he to be . " the clergyman have a very kind , handsome face . " 
 " here come a great clergyman , " cry Mr. Wolfe . " it be my Lord of Salisbury , with his blue ribbon , and a chaplain behind he . " 
 " and whom a mercy 's name have we here ? " break in Mrs. Lambert , as a sedan - chair , cover with gilding , top with no less than five earl 's coronet , carry by bearer in richly laced clothe , and precede by three footman in the same splendid livery , now come up to Madame de Bernstein 's door . the Bishop , who have be about to enter , stop , and run back with the most respectful bow and curtsey to the sedan - chair , give his hand to the lady who step thence . 
 " who on earth be this ? " ask Mrs. Lambert . 
 " Sprechen sie Deutsch ? Ja , meinherr . Nichts verstand , " say the waggish Colonel . 
 " Pooh , Martin . " 
 " well , if you can not   understand High Dutch , my love , how can I help it ? your education be neglect at school . can you understand heraldry ? I know you can . " 
 " I make . " cry Charley , recite the shield , " three merion on a field or , with an earl 's coronet . " 
 " a countess 's coronet , my son . the Countess of Yarmouth , my son . " 
 " and pray who be she ? " 
 " it hath ever be the custom of our sovereign to advance person of distinction to honour , " continue the Colonel , gravely , " and this eminent lady hath be so promote by our gracious monarch , to the rank of Countess of this kingdom . " 
 " but why , papa ? " ask the daughter together . 
 " never mind , girl ! " say mamma . 
 but that incorrigible Colonel would go on . 
 " Y , my child , be one of the last and the most awkward letter of the whole alphabet . when I tell you story , you be always say why . why should my Lord Bishop be cringe to that lady ? look at he rub his fat hand together , and smile into her face ! it be not a handsome face any long . it be all paint red and white like Scaramouch 's in the pantomime . see , there come another blue - riband , as I live . my Lord Bamborough . the descendant of the Hotspurs . the proud man in England . he stop , he bow , he smile ; he be hat in hand , too . see , she tap he with her fan . get away , you crowd of little blackguard boy , and do not   tread on the robe of the lady whom the King delight to honour . " 
 " but why do the King honour she ? " ask the girl once more . 
 " there go that odious last letter but one ! do you ever hear of her grace the Duchess of Kendal ? no . of the Duchess of Portsmouth ? Non plus . of the Duchess of La Valliore ? of Fair Rosamond , then ? " 
 " hush , papa ! there be no need to bring blush on the cheek of my dear one , Martin Lambert ! " say the mother , put her finger to her husband 's lip . 
 " ' tis not I ; it be their sacred Majesties who be the cause of the shame , " cry the son of the old republican . " think of the bishop of the Church and the proud nobility of the world cringe and bow before that paint high dutch Jezebel . oh , it be a shame ! a shame ! " 
 " confusion ! " here break out Colonel Wolfe , and make a dash at his hat , run from the room . he have see the young lady whom he admire and her guardian walk across the Pantiles on foot to the Baroness 's party , and they come up whilst the Countess of Yarmouth - Walmoden be engage in conversation with the two lord spiritual and temporal , and these two make the low reverence and bow to the Countess , and wait until she have pass in at the door on the Bishop 's arm . 
 Theo turn away from the window with a sad , almost awestricken face . Hetty still remain there , look from it with indignation in her eye , and a little red spot on each cheek . 
 " a penny for little Hetty 's thought , " say mamma , come to the window to lead the child away . 
 " I be think what I should do if I see papa bow to that woman , " say Hetty . 
 Tea and a hiss kettle here make their appearance , and the family sate down to partake of their evening meal , leave , however , Miss Hetty , from her place , command of the window , which she beg her brother not to close . that young gentleman have be down amongst the crowd to inspect the armorial bearing of the Countess 's and other sedan , no doubt , and also to invest sixpence in a cheese - cake , by mamma 's order and his own desire , and he return presently with this delicacy wrap up in a paper . 
 " look , mother , " he come back and say , " do you see that big man in brown beat all the pillar with a stick ? that be the learn Mr. Johnson . he come to the Friars sometimes to see our master . he be sit with some friend just now at the tea - table before Mrs. Brown 's tart - shop . they have tea there , twopence a cup ; I hear Mr. Johnson say he have have seventeen cup that make two - and - tenpence what a sight of money for tea ! " 
 " what would you have , Charley ? " ask Theo . 
 " I think I would have cheese - cake , " say Charley , sighing , as his tooth close on a large slice , " and the gentleman whom Mr. Johnson be with , " continue Charley , with his mouth quite full , " be Mr. Richardson who write " 
 " Clarissa ! " cry all the woman in a breath , and run to the window to see their favourite writer . by this time the sun be sink , the star be twinkle overhead , and the footman come and light the candle in the Baroness 's room opposite our spy . 
 Theo and her mother be stand together look from their place of observation . there be a small illumination at Mrs. Brown 's tart- and tea - shop , by which our friend could see one lady get Mr. Richardson 's hat and stick , and another tie a shawl round his neck , after which he walk home . 
 " oh dear I ! he do not look like Grandison ! " cry Theo . 
 " I rather think I wish we have not see he , my dear , " say mamma , who have be describe as a most sentimental woman and eager novel - reader ; and here again they be interrupt by Miss Hetty , who cry : 
 " never mind that little fat man , but look yonder , mamma . " 
 and they look yonder . and they see , in the first place , Mr. Warrington undergo the honour of a presentation to the Countess of Yarmouth , who be still follow by the obsequious peer and prelate with blue riband . and now the Countess graciously sate down to a card - table , the Bishop and the Earl and a fourth person be her partner . and now Mr. Warrington come into the embrasure of the window with a lady whom they recognise as the lady whom they have see for a few minute at Oakhurst . 
 " how much fine he be ! " remark mamma . 
 " how he be improve in his look ! what have he do to himself ? " ask Theo . 
 " look at his grand lace frill and rule ! my dear , he have not get on our shirt any more , " cry the matron . 
 " what be you talk about , girl ? " ask papa , recline on his sofa , where , perhaps , he be doze after the fashion of honest house - father . 
 the girl say how Harry Warrington be in the window , talk with his cousin Lady Maria Esmond . 
 " come away ! " cry papa . " you have no right to be spy the young fellow . down with the curtain , I say ! " 
 and down the curtain go , so that the girl see no more of Madame Bernstein 's guest or doing for that night . 
 I pray you be not angry at my remarking , if only by way of contrast between these two opposite house , that while Madame Bernstein and her guest bishop , dignitary , nobleman , and what not be gamble or talk scandal , or devour champagne and chicken   which I hold to be venial sin , or do honour to her ladyship the king 's favourite , the Countess of Yarmouth - Walmoden , our country friend in their lodging kneel round their table , whither Mr. Brian the coachman come as silently as his creak shoe would let he , whilst Mr. Lambert , stand up , read in a low voice , a prayer that Heaven would lighten their darkness and defend they from the peril of that night , and a supplication that it would grant the request of those two or three gather together . 
 our young folk be up betime on Sunday morning , and array themselves in those smart new dress which be to fascinate the Tunbridge folk , and , with the escort of brother Charley , pace the little town , and the quaint Pantiles , and the pretty common , long ere the company be at breakfast , or the bell have ring to church . it be hester who find out where Harry Warrington 's lodging must be , by remark Mr. Gumbo in an undress , with his lovely hair in curl - paper , draw a pair of red curtain aside , and open a window - sash , whence he thrust his head and inhale the sweet morning breeze . Mr. Gumbo do not happen to see the young people from Oakhurst , though they behold he clearly enough . he lean gracefully from the window ; he wave a large feather brush , with which he condescend to dust the furniture of the apartment within ; he affably engage in conversation with a cherry - cheek milkmaid , who be linger under the casement , and kiss his lily hand to she . Gumbo 's hand sparkle with ring , and his person be decorate with a profusion of jewellery gift , no doubt , of the fair who appreciate the young African . once or twice more before breakfast - time the girl pass near that window . it remain open , but the room behind it be blank . no face of Harry Warrington appear there . neither speak to the other of the subject on which both be brood . Hetty be a little provoke with Charley , who be clamorous about breakfast , and tell he he be always think of eat . in reply to her sarcastic inquiry , he artlessly own he should like another cheese - cake , and good - natured Theo , laughing , say she have a sixpence , and if the cake - shop be open of a Sunday morning Charley should have one . the cake - shop be open : and Theo take out her little purse , net by her dear friend at school , and contain her pocket - piece , her grandmother 's guinea , her slender little store of shilling nay , some copper money at one end ; and she treat Charley to the meal which he love . 
 a great deal of fine company be at church . there be that funny old duchess , and old Madame Bernstein , with Lady Maria at her side ; and Mr. Wolfe , of course , by the side of Miss Lowther , and sing with she out of the same psalm - book ; and Mr. Richardson with a bevy of lady . one of they be Miss Fielding , papa tell they after church , Harry Fielding 's sister . " oh , girl , what good company he be ! and his book be worth a dozen of your milksop Pamelas and Clarissas , Mrs. Lambert : but what woman ever love true humour ? and there be Mr. Johnson sit amongst the charity child . do you see how he turn round to the altar at the Belief , and upset two or three of the scared little urchin in leather breech ? and what a famous sermon Harry 's parson give , do not   he ? a sermon about scandal . how , he touch up some of the old harridan who be seat round ! why be not   Mr. Warrington at church ? it be a shame he be not   at church . " 
 " I really do not remark whether he be there or not , " say Miss Hetty , toss her head up . 
 but Theo , who be all truth , say , " yes , I think of he , and be sorry he be not there ; and so do you think of he , Hetty . " 
 " I do no such thing , miss , " persist Hetty . 
 " then why do you whisper to I it be Harry 's clergyman who preach ? " 
 " to think of Mr. Warrington 's clergyman be not to think of Mr. Warrington . it be a most excellent sermon , certainly , and the child sing most dreadfully out of tune . and there be Lady Maria at the window opposite , smell at the rose ; and that be Mr. Wolfe 's step , I know his great military tramp . right leave right left ! how do you do , Colonel Wolfe ? " 
 " why do you look so glum , James ? " ask Colonel Lambert , good - naturedly . " have the charmer be scold thee , or be thy conscience prick by the sermon . Mr. Sampson , be not   the parson 's name ? a famous preacher , on my word ! " 
 " a pretty preacher , and a pretty practitioner ! " say Mr. Wolfe , with a shrug of his shoulder . 
 " why , I think the discourse do not last ten minute , and madam do not sleep one single wink during the sermon , didst thou , Molly ? " 
 " do you see when the fellow come into church ? " ask the indignant Colonel Wolfe . " he come in at the open door of the common , just in time , and as the psalm be over . " 
 " well , he have be read the service probably to some sick person ; there be many here , " remark Mrs. Lambert . 
 " read the service ! oh , my good Mrs. Lambert ! do you know where I find he ? I go to look for your young scapegrace of a Virginian . " 
 " his own name be a very pretty name , I be sure , " cry out Hetty . " it be not   scapegrace ! it be Henry Esmond Warrington , Esquire . " 
 " Miss Hester , I find the parson in his cassock , and Henry Esmond Warrington , Esquire , in his bedgown , at a quarter before eleven o'clock in the morning , when all the Sunday bell be ring , and they be play over a game of piquet they have have the night before ! " 
 " well , number of good people play at card of a Sunday . the King play at card of a Sunday . " 
 " Hush , my dear ! " 
 " I know he do , " say Hetty , " with that paint person we see yesterday that Countess what - d'you - call - she ? " 
 " I think , my dear Miss Hester , a clergyman have good take to God 's book instead of the Devil 's book on that day and so I take the liberty of tell your parson . " Hetty look as if she think it be a liberty which Mr. Wolfe have take . " and I tell our young friend that I think he have well have be on his way to church than there in his bedgown . " 
 " you would not   have Harry go to church in a dressing - gown and nightcap , Colonel Wolfe ? that would be a pretty sight , indeed ! " again say Hetty , fiercely . 
 " I would have my little girl 's tongue not wag quite so fast , " remark papa , pat the girl 's flush little cheek . 
 " not speak when a friend be attack , and nobody say a word in his favour ? no ; nobody ! " 
 here the two lip of the little mouth close on each other : the whole little frame shake : the child fling a parting look of defiance at Mr. Wolfe , and go out of the room , just in time to close the door , and burst out cry on the stair . 
 Mr. Wolfe look very much discomfited . " I be sure , Aunt Lambert , I do not intend to hurt hester 's feeling . " 
 " no , James , " she say , very kindly the young officer use to call her Aunt Lambert in quite early day and she give he her hand . 
 Mr. Lambert whistle his favourite tune of " over the hill and far away , " with a drum accompaniment perform by his finger on the window . " I say , you must not   whistle on Sunday , papa ! " cry the artless young gown - boy from Grey Friars ; and then suggest that it be three hour from breakfast , and he should like to finish Theo 's cheese - cake . 
 " oh , you greedy child ! " cry Theo . but here , hear a little exclamatory noise outside , she run out of the room , close the door behind she . and we will not pursue she . the noise be that sob which break from Hester 's panting , overloaded heart ; and , though we can not see , I be sure the little maid fling herself on her sister 's neck , and weep upon Theo 's kind bosom . 
 Hetty do not walk out in the afternoon when the family take the air on the common , but have a headache and lie on her bed , where her mother watch she . Charley have discover a comrade from Grey Friars : Mr. Wolfe of course pair off with Miss Lowther : and Theo and her father , take their sober walk in the Sabbath sunshine , find Madame Bernstein bask on a bench under a tree , her niece and nephew in attendance . Harry run up to greet his dear friend : he be radiant with pleasure at behold they the eld lady be most gracious to the Colonel and his wife , who have so kindly welcome their Harry . 
 how noble and handsome he look ! Theo think : she call he by his christian name , as if he be really her brother . " why do we not see you soon to - day , Harry ? " she ask . 
 " I never think you be here , Theo . " 
 " but you might have see we if you wish . " 
 " where ? " ask Harry . 
 " there , sir , " she say , point to the church . and she hold her hand up as if in reproof ; but a sweet kindness beam in her honest face . ah , friendly young reader , wander on the world and struggle with temptation , may you also have one or two pure heart to love and pray for you ! 




 CHAPTER XXXIII . contain a Soliloquy by hester 

 Martin Lambert 's first feeling , upon learn the little secret which his young daughter 's emotion have reveal , be to be angry with the lad who have rob his child 's heart away from he and her family . " a plague upon all scapegrace , English or Indian ! " cry the Colonel to his wife . " I wish this one have break his nose against any doorpost but our . " 
 " perhaps we be to cure he of be a scapegrace , my dear , " say Mrs. Lambert , mildly interposing , " and the fall at our door hath something providential in it . you laugh at I , Mr. Lambert , when I say so before ; but if Heaven do not send the young gentleman to we , who do ? and it may be for the blessing and happiness of we all that he come , too . " 
 " it be hard , Molly ! " groan the Colonel . " we cherish and fondle and rear them : we tend they through sickness and health : we toil and we scheme : we hoard away money in the stocking , and patch our own old coat : if they have   a headache we can not   sleep for thinking of their ailment ; if they have a wish or fancy , we work day and night to compass it , and ' tis darling daddy and dear pappy , and whose father be like our ? and so forth . on Tuesday morning I be king of my house and family . on Tuesday evening Prince Whippersnapper make his appearance , and my reign be over . a whole life be forget and forswear for a pair of blue eye , a pair of lean shank , and a head of yellow hair . " 
 " ' tis write that we woman should leave all to follow our husband . I think our courtship be not very long , dear Martin ! " say the matron , lay her hand on her husband 's arm . 
 " ' tis human nature , and what can you expect of the jade ? " sigh the Colonel . 
 " and I think I do my duty to my husband , though I own I leave my papa for he , " add Mrs. Lambert , softly . 
 " excellent wench ! perdition catch my soul ! but I do love thee , Molly ! " say the good Colonel ; " but , then , mind you , your father never do I ; and if ever I be to have son - in - law " 
 " ever , indeed ! of course my girl be to have husband , Mr. Lambert ! " cry mamma . 
 " well , when they come , I will hate they , madam , as your father do I ; and quite right too , for take his treasure away from he . " 
 " do not   be irreligious and unnatural , Martin Lambert ! I say you be unnatural , sir ! " continue the matron . 
 " Nay , my dear , I have an old tooth in my left jaw , here ; and ' tis natural that the tooth should come out . but when the toothdrawer pull it , ' tis natural that I should feel pain . do you suppose , madam , that I do not   love Hetty well than any tooth in my head ? " ask Mr. Lambert . but no woman be ever averse to the idea of her daughter get a husband , however father revolt against the invasion of the son - in - law . as for mother and grandmother , those good folk be married over again in the marriage of their young one ; and their soul attire themselves in the lace and muslin of twenty - forty year ago ; the postillion 's white ribbon bloom again , and they flutter into the postchaise , and drive away . what woman , however old , have not the bridal favour and raiment stow away , and pack in lavender , in the inmost cupboard of her heart ? 
 " it will be a sad thing , part with she , " continue Mrs. Lambert , with a sigh . 
 " you have settle that point already , molly , " laugh the Colonel . " have I not well go out and order raisin and corinth for the wedding - cake ? " 
 " and then I shall have to leave the house in their charge when I go to she , you know , in Virginia . how many mile be it to Virginia , Martin ? I should think it must be thousand of mile . " 
 " a hundred and seventy - three thousand three hundred and ninety - one and three - quarter , my dear , by the near way , " answer Lambert , gravely ; " that through Prester John 's country . by the other route , through Persia " 
 " oh , give I the one where there be the least of the sea , and your horrid ship , which I can not   bear ! " cry the Colonel 's spouse . " I hope Rachel Esmond and I shall be well friend . she have a very high spirit when we be girl at school . " 
 " have we not well go about the baby - linen , Mrs. Martin Lambert ? " here interpose her wonder husband . now , Mrs. Lambert , I dare say , think there be no matter for wonderment at all , and have remark some very pretty lace cap and bib in Mrs. Bobbinit 's toy - shop . and on that Sunday afternoon , when the discovery be make , and while little Hetty be lie upon her pillow with feverish cheek , closed eye , and a piteous face , her mother look at the child with the most perfect ease of mind , and seem to be rather pleased than otherwise at Hetty 's woe . 
 the girl be not only unhappy , but enrage with herself for have publish her secret . perhaps she have not know it until the sudden emotion acquaint she with her own state of mind ; and now the little maid choose to be as much ashamed as if she have do a wrong , and be discover in it . she be indignant with her own weakness , and break into transport of wrath against herself . she vow she never would forgive herself for submit to such a humiliation . so the young pard , wound by the hunter 's dart , chafe with rage in the forest , be angry with the surprise of the rankle steel in her side , and snarl and bite at her sister - cub , and the leopardess , her spotted mother . 
 Little Hetty tear and gnaw , and growl , so that I should not like to have be her fraternal cub , or her spot dam or sire . " what business have any young woman , " she cry out , " to indulge in any such nonsense ? Mamma , I ought to be whip , and send to bed . I know perfectly well that Mr. Warrington do not care a fig about I . I dare say he like french actress and the common little milliner - girl in the toy - shop well than I . and so he ought , and so they be well than I . why , what a fool I be to burst out cry like a ninny about nothing , and because Mr. Wolfe say Harry play card of a Sunday ! I know he be not clever , like papa . I believe he be stupid I be certain he be stupid : but he be not so stupid as I be . why , of course , I can not   marry he . how be I to go to America , and leave you and Theo ? of course , he like somebody else , at America , or at Tunbridge , or at Jericho , or somewhere . he be a prince in his own country , and can not   think of marry a poor half - pay officer 's daughter , with twopence to her fortune . use not you to tell I how , when I be a baby , I cry and want the moon ? I be a baby now , a most absurd , silly , little baby do not   talk to I , Mrs. Lambert , I be . only there be this to be say , he do not   know anything about it , and I would rather cut my tongue out than tell he . " 
 Dire be the threat with which Hetty menace Theo , in case her sister should betray she . as for the infantile Charley , his mind be altogether set on cheese - cake , he have not remark or be move by Miss Hester 's emotion ; and the parent and the kind sister of course all promise not to reveal the little maid 's secret . 
 " I begin to think it have be good for we to stay at home , " sigh Mrs. Lambert to her husband . 
 " Nay , my dear , " reply the other . " human nature will be human nature ; surely Hetty 's mother tell I herself that she have the beginning of a liking for a certain young curate before she fall over head and ear in love with a certain young officer of Kingsley 's . and as for I , my heart be wound in a dozen place ere Miss Molly Benson take entire possession of it . our son and daughter must follow in the way of their parent before they , I suppose . why , but yesterday , you be scold I for grumble at Miss Het 's precocious fancy . to do the child justice , she disguise her feeling entirely , and I defy Mr. Warrington to know from her behaviour how she be disposed towards he . " 
 " a daughter of mine and your , Martin , " cry the mother , with great dignity , " be not go to fle herself at a gentleman 's head ! " 
 " neither herself nor the teacup , my dear , " answer the Colonel . " little Miss Het treat Mr. Warrington like a vixen . he never come to we , but she box his ear in one fashion or t'other . I protest she be barely civil to he ; but , know what be go on in the young hypocrite 's mind , I be not go to be angry at her rudeness . " 
 " she hath no need to be rude at all , Martin ; and our girl be good enough for any gentleman in England or America . why , if their age suit , should not   they marry after all , sir ? " 
 " why , if he want she , should not   he ask she , my dear ? I be sorry we come . I be for put the horse into the carriage , and turn their head towards home again . " 
 but mamma fondly say , " depend on it , my dear , that these matter be wisely ordain for we . depend upon it , Martin , it be not for nothing that Harry Warrington be bring to our gate in that way ; and that he and our child be thus bring together again . if that marriage have be decree in Heaven , a marriage it will be . " 
 " at what age , Molly , I wonder , do woman begin and leave off match - making ? if our little chit fall in love and fall out again , she will not be the first of her sex , Mrs. Lambert . I wish we be on our way home again , and , if I have my will , would trot off this very night . " 
 " he have promise to drink his tea here to - night . you would not take away our child 's pleasure , Martin ? " ask the mother , softly . 
 in his fashion , the father be not less good - natured . " you know , my dear , " say Lambert , " that if either of them have a fancy to our ear , we would cut they off and serve they in a fricassee . " 
 Mary Lambert laugh at the idea of her pretty little delicate ear be so serve . when her husband be most tender - hearted , his habit be to be most grotesque . when he pull the pretty little delicate ear , behind which the matron 's fine hair be comb back , wherein twinkle a shin line or two of silver , I dare say he do not hurt she much . I dare say she be think of the soft , well - remember time of her own modest youth and sweet courtship . hallowed remembrance of sacred time ! if the sight of youthful love be pleasant to behold , how much more charming the aspect of the affection that have survive year , sorrow , fade beauty perhaps , and life 's doubt , difference , trouble ! 
 in regard of her promise to disguise her feeling for Mr. Warrington in that gentleman 's presence , Miss Hester be well , or bad if you will , than her word . Harry not only come to take tea with his friend , but invite they for the next day to an entertainment at the room , to be give in their special honour . 
 " a dance , and give for we ! " cry Theo . " oh , Harry , how delightful ! I wish we could begin this very minute ! " 
 " why , for a savage Virginian , I declare , Harry Warrington , thou art the most civilised young man possible ! " say the Colonel . " my dear , shall we dance a minuet together ? " 
 " we have do such a thing before , Martin Lambert ! " say the soldier 's fond wife . her husband hum a minuet tune ; whip a plate from the tea - table , and make a preparatory bow and flourish with it as if it be a hat , whilst madam perform her good curtsey . 
 only Hetty , of the party , persist in look glum and displease . " why , child , have you not a word of thank to throw to Mr. Warrington ? " ask Theo of her sister . 
 " I never do care for dance much , " say Hetty . " what be the use of stand up opposite a stupid man , and dance down a room with he ? " 
 " merci du compliment ! " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " I do not   say that you be stupid that be that is , I I only mean country dance , " say Hetty , bite her lip , as she catch her sister 's eye . she remember she have say Harry be stupid , and Theo 's droll humorous glance be her only reminder . 
 but with this Miss Hetty choose to be as angry as if it have be quite a cruel rebuke . " I hate dance there I own it , " she say , with a toss of her head . 
 " Nay , you use to like it well enough , child ! ! " interpose her mother . 
 " that be when she be a child : do not   you see she be grow up to be an old woman ? " remark Hetty 's father . " or perhaps Miss Hester have get the gout ? " 
 " fiddle ! " say Hester , snappishly , drub with her little foot . 
 " what be a dance without a fiddle ? " say imperturbed papa . 
 darkness have come over Harry Warrington 's face . " I come to try my good , and give they pleasure and a dance , " he think , " and the little thing tell I she hat dancing . we do not   practise kindness , or acknowledge hospitality so in our country . no nor speak to our parent so , neither . " I be afraid , in this particular usage have change in the United States during the last hundred year , and that the young folk there be considerably hettified . 
 not content with this , Miss Hester must proceed to make such fun of all the company at the Wells , and especially of Harry 's own immediate pursuit and companion , that the honest lad be still far pain at her behaviour ; and , when he see Mrs. Lambert alone , ask how or in what he have again offend , that hester be so angry with he ? the kind matron feel more than ever well disposed towards the boy , after her daughter 's conduct to he . she would have like to tell the secret which hester hide so fiercely . Theo , too , remonstrate with her sister in private ; but hester would not listen to the subject , and be as angry in her bedroom , when the girl be alone , as she have be in the parlour before her mother 's company . " suppose he hat I ? " say she . " I expect he will . I hate myself , I do , and scorn myself for be such an idiot . how ought he to do otherwise than hate I ? do not   I abuse he , call he goose , all sort of name ? and know he be not clever all the time . I know I have well wit than he have . it be only because he be tall , and have blue eye , and a pretty nose that I like he . what an absurd fool a girl must be to like a man merely because he have a blue nose and hooked eye ! so I be a fool , and I will not   have you say a word to the contrary , Theo ! " 
 now Theo think that her little sister , far from be a fool , be a wonder of wonder , and that if any girl be worthy of any prince in Christendom , Hetty be that spinster . " you be silly sometimes , Hetty , " say Theo , " that be when you speak unkindly to people who mean you well , as you do to Mr. Warrington at tea to - night . when he propose to we his party at the Assembly Rooms , and nothing could be more gallant of he , why do you say you do not   care for music , or dancing , or tea ? you know you love they all ! " 
 " I say it merely to vex myself , Theo , and annoy myself , and whip myself , as I deserve , child . and , besides , how can you expect such an idiot as I be to say anything but idiotic thing ? do you know , it quite please I to see he angry . I think , ah ! now I have hurt his feeling ! now he will say , Hetty Lambert be an odious little set - up , sour - temper vixen . and that will teach he , and you , and mamma , and papa , at any rate , that I be not go to set my cap at Mr. Harry . no ; our papa be ten time as good as he be . I will stay by our papa , and if he ask I to go to Virginia with he to - morrow , I would not , Theo . my sister be worth all the Virginians that ever be make since the world begin . " 
 and here , I suppose , follow osculation between the sister , and mother 's knock come to the door , who have overhear their talk through the wainscot , and call out , " Children , ' tis time to go to sleep . " Theo 's eye close speedily , and she be at rest ; but ob , poor little Hetty ! think of the hour toll one after another , and the child 's eye wide open , as she lie toss and wakeful with the anguish of the new wound ! 
 " it be a judgment upon I , " she say , " for have think and speak scornfully of he . only , why should there be a judgment upon I ? I be only in fun . I know I like he very much all the time : but I think Theo like he too , and I would give up anything for my darling Theo . if she have , no torture should ever have draw a word from I I would have get a rope - ladder to help she to run away with Harry , that I would , or fetch the clergyman to marry they . and then I would have retire alone , and alone , and alone , and take care of papa and mamma , and of the poor in the village , and have read sermon , though I hate them , and would have die without tell a word not a word and I shall die soon , I know I shall . " but when the dawn rise , the little maid be asleep , nestle by her sister , the stain of a tear or two upon her flush downy cheek . 
 Most of we play with edge tool at some period of our life , and cut ourselves accordingly . at first the cut hurt and sting , and down drop the knife , and we cry out like wound little baby as we be . some very very few and unlucky folk at the game cut their head sheer off , or stab themselves mortally , and perish outright , and there be an end of they . but , heaven help we ! many people have finger those ardente sagitta which love sharpen on his whetstone , and be stab , scarred , prick , perforate , tattooed all over with the wound , who recover , and live to be quite lively . wir auch have taste das irdische Glueck ; we also have gelebt and und so weiter . warble your death - song , sweet Thekla ! perish off the face of the earth , poor pulmonary victim , if so minded ! have you survive to a later period of life , my dear , you would have think of a sentimental disappointment without any reference to the undertaker . let we trust there be no present need of a sexton for Miss Hetty . but meanwhile , the very instant she wake , there , tear at her little heart , will that Care be , which have give she a few hour ' respite , melt , no doubt , by her youth and her tear . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV . in which Mr. Warrington treat the Company with Tea and a Ball 

 Generous with his very easily get money , hospitable and cordial to all , our young Virginian , in his capacity of man of fashion , could not do less than treat his country friend to an entertainment at the Assembly Rooms , whither , accord to the custom of the day , he invite almost all the remain company at the Wells . card - table be set in one apartment , for all those who could not spend an evening without the pastime then common to all european society : a supper with champagne in some profusion and bowl of negus be prepare in another chamber : the large assembly - room be set apart for the dance , of which enjoyment Harry Warrington 's guest partook in our ancestor ' homely fashion . I can not fancy that the amusement be especially lively . first , minuet be call , two or three of which be perform by as many couple . the spinster of the high rank in the assembly go out for the minuet , and my Lady Maria Esmond , be an earl 's daughter , and the person of the high rank present   with the exception of Lady Augusta Crutchley , who be lame , Mr. Warrington dance the first minuet with his cousin , acquit himself to the satisfaction of the whole room , and perform much more elegantly than Mr. Wolfe , who stand up with Miss Lowther . have complete the dance with Lady Maria , Mr. Warrington beg Miss Theo to do he the honour of walk the next minuet , and accordingly Miss Theo , blush and look very happy , go through her exercise to the great delight of her parent and the rage of Miss Humpleby , Sir John Humpleby 's daughter , of Liphook , who expect , at least , to have stand up next after my Lady Maria . then , after the minuet , come country dance , the music be perform by a harp , fiddle , and flageolet , perch in a little balcony , and thrum through the evening rather feeble and melancholy tune . take up an old book of music , and play a few of those tune now , and one wonder how people at any time could have find the air otherwise than melancholy . and yet they love and frisk and laugh and court to that sad accompaniment . there be scarce one of the air that have not an amari aliquid , a tang of sadness . perhaps it be because they be old and defunct , and their plaintive echo call out to we from the limbo of the past , whither they have be consign for this century . perhaps they be gay when they be alive ; and our descendant when they hear well , never mind name when they hear the work of certain maestri now popular , will say : Bon Dieu , be this the music which amuse our forefather ? 
 Mr. Warrington have the honour of a duchess 's company at his tea - drink Colonel Lambert 's and Mr. Prior 's heroine , the Duchess of Queensberry . and though the duchess carefully turn she back upon a countess who be present , laugh loudly , glance at the latter over her shoulder , and point at she with her fan , yet almost all the company push , and bow , and cringe , and smile , and back before this countess , scarcely take any notice of her Grace of Queensberry and her joke , and her fan , and her air . now this countess be no other than the Countess of Yarmouth - Walmoden , the lady whom his Majesty George the Second , of Great Britain , France , and Ireland , King , Defender of the Faith , delight to honour . she have meet Harry Warrington in the walk that morning , and have be mighty gracious to the young Virginian . she have tell he they would have a game at card that night ; and purblind old Colonel Blinkinsop , who fancy the invitation have be address to he , have make the profoundest of bow . " Pooh ! pooh ! " say the Countess of England and Hanover , " I do not   mean you . I mean the young Firshinian ! " and everybody congratulate the youth on his good fortune . at night , all the world , in order to show their loyalty , doubtless , throng round my Lady Yarmouth ; my Lord Bamborough be eager to make her parti at quadrille . my Lady Blanche Pendragon , that model of virtue ; Sir Lancelot Quintain , that pattern of knighthood and valour ; Mr. Dean of Ealing , that exemplary divine and preacher ; numerous gentleman , nobleman , general , colonel , matron , and spinster of the high rank , be on the watch for a smile from she , or eager to jump up and join her card - table . Lady Maria wait upon she with meek respect , and Madame de Bernstein treat the hanoverian lady with profound gravity and courtesy . 
 Harry 's bow have be no low than hospitality require ; but , such as it be , Miss Hester choose to be indignant with it . she scarce speak a word to her partner during their dance together ; and when he take she to the supper - room for refreshment she be little more communicative . to enter that room they have to pass by Madame Walmoden 's card - table , who good - naturedly call out to her host as he be pass , and ask he if his " breddy liddle bardner like tanze ? " 
 " I thank your ladyship , I do not   like tanze , and I do not   like card , " say Miss Hester , toss up her head ; and , drop a curtsey like a " cheese , " she strut away from the Countess 's table . 
 Mr. Warrington be very much offended . sarcasm from the young to the old pain he : flippant behaviour towards himself hurt he . courteous in his simple way to all person whom he meet , he expect a like politeness from they . Hetty perfectly well know what offence she be give ; could mark the displeasure redden on her partner 's honest face , with a sidelong glance of her eye ; nevertheless she try to wear her most ingenuous smile ; and , as she come up to the sideboard where the refreshment be set , artlessly say : 
 " what a horrid , vulgar old woman that be ; do not   you think so ? " 
 " what woman ? " ask the young man . 
 " that german woman my Lady Yarmouth to whom all the man be bow and cringe . " 
 " her ladyship have be very kind to I , " say Harry , grimly . " will not   you have some of this custard ? " 
 " and you have be bow to she , too ! you look as if your negus be not nice , " harmlessly continue Miss Hetty . 
 " it be not very good negus , " say Harry , with a gulp . 
 " and the custard be bad too ! I declare ' tis make with bad egg ! " cry Miss Lambert . 
 " I wish , Hester , that the entertainment and the company have be well to your liking , " say poor Harry . 
 " ' tis very unfortunate ; but I dare say you could not help it , " cry the young woman , toss her little curly head . 
 Mr. Warrington groan in spirit , perhaps in body , and clench his fist and his tooth . the little torturer artlessly continue , " you seem disturbed : shall we go to my mamma ? " 
 " yes , let we go to your mamma , " cry Mr. Warrington , with glare eye and a " curse you , why be you always stand in the way ? " to an unlucky waiter . 
 " La ! be that the way you speak in Virginia ? " ask Miss Pertness . 
 " we be rough there sometimes , madam , and can not   help be disturb , " he say slowly , and with a quiver in his whole frame , look down upon she with fire flash out of his eye . Hetty see nothing distinctly afterwards , and until she come to her mother . never have she see Harry look so handsome or so noble . 
 " you look pale , child ! " cry mamma , anxious , like all pavidae matre . 
 " ' tis the cold no , I mean the heat . thank you , Mr. Warrington . " and she make he a faint curtsey , as Harry bow a tremendous bow , and walk elsewhere amongst his guest . he hardly know what be happen at first , so angry be he . 
 he be arouse by another altercation , between his aunt and the Duchess of Queensberry . when the royal favourite pass the Duchess , her grace give her ladyship an awful stare out of eye that be not so bright now as they have be in the young day when they ' set the world on fire ; " turn round with an affected laugh to her neighbour , and shoot at the jolly hanoverian lady a ceaseless fire of giggle and sneer . the Countess pursue her game at card , not know , or not choose , perhaps , to know how her enemy be gibe at she . there have be a feud of many year ' date between their Graces of Queensberry and the family on the throne . 
 " how you all bow down to the idol ! do not   tell I ! you be as bad as the rest , my good Madame Bernstein ! " the Duchess say . " ah , what a true christian country this be ! and how your dear first husband , the Bishop , would have like to see such a sight ! " 
 " forgive I , if I fail quite to understand your grace . " 
 " we be both of we grow old , my good Bernstein , or , perhaps , we will not   understand when we do not   choose to understand . that be the way with we woman , my good young Iroquois . " 
 " your grace remark , that it be a christian country , " say Madame de Bernstein , " and I fail to perceive the point of the remark . " 
 " indeed , my good creature , there be very little point in it ! I mean we be such good Christians , because we be so forgiving . do not   you remember reading , when you be young , or your husband the Bishop reading , when he be in the pulpit , how when a woman amongst the Jews be catch do wrong , the Pharisees be for stone she out of hand ? far from stone such a woman now , look , how fond we be of she ! any man in this room would go round it on his knee if yonder woman bid he . yes , Madame Walmoden , you may look up from your card with your great paint face , and frown with your great paint eyebrow at I . you know I be talk about you ; and intend to go on talk about you , too . I say any man here would go round the room on his knee , if you bade he ! " 
 " I think , madam , I know two or three who would not ! " say Mr. Warrington , with some spirit . 
 " Quick , let I hug they to my heart of heart ! " cry the old duchess . " which be they ? bring them to I , my dear Iroquois ! let we have a game of four of honest man and woman ; that be to say , if we can find a couple more partner , Mr. Warrington ! " 
 " here be we three , " say the Baroness Bernstein , with a forced laugh ; " let we play a dummy . " 
 " pray , madam , where be the third ? " ask the old Duchess , look round . 
 " Madam ! " cry out the other elderly lady , " I leave your grace to boast of your honesty , which I have no doubt be spotless : but I will thank you not to doubt mine before my own relative and child ! " 
 " see how she fire up at a word ! I be sure , my dear creature , you be quite as honest as most of the company , " say the Duchess . 
 " which may not be good enough for her grace the Duchess of Queensberry and Dover , who , to be sure , might have stay away in such a case , but it be the good my nephew could get , madam , and his good he have give you . you look astonish , Harry , my dear and well you may . he be not use to our way , madam . " 
 " Madam , he have find an aunt who can teach he our way , and a great deal more ! " cry the Duchess , rap her fan . 
 " she will teach he to try and make all his guest welcome , old or young , rich or poor . that be the virginian way , be not   it , Harry ? she will tell he , when Catherine Hyde be angry with his old aunt , that they be friend as girl , and ought not to quarrel now they be old woman . and she will not be wrong , will she , Duchess ? " and herewith the one dowager make a superb curtsey to the other , and the battle just impend between they pass away . 
 " egad , it be like Byng and Galissoniere ! " cry Chaplain Sampson , as Harry talk over the night 's transaction with his tutor next morning . " no power on earth , I think , could have prevent those two from go into action ! " 
 " seventy - four at least both of them ! " laugh Harry . 
 " but the Baroness decline the battle , and sail out of fire with inimitable skill . " 
 " why should she be afraid ? I have hear you say my aunt be as witty as any woman alive , and need fear the tongue of no dowager in England . " 
 " Hem ! perhaps she have good reason for be peaceable ! " Sampson know very well what they be , and that poor Bernstein 's reputation be so hopelessly flawed and crack , that any sarcasm level at Madame Walmoden be equally applicable to she . 
 " Sir , " cry Harry , in great amazement , " you do not   mean to say there be anything against the character of my aunt , the Baroness de Bernstein ! " 
 the chaplain look at the young Virginian with such an air of utter wonderment , that the latter see there must be some history against his aunt , and some charge which Sampson do not choose to reveal . " good heaven ! " Harry groan out , " be there two then in the family , who be ? " 
 " which two ? " ask the chaplain . 
 but here Harry stop , blush very red . he remember , and we shall presently have to state , whence he have get his information regard the other family culprit , and bite his lip , and be silent . 
 " Bygones be always unpleasant thing , Mr. Warrington , " say the chaplain ; " and we have well hold our peace regard they . no man or woman can live long in this wicked world of our without some scandal attach to they , and I fear our excellent Baroness have be no more fortunate than her neighbour . we can not escape calumny , my dear young friend ! you have have sad proof enough of that in your brief stay amongst we . but we can have clear conscience , and that be the main point ! " and herewith the chaplain throw his handsome eye upward , and try to look as if his conscience be as white as the ceiling . 
 " have there be anything very wrong , then , about my Aunt Bernstein ? " continue Harry , remember how at home his mother have never speak of the Baroness . 
 " o sancta simplicita ! " the chaplain mutter to himself . " story , my dear sir , much old than your time or mine . story such as be tell about everybody , de I , de te ; you know with what degree of truth in your own case . " 
 " confound the villain ! I should like to hear any scoundrel say a word against the dear old lady , " cry the young gentleman . " why , this world , parson , be full of lie and scandal ! " 
 " and you be just begin to find it out , my dear sir , " cry the clergyman , with his most beatified air . " whose character have not be attack ? my lord 's , your , mine , every one 's . we must bear as well as we can , and pardon to the utmost of our power . " 
 " you may . it be your cloth , you know ; but , by George , I will not ! " cry Mr. Warrington , and again go down the fist with a thump on the table . " let any fellow say a word in my hearing against that dear old creature , and I will pull his nose , as sure as my name be Harry Esmond . how do you do , Colonel Lambert ? you find we late again , sir . I and his reverence keep it up pretty late with some of the young fellow , after the lady go away . I hope the dear lady be well , sir ? " and here Harry rise , greet his friend the Colonel very kindly , who have come to pay he a morning visit , and have enter the room follow by Mr. Gumbo   the latter preferred walking very leisurely about all the affair of life , just as Harry suit the action to the word be tweak the nose of Calumny . 
 " the lady be purely . whose nose be you pull when I come in , Mr. Warrington ? " say the Colonel , laugh . 
 " be not   it a shame , sir ? the parson , here , be tell I that there be villain here who attack the character of my aunt , the Baroness of Bernstein ! " 
 " you do not   mean to say so ! " cry Mr. Lambert . 
 " I tell Mr. Harry that everybody be calumniate ! " say the chaplain , with a clerical intonation ; but , at the same time , he look at Colonel Lambert and wink , as much as to say , " he know nothing keep he in the dark . " 
 the Colonel take the hint . " yes , " say he , " the jaw of slander be for ever wag . witness that story about the dancing - girl , that we all believe against you , Harry Warrington . " 
 " what , all , sir ? " 
 " no , not all . one do not   Hetty do not . you should have hear she stand up for you , Harry , t'other day , when somebody a little bird bring we another story about you ; about a game at card on Sunday morning , when you and a friend of yours might have be well employ . " and here there be a look of mingle humour and reproof at the clergyman . 
 " Faith , I own it , sir ! " say the chaplain . " it be mea culpa , mea maxima no , mea minima culpa , only the rehearsal of an old game at piquet , which we have be talk over . " 
 " and do Miss Hester stand up for I ? " say Harry . 
 " Miss Hester do . but why that wonder look ? " ask the Colonel . 
 " she scold I last night like like anything , " say downright Harry . " I never hear a young girl go on so . she make fun of everybody hit about at young and old so that I could not   help tell she , sir , that in our country , leastway in Virginia   they say the Yankees be very pert , young people do not   speak of their elder so . and , do you know , sir , we have a sort of a quarrel , and I be very glad you have   tell I she speak kindly of I , " say Harry , shake his friend 's hand , a ready boyish emotion glow in his cheek and in his eye . 
 " you will not   come to much hurt if you find no bad enemy than Hester , Mr. Warrington , " say the girl 's father , gravely , look not without a deep thrill of interest at the flushed face and moist eye of his young friend . " be he fond of she ? " think the Colonel . " and how fond ? ' tis evident he know nothing , and Miss Het have be perform some of her trick . he be a fine , honest lad , and God bless he ! " and Colonel Lambert look towards Harry with that manly , friendly kindness which our lucky young Virginian be not unaccustomed to inspire , for he be comely to look at , prone to blush , to kindle , nay , to melt , at a kind story . his laughter be cheery to hear : his eye shine confidently : his voice speak truth . 
 " and the young lady of the minuet ? she distinguish herself to perfection : the whole room admire , " ask the courtly chaplain . " I trust Miss Miss " 
 " Miss Theodosia be perfectly well , and ready to dance at this minute with your reverence , " say her father . " or stay , Chaplain , perhaps you only dance on Sunday ? " the Colonel then turn to Harry again . " you pay your court very neatly to the great lady , Mr. Flatterer . my Lady Yarmouth have be trumpet your praise at the Pump Room . she say she have get a leedel boy in Hannover dat be wery like you , and you be a sharme young man . " 
 " if her ladyship be a queen , people could scarcely be more respectful to she , " say the chaplain . 
 " let we call she a vice - queen , parson , " say the Colonel , with a twinkle of his eye . 
 " her Majesty pocket forty of my guineas at quadrille , " cry Mr. Warrington , with a laugh . 
 " she will play you on the same term another day . the Countess be fond of play , and she win from most people , " say the Colonel , drily . " why do not   you bet her ladyship five thousand on a bishopric , parson ? I have hear of a clergyman who make such a bet , and who lose it , and who pay it , and who get the bishopric . 
 " ah ! who will lend I the five thousand ? will you , sir ? ask the chaplain . 
 " no , sir ! I will not   give she five thousand to be make Commander - in - Chief or Pope of Rome , " say the Colonel , stoutly . " I shall fle no stone at the woman ; but I shall bow no knee to she , as I see a pack of rascal do . no offence I do not   mean you . and I do not   mean Harry Warrington , who be quite right to be civil to she , and to lose his money with good - humour . Harry , I be come to bid thee farewell , my boy . we have have our pleasuring my money be run out , and we must jog back to Oakhurst . will you ever come and see the old place again ? " 
 " now , sir , now ! I will ride back with you ! " cry Harry , eagerly . 
 " why no not now , " say the Colonel , in a hurried manner . " we have not   get room that be , we be we be expect some friend . "   " the Lord forgive I for the lie ! " he mutter .   " but but you will come to we when when Tom be at home yes , when Tom be at home . that will be famous fun and I would have you to know , sir , that my wife and I love you sincerely , sir and so do the girl , however much they scold you . and if you ever be in a scrape and such thing have happen , Mr. Chaplain ! you will please to count upon I . mind that , sir ! " 
 and the Colonel be for take leave of Harry then and there , on the spot , but the young man follow he down the stair , and insist upon say good - bye to his dear lady . 
 instead , however , of proceed immediately to Mr. Lambert 's lodging , the two gentleman take the direction of the common , where , look from Harry 's window , Mr. Sampson see the pair in earnest conversation . first , Lambert smile and look roguish . then , presently , at a farth stage of the talk , he fling up both his hand and perform other gesture indicate surprise and agitation . 
 " the boy be tell he , " think the chaplain . when Mr. Warrington come back in an hour , he find his reverence deep in the composition of a sermon . Harry 's face be grave and melancholy ; he fling down his hat , bury himself in a great chair , and then come from his lip something like an execration . 
 " the young lady be go , and our heart be affect ? " say the chaplain , look up from his manuscript . 
 " heart ! " sneer Harry . 
 " which of the young lady be the conqueror , sir ? I think the young 's eye follow you about at your ball . " 
 " confound the little termagant ! " break out Harry . " what do she mean by be so pert to I ? she treat I as if I be a fool ! " 
 " and no man be , sir , with a woman ! " say the scribe of the sermon . 
 " be not   they , Chaplain ? " and Harry growl out more naughty word expressive of inward disquiet . 
 " by the way , have you hear anything of your lose property ? " ask the chaplain , presently look up from his page . 
 Harry say " no ! " with another word , which I would not print for the world . 
 " I begin to suspect , sir , that there be more money than you like to own in that book . I wish I could find some . " 
 " there be note in it , " say Harry , very gloomily , " and and paper that I be very sorry to lose . what the deuce have come of it ? I have it when we din together . " 
 " I see you put it in your pocket , " cry the chaplain . " I see you take it out and pay at the toy - shop a bill for a gold thimble and workbox for one of your young lady . of course you have ask there , sir ? " 
 " of course I have , " say Mr. Warrington , plunge in melancholy . 
 " Gumbo put you to bed at least , if I remember right . I be so cut myself that I scarce remember anything . can you trust those black fellow , sir ? " 
 " I can trust he with my head . with my head ? " groan out Mr. Warrington , bitterly . , " I can not   trust myself with it . " 
 " ' oh , that a man should put an enemy into his mouth to steal away his brain ! ' " 
 " you may well call it an enemy , Chaplain . hang it , I have a great mind to make a vow never to drink another drop ! a fellow say anything when he be in drink . " 
 the chaplain laugh . " you , sir , " he say , " be close enough ! " and the truth be , that , for the last few day , no amount of wine would unseal Mr. Warrington 's lip , when the artless Sampson by chance touch on the subject of his patron 's loss . 
 " and so the little country nymph be go , or go , sir ? " ask the chaplain . " they be nice , fresh little thing ; but I think the mother be the fine woman of the three . I declare , a woman at five - and - thirty or so be at her prime . what do you say , sir ? " 
 Mr. Warrington look , for a moment , askance at the clergyman . " confound all woman , I say ! " mutter the young misogynist . for which sentiment every well - condition person will surely rebuke he . 




 CHAPTER XXXV . entanglement 

 our good Colonel have , no doubt , take counsel with his good wife , and they have determine to remove their little Hetty as speedily as possible out of the reach of the charmer . in complaint such as that under which the poor little maiden be suppose to be suffer , the remedy of absence and distance often act effectually with man ; but I believe woman be not so easily cure by the alibi treatment . some of they will go away ever so far , and forever so long , and the obstinate disease hang by they , spite of distance or climate . you may whip , abuse , torture , insult they , and still the little delude creature will persist in their fidelity . Nay , if I may speak , after profound and extensive study and observation , there be few well way of secure the faithfulness and admiration of the beautiful partner of our existence than a little judicious ill - treatment , a brisk dose of occasional violence as an alterative , and , for general and wholesome diet , a cooling but pretty constant neglect . at spar interval administer small quantity of love and kindness ; but not every day , or too often , as this medicine , much take , lose its effect . those dear creature who be the most indifferent to their husband , be those who be cloy by too much surfeiting of the sugar - plum and lollipop of Love . I have know a young being , with every wish gratify , yawn in her adore husband 's face , and prefer the conversation and petit soin of the mere booby and idiot ; whilst , on the other hand , I have see Chloe , at whom Strephon have fling his bootjack in the morning , or whom he have curse before the servant at dinner , come creep and fondle to his knee at tea - time , when he be comfortable after his little nap and his good wine ; and pat his head and play he his favourite tune ; and , when old John , the butler , or old Mary , the maid , come in with the bed - candle , look round proudly , as much as to say , now , John , look how good my dear Henry be ! make your game , gentleman , then ! there be the coax , fondling , adore line , when you be henpecke , and Louisa be indifferent , and bore out of her existence . there be the manly , selfish , effectual system , where she answer to the whistle and come in at " Down charge ; " and know her master ; and frisk and fawn about he ; and nuzzle at his knee ; and " lick the hand that be raise " that be raise to do she good , as   I quote from memory   Mr. Pope finely observe . what use the late lament O'Connell to say , over whom a grateful country have raise such a magnificent testimonial ? " hereditary bondsman , " he use to remark , " know ye not , who would be free , themselves must strike the blow ? " of course you must , in political as in domestic circle . so up with your cudgel , my enslave , injured boy ! 
 woman will be pleased with these remark , because they have such a taste for humour and understand irony ; and I should not be surprised if young Grubstreet , who correspond with three penny paper and describe the person and conversation of gentleman whom he meet at his " club , " will say , " I tell you so ! he advocate the thrashing of woman ! he have no nobility of soul ! he have no heart ! " nor have I , my eminent young Grubstreet ! any more than you have ear . dear lady ! I assure you I be only joke in the above remark , I do not advocate the thrashing of your sex at all , and , as you can not   understand the commonest bit of fun , beg leave flatly to tell you , that I consider your sex a hundred time more loving and faithful than our . 
 so , what be the use of Hetty 's parent take her home , if the little maid intend to be just as fond of Harry absent as of Harry present ? why not let she see he before Ball and Dobbin be put to , and say , " good - bye , Harry ! I be very wilful and fractious last night , and you be very kind : but good - bye , Harry ! " she will show no special emotion : she be so ashamed of her secret , that she will not betray it . Harry be too much preoccupied to discover it for himself . he do not know what grief be lie behind Hetty 's glance , or hide under the artifice of her innocent young smile . he have , perhaps , a care of his own . he will part from she calmly , and fancy she be happy to get back to her music and her poultry and her flower - garden . 
 he do not even ride part of the way homeward by the side of his friend 's carriage . he have some other party arrange for , that afternoon , and when he return thence , the good Lamberts be go from Tunbridge Wells . there be their window open , and the card in one of they signify that the apartment be once more to let . a little pass sorrow at the blank aspect of the room lately enliven by countenance so frank and friendly , may have cross the young gentleman 's mind ; but he din at the White Horse at four o'clock , and eat his dinner and call fiercely for his bottle . poor little hester will choke over her tea about the same hour when the lambert arrive to sleep at the house of their friend at Westerham . the young rose will be wan in her cheek in the morning , and there will be black circle round her eye . it be the thunder : the night be hot : she could not sleep : she will be well when she get home again the next day . and home they come . there be the gate where he fall . there be the bed he lie in , the chair in which he use to sit what age seem to have pass ! what a gulf between to - day and yesterday ! who be that little child call her chicken , or water her rose yonder ? be she and that girl the same Hester Lambert ? why , she be ever so much old than Theo now Theo , who have always be so composed , and so clever , and so old for her age . but in a night or two hester have live oh , long , long year ! so have many beside : and poppy and mandragora will never medicine they to the sweet sleep they taste yesterday . 
 Maria Esmond see the lambert cavalcade drive away , and feel a grim relief . she look with hot eye at Harry when he come into his aunt 's card - table , flush with Barbeau 's good wine . he laugh , rattle in reply to his aunt , who ask he which of the girl be his sweetheart ? he gaily say he love they both like sister . he have never see a well gentleman , nor well people , than the lambert . why be Lambert not a general ? he have be a most distinguished officer : his Royal Highness the Duke be very fond of he . Madame Bernstein say that Harry must make interest with Lady Yarmouth for his protege . 
 " Elle ravvole de fous , cher bedid anche ! " say Madame Bernstein , mimic the Countess 's german accent . the Baroness be delighted with her boy 's success . " you carry off the heart of all the old woman , do not   he , Maria ? " she say , with a sneer at her niece , who quiver under the stab . 
 " you be quite right , my dear , not to perceive that she cheat at card , and you play like a grand seigneur , " continue Madame de Bernstein . 
 " do she cheat ? " cry Harry , astonish . " I be sure , ma'am , I see no unfair play . " 
 " no more do I , my dear , but I be sure she cheat . Bah ! every woman cheat , I and Maria include , when we can get a chance . but when you play with the Walmoden , you do not   do wrong to lose in moderation ; and many man cheat in that way . cultivate she . she have take a fancy to your beaux yeux . why should your Excellency not be Governor of Virginia , sir ? you must go and pay your respect to the Duke and his Majesty at Kensington . the Countess of Yarmouth will be your good friend at court . " 
 " why should you not introduce I , aunt ? " ask Harry . 
 the old lady 's rouge cheek grow a little redder . " I be not in favour at Kensington , " she say . " I may have be once ; and there be no face so unwelcome to king as those they wish to forget . all of we want to forget something or somebody . I dare say our ingenu here would like to wipe a sum or two off the slate . wouldst thou not , Harry ? " 
 Harry turn red , too , and so do Maria , and his aunt laugh one of those wicked laugh which be not altogether pleasant to hear . what mean those guilty signal on the cheek of her nephew and niece ? what account be score upon the memory of either , which they be desirous to efface ? I fear Madame Bernstein be right , and that most folk have some ugly reckoning write up on their conscience , which we be glad to be quit of . 
 have Maria know one of the cause of Harry 's disquiet , the middle - aged spinster would have be more unquiet still . for some day he have miss a pocket - book . he have remember it in his possession on that day when he drink so much claret at the White Horse , and Gumbo carry he to bed . he seek for it in the morning , but none of his servant have see it . he have inquire for it at the White Horse , but there be no trace of it . he could not cry the book , and could only make very cautious inquiry respect it . he must not have it know that the book be lose . a pretty condition of mind Lady Maria Esmond would be in , if she know that the outpouring of her heart be in the hand of the public ! the letter contain all sort of disclosure : a hundred family secret be narrate by the artless correspondent : there be ever so much satire and abuse of person with whom she and Mr. Warrington come in contact . there be expostulation about his attention to other lady . there be scorn , scandal , joke , appeal , protest of eternal fidelity ; the usual farrago , dear madam , which you may remember you write to your Edward , when you be engage to he , and before you become Mrs. Jones . would you like those letter to be read by any one else ? do you recollect what you say about the Miss Browns in two or three of those letter , and the unfavourable opinion you express of Mrs. Thompson 's character ? do you happen to recall the word which you use regard Jones himself , whom you subsequently marry   for in consequence of dispute about the settlement your engagement with Edward be break off ? and would you like Mr. J. to see those remark ? you know you would not . then be pleased to withdraw that imputation which you have already cast in your mind upon Lady Maria Esmond . no doubt her letter be very foolish , as most love - letter be , but it do not follow that there be anything wrong in they . they be foolish when write by young folk to one another , and how much more foolish when write by an old man to a young lass , or by an old lass to a young lad ! no wonder Lady Maria should not like her letter to be read . why , the very spelling but that do not   matter so much in her ladyship 's day , and people be just as foolish now , though they spell well . no , it be not the spelling which matter so much ; it be the writing at all . I for one , and for the future , be determined never to speak or write my mind out regard anything or anybody . I intend to say of every woman that she be chaste and handsome ; of every man that he be handsome , clever , and rich ; of every book that it be delightfully interesting ; of Snobmore 's manner that they be gentlemanlike ; of Screwby 's dinner that they be luxurious ; of Jawkins 's conversation that it be lively and amusing ; of Xantippe , that she have a sweet temper ; of Jezebel , that her colour be natural ; of Bluebeard , that he really be most indulgent to his wife , and that very likely they die of bronchitis . what ? a word against the spotless Messalina ? what an unfavourable view of human nature ! what ? King Cheops be not a perfect monarch ? oh , you railer at royalty and slanderer of all that be noble and good ! when this book be conclude , I shall change the jaundiced livery which my book have wear since I begin to lisp in number , have rise - colour coat for they with cherub on the cover , and all the character within shall be perfect angel . 
 meanwhile we be in a society of man and woman , from whose shoulder no sort of wing have sprout as yet , and who , without any manner of doubt , have their little failing . there be Madame Bernstein : she have fall asleep after dinner , and eat and drink too much , those be her ladyship 's little failing . Mr. Harry Warrington have go to play a match at billiard with Count Caramboli : I suspect idleness be his failing . that be what Mr. Chaplain Sampson remark to Lady Maria , as they be talk together in a low tone , so as not to interrupt Aunt Bernstein 's doze in the neighbouring room . 
 " a gentleman of Mr. Warrington 's mean can afford to be idle , " say Lady Maria . " why , sure you love card and billiard yourself , my good Mr. Sampson ? " 
 " I do not   say , madam , my practice be good , only my doctrine be sound , " say Mr. Chaplain with a sigh . " this young gentleman should have some employment . he should appear at court , and enter the service of his country , as befit a man of his station . he should settle down , and choose a woman of a suitable rank as his wife . " Sampson look in her ladyship 's face as he speak . 
 " indeed , my cousin be waste his time , " say Lady Maria , blush slightly . 
 " Mr. Warrington might see his relative of his father 's family , " suggest Mr. Chaplain . 
 " Suffolk country booby drink beer and halloo after fox ! I do not   see anything to be gain by his frequent they , Mr. Sampson ! " 
 " they be of an ancient family , of which the chief have be knight of the shire these hundred year , " say the chaplain . " I have hear Sir Miles hath a daughter of Mr. Harry 's age and beauty , too . " 
 " I know nothing , sir , about Sir Miles Warrington , and his daughter , and his beauty ! " cry Maria , in a fluster . 
 " the Baroness stir no her ladyship be in a sweet sleep , " say the chaplain , in a very soft voice . " I fear , madam , for your ladyship 's cousin , Mr. Warrington . I fear for his youth ; for design person who may get about he ; for extravagance , folly , intrigue even into which he will be lead , and into which everybody will try to tempt he . his lordship , my kind patron , bid I to come and watch over he , and I be here accordingly , as your ladyship knoweth . I know the folly of young man . perhaps I have practise they myself . I own it with a blush , " add Mr. Sampson with much unction not , however , bring the promise blush forward to corroborate the asserted repentance . 
 " between ourselves , I fear Mr. Warrington be in some trouble now , madam , " continue the chaplain , steadily look at Lady Maria . 
 " what , again ? " shriek the lady . 
 " Hush ! your ladyship 's dear invalid ! " whisper the chaplain again point towards Madame Bernstein . " do you think your cousin have any partiality for any any member of Mr. Lambert 's family ? for example , Miss Lambert ? " 
 " there be nothing between he and Miss Lambert , " say Lady Maria . 
 " your ladyship be certain ? " 
 " woman be say to have good eye in such matter , my good Sampson , " say my lady , with an easy air . " I think the little girl seem to be follow he . " 
 " then I be at fault once more , " the frank chaplain say . " Mr. Warrington say of the young lady , that she ought to go back to her doll , and call she a pert , stuck - up little hussy . " 
 " ah ! " sigh Lady Maria , as if relieve by the news . 
 " then , madam , there must be somebody else , " say the chaplain . " have he confide nothing to your ladyship ? " 
 " to I , Mr. Sampson ? what ? where ? how ? " exclaim Maria . 
 " some six day ago , after we have be din at the White Horse , and drink too freely , Mr. Warrington lose a pocket - book contain letter . " 
 " letter ? " gasp Lady Maria . 
 " and probably more money than he like to own , " continue Mr. Sampson , with a grave nod of the head . " he be very much disturb about the book . we have both make cautious inquiry about it . we have gracious power , be your ladyship ill ? " 
 here my Lady Maria give three remarkably shrill scream , and tumble off her chair . 
 " I will see the Prince . I have a right to see he . what be this ? where be I ? what be the matter ? " cry Madame Bernstein , wake up from her sleep . she have be dream of old day , no doubt . the old lady shake in all her limb her face be very much flushed . she star about wildly a moment , and then totter forward on her tortoiseshell cane . " what what be the matter ? " she ask again . " have you kill she , sir ? " 
 " some sudden qualm must have come over her ladyship . shall I cut her lace , madam ? or send for a doctor ? " cry the chaplain , with every look of innocence and alarm . 
 " what have pass between you , sir ? " ask the old lady , fiercely . 
 " I give you my honour , madam , I have do I do not   know what . I but mention that Mr. Warrington have lose a pocket - book contain letter , and my lady swoon , as you see . " 
 Madame Bernstein dash water on her niece 's face . a feeble moan tell presently that the lady be come to herself . 
 the Baroness look sternly after Mr. Sampson , as she send he away on his errand for the doctor . her aunt 's grim countenance be of little comfort to poor Maria when she see it on wake up from her swoon . 
 " what have happen ? " ask the young lady , bewildered and gasp . 
 " H'm ! you know well what have happen , madam , I suppose . what hath happen before in our family ? " cry the old Baroness , glare at her niece with savage eye . 
 " ah , yes ! the letter have be lose ach lieber Himmel ! " and Maria , as she would sometimes do , when much move , begin to speak in the language of her mother . 
 " yes ! the seal have be break , and the letter have be lose , ' tis the old story of the Esmonds , " cry the elder , bitterly . 
 " Seal break , letter lose ? what do you mean , aunt ? " ask Maria , faintly . 
 " I mean that my mother be the only honest woman that ever enter the family ! " cry the Baroness , stamp her foot . " and she be a parson 's daughter of no family in particular , or she would have go wrong , too . good heavens ! be it decreed that we be all to be ... ? " 
 " to be what , madam ? " cry Maria . 
 " to be what my Lady Queensberry say we be last night . to be what we be ! you know the word for it ! " cry the indignant old woman . " I say , what have come to the whole race ? your father 's mother be an honest woman , Maria . why do I leave she ? why could not   you remain so ? " 
 " Madam ! " exclaim Maria , " I declare , before Heaven , I be as " 
 " bah ! do not   madam I ! do not   call heaven to witness there be nobody by ! and if you swear to your innocence till the rest of your tooth drop out of your mouth , my Lady Maria Esmond , I would not believe you ! " 
 " ah ! it be you tell he ! " gasp Maria . she recognise an arrow out of her aunt 's quiver . 
 " I see some folly go on between you and the boy , and I tell he that you be as old as his mother . yes , I do ! do you suppose I be go to let Henry Esmond 's boy fle himself and his wealth away upon such a battered old rock as you ? the boy shall not   be rob and cheat in our family . not a shilling of mine shall any of you have if he come to any harm amongst you . 
 " ah ! you tell he ! " cry Maria , with a sudden burst of rebellion . " well , then ! I would have you to know that I do not   care a penny , madam , for your paltry money ! I have Mr. Harry Warrington 's word yes , and his letter and I know he will die rather than break it . " 
 " he will die if he keep it ! "   Maria shrug her shoulder . 
 " but you do not   care for that you have   no more heart " 
 " than my father 's sister , madam ! " cry Maria again . the young woman , ordinarily submissive , have turn upon here persecutor . 
 " ah ! why do not I marry an honest man ? " say the of lady , shake her head sadly . " Henry Esmond be noble and good , and perhaps might have make I so . but no , no we have all get the taint in we all ! you do not   mean to sacrifice this boy , Maria ? " 
 " Madame ma tante , do you take I for a fool at my age ? " ask Maria . 
 " set he free ! I will give you five thousand pound in my in my will , Maria . I will , on my honour ! " 
 " when you be young , and you like Colonel Esmond , you throw he aside for an earl , and the earl for a duke ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " eh ! Bon sing ne peut mentir ! I have no money , I have no friend . my father be a spendthrift , my brother be a beggar . I have Mr. Warrington 's word , and I know , madam , he will keep it . and that be what I tell your ladyship ! " cry Lady Maria with a wave of her hand . " suppose my letter be publish to all the world to - morrow ? apre ? I know they contain thing I would as lieve not tell . thing not about I alone . comment ! do you suppose there be no story but mine in the family ? it be not my letter that I be afraid of , so long as I have his , madam . yes , his and his word , and I trust they both . " 
 " I will send to my merchant , and give you the money now , Maria , " plead the old lady . 
 " no , I shall have my pretty Harry , and ten time five thousand pound ! " cry Maria . 
 " not till his mother 's death , madam , who be just your age ! " 
 " we can afford to wait , aunt . at my age , as you say , I be not so eager as young chit for a husband . " 
 " but to wait my sister 's death , at least , be a drawback ? " 
 " offer I ten thousand pound , Madam Tusher , and then we will see ! " cry Maria . 
 " I have not so much money in the world , Maria , " say the old lady . 
 " then , madam , let I make what I can for myself ! " say Maria . 
 " ah , if he hear you ? " 
 " Apres ? I have his word . I know he will keep it . I can afford to wait , madam , " and she fling out of the room , just as the chaplain return . it be Madame Bernstein who want cordial now . she be immensely move and shock by the news which have be thus suddenly bring to she . 




 CHAPTER XXXVI . which seem to mean Mischief 

 though she have clearly have the bad of the battle describe in the last chapter , the Baroness Bernstein , when she next meet her niece show no rancour or anger . " of course , my Lady Maria , " she say , " you can not   suppose that I , as Harry Warrington 's near relative , can be pleased at the idea of his marry a woman who be as old as his mother , and have not a penny to her fortune ; but if he choose to do so silly a thing , the affair be none of mine ; and I doubt whether I should have be much inclined to be take au serieux with regard to that offer of five thousand pound which I make in the heat of our talk . so it be already at Castlewood that this pretty affair be arrange ? have I know how far it have go , my dear , I should have spar some needless opposition . when a pitcher be break , what railing can mend it ? " 
 " Madam ! " here interpose Maria . 
 " pardon I I mean nothing against your ladyship 's honour or character , which , no doubt , be quite safe . Harry say so , and you say so what more can one ask ? " 
 " you have talk to Mr. Warrington , madam ? " 
 " and he have own that he make you a promise at Castlewood : that you have it in his writing . " 
 " certainly I have , madam ! " say Lady Maria . 
 " ah ! "   the eld lady do not wince at this . " and I own , too , that at first I put a wrong construction upon the tenor of your letter to he . they implicate other member of the family " 
 " who have speak most wickedly of I , and endeavour to prejudice I in every way in my dear Mr. Warrington 's eye . yes , madam , I own I have write against they , to justify myself . " 
 " but , of course , be pain to think that any wretch should get possession of story to the disadvantage of our family , and make they public scandal . hence your disquiet just now . " 
 " exactly so , " say Lady Maria . " from Mr. Warrington I could have nothing conceal henceforth , and speak freely to he . but that be a very different thing from wish all the world to know the dispute of a noble family . " 
 " upon my word , Maria , I admire you , and have do you injustice . these these twenty year , let we say . " 
 " I be very glad , madam , that you end by do I justice at all , " say the niece . 
 " when I see you last night , open the ball with my nephew , can you guess what I think of , my dear ? " 
 " I really have no idea what the Baroness de Bernstein think of , " say Lady Maria , haughtily . 
 " I remember that you have perform to that very tune with the dancing - master at Kensington , my dear ! " 
 " Madam , it be an infamous calumny . " 
 " by which the poor dancing - master get a cudgelling for nothing ! " 
 " it be cruel and unkind , madam , to recall that calumny and I shall beg to decline live any long with any one who utter it , " continue Maria , with great spirit . 
 " you wish to go home ? I can fancy you will not   like Tunbridge . it will be very hot for you if those letter be find . " 
 " there be not a word against you in they , madam : about that I can make your mind easy . " 
 " so Harry say , and do your ladyship justice . well , my dear , we be tired of one another , and shall be well apart for a while . " 
 " that be precisely my own opinion , " say Lady Maria , drop a curtsey . 
 " Mr. Sampson can escort you to Castlewood . you and your maid can take a postchaise . " 
 " we can take a postchaise , and Mr. Sampson can escort I , " echo the young lady . " you see , madam , I act like a dutiful niece . " 
 " do you know , my dear , I have a notion that Sampson have get the letter ? " say the Baroness , frankly . 
 " I confess that such a notion have pass through my own mind . " 
 " and you want to go home in the chaise , and coax the letter from he ! Delilah ! well , they can be no good to I , and I trust you may get they . when will you go ? the soon the well , you say ? we be woman of the world , Maria . we only call name when we be in a passion . we do not   want each other 's company ; and we part on good term . shall we go to my Lady Yarmouth 's ? ' tis her night . there be nothing like a change of scene after one of those little nervous attack you have have , and card drive away unpleasant thought well than any doctor . " 
 Lady Maria agree to go to Lady Yarmouth 's card , and be dressed and ready first , await her aunt in the drawing - room . Madame Bernstein , as she come down , remark Maria 's door be leave open . " she have the letter upon she , " think the old lady . and the pair go off to their entertainment in their respective chair , and exhibit towards each other that charming cordiality and respect which woman can show after , and even during , the bitter quarrel . 
 that night , on their return from the Countess 's drum , Mrs. Brett , Madame Bernstein 's maid , present herself to my Lady Maria 's call , when that lady ring her hand - bell upon retire to her room . Betty , Mrs. Brett be ashamed to say , be not in a fit state to come before my lady . Betty have be a - junket and merry - making with Mr. Warrington 's black gentleman , with my Lord Bamborough 's valet , and several more lady and gentleman of that station , and the liquor Mrs. Brett be shocked to own it have prove too much for Mrs. Betty . should Mrs. Brett undress my lady ? my lady say she would undress without a maid , and give Mrs. Brett leave to withdraw . " she have the letter in her stay , " think Madame Bernstein . they have bid each other an amicable good - night on the stair . 
 Mrs. Betty have a scolding the next morning , when she come to wait on her mistress , from the closet adjoining Lady Maria 's apartment , in which Betty lie . she own , with contrition , her partiality for rum - punch , which Mr. Gumbo have the knack of brew most delicate . she take she scolding with meekness , and , have perform her usual duty about her lady 's person , retire . 
 now Betty be one of the Castlewood girl who have be so fascinated by Gumbo , and be a very good - look , blue - eyed lass , upon whom Mr. Case , Madame Bernstein 's confidential man , have also cast the eye of affection . hence , between Messrs. Gumbo and Case , there have be jealousy and even quarrel ; which have cause Gumbo , who be of a peaceful disposition , to be rather shy of the Baroness 's gentleman , the chief of whom vow he would break the bone , or have the life of Gumbo , if he persist in his attention to Mrs. Betty . 
 but on the night of the rum - punch , though Mr. Case find Gumbo and Mrs. Betty whispering in the doorway , in the cool breeze , and Gumbo would have turn pale with fear have he be able so to do , no one could be more gracious than Mr. Case . it be he who propose the bowl of punch , which be brew and drunk in Mrs. Betty 's room , and which Gumbo concoct with exquisite skill . he compliment Gumbo on his music . though a sober man ordinarily , he insist upon more and more drinking , until poor Mrs. Betty be reduce to the state which occasion her ladyship 's just censure . 
 as for Mr. Case himself , who lie out of the house , he be so ill with the punch , that he keep his bed the whole of the next day , and do not get strength to make his appearance , and wait on his lady , until supper - time ; when his mistress good - naturedly rebuke he , say that it be not often he sin in that way . 
 " why , case , I could have make oath it be you I see on horseback this morning gallop on the London road , " say Mr. Warrington , who be sup with his relative . 
 " Me ! law bless you , sir ! I be a - bed , and I think my head would come off with the aching . I eat a bit at six o'clock , and drink a deal of small beer , and I be almost my own man again now . but that Gumbo , save your honour 's presence , I will not   taste none of his punch again . " and the honest major - domo go on with his duty among the bottle and glass . 
 as they sate after their meal , Madame Bernstein be friendly enough . she prescribe strong fortifying drink for Maria , against the recurrence of her fainting fit . the lady have such attack not unfrequently . she urge she to consult her London physician , and to send up an account of her case by Harry . by Harry ! ask the lady . yes . Harry be go for two day on an errand for his aunt to London . " I do not care to tell you , my dear , that it be on business which will do he good . I wish Mr. Draper to put he into my will , and as I be go travel upon a round of visit when you and I part , I think , for security , I shall ask Mr. Warrington to take my trinket - box in his postchaise to London with he , for there have be robbery of late , and I have no fancy for be stop by highwayman . " 
 Maria look blank at the notion of the young gentleman 's departure , but hop that she might have his escort back to Castlewood , whither her eld brother have now return . " Nay , " say his aunt , " the lad hath be tie to our apron - string long enough . a day in London will do he no harm . he can perform my errand for I and be back with you by Saturday . " 
 " I would offer to accompany Mr. Warrington , but I preach on Friday before her ladyship , " say Mr. Sampson . he be anxious that my Lady Yarmouth should judge of his power as a preacher ; and Madame Bernstein have exert her influence with the king 's favourite to induce she to hear the chaplain . 
 Harry relish the notion of a rattle journey to London , and a day or two of sport there . he promise that his pistol be good , and that he would hand the diamond over in safety to the banker 's strong - room . would he occupy his aunt 's London house ? no , that would be a dreary lodge with only a housemaid and a groom in charge of it . he would go to the Star and Garter in Pall Mall , or to an inn in Covent Garden . " ah ! I have often talk over that journey , " say Harry , his countenance saddening . 
 " and with whom , sir ? " ask Lady Maria . 
 " with one who promise to make it with I , " say the young man , think , as he always do , with an extreme tenderness of the lost brother . 
 " he have more heart , my good Maria , than some of we ! " say Harry 's aunt , witness his emotion . uncontrollable gust of grief would , not unfrequently , still pass over our young man . the parting from his brother ; the scene and circumstance of George 's fall last year ; the recollection of his word , or of some excursion at home which they have plan together ; would recur to he and overcome he . " I doubt , madam , " whisper the chaplain , demurely , to Madame Bernstein , after one of these burst of sorrow , " whether some folk in England would suffer quite so much at the death of their eld brother . " 
 but , of course , this sorrow be not to be perpetual ; and we can fancy Mr. Warrington set out on his London journey eagerly enough , and very gay and happy , if it must be own , to be rid of his elderly attachment . yes . there be no help for it . at Castlewood , on one unlucky evening , he have make an offer of his heart and himself to his mature cousin , and she have accept the foolish lad 's offer . but the marriage now be out of the question . he must consult his mother . she be the mistress for life of the virginian property . of course she would refuse her consent to such a union . the thought of it be defer to a late period . meanwhile , it hang like a weight round the young man 's neck , and cause he no small remorse and disquiet . 
 no wonder that his spirit rise more gaily as he come near London , and that he look with delight from his postchaise window upon the city as he advance towards it . no highwayman stop our traveller on Blackheath . yonder be the gleam dome of Greenwich , canopy with wood . there be the famous Thames , with its countless shipping ; there actually be the Tower of London . " look , Gumbo ! there be the Tower ! " " yes , master , " say Gumbo , who have never hear of the Tower ; but Harry have , and remember how he have read about it in Howell 's Medulla , and how he and his brother use to play at the Tower , and he think with delight now , how he be actually go to see the armour and the jewel and the lion . they pass through Southwark and over that famous London Bridge , which be all cover with house like a street two year ago . now there be only a single gate leave , and that be come down . then the chaise roll through the city ; and , " look , Gumbo , that be Saint Paul 's ! " " yes , master ; Saint Paul 's , " say Gumbo , obsequiously , but little strike by the beauty of the architecture . and so by the well - know course we reach the Temple , and Gumbo and his master look up with awe at the rebel head on Temple Bar . 
 the chaise drive to Mr. Draper 's chamber in Middle Temple Lane , where Harry hand the precious box over to Mr. Draper , and a letter from his aunt , which the gentleman read with some interest seemingly , and carefully put away . he then consign the trinket - box to his strong closet , go into the adjoining room , take his clerk with he , and then be at Mr. Warrington 's service to take he to an hotel . an hotel in Covent Garden be fix upon as the good place for his residence . " I shall have to keep you for two or three day , Mr. Warrington , " the lawyer say . " I do not   think the paper which the Baroness want can be ready until then . meanwhile , I be at your service to see the town . I live out of it myself , and have a little box at Camberwell , where I shall be proud to have the honour of entertain Mr. Warrington ; but a young man , I suppose , will like his inn and his liberty well , sir ? " 
 Harry say yes , he think the inn would be good ; and the postchaise , and a clerk of Mr. Draper 's inside , be despatch to the Bedford , whither the two gentleman agree to walk on foot . 
 Mr. Draper and Mr. Warrington sit and talk for a while . the Drapers , father and son , have be lawyer time out of mind to the Esmond family , and the attorney relate to the young gentleman numerous story regard his ancestor of Castlewood . of the present Earl Mr. Draper be no long the agent : his father and his lordship have have difference , and his lordship 's business have be take elsewhere : but the Baroness be still their honoured client , and very happy indeed be Mr. Draper to think that her ladyship be so well disposed towards her nephew . 
 as they be take their hat to go out , a young clerk of the house stop his principal in the passage , and say : " if you please , sir , they paper of the Baroness be give to her ladyship 's man , Mr. Case , two day ago . " 
 " just please to mind your own business , Mr. Brown , " say the lawyer , rather sharply . " this way , Mr. Warrington . our Temple stair be rather dark . allow I to show you the way . " 
 Harry see Mr. Draper dart a parthian look of anger at Mr. Brown . " so it be case I see on the London Road two day ago , " he think . " what business bring the old fox to London ? " Wherewith , not choose to be inquisitive about other folk ' affair , he dismiss the subject from his mind . 
 Whither should they go first ? first , Harry be for go to see the place where his grandfather and Lord Castlewood have fight a duel fifty - six year ago , in Leicester Field . Mr. Draper know the place well , and all about the story . they might take Covent Garden on their way to Leicester Field , and see that Mr. Warrington be comfortably lodge . " and order dinner , " say Mr. Warrington . no , Mr. Draper could not consent to that . Mr. Warrington must be so obliging as to honour he on that day . in fact , he have make so bold as to order a collation from the Cock . Mr. Warrington could not decline an invitation so pressing , and walk away gaily with his friend , pass under that arch where the head be , and take off his hat to they , much to the lawyer 's astonishment . 
 " they be gentleman who die for their king , sir . my dear brother George and I always say we would salute them when we see them , " Mr. Warrington say . 
 " you will have a mob at your heel if you do , sir , " say the alarmed lawyer . 
 " confound the mob , sir , " say Mr. Harry , loftily , but the passer - by , think about their own affair , do not take any notice of Mr. Warrington 's conduct ; and he walk up the throng Strand , gaze with delight upon all he see , remembering , I dare say , for all his life after , the sight and impression there present to he , but maintain a discreet reserve ; for he do not care to let the lawyer know how much he be move , or the public perceive that he be a stranger . he do not hear much of his companion 's talk , though the latter chatter ceaselessly on the way . nor be Mr. Draper displease by the young Virginian 's silent and haughty demeanour . a hundred year ago a gentleman be a gentleman , and his attorney his very humble servant . 
 the chamberlain at the Bedford show Mr. Warrington to his room , bow before he with delightful obsequiousness , for Gumbo have already trumpet his master 's greatness , and Mr. Draper 's clerk announce that the new - comer be a " high fellar . " then , the room survey , the two gentleman go to Leicester Field , Mr. Gumbo strut behind his master : and , have look at the scene of his grandsire 's wound , and poor Lord Castlewood 's tragedy , they return to the Temple to Mr. Draper 's chamber . 
 who be that shabby - look big man Mr. Warrington bow to as they go out after dinner for a walk in the garden ? that be Mr. Johnson , an author , whom he have meet at Tunbridge Wells . " take the advice of a man of the world , sir , " say Mr. Draper , eye the shabby man of letter very superciliously ; " the less you have to do with that kind of person , the well . the business we have into our office about they literary man be not very pleasant , I can tell you . " " indeed ! " say Mr. Warrington . he do not like his new friend the more as the latter grow more familiar . the theatre be shut . should they go to Sadler 's Wells ? or Marybone Gardens ? or Ranelagh ? or how ? " not Ranelagh , " say Mr. Draper , " because there be none of the nobility in town ; " but , see in the newspaper that at the entertainment at Sadler 's Wells , Islington , there would be the most singular kind of diversion on eight hand - bell by Mr. Franklyn , as well as the surprising performance of Signora Catherina , Harry wisely determine that he would go to Marybone Gardens , where they have a concert of music , a choice of tea , coffee , and all sort of wine , and the benefit of Mr. Draper 's ceaseless conversation . the lawyer 's obsequiousness only end at Harry 's bedroom door , where , with haughty grandeur , the young gentleman bid his talkative host good night . 
 the next morning Mr. Warrington , array in his brocade bedgown , take his breakfast , read the newspaper , and enjoy his ease in his inn . he read in the paper news from his own country . and when he see the word , Williamsburg , Virginia , June 7th , his eye grow dim somehow . he have just have letter by that packet of June 7th , but his mother do not tell how " a great number of the principal gentry of the colony have associate themselves under the command of the Honourable Peyton Randolph , Esquire , to march to the relief of their distressed fellow - subject , and revenge the cruelty of the French and their barbarous ally . they be in a uniform : viz . , a plain blue frock , nanquin or brown waistcoat and breech , and plain hat . they be arm each with a light firelock , a brace of pistol , and a cut sword . " 
 " ah , why be not   we there , Gumbo ? " cry out Harry . 
 " why be not   we dar ? " shout Gumbo . 
 " why be I here , dangle at woman 's train ? " continue the Virginian . 
 " think dangle at woman 's train very pleasant , Master Harry ! " say the materialistic Gumbo , who be also very little affect by some further home news which his master read , viz . , that the Lovely Sally , Virginia ship , have be take in sight of port by a french privateer . 
 and now , read that the fine mare in England , and a pair of very genteel bay gelding , be to be sell at the Bull Inn , the low end of Hatton Garden , Harry determine to go and look at the animal , and inquire his way to the place . he then and there buy the genteel bay gelding , and pay for they with easy generosity . he never say what he do on that day , be shy of appear like a stranger ; but it be believe that he take a coach and go to Westminster Abbey , from which he bid the coachman drive he to the Tower , then to Mrs. Salmon 's Waxwork , then to Hyde Park and Kensington Palace ; then he have give order to go to the Royal Exchange , but catch a glimpse of Covent Garden , on his way to the Exchange , he bid Jehu take he to his inn , and cut short his enumeration of place to which he have be , by fling the fellow a guinea . 
 Mr. Draper have call in his absence , and say he would come again ; but Mr. Warrington , have din sumptuously by himself , go off nimbly to Marybone Gardens again , in the same noble company . 
 as he issue forth the next day , the bell of St. Paul 's , Covent Garden , be ring for morning prayer , and remind he that friend Sampson be go to preach his sermon . Harry smile . he have begin to have a shrewd and just opinion of the value of Mr. Sampson 's sermon . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII . in which various Matches be fight 

 read in the London Advertiser , which be serve to his worship with his breakfast , an invitation to all lover of manly british sport to come and witness a trial of skill between the great champion Sutton and Figg , Mr. Warrington determine upon attend these performance , and accordingly proceed to the Wooden House , in Marybone Fields , drive thither the pair of horse which he have purchase on the previous day . the young charioteer do not know the road very well , and veer and tack very much more than be needful upon his journey from Covent Garden , lose himself in the green lane behind Mr. Whitfield 's round Tabernacle of Tottenham Road , and the field in the midst of which Middlesex Hospital stand . he reach his destination at length , however , and find no small company assemble to witness the valorous achievement of the two champion . 
 a crowd of London blackguard be gather round the door of this temple of british valour ; together with the horse and equipage of a few person of fashion , who come , like Mr. Warrington , to patronise the sport . a variety of beggar and cripple hustle round the young gentleman , and whine to he for charity . shoeblack - boy tumble over each other for the privilege of black his honour 's boot ; nosegay - woman and fly fruiterer ply Mr. Gumbo with their ware ; pieman , pad , tramp , stroller of every variety , hang round the battle - ground . a flag be fly upon the building ; and , on to the stage in front , accompany by a drummer and a horn - blower , a manager repeatedly issue to announce to the crowd that the noble english sport be just about to begin . 
 Mr. Warrington pay his money , and be accommodate with a seat in a gallery command a perfect view of the platform whereon the sport be perform ; Mr. Gumbo take his seat in the amphitheatre below ; or , when tired , issue forth into the outer world to drink a pot of beer , or play a game at card with his brother - lacquey , and the gentleman 's coachman on the box of the carriage wait without . lacquey , livery , footmen the old society be encumber with a prodigious quantity of these . gentleman or woman could scarce move without one , sometimes two or three , vassal in attendance . every theatre have its footman 's gallery : an army of the liveried race hustle around every chapel - door : they swarm in anteroom : they sprawl in hall and on landing : they guzzle , devour , debauch , cheat , play card , bully visitor for vail : that noble old race of footman be well - nigh go . a few thousand of they may still be leave among we . Grand , tall , beautiful , melancholy , we still behold they on levee day , with their nosegay and their buckle , their plush and their powder . so have I see in America specimen , nay camp and village , of Red Indians . but the race be doom . the fatal decree have go forth , and Uncas with his tomahawk and eagle 's plume , and Jeames with his cocked hat and long cane , be pass out of the world where they once walk in glory . 
 before the principal combatant make their appearance , minor warrior and exercise be exhibit . a boxing - match come off , but neither of the man be very game or severely punish , so that Mr. Warrington and the rest of the spectator have but little pleasure out of that encounter . then ensue some cudgel - playing ; but the head break be of so little note , and the wound give so trifling and unsatisfactory , that no wonder the company begin to hiss , grumble , and show other sign of discontent . " the master , the master ! " shout the people , whereupon those famous champion at length thought fit to appear . 
 the first who walk up the step to the stage be the intrepid Sutton , sword in hand , who salute the company with his warlike weapon , make an especial bow and salute to a private box or gallery in which sate a stout gentleman , who be seemingly a person of importance . Sutton be speedily follow by the famous Figg , to whom the stout gentleman wave a hand of approbation . both man be in their shirt , their head be shaven clean , but bear the crack and scar of many former glorious battle . on his burly sword - arm , each intrepid champion wear an " armiger , " or ribbon of his colour . and now the gladiator shake hand , and , as a contemporary poet say : " the word it be bilboe . "   the antiquarian reader know the pleasant poem in the sixth volume of Dodsley 's Collection , in which the above combat be describe . 
 at the commencement of the combat the great Figg deal a blow so tremendous at his opponent , that have it encounter the other 's honest head , that comely noddle would have be shorn off as clean as the carving - knife chop the carrot . but Sutton receive his adversary 's blade on his own sword , whilst Figg 's blow be deliver so mightily that the weapon brake in his hand , less constant than the heart of he who wield it . other sword be now deliver to the warrior . the first blood draw spout from the pant side of Figg amidst a yell of delight from Sutton 's supporter ; but the veteran appeal to his audience , and especially , as it seem , to the stout individual in the private gallery , show that his sword break in the previous encounter have cause the wound . 
 Whilst the parley occasion by this incident be go on , Mr. Warrington see a gentleman in a riding - frock and plain scratch - wig enter the box devote to the stout personage , and recognise with pleasure his Tunbridge Wells friend , my Lord of March and Ruglen . Lord March , who be by no means prodigal of politeness seem to show singular deference to the stout gentleman , and Harry remark how his lordship receive , with a profound bow , some bank - bill which the other take out from a pocket - book and hand to he . Whilst thus engage , Lord March spy out our Virginian , and , his interview with the stout personage finish , my lord come over to Harry 's gallery and warmly greet his young friend . they sit and beheld the combat wag with various success , but with immense skill and valour on both side . after the warrior have sufficiently fight with sword , they fall to with the quarter - staff , and the result of this long and delightful battle be , that victory remain with her ancient champion Figg . 
 whilst the warrior be at battle , a thunderstorm have break over the building , and Mr. Warrington gladly enough accept a seat in my Lord March 's chariot , leave his own phaeton to be drive home by his groom . Harry be in great delectation with the noble sight he have witness : be pronounce this indeed to be something like sport , and of the good he have see since his arrival in England : and , as usual , associate any pleasure which he enjoy with the desire that the dear companion of his boyhood should share the amusement in common with he , he begin by sigh out , " I wish ... " then he stop . " no , I do not , " say he . 
 " what do you wish and what do not   you wish ? " ask Lord March . 
 " I be think , my lord , of my eld brother , and wish he have be with I . we have promise to have our sport together at home , you see ; and many be the time we talk of it . but he would not   have like this rough sort of sport , and do not   care for fighting , though he be the brave lad alive . " 
 " oh ! he be the brave lad alive , be he ? " ask my lord , loll on his cushion , and eye his virginian friend with some curiosity . 
 " you should have see he in a quarrel with a very gallant officer , our friend an absurd affair , but it be hard to keep George off he . I never see a fellow so cool , nor more savage and determine , God help I . ah ! I wish for the honour of the country , you know , that he could have come here instead of I , and show you a real virginian gentleman . " 
 " Nay , sir , you will do very well . what be this I hear of Lady Yarmouth take you into favour ? " say the amused nobleman . 
 " I will do as well as another . I can ride , and , I think , I can shoot well than George ; but then my brother have the head , sir , the head ! " say Harry , tap his own honest skull . " why , I give you my word , my lord , that he have read almost every book that be ever write ; could play both on the fiddle and harpsichord , could compose poetry and sermon most elegant . what can I do ? I be only good to ride and play at card , and drink Burgundy . " and the penitent hang down his head . " but they I can do as well as most fellow , you see . in fact , my lord , I will back myself , " he resume , to the other 's great amusement . 
 Lord March relish the young man 's naivete , as the jade voluptuary still to the end always can relish the juicy wholesome mutton - chop . " by Gad , Mr. Warrington , " say he , " you ought to be take to Exeter ' Change , and put in a show . " 
 " and for why ? " 
 " a gentleman from Virginia who have lose his eld brother and absolutely regret he . the breed be not   know in this country . upon my honour and conscience , I believe that you would like to have he back again . " 
 " believe ! " cry the Virginian , grow red in the face . 
 " that be , you believe you believe you would like he back again . but depend on it you would not . ' tis not in human nature , sir ; not as I read it , at least . here be some fine house we be come to . that at the corner be Sir Richard Littleton 's , that great one be my Lord Bingley 's . ' tis a pity they do nothing well with this great empty space of Cavendish Square than fence it with these unsightly board . by George ! I do not   know where the town 's running . there 's Montagu House make into a confound Don Saltero 's museum , with book and stuff bird and rhinoceros . they have actually run a cursed cut New Road they call it at the back of Bedford House Gardens , and spoil the Duke 's comfort , though , I guess , they will console he in the pocket . I do not   know where the town will stop . shall we go down Tyburn Road and the Park , or through Swallow Street , and into the habitable quarter of the town ? we can dine at Pall Mall , or , if you like , with you ; and we can spend the evening as you like with the Queen of Spades , or ... " 
 " with the Queen of Spades , if your lordship please , " say Mr. Warrington , blushing . so the equipage drive to his hotel in Covent Garden , where the landlord come forward with his usual obsequiousness , and recognise my Lord of March and Ruglen , bow his wig on to my lord 's shoe in his humble welcome to his lordship . a rich young english peer in the reign of George the Second ; a wealthy patrician in the reign of Augustus ; which would you rather have be ? there be a question for any young gentleman 's debating - club of the present day . 
 the good english dinner which could be produce , of course , be at the service of the young Virginian and his noble friend . after dinner come wine in plenty , and of quality good enough even for the epicurean earl . over the wine there be talk of go to see the firework at Vauxhall , or else of card . Harry , who have never see a firework beyond an exhibition of a dozen squibs at Williamsburg on the fifth of November   which he think a sublime display , would have like the Vauxhall , but yield to his guest 's preference for piquet ; and they be very soon absorb in that game . 
 Harry begin by win as usual ; but , in the course of a half - hour , the luck turn and favour my Lord March , who be at first very surly when Mr. Draper , Mr. Warrington 's man of business , come bow into the room , where he accept Harry 's invitation to sit and drink . Mr. Warrington always ask everybody to sit and drink , and partake of his good . have he a crust , he would divide it ; have he a haunch , he would share it ; have he a jug of water , he would drink about with a kindly spirit ; have he a bottle of Burgundy , it be gaily drunk with a thirsty friend . and do not   fancy the virtue be common . you read of it in book , my dear sir , and fancy that you have it yourself because you give six dinner of twenty people and pay your acquaintance all round ; but the welcome , the friendly spirit , the kindly heart ? believe I , these be rare quality in our selfish world . we may bring they with we from the country when we be young , but they mostly wither after transplantation , and droop and perish in the stifle London air . 
 Draper do not care for wine very much , but it delight the lawyer to be in the company of a great man . he protest that he like nothing well than to see piquet play by two consummate player and man of fashion ; and , take a seat , undismaye by the sidelong scowl of his lordship , survey the game between the gentleman . Harry be not near a match for the experienced player of the London club . to - night , too , Lord March hold well card to aid his skill . 
 what their stake be be no business of Mr. Draper 's . the gentleman say they would play for shilling , and afterwards count up their gain and loss , with scarce any talking , and that in an undertone . a bow on both side , a perfectly grave and polite manner on the part of each , and the game go on . 
 but it be destine to a second interruption , which bring an execration from Lord March 's lip . First be hear a scuffling without then a whispering then an outcry as of a woman in tear , and then , finally , a female rush into the room , and produce that explosion of naughty language from Lord March . 
 " I wish your woman would take some other time for come , confound them , " say my lord , lay his card down in a pet . 
 " what , Mrs. Betty ! " cry Harry . 
 indeed it be no other than Mrs. Betty , Lady Maria 's maid ; and Gumbo stand behind she , his fine countenance beslobbere with tear . 
 " what have happen ? " ask Mr. Warrington , in no little perturbation of spirit . " the Baroness be well ? " 
 " help ! help ! sir , your honour ! " ejaculate Mrs. Betty , and proceed to fall on her knee . 
 " help whom ? " 
 a howl ensue from Gumbo . 
 " Gumbo ! you scoundrel ! have anything happen between Mrs. Betty and you ? " ask the black 's master . 
 Mr. Gumbo step back with great dignity , lay his hand on his heart , and say , " no , sir ; nothing hab happen ' twix ' this lady and I . " 
 " it be my mistress , sir , " cry Betty . " help ! help ! here be the letter she have write , sir ! they have go and take she , sir ! " 
 " be it only that old Molly Esmond ? she be know to be over head and heel in debt ! dry your eye in the next room , Mrs. Betty , and let I and Mr. Warrington go on with our game , " say my lord , take up his card . 
 " help ! help she ! " cry Betty again . " oh , Mr. Harry ! you will not   be a - go on with your card , when my lady call out to you to come and help she ! your honour use to come quick enough when my lady use to send I to fetch you at Castlewood ! " 
 " confound you ! can not   you hold your tongue ? " say my lord , with more choice word and oath . 
 but Betty would not cease weeping , and it be decree that Lord March be to cease win for that night . Mr. Warrington rise from his seat , and make for the bell , say : 
 " my dear lord , the game must be over for to - night . my relative write to I in great distress , and I be bind to go to she . " 
 " curse she ! why could not   she wait till to - morrow ? " cry my lord , testily . 
 Mr. Warrington order a postchaise instantly . his own horse would take he to Bromley . 
 " bet you , you do not   do it within the hour ! bet you , you do not   do it within five quarter of an hour ! bet you four to one or I will take your bet , which you please that you be not rob on Blackheath ! bet you , you be not at Tunbridge Wells before midnight ! " cry Lord March . 
 " do ! " say Mr. Warrington . and my lord carefully note down the term of the four wager in his pocket - book . 
 Lady Maria 's letter run as follow : 
 " MY DEAR COUSIN I be fall into a trapp , which I perceive the machination of villian . I be a prisner . Betty will tell you all . ah , my Henrico ! come to the resque of your MOLLY . " 
 in half an hour after the receipt of this missive , Mr. Warrington be in his postchaise and gallop over Westminster Bridge on the road to succour his kinswoman . 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII . Sampson and the Philistines 

 my happy chance in early life lead I to become intimate with a respectable person who be bear in a certain island , which be pronounce to be the first gem of the ocean by , no doubt , impartial judge of maritime jewellery . the story which that person impart to I regard his relative who inhabit the gem above - mention , be such as use to make my young blood curdle with horror to think there should be so much wickedness in the world . every crime which you can think of ; the entire ten Commandments break in a general smash ; such roguery and knavery as no storyteller could invent ; such murder and robbery as Thurtell or turpin scarce ever perpetrate ; be by my informant accurately remember , and freely relate , respect his near kindred , to any one who choose to hear he . it be a wonder how any of the family still live out of the hulk . I brother Tim have bring his fawther 's gree hair with sorrow to the greeve ; I brother Mick have rob the par'sh church repaytedly ; I sisther Annamaroia have jilt the Captain and run off with the ensign , forge her grandmother 's will , and steal the spoon , which Larry the knife - boy be hang for . the family of Atreus be as nothing compare to the race of O'What - d'ye - call-'em , from which my friend spring ; but no power on earth would , of course , induce I to name the country whence he come . 
 how great then use to be my naif astonishment to find these murderer , rogue , parricide , habitual forger of bill of exchange , and so forth , every now and then write to each other as " my dear brother , " " my dear sister , " and for month at a time live on the most amicable term ! with hand reek with the blood of his murder parent , Tim would mix a screech tumbler , and give Maria a glass from it . with lip black with the perjury he have swear in court respect his grandmother 's abstract testament , or the murder of his poor brother Thady 's helpless orphan , Mick would kiss his sister Julia 's bonny cheek , and they would have a jolly night , and cry as they talk about old time , and the dear old Castle what - d'ye - call-'em , where they be bear , and the fight Onetyoneth be quarthere there , and the major proposing for Cyaroloine , and the tomb of their seented mother   who have chayte they out of the propertee . Heaven bless her soul ! they use to weep and kiss so profusely at meeting and parting , that it be touch to behold they . at the sight of their embrace one forget those painful little story , and those repeat previous assurance that , do they tell all , they could hang each other all round . 
 what can there be fine than forgiveness ? what more rational than , after call a man by every bad name under the sun , to apologise , regret hasty expression , and so forth , withdraw the decanter   say   which you have fling at your enemy 's head , and be friend as before ? some folk possess this admirable , this angellike gift of forgiveness . it be beautiful , for instance , to see our two lady at Tunbridge Wells forgive one another , smile , joking , fondle almost in spite of the hard word of yesterday yes , and forget bygone , though they could not   help remember they perfectly well . I wonder , can you and I do as much ? let we strive , my friend , to acquire this pacable , christian spirit . my belief be that you may learn to forgive bad language employ to you ; but , then , you must have a deal of practice , and be accustom to hear and use it . you embrace after a quarrel and mutual bad language . Heaven bless we ! bad word be nothing when one be accustomed to they , and scarce need ruffle the temper on either side . 
 so the aunt and niece play card very amicably together , and drink to each other 's health , and each take a wing of the chicken , and pull a bone of the merry - thought , and   in conversation   scratch their neighbour ' , not each other 's , eye out . thus we have read how the Peninsular warrior , when the bugle sing truce , fraternise and exchange tobacco - pouch and wine , ready to seize their firelock and knock each other 's head off when the truce be over ; and thus our old soldier , skilful in war , but know the charm of a quiet life , lay their weapon down for the nonce , and hob - and - nobbed gaily together . of course , whilst drink with Jack Frenchman , you have your piece handy to blow his brain out if he make a hostile move : but , meanwhile , it be a votre sante , mon camarade ! here be to you , mounseer ! and everything be as pleasant as possible . regard Aunt Bernstein 's threatened gout ? the twinge have go off . Maria be so glad ! Maria 's fainting fit ? she have no return of they . a slight recurrence last night . the Baroness be so sorry ! her niece must see the good doctor , take everything to fortify she , continue to take the steel , even after she leave Tunbridge . how kind of Aunt Bernstein to offer to send some of the bottled water after she ! suppose Madame Bernstein say in confidence to her own woman , " fainting fit ! pooh ! epilepsy ! inherit from that horrible scrofulous german mother ! " what mean have we of know the private conversation of the old lady and her attendant ? suppose Lady Maria order Mrs. Betty , her ladyship 's maid , to taste every glass of medicinal water , first declare that her aunt be capable of poison she ? very likely such conversation take place . these be but precaution these be the firelock which our old soldier have at their side , load and cocked , but at present lying quiet on the grass . 
 have Harry 's bond in her pocket , the veteran Maria do not choose to press for payment . she know the world too well for that . he be bind to she , but she give he plenty of day - rule , and leave of absence on parole . it be not her object needlessly to chafe and anger her young slave . she know the difference of age , and that Harry must have his pleasure and diversion . " take your ease and amusement , cousin , " say Lady Maria . " Frisk about , pretty little mousekin , " say grey Grimalkin , purr in the corner , and keep watch with her green eye . about all that Harry be to see and do on his first visit to London , his female relative have of course talk and joke . both of the lady know perfectly what be a young gentleman 's ordinary amusement in those day , and speak of they with the frankness which characterise those easy time . 
 our wily Calypso console herself , then , perfectly , in the absence of her young wanderer , and take any diversion which come to hand . Mr. Jack Morris , the gentleman whom we have mention as rejoice in the company of Lord March and Mr. Warrington , be one of these diversion . to live with title personage be the delight of Jack Morris 's life ; and to lose money at card to an earl 's daughter be almost a pleasure to he . now , the Lady Maria Esmond be an earl 's daughter who be very glad to win money . she obtain permission to take Mr. Morris to the Countess of Yarmouth 's assembly , and play card with he and so everybody be pleased . 
 thus the first eight - and - forty hour after Mr. Warrington 's departure pass pretty cheerily at Tunbridge Wells , and Friday arrive , when the sermon be to be deliver which we have see Mr. Sampson prepare . the company at the Wells be ready enough to listen to it . Sampson have a reputation for be a most amusing and eloquent preacher ; and if there be no breakfast , conjurer , dancing bear , concert go on , the good Wells folk would put up with a sermon . he know Lady Yarmouth be come , and what a power she have in the giving of living and the dispensing of bishopric , the Defender of the Faith of that day have a remarkable confidence in her ladyship 's opinion upon these matter ; and so we may be sure that Mr. Sampson prepare his very good discourse for her hearing . when the Great Man be at home at the Castle , and walk over to the little country church , in the park , bring the Duke , the Marquis , and a couple of Cabinet Ministers with he , have it ever be your lot to sit among the congregation , and watch Mr. Trotter the curate and his sermon ? he look anxiously at the Great Pew ; he falter as he give out his text , and think , " ah ! perhaps his lordship may give I a living ! " Mrs. Trotter and the girl look anxiously at the Great Pew too , and watch the effect of papa 's discourse the well - know favourite discourse upon the big - wig assemble . Papa 's first nervousness be over : his noble voice clear , warm to his sermon : he kindle : he take his pocket - handkerchief out : he be come to that exquisite passage which have make they all cry at the parsonage : he have begin it ! ah ! what be that hum noise , which fill the edifice , and cause hob - nail Melibaeus to grin at smock - frock Tityrus ? it be the right honourable Lord Naseby snore in the pew by the fire ! and poor Trotter 's visionary mitre disappear with the music . 
 Sampson be the domestic chaplain of Madame Bernstein 's nephew . the two lady of the Esmond family patronise the preacher . on the day of the sermon , the Baroness have a little breakfast in his honour , at which Sampson make his appearance , rosy and handsome , with a fresh - flower wig , and a smart , rustle , new cassock , which he have on credit from some church - admire mercer at the Wells . by the side of his patroness , their ladyship ' lacquey walk behind they with their great gilt prayer - book , Mr. Sampson march from breakfast to church . every one remark how well the Baroness Bernstein look ; she laugh , and be particularly friendly with her niece ; she have a bow and a stately smile for all , as she move on , with her tortoiseshell cane . at the door there be a dazzling conflux of rank and fashion all the fine company of the Wells troop in ; and her ladyship of Yarmouth , conspicuous with vermilion cheek , and a robe of flame - colour taffeta . there be shabby people present , besides the fine company , though these latter be by far the most numerous . what an odd - look pair , for instance , be those in ragged coat , one of they with his carroty hair appear under his scratch - wig , and who enter the church just as the organ stop ! Nay , he could not have be a protestant , for he mechanically cross himself as he enter the place , say to his comrade , " Bedad , Tim , I forgawt ! " by which I conclude that the individual come from an island which have be mention at the commencement of this chapter . wherever they go a rich fragrance of whisky spread itself . a man may be a heretic , but possess genius : these catholic gentleman have come to pay homage to Mr. Sampson . 
 Nay , there be not only member of the old religion present , but disciple of a creed still old . who be those two individual with hooked nose and sallow countenance , who work into the church in spite of some little opposition on the part of the beadle ? see the greasy appearance of these hebrew stranger , Mr. Beadle be for deny they admission . but one whisper into his ear , " we want to be conwerte , gov'nor ! " another slip money into his hand , Mr. Beadle lift up the mace with which he be bar the doorway , and the Hebrew gentleman enter . there go the organ ! the door have close . shall we go in , and listen to Mr. Sampson 's sermon , or lie on the grass without ? 
 precede by that beadle in gold lace , Sampson walk up to the pulpit , as rosy and jolly a man as you could wish to see . presently , when he surge up out of his plump pulpit cushion , why do his Reverence turn as pale as death ? he look to the western church - door there , on each side of it , be those horrible Hebrew caryatide . he then look to the vestry - door , which be hard by the rector 's pew , in which Sampson have be sit during the service , alongside of their ladyship his patroness . suddenly a couple of perfume hibernian gentleman slip out of an adjacent seat , and place themselves on a bench close by that vestry - door and rector 's pew , and so sate till the conclusion of the sermon , with eye meekly cast down to the ground . how can we describe that sermon , if the preacher himself never know how it come to an end ? 
 nevertheless , it be consider an excellent sermon . when it be over , the fine lady buzz into one another 's ear over their pew , and utter their praise and comment . Madame Walmoden , who be in the next pew to our friend , say it be bewdiful , and make she dremble all over . Madame Bernstein say it be excellent . Lady Maria be pleased to think that the family chaplain should so distinguish himself . she look up at he , and strove to catch his reverence 's eye , as he still sate in his pulpit ; she greet he with a little wave of the hand and flutter of her handkerchief . he scarcely seem to note the compliment ; his face be pale , his eye be look yonder , towards the font , where those Hebrews still remain . the stream of people pass by they in a rush , when they be lose to sight , in a throng in a march of two and three in a dribble of one at a time . everybody be go . the two Hebrews be still there by the door . 
 the Baroness de Bernstein and her niece still linger in the rector 's pew , where the old lady be deep in conversation with that gentleman . 
 " who be those horrible man at the door ? and what a smell of spirit there be ! " cry Lady Maria , to Mrs. Brett , her aunt 's woman , who have attend the two lady . 
 " farewell , doctor ; you have a darling little boy : be he to be a clergyman , too ? " ask Madame de Bernstein . " be you ready , my dear ? " and the pew be throw open , and Madame Bernstein , whose father be only a viscount , insist that her niece , Lady Maria , who be an earl 's daughter , should go first out of the pew . 
 as she step forward , those individual whom her ladyship designate as two horrible man , advance . one of they pull a long strip of paper out of his pocket , and her ladyship start and turn pale . she make for the vestry , in a vague hope that she can clear the door and close it behind she . the two whiskified gentleman be up with she , however ; one of they actually lay his hand on her shoulder , and say : 
 " at the shuit of Misthress Pincott , of Kinsington , mercer , I have the honour of arrest your leedyship . I neem be Costigan , madam , a poor gentleman of Oireland , bind to circumstance and force to follow a disagrayable profession . will your leedyship walk , or shall I man go fetch a cheer ? " 
 for reply Lady Maria Esmond give three shriek , and fall swoon to the ground . " keep the door , Mick ! " shout Mr. Costigan . " well let in no one else , madam , " he say , very politely , to Madame de Bernstein . " her ladyship have fall in a feenting fit , and will recover here , at her aise . " 
 " Unlace she , Brett ! " cry the old lady , whose eye twinkle oddly ; and as soon as that operation be perform , Madame Bernstein seize a little bag suspend by a hair chain , which Lady Maria wear round her neck , and snip the necklace in twain . " dash some cold water over her face , it always recover she ! " say the Baroness . " you stay with she , Brett . how much be your suit gentleman ? " 
 Mr. Costigan say , " the deem we have against her leedyship for one hundred and thirty - two pound , in which she be indebted to Misthress Eliza Pincott " 
 meanwhile , where be the Reverend Mr. Sampson ? like the fabled opossum we have read of , who , when he spy the unerre gunner from his gum - tree , say : " it be no use Major , I will come down , " so Sampson give himself up to his pursuer . " at whose suit , simon ? " he sadly ask . Sampson know simon : they have meet many a time before . 
 " Buckleby Cordwainer , " say Mr. Simons . 
 " forty - eight pound and charge , I know , " say Mr. Sampson , with a sigh . " I have not   get the money . what officer be there here ? " Mr. Simons 's companion , Mr. Lyons , here step forward , and say his house be most convenient , and often use by gentleman , and he should be most happy and proud to accommodate his reverence . 
 two chair happen to be in wait outside the chapel . in those two chair my Lady Maria Esmond and Mr. Sampson place themselves , and go to Mr. Lyons 's residence , escort by the gentleman to whom we have just be introduce . 
 very soon after the capture the Baroness Bernstein send Mr. Case , her confidential servant , with a note to her niece , full of expression of the most ardent affection : but regret that her heavy loss at card render the payment of such a sum as that in which Lady Maria stand indebted quite impossible . she have write off to Mrs. Pincott , by that very post , however , to entreat she to grant time , and as soon as ever she have an answer , would not fail to acquaint her dear unhappy niece . 
 Mrs. Betty come over to console her mistress : and the two poor woman cast about for money enough to provide a horse and chaise for Mrs. Betty , who have very nearly come to misfortune , too . both my Lady Maria and her maid have be unlucky at card , and could not muster more than eighteen shilling between they : so it be agree that Betty should sell a gold chain belong to her lady , and with the money travel to London . now , Betty take the chain to the very toy - shop man who have sell it to Mr. Warrington , who have give it to his cousin ; and the toy - shop man , suppose that she have steal the chain , be for bring in a constable to Betty . hence , she have to make explanation , and to say how her mistress be in durance ; and , ere the night close , all Tunbridge Wells know that my Lady Maria Esmond be in the hand of bailiff . meanwhile , however , the money be find , and Mrs. Betty whisk up to London in search of the champion in whom the poor prisoner confide . 
 " do not   say anything about that paper be go ! oh , the wretch , the wretch ! she shall pay it I ! " I presume that Lady Maria mean her aunt by the word " wretch . " Mr. Sampson read a sermon to her ladyship , and they pass the evening over revenge and backgammon ; with well - ground hope that Harry Warrington would rush to their rescue as soon as ever he hear of their mishap . 
 though , ere the evening be over , every soul at the Wells know what have happen to Lady Maria , and a great deal more ; though they know she be take in execution , the house where she lay , the amount nay , ten time the amount for which she be capture , and that she be oblige to pawn her trinket to get a little money to keep she in jail ; though everybody say that old fiend of a Bernstein be at the bottom of the business , of course they be all civil and bland in society ; and , at my Lady Trumpington 's card that night , where Madame Bernstein appear , and as long as she be within hearing , not a word be say regard the morning 's transaction . Lady Yarmouth ask the Baroness news of her breddy nephew , and hear Mr. Warrington be in London . my Lady Maria be not come to Lady Trumpington 's that evening ? my Lady Maria be indispose , have faint at church that morning , and be oblige to keep her room . the card be deal , the fiddle sing , the wine go round , the gentlefolk talk , laugh , yawn , chatter , the footman waylay the supper , the chairman drink and swore , the star climb the sky , just as though no Lady Maria be imprison , and no poor Sampson arrest . ' tis certain , dearly beloved brother , that the little grief , sting , annoyance , which you and I feel acutely in our own person , do not   prevent our neighbour from sleep ; and that when we slip out of the world the world do not miss we . be this humiliating to our vanity ? so much the well . but , on the other hand , be it not a comfortable and consoling truth ? and may not   we be thankful for our humble condition ? if we be not selfish passez - moi le mot , s.v.p . and if we have to care for other people 's grief as much as our own , how intolerable human life would be ! if my neighbour 's tight boot pinch my corn ; if the calumny utter against Jones set Brown into fury ; if Mrs. A 's death plunge Messrs. B , C , D , E , F , into distraction , would there be any bearing of the world 's burthen ? do not let we be in the least angry or surprised if all the company play on , and be happy , although Lady Maria have come to grief . Countess , the deal be with you ! be you go to Stubblefield to shoot as usual , Sir John ? Captain , we shall have you run off to the bath after the widow ! so the clatter go on ; the light burn ; the beaux and the lady flirt , laugh , ogle ; the prisoner rag in his cell ; the sick man toss on his bed . 
 perhaps Madame de Bernstein stay at the assembly until the very last , not willing to allow the company the chance of speak of she as soon as her back should be turn . ah , what a comfort it be , I say again , that we have back , and that our ear do not   grow on they ! he that have ear to hear , let he stuff they with cotton . Madame Bernstein might have hear folk say it be heartless of she to come abroad , and play at card , and make merry when her niece be in trouble . as if she could help Maria by stay at home , indeed ! at her age , it be dangerous to disturb an old lady 's tranquillity . " do not   tell I ! " say Lady Yarmouth . " the Bernstein would play at card over her niece 's coffin . talk about her heart ! who ever say she have one ? that old spy lose it to the Chevalier a thousand year ago , and have live ever since perfectly well without one . for how much be the Maria put in prison ? if it be only a small sum we would pay it , it would vex her aunt so . find out , Fuchs , in the morning , for how much Lady Maria Esmond be put in prison . " and the faithful Fuchs bow , and promise to do her Excellency 's will . 
 meanwhile , about midnight , Madame de Bernstein go home , and presently fall into a sound sleep , from which she do not wake up until a late hour of the morning , when she summon her usual attendant , who arrive with her ladyship 's morning dish of tea . if I tell you she take a dram with it , you would be shock . some of our great - grandmother use to have cordial in their " closet . " have you not read of the fine lady in Walpole , who say , " if I drink more , I shall be ' muckibus ! ' ? " as surely as Mr. Gough be alive now , our ancestress be accustom to partake pretty freely of strong water . 
 so , have tip off the cordial , Madame Bernstein rous and ask Mrs. Brett the news . 
 " he can give it you , " say the waiting - woman , sulkily . 
 " he ? who ? " 
 Mrs. Brett name Harry , and say Mr. Warrington arrive about midnight yesterday and Betty , my Lady Maria 's maid , be with he . " and my Lady Maria send your ladyship her love and duty , and hop you sleep well , " say Brett . 
 " excellently , poor thing ! be Betty go to she ? " 
 " no ; she be here , " say Mrs. Brett . 
 " let I see she directly , " cry the old lady . 
 " I will tell she , " reply the obsequious Brett , and go away upon her mistress 's errand , leave the old lady placidly repose on her pillow . presently , two pair of high - heeled shoe be hear patter over the deal floor of the bedchamber . carpet be luxury scarcely know in bedroom of those day . 
 " so , Mrs. Betty , you be in London yesterday ? " call Bernstein from her curtain . 
 " it be not Betty it be I ! good morning , dear aunt ! I hope you sleep well ? " cry a voice which make old Bernstein start on her pillow . it be the voice of Lady Maria , who draw the curtain aside , and drop her aunt a low curtsey . Lady Maria look very pretty , rosy , and happy . and with the little surprise incident at her appearance through Madame Bernstein 's curtain , I think we may bring this chapter to a close . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX . Harry to the Rescue 

 " my dear Lord March "   write Mr. Warrington from Tunbridge Wells , on Saturday morning , the 25th August , 1756 : " this be to inform you   with satisfaction   that I have one all our three bett . I be at Bromley two minute within the hour ; my new horse kep a - go at a capital rate . I drive they myself , have the postilion by I to show I the way , and my black man inside with Mrs. Betty . Hope they find the drive very pleasant . we be not stop on Blackheath , though two fellow on horseback ride up to we , but not like the look of our countenantse , ride off again ; and we get into Tunbridge Wells   where I transact my business   at forty - five minute after eleven . this make I quitt with your lordship after yesterday 's piquet , which I shall be very happy to give your revenge , and be 
 " your most obliged , faithful servant , 

 " H. ESMOND WARRINGTON . " 
 and now , perhaps , the reader will understand by what mean Lady Maria Esmond be enable to surprise her dear aunt in her bed on Saturday morning , and walk out of the house of captivity . have despatch Mrs. Betty to London , she scarcely expect that her emissary would return on the day of her departure ; and she and the chaplain be play their card at midnight , after a small refection which the bailiff 's wife have provide for they , when the rapid whirling of wheel be hear approach their house , and cause the lady to lay her trump down , and her heart to beat with more than ordinary emotion . Whirr come the wheel the carriage stop at the very door : there be a parley at the gate : then appear Mrs. Betty , with a face radiant with joy , though her eye be full of tear ; and next , who be that tall young gentleman who enter ? can any of my reader guess ? will they be very angry if I say that the chaplain slap down his card with a huzzay , whilst Lady Maria , turn as white as a sheet , rise up from her chair , totter forward a step or two , and , with an hysterical shriek , fling herself in her cousin 's arm ? how many kiss do he give she ? if they be mille , deinde centum , dein mille altera , dein secunda centum , and so on , I be not go to cry out . he have come to rescue she . she know he would ; he be her champion , her preserver from bondage and ignominy . she weep a genuine flood of tear upon his shoulder , and as she recline there , give way to a hearty emotion , I protest I think she look handsomer than she have look during the whole course of this history . she do not faint this time ; she go home , lean lovingly on her cousin 's arm , and may have have one or two hysterical outbreak in the night ; but Madame Bernstein sleep soundly , and do not hear she . 
 " you be both free to go home , " be the first word Harry say . " get my lady 's hat and cardinal , Betty , and , Chaplain , we will smoke a pipe together at our lodging , it will refresh I after my ride . " the chaplain , who , too , have a great deal of available sensibility , be very much overcome ; he burst into tear as he seize Harry 's hand , and kiss it , and pray God to bless his dear , generous , young patron . Mr. Warrington feel a glow of pleasure thrill through his frame . it be good to be able to help the suffering and the poor ; it be good to be able to turn sorrow into joy . not a little proud and elated be our young champion , as , with his hat cock , he march by the side of his rescue princess . his feeling come out to meet he , as it be , and beautiful happiness with kind eye and smile dance before he , and clothe he in a robe of honour , and scatter flower on his path , and blow trumpet and shawm of sweet gratulation , call , " here come the conqueror ! make way for the champion ! " and so they lead he up to the king 's house , and seat he in the hall of complacency , upon the cushion of comfort . and yet it be not much he have do . only a kindness . he have but to put his hand in his pocket , and with an easy talisman , drive off the dragon which keep the gate , and cause the tyrant to lay down his axe , who have get Lady Maria in execution . never mind if his vanity be puff up ; he be very good - natured ; he have rescue two unfortunate people , and pump tear of goodwill and happiness out of their eye : and if he brag a little to - night , and swagger somewhat to the chaplain , and talk about London , and Lord March , and White 's , and Almack 's , with the air of a macaroni , I do not   think we need like he much the less . 
 Sampson continue to be prodigiously affect . this man have a nature most easily work upon , and extraordinarily quick to receive pain and pleasure , to tear , gratitude , laughter , hatred , like . in his preaching profession he have educate and train his sensibility so that they be of great use to he ; he be for the moment what he act . he weep quite genuine tear , find that he could produce they freely . he love you whilst he be with you ; he have a real pang of grief as he mingle his sorrow with the widow or orphan ; and , meet Jack as he come out of the door , go to the tavern opposite , and laugh and roar over the bottle . he give money very readily , but never repay when he borrow . he be on this night in a rapture of gratitude and flattery towards Harry Warrington . in all London , perhaps , the unlucky Fortunate Youth could not have find a more dangerous companion . 
 to - night he be in his grateful mood , and full of enthusiasm for the benefactor who have release he from durance . with each bumper his admiration grow strong . he exalt Harry as the good and noblest of man , and the complacent young simpleton , as we have say , be disposed to take these praise as very well deserve . " the young branch of our family , " say Mr. Harry , with a superb air , " have treat you scurvily ; but , by Jove , Sampson my boy , I will stand by you ! " at a certain period of burgundian excitement Mr. Warrington be always very eloquent respect the splendour of his family . " I be very glad I be enable to help you in your strait . count on I whenever you want I , Sampson . do you not say you have a sister at boarding - school ? you will want money for she , sir . here be a little bill which may help to pay her schooling . " and the liberal young fellow pass a bank - note across to the chaplain . 
 again the man be affect to tear . Harry 's generosity smite he . 
 " Mr. Warrington , " he say , put the bank - note a short distance from he , " I I do not   deserve your kindness by George , I do not ! " and he swear an oath to corroborate his passionate assertion . 
 " Psha ! " say Harry . " I have plenty more of them . there be no money in that confound pocket - book which I lose last week . " 
 " no , sir . there be no money ! " say Mr. Sampson , drop his head . 
 " Hallo ! how do you know , Mr. Chaplain ? " ask the young gentleman . 
 " I know because I be a villain , sir . I be not worthy of your kindness . I tell you so . I find the book , sir , that night , when you have too much wine at Barbeau 's . " 
 " and read the letter ? " ask Mr. Warrington , start up and turn very red . 
 " they tell I nothing I do not know , sir , " say the chaplain " you have have spy about you whom you little suspect from whom you be much too young and simple to be able to keep your secret . " 
 " be those story about Lady Fanny , and my cousin will and his doing , true then ? " inquire Harry . 
 " yes , they be true , " sigh the chaplain . " the house of Castlewood have not be fortunate , sir , since your honour 's branch , the eld branch , leave it . " 
 " Sir , you do not   dare for to breathe a word against my Lady Maria ? " Harry cry out . 
 " oh , not for world ! " say Mr. Sampson , with a queer look at his young friend . " I may think she be too old for your honour , and that ' tis a pity you should not have a wife well suit to your age , though I admit she look very young for her , and hath every virtue and accomplishment . " 
 " she be too old , Sampson , I know she be , " say Mr. Warrington , with much majesty ; " but she have my word , and you see , sir , how fond she be of I . go bring I the letter , sir , which you find , and let I try and forgive you for have seize upon they . " 
 " my benefactor , let I try and forgive myself ! " cry Mr. Sampson , and depart towards his chamber , leave his young patron alone over his wine . 
 Sampson return presently , look very pale . " what have happen , sir ? " say Harry , with an imperious air . 
 the chaplain hold out a pocket - book . " with your name in it , sir , " he say . 
 " my brother 's name in it , " say Harry ; " it be George who give it to I . " 
 " I keep it in a locked chest , sir , in which I leave it this morning before I be take by those people . here be the book , sir , but the letter be go . my trunk and valise have also be tamper with . and I be a miserable , guilty man , unable to make you the restitution which I owe you . " Sampson look the picture of woe as he utter these sentiment . he clasp his hand together , and almost knelt before Harry in an attitude the most pathetic . 
 who have be in the room in Mr. Sampson 's and Mr. Warrington 's absence ? the landlady be ready to go on her knee , and declare that nobody have come in : nor , indeed , be Mr. Warrington 's chamber in the least disturbed , nor anything abstract from Mr. Sampson 's scanty wardrobe and possession , except those paper of which he deplore the absence . 
 whose interest be it to seize they ? Lady Maria 's ? the poor woman have be a prisoner all day , and during the time when the capture be effect . 
 she certainly be guiltless of the rape of the letter . the sudden seizure of the two Case , the house - steward 's secret journey to London , Case , who know the shoemaker at whose house Sampson lodge in London , and all the secret affair of the Esmond family , these point , consider together and separately , might make Mr. Sampson think that the Baroness Bernstein be at the bottom of this mischief . but why arrest Lady Maria ? the chaplain know nothing as yet about that letter which her ladyship have lose ; for poor Maria have not think it necessary to confide her secret to he . 
 as for the pocket - book and its content , Mr. Harry be so swollen up with self - satisfaction that evening , at win his three bet , at rescue his two friend , at the capital premature cold supper of partridge and ancient Burgundy which obsequious Monsieur Barbeau have send over to the young gentleman 's lodging , that he accept Sampson 's vow of contrition , and solemn promise of future fidelity , and reach his gracious hand to the chaplain , and condone his offence . when the latter swear his great god , that henceforth he would be Harry 's true , humblest friend and follower , and at any moment would be ready to die for Mr. Warrington , Harry say , majestically , " I think , Sampson , you would ; I hope you would . my family the Esmond family have always be accustom to have faithful friend round about them and to reward them too . the wine be with you , Chaplain . what toast do you call , sir ? " 
 " I call a blessing on the house of Esmond - Warrington ! " cry the chaplain , with real tear in his eye . 
 " we be the elder branch , sir . my grandfather be the Marquis of Esmond , " say Mr. Harry , in a voice noble but somewhat indistinct . " here be to you , Chaplain and I forgive you , sir and God bless you , sir and if you have be take for three time as much , I would have pay it . why , what be that I see through the shutter ? I be blest if the sun have not   rise again ! we have no need of candle to go to bed , ha , ha ! " and once more extend his blessing to his chaplain , the young fellow go off to sleep . 
 about noon Madame de Bernstein send over a servant to say that she would be glad if her nephew would come over and drink a dish of chocolate with she , whereupon our young friend rise and walk to his aunt 's lodging . she remark , not without pleasure , some alteration in his toilette : in his brief sojourn in London he have visit a tailor or two , and have be introduce by my Lord March to some of his lordship 's purveyor and tradesman . 
 Aunt Bernstein call he " my dear child , " and thank he for his noble , his generous behaviour to dear Maria . what a shock that seizure in church have be to she ! a still great shock that she have lose three hundred only on the Wednesday night to Lady Yarmouth , and be quite a sec . " why , " say the Baroness , " I have to send case to London to my agent to get I money to pay I could not leave Tunbridge in her debt . " 
 " so case do go to London ? " say Mr. Harry . 
 " of course he do : the Baroness de Bernstein can not   afford to say she be court d'argent . Canst thou lend I some , child ? " 
 " I can give your ladyship twenty - two pound , " say Harry , blush very red : " I have but forty - four left till I get my virginian remittance . I have buy horse and clothe , and be very extravagant , aunt . " 
 " and rescue your poor relation in distress , you prodigal good boy . no , child , I do not want thy money . I can give thee some . here be a note upon my agent for fifty pound , vaurien ! go and spend it , and be merry ! I dare say thy mother will repay I , though she do not love I . " and she look quite affectionate , and hold out a pretty hand , which the youth kiss . 
 " your mother do not love I , but your mother 's father do once . Mind , sir , you always come to I when you have need of I . " 
 when bent on exhibit they , nothing could exceed Beatrix Bernstein 's grace or good - humour . " I can not   help love you , child , " she continue , " and yet I be so angry with you that I have scarce the patience to speak to you . so you have actually engage yourself to poor Maria , who be as old as your mother ? what will Madam Esmond say ? she may live three hundred year , and you will not have wherewithal to support yourself . " 
 " I have ten thousand pound from my father , of my own , now my poor brother be go , " say Harry , " that will go some way . " 
 " why , the interest will not keep you in card - money . " 
 " we must give up card , " say Harry . 
 " it be more than Maria be capable of . she will pawn the coat off your back to play . the rage for it run in all my brother 's family in I too , I own it . I warn you . I pray you not to play with they , and now a lad of twenty to engage himself to a woman of forty - two ! to write letter on his knee and sign with his heart 's blood   which he spell like hartshorn , and say that he will marry no other woman than his adorable cousin , Lady Maria Esmond . oh ! it be cruel cruel ! " 
 " Great heavens ! madam , who show you my letter ? " ask Harry , burn with a blush again . 
 " an accident . she faint when she be take by those bailiff . Brett cut her lace for she ; and when she be carry off , poor thing , we find a little sachet on the floor , which I open , not know in the least what it contain . and in it be Mr. Harry Warrington 's precious letter . and here , sir , be the case . " 
 a pang shoot through Harry 's heart . " great heaven ! why do not   she destroy it ? " he think . 
 " I I will give it back to Maria , " he say , stretch out his hand for the little locket . 
 " my dear , I have burn the foolish letter , " say the old lady . 
 " if you choose to betray I I must take the consequence . if you choose to write another , I can not help thee . but , in that case , Harry Esmond , I have rather never see thee again . will you keep my secret ? will you believe an old woman who love you and know the world well than you do ? I tell you , if you keep that foolish promise , misery and ruin be surely in store for you . what be a lad like you in the hand of a wily woman of the world , who make a toy of you ? she have entrap you into a promise , and your old aunt have cut the string and set you free . go back again ! betray I if you will , Harry . " 
 " I be not angry with you , aunt I wish I be , " say Mr. Warrington , with very great emotion . " I I shall not repeat what you tell I . " 
 " Maria never will , child mark my word ! " cry the old lady , eagerly . " she will never own that she have lose that paper . she will tell you that she have it . " 
 " but I be sure she she be very fond of I ; you should have see she last night , " falter Harry . 
 " must I tell more story against my own flesh and blood ? " sob out the Baroness . " child , you do not know her past life ! " 
 " and I must not , and I will not ! " cry Harry , start up . " write or say it do not matter which ! but my word be give ; they may play with such thing in England , but we gentleman of Virginia do not   break them . if she hold I to my word , she shall have I . if we be miserable , as I dare say we shall be , I will take a firelock , and go join the King of Prussia , or let a ball put an end to I . " 
 " I I have no more to say . will you be pleased to ring that bell ? I I wish you a good morning , Mr. Warrington , " and drop a very stately curtsey , the old lady rise on her tortoiseshell stick , and turn towards the door . but , as she make her first step , she put her hand to her heart , sink on the sofa again , an shed the first tear that have drop for long year from Beatrix Esmond 's eye . 
 Harry be greatly move , too . he kneel down by she . he seize her cold hand , and kiss it . he tell she , in his artless way , how very keenly he have feel her love for he , and how , with all his heart , he return it . " ah , aunt ! " say he , " you do not   know what a villain I feel myself . when you tell I , just now how that paper be burn oh ! I be ashamed to think how glad I be . " he bow his comely head over her hand . she feel hot drop from his eye rain on it . she have love this boy . for half a century past never , perhaps , in the course of her whole worldly life , have she feel a sensation so tender and so pure . the hard heart be wound now , soften , overcome . she put she two hand on his shoulder , and lightly kiss his forehead . 
 " you will not tell she what I have do , child ? " she say . 
 he declare never ! never ! and demure Mrs. Brett , enter at her mistress 's summon , find the nephew and aunt in this sentimental attitude . 




 CHAPTER XL . in which Harry pay off an Old Debt , and incur some New Ones 

 our Tunbridge friend be now weary of the Wells , and eager to take their departure . when the autumn should arrive , Bath be Madame de Bernstein 's mark . there be more card , company , life , there . she would reach it after pay a few visit to her country friend . Harry promise , with rather a bad grace , to ride with Lady Maria and the chaplain to Castlewood . again they pass by Oakhurst village , and the hospitable house where Harry have be so kindly entertain . Maria make so many keen remark about the young lady of Oakhurst , and their set their cap at Harry , and the mother 's evident desire to catch he for one of they , that , somewhat in a pet , Mr. Warrington say he would pass his friend ' door , as her ladyship dislike and abuse they ; and be very haughty and sulky that evening at the inn where they stop , some few mile far on the road . at supper , my Lady Maria 's smile bring no corresponding good - humour to Harry 's face ; her tear   which her ladyship have at command   do not seem to create the least sympathy from Mr. Warrington ; to her querulous remark he growl a surly reply ; and my lady be oblige to go to bed at length without get a single tete - a - tete with her cousin , that obstinate chaplain , as if by order , persist in stay in the room . have Harry give Sampson order to remain ? she depart with a sigh . he bow she to the door with an obstinate politeness , and consign she to the care of the landlady and she maid . 
 what horse be that which gallop out of the inn - yard ten minute after Lady Maria have go to her chamber ? an hour after her departure from their supper - room , Mrs. Betty come in for her lady 's bottle of smell - salt , and find Parson Sampson smoke a pipe alone . Mr. Warrington be go to bed be go to fetch a walk in the moonlight how should he know where Mr. Harry be ? Sampson answer , in reply to the maid 's interrogatory . Mr. Warrington be ready to set forward the next morning , and take his place by the side of Lady Maria 's carriage . but his brow be black the dark spirit be still on he . he hardly speak to she during the journey . " great heaven ! she must have tell he that she steal it ! " think Lady Maria within her own mind . 
 the fact be , that , as they be walk up that steep hill which lie about three mile from Oakhurst , on the Westerham road , Lady Maria Esmond , lean on her fond youth 's arm , and indeed very much in love with he , have warble into his ear the most sentimental vow , protest , and expression of affection . as she grow fonder , he grow cold . as she look up in his face , the sun shine down upon her , which , fresh and well - preserve as it be , yet show some of the line and wrinkle of twoscore year ; and poor Harry , with that arm lean on his , feel it intolerably weighty , and by no mean relish his walk up the hill . to think that all his life , that drag be to be upon he ! it be a dreary look forward and he curse the moonlight walk , and the hot evening , and the hot wine which have make he give that silly pledge by which he be fatally bind . 
 Maria 's praise and rapture annoy Harry beyond measure . the poor thing pour out scrap of the few play which she know that have reference to her case , and strove with her utmost power to charm her young companion . she call he , over and over again , her champion , her Henrico , her preserver , and vow that his Molinda would be ever , ever faithful to he . she cling to he . " ah , child ! have I not thy precious image , thy precious hair , thy precious writing here ? " she say , look in his face . " shall it not go with I to the grave ? it would , sir , be I to meet with unkindness from my Henrico ! " she sigh out . 
 here be a strange story ! Madame Bernstein have give he the little silken case she have burn the hair and the note which the case contain , and Maria have it still on her heart ! it be then , at the start which Harry give , as she be lean on his arm at the sudden movement as if he would drop hers that Lady Maria feel her first pang of remorse that she have tell a fib , or rather , that she be find out in tell a fib , which be a far more cogent reason for repentance . Heaven help we ! if some people be to do penance for tell lie , would they ever be out of sackcloth and ash ? 
 arrive at Castlewood , Mr. Harry 's good - humour be not increase . my lord be from home ; the lady also be away ; the only member of the family whom Harry find , be Mr. Will , who return from partridge - shooting just as the chaise and cavalcade reach the gate , and who turn very pale when he see his cousin , and receive a sulky scowl of recognition from the young Virginian . 
 nevertheless , he think to put a good face on the matter , and they meet at supper , where , before my Lady Maria , their conversation be at first civil , but not lively . Mr. Will have be to some race ? to several . he have be pretty successful in his bet ? Mr. Warrington hop . pretty well . " and you have bring back my horse sound ? " ask Mr. Warrington . 
 " your horse ! what horse ? " ask Mr. Will . 
 " what horse ? my horse ! " say Mr. Harry , curtly . 
 " protest I do not   understand you , " say will . 
 " the brown horse for which I play you , and which I win of you the night before you ride away upon it , " say Mr. Warrington , sternly . " you remember the horse , Mr. Esmond . " 
 " Mr. Warrington , I perfectly well remember play you for a horse , which my servant hand over to you on the day of your departure . " 
 " the chaplain be present at our play . Mr. Sampson , will you be umpire between we ? " Mr. Warrington say , with much gentleness . 
 " I be bind to decide that Mr. Warrington play for the brown horse , " say Mr. Sampson . 
 " well , he get the other one , " say sulky Mr. Will , with a grin . 
 " and sell it for thirty shilling ! " say Mr. Warrington , always preserve his calm tone . 
 will be waggish . " thirty shilling ? and a devilish good price , too , for the break - kneed old rip . ha , ha ! " 
 " not a word more . ' tis only a question about a bet , my dear Lady Maria . shall I serve you some more chicken ? " nothing could be more studiously courteous and gay than Mr. Warrington be , so long as the lady remain in the room . when she rise to go , Harry follow she to the door , and close it upon she with the most courtly bow of farewell . he stand at the closed door for a moment , and then he bid the servant retire . when those menial be go , Mr. Warrington lock the heavy door before they , and pocket the key . 
 as it click in the lock , Mr. Will , who have be sit over his punch , look now and then askance at his cousin , ask , with one of the oath which commonly garnish his conversation , what the Mr. Warrington mean by that ? 
 " I guess there be go to be a quarrel , " say Mr. Warrington , blandly , " and there be no use in have these fellow look on at row between their better . " 
 " who be go to quarrel here , I should like to know ? " ask Will , look very pale , and grasp a knife . 
 " Mr. Sampson , you be present when I play Mr. Will fifty guineas against his brown horse ? " 
 " against his horse ! " bawl out Mr. Will . 
 " I be not such a something fool as you take I for , " say Mr. Warrington , " although I do come from Virginia ! " and he repeat his question : " Mr. Sampson , you be here when I play the Honourable William Esmond , Esquire , fifty guineas against his brown horse ? " 
 " I must own it , sir , " say the chaplain , with a deprecatory look towards his lord 's brother . 
 " I do not   own no such a thing , " say Mr. Will , with rather a forced laugh . 
 " no , sir : because it cost you no more pain to lie than to cheat , " say Mr. Warrington , walk up to his cousin . " hand off , Mr. Chaplain , and see fair play ! because you be no well than a ha ! " 
 no well than a what we can not   say , and shall never know , for as Harry utter the exclamation , his dear cousin fling a wine bottle at Mr. Warrington 's head , who bob just in time , so that the missile fly across the room , and break against the wainscot opposite , break the face of a picture ancestor of the Esmond family , and then itself against the wall , whence it spirt a pint of good port wine over the chaplain 's face and flower wig . " great heaven , gentleman , I pray you to be quiet ! " cry the parson , drip with gore . 
 but gentleman be not incline at some moment to remember the command of the Church . the bottle have fail , Mr. Esmond seize the large silver - handle knife and drive at his cousin . but Harry catch up the other 's right hand with his left , as he have see the boxer do at Marybone ; and deliver a rapid blow upon Mr. Esmond 's nose , which send he reel up against the oak panel , and I dare say cause he to see ten thousand illumination . he drop his knife in his retreat against the wall , which his rapid antagonist kick under the table . 
 now will , too , have be at Marybone and Hockley - in - the - Hole , and after a gasp for breath and a glare over his bleed nose at his enemy , he dash forward his head as though it have be a battering - ram , intend to project it into Mr. Henry Warrington 's stomach . 
 this manoeuvre Harry have see , too , on his visit to Marybone , and amongst the negro upon the maternal estate , who would meet in combat like two concutient cannon - ball , each hard than the other . but Harry have see and mark the civilised practice of the white man . he skip aside , and , salute his advance enemy with a tremendous blow on the right ear , fell he , so that he strike his head against the heavy oak table and sink lifeless to the ground . 
 " Chaplain , you will bear witness that it have be a fair fight ! " say Mr. Warrington , still quiver with the excitement of the combat , but strive with all his might to restrain himself and look cool . and he draw the key from his pocket and open the door in the lobby , behind which three or four servant be gather . a crash of broken glass , a cry , a shout , an oath or two , have tell they that some violent scene be occur within , and they enter , and behold two victim bedabble with red the chaplain bleed port wine , and the Honourable William Esmond , Esquire , stretch in his own gore . 
 " Mr. Sampson will bear witness that I strike fair , and that Mr. Esmond hit the first blow , " say Mr. Warrington . " Undo his neckcloth , somebody he may be dead ; and get a fleam , Gumbo , and blee he . stop ! he be come to himself ! lift he up , you , and tell a maid to wash the floor . " 
 indeed , in a minute , Mr. Will do come to himself . first his eye roll about , or rather , I be ashamed to say , his eye , one have be close by Mr. Warrington 's first blow . first , then , his eye roll about ; then he gasp and utter an inarticulate moan or two , then he begin to swear and curse very freely and articulately . 
 " he be get well , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " oh , praise be Mussy ! " sigh the sentimental Betty . 
 " ask he , Gumbo , whether he would like any more ? " say Mr. Warrington , with a stern humour . 
 " Massa Harry say , wool you like any maw ? " ask obedient Gumbo , bow over the prostrate gentleman . 
 " no , curse you , you black devil ! " say Mr. Will , hit up at the black object before he .   " so he nearly cut my tongue in to in my mouf ! " Gumbo explain to the pitying Betty .   " no , that be , yes ! you infernal Mohock ! why do not somebody kick he out of the place ? " 
 " because nobody dare , Mr. Esmond , " say Mr. Warrington , with great state , arrange his ruffle his ruffled ruffle . 
 " and nobody will not   neither , " growl the man . they have all grow to love Harry , whereas Mr. Will have nobody 's good word . 
 " we know all be fair , sir . it be not   the first time Master William have be serve so . " 
 " and I hope it will not   be the last , " cry shrill Betty . " to go for to strike a poor black gentleman so ! " 
 Mr. Will have gather himself up by this time , have wipe his bleeding face with a napkin , and be skulk off to bed . 
 " surely it be manner to say good night to the company . good night , Mr. Esmond , " say Mr. Warrington , whose joke , though few , be not very brilliant ; but the honest lad relish the brilliant sally and laugh at it inwardly . 
 " he be ad his zopper , and he go to baid ! " say Betty , in her native dialect , at which everybody laugh outright , except Mr. William , who go away leave a black fume of curse , as it be , roll out of that funnel , his mouth . 
 it must be own that Mr. Warrington continue to be witty the next morning . he send a note to Mr. Will beg to know whether he be for a ride to town or anywhere else . if he be for London , that he would friten the highwayman on Hounslow Heath , and look a very genteel figar at the Chocolate House . which letter , I fear , Mr. Will receive with his usual violence , request the writer to go to some place not hounslow . 
 and , besides the parley between Will and Harry , there come a maiden simper to Mr. Warrington 's door , and Gumbo advance , hold something white and triangular in his ebon finger . 
 Harry know what it be well enough . " of course it be a letter , " groan he . molinda greet her Enrico , etc . etc . etc . no sleep have she know that night , and so forth , and so forth , and so forth . have Enrico sleep well in the hall of his father ? und so weiter , und so weiter . he must never never quaril and be so cruel again . Kai ta loipa . and I protest I shall not   quote any more of this letter . ah , tablet , golden once , be ye now fade leaf ? where be the juggler who transmute you , and why be the glamour over ? 
 after the little scandal with cousin will , Harry 's dignity would not allow he to stay long at Castlewood : he write a majestic letter to the lord of the mansion , explain the circumstance which have occur , and , as he call in Parson Sampson to supervise the document , no doubt it contain none of those eccentricity in spelling which figure in his ordinary correspondence at this period . he represent to poor Maria , that after blacken the eye and damage the nose of a son of the house , he should remain in it with a very bad grace ; and she be force to acquiesce in the opinion that , for the present , his absence would well become he . of course , she weep plentiful tear at part with he . he would go to London , and see young beauty : he would find none , none who would love he like his fond Maria . I fear Mr. Warrington do not exhibit any profound emotion on leave she : nay , he cheer up immediately after he cross Castlewood Bridge , and make his horse whisk over the road at ten mile an hour : he sing to they to go along : he nod to the pretty girl by the roadside : he chuck my landlady under the chin : he certainly be not inconsolable . truth be , he long to be back in London again , to make a figure at St. James 's , at Newmarket , wherever the man of fashion congregate . all that petty Tunbridge society of woman and card - playing seem child's - play to he now he have taste the delight of London life . 
 by the time he reach London again , almost all the four - and - forty pound which we have see that he possess at Tunbridge have slip out of his pocket , and further supply be necessary . regard these he make himself presently easy . there be the two sum of 5000 pound in his own and his brother 's name , of which he be the master . he would take up a little money , and with a run or two of good luck at play he could easily replace it . meantime he must live in a manner become his station , and it must be explain to Madam Esmond that a gentleman of his rank can not keep fitting company , and appear as become he in society , upon a miserable pittance of two hundred a year . 
 Mr. Warrington sojourn at the Bedford Coffee - House as before , but only for a short while . he seek out proper lodging at the Court end of the town , and fix on some apartment in Bond Street , where he and Gumbo instal themselves , his horse stand at a neighbouring livery - stable . and now tailor , mercer , and shoemaker be put in requisition . not without a pang of remorse , he lay aside his mourning and figure in a laced hat and waistcoat . Gumbo be always dexterous in the art of dress hair , and with a little powder fling into his fair lock Mr. Warrington 's head be as modish as that of any gentleman in the Mall . he figure in the Ring in his phaeton . report of his great wealth have long since precede he to London , and not a little curiosity be excited about the fortunate Virginian . 
 until our young friend could be ballot for at the proper season , my Lord March have write down his name for the club at White 's Chocolate - House , as a distinguished gentleman from America . there be as yet but few person of fashion in London , but with a pocket full of money at one - and - twenty , a young fellow can make himself happy even out of the season ; and Mr. Harry be determined to enjoy . 
 he order Mr. Draper , then , to sell five hundred pound of his stock . what would his poor mother have say have she know that the young spendthrift be already begin to dissipate his patrimony ? he din at the tavern , he sup at the club , where Jack Morris introduce he , with immense eulogium , to such gentleman as be in town . life and youth and pleasure be before he , the wine be set a - running , and the eager lad be greedy to drink . do you see , far away in the west yonder , the pious widow at her prayer for her son ? behind the tree at Oakhurst a tender little heart , too , be beat for he , perhaps . when the Prodigal Son be away carouse , be not love and forgiveness still on the watch for he ? 
 amongst the inedited letter of the late Lord Orford , there be one which the present learn editor , Mr. Peter Cunningbam , have omit from his collection , doubt possibly the authenticity of the document . Nay , I myself have only see a copy of it in the Warrington paper in Madam Esmond 's prim handwriting , and note " Mr. H. Walpole 's account of my son Henry at London , and of Baroness Tusher , write to General Conway . " 
 " ARLINGTON STREET , Friday Night . 
 " I have come away , child , for a day or two from my devotion to our Lady of Strawberry . have I not be on my knee to she these three week , and be not   the poor old joint full of rheumatism ? a fit take I that I would pay London a visit , that I would go to Vauxhall and Ranelagh . Quoi ! may I not have my rattle as well as other elderly baby ? suppose , after be so long virtuous , I take a fancy to cake and ale , shall your reverence say nay to I ? George Selwyn and Tony Storer and your humble servant take boat at Westminster t'other night . be it Tuesday ? no , Tuesday I be with their Graces of Norfolk , who be just from Tunbridge it be Wednesday . how should I know ? be not   I dead drunk with a whole pint of lemonade I take at White 's ? 
 " the Norfolk folk have be entertain I on Tuesday with the account of a young savage Iroquois , Choctaw , or Virginian , who have lately be make a little noise in our quarter of the globe . he be an offshoot of that disreputable family of Esmond , Castlewood , of whom all the man be gambler and spendthrift , and all the woman well , I shall not   say the word , lest Lady Ailesbury should be look over your shoulder . both the late lord , my father tell I , be in his pay , and the last one , a beau of Queen Anne 's reign , from a viscount advanced to be an earl through the merit and intercession of his notorious old sister Bernstein , late Tusher , nee Esmond a great beauty , too , of her day , a favourite of the old Pretender . she sell his secret to my papa , who pay she for they ; and be nowise particular in her love for the Stuarts , come over to the august Hanoverian house at present reign over we . ' will Horace Walpole 's tongue never stop scandal ? ' say your wife over your shoulder . I kiss your ladyship 's hand . I be dumb . the Bernstein be a model of virtue . she have no good reason for marry her father 's chaplain . many of the nobility omit the marriage altogether . she be not   ashamed of be Mrs. Tusher , and do not   take a german Baroncino for a second husband , whom nobody out of Hanover ever see . the Yarmouth bear no malice . Esther and Vashti be very good friend , and have be cheat each other at Tunbridge at card all the summer . 
 " ' and what have all this to do with the Iroquois ? ' say your ladyship . the Iroquois have be at Tunbridge , too not cheat , perhaps , but win vastly . they say he have bleed Lord March of thousand Lord March , by whom so much blood hath be shed , that he have quarrel with everybody , fight with everybody , ride over everybody , be fall in love with by everybody 's wife except Mr. Conway 's , and not except her present Majesty , the Countess of England , Scotland , France and Ireland , queen of Walmoden and Yarmouth , whom Heaven preserve to we . 
 " you know an offensive little creature , de par le monde , one Jack Morris , who skip in and out of all the house of London . when we be at Vauxhall , Mr. Jack give we a nod under the shoulder of a pretty young fellow enough , on whose arm he be lean , and who appear hugely delighted with the enchantment of the garden . Lord , how he star at the firework ! god , how he huzzaye at the singing of a horrible paint wench who shriek the ear off my head ! a twopenny string of glass bead and a strip of tawdry cloth be treasure in Iroquois - land , and our savage value they accordingly . 
 " a buzz go about the place that this be the fortunate youth . he win three hundred at White 's last night very genteelly from Rockingham and my precious nephew , and here he be bellow and huzzaye over the music so as to do you good to hear . I do not love a puppet - show , but I love to treat child to one , Miss Conway ! I present your ladyship my compliment , and hope we shall go and see the doll together . 
 " when the singing woman come down from her throne , Jack Morris must introduce my Virginian to she . I see he blush up to the eye , and make she , upon my word , a very fine bow , such as I have no idea be practise in wigwam . ' there be a certain jenny squaw about she , and that be why the savage like she , ' George say a joke certainly not as brilliant as a firework . after which it seem to I that the savage and the savage retire together . 
 " have have a great deal too much to eat and drink three hour before , my partner must have chicken and rack - punch at Vauxhall , where George fall asleep straightway , and for my sin I must tell Tony Storer what I know about this Virginian 's amiable family , especially some of the Bernstein 's antecedent , and the history of another elderly beauty of the family , a certain Lady Maria , who be au mieux with the late Prince of Wales . what do I say ? I protest not half of what I know , and of course not a tenth part of what I be go to tell , for who should start out upon we but my savage , this time quite red in the face ; and in his war paint . the wretch have be drink fire - water in the next box ! 
 " he cock his hat , clap his hand to his sword , ask which of the gentleman be it that be malign his family ? so that I be oblige to entreat he not to make such a noise , lest he should wake my friend , Mr. George Selwyn . and I add , ' I assure you , sir , I have no idea that you be near I , and most sincerely apologise for give you pain . ' 
 " the Huron take his hand off his tomahawk at this pacific rejoinder , make a bow not ungraciously , say he could not , of course , ask more than an apology from a gentleman of my age   Merci , monsieur ! , and , hear the name of Mr. Selwyn , make another bow to George , and say he have a letter to he from Lord March , which he have have the ill - fortune to mislay . George have put he up for the club , it appear , in conjunction with March , and no doubt these three lamb will fleece each other . meanwhile , my pacified savage sate down with we , and bury the hatchet in another bowl of punch , for which these gentleman must call . Heaven help we ! ' tis eleven o'clock , and here come Bedson with my gruel ! H. W. 
 " to the Honourable . H. S. Conway . " 




 CHAPTER XLI . rake 's Progress 

 People be still very busy in Harry Warrington 's time   not that our young gentleman take much heed of the controversy   in determine the relative literary merit of the ancient and the modern ; and the learn , and the world with they , indeed , pretty generally pronounce in favour of the former . the modern of that day be the ancient of ours , and we speculate upon they in the present year of grace , as our grandchild , a hundred year hence , will give their judgment about we . as for your book - learning , o respectable ancestor   though , to be sure , you have the mighty Gibbon with you , I think you will own that you be beat , and could point to a couple of professor at Cambridge and Glasgow who know more greek than be to be have in your time in all the university of Europe , include that of Athens , if such an one exist . as for science , you be scarce more advanced than those heathen to whom in literature you own yourselves inferior . and in public and private morality ? which be the well , this actual year 1858 , or its predecessor a century back ? gentleman of Mr. Disraeli 's House of Commons ! have every one of you his price , as in Walpole 's or Newcastle 's time , or   and that be the delicate question   have you almost all of you have it ? lady , I do not say that you be a society of Vestals but the chronicle of a hundred year since contain such an amount of scandal , that you may be thankful you do not live in such dangerous time . no : on my conscience , I believe that man and woman be both well ; not only that the Susannas be more numerous , but that the Elders be not nearly so wicked . do you ever hear of such book as Clarissa , Tom Jones , Roderick Random ; painting by contemporary artist , of the man and woman , the life and society , of their day ? suppose we be to describe the doing of such a person as Mr. Lovelace or my Lady Bellaston , or that wonderful " Lady of Quality " who lend her memoir to the author of Peregrine Pickle . how the pure and outraged Nineteenth Century would blush , scream , run out of the room , call away the young lady , and order Mr. Mudie never to send one of that odious author 's book again ! you be fifty - eight year old , madam , and it may be that you be too squeamish , that you cry out before you be hurt , and when nobody have any intention of offend your ladyship . also , it may be that the novelist 's art be injure by the restraint put upon he as many an honest , harmless statue at St. Peter 's and the Vatican be spoil by the tin drapery in which ecclesiastical old woman have swaddle the fair limb of the marble . but in your prudery there be reason . so there be in the state censorship of the Press . the page may contain matter dangerous to bono more . out with your scissor , censor , and clip off the prurient paragraph ! we have nothing for it but to submit . Society , the despot , have give his imperial decree . we may think the statue have be see to great advantage without the tin drapery ; we may plead that the moral be well might we recite the whole fable . away with he not a word ! I never see the pianoforte in the United States with the frille muslin trouser on their leg ; but , depend on it , the muslin cover some of the note as well as the mahogany , muffle the music , and stop the player . 
 to what do this prelude introduce we ? I be think of Harry Warrington , Esquire , in his lodging in Bond Street , London , and of the life which he and many of the young buck of fashion lead in those time , and how I can no more take my faire young reader into they , than Lady Squeams can take her daughter to Cremorne Gardens on an ordinary evening . my dear Miss Diana   psha ! I know you be eight - and - thirty , although you be so wonderfully shy , and want to make we believe you have just leave off schoolroom dinner and a pinafore , when your grandfather be a young man about town , and a member of one of the club at White 's , and din at Pontac 's off the feast provide by Braund and Lebeck , and ride to Newmarket with March and Rockingham , and toast the good in England with Gilly Williams and George Selwyn   and do not   understand George 's joke , of which , indeed , the flavour have very much evaporate since the bottle   the old gentleman lead a life of which your noble aunt   author of Legends of the Squeams 's ; or , Fair Fruits of a Family Tree   have not give you the slight idea . 
 it be before your grandmother adopt those serious view for which she be distinguish during her last long residence at Bath , and after Colonel Tibbalt marry Miss Lye , the rich soap - boiler 's heiress , that her ladyship 's wild oat be sown . when she be young , she be as giddy as the rest of the genteel world . at her house in Hill Street , she have ten card - table on Wednesdays and Sunday evening , except for a short time when Ranelagh be open on Sundays . every night of her life she gamble for eight , nine , ten hour . everybody else in society do the like . she lose ; she win ; she cheat ; she pawn her jewel ; who know what else she be not ready to pawn , so as to find fund to supply her fury for play ? what be that after - supper duel at the Shakspeare 's Head in Covent Garden , between your grandfather and Colonel Tibbalt : where they draw sword and engage only in the presence of Sir John Screwby , who be drunk under the table ? they be interrupt by Mr. John Fielding 's people , and your grandfather be carry home to Hill Street wound in a chair . I tell you those gentleman in powder and ruffle , who turn out the toe of their buckle pump so delicately , be terrible fellow . sword be perpetually be draw ; bottle after bottle be drunk ; oath roar unceasingly in conversation ; tavern - drawer and watchman be pink and maim ; chairman belabour ; citizen insult by reel pleasure - hunter . you have be to Cremorne with proper " voucher " of course ? do you remember our great theatre thirty year ago ? you be too good to go to a play . well , you have no idea what the playhouse be , or what the green box be , when Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard be play before they ! and I , for my child 's sake , thank that good actor in his retirement who be the first to banish that shame from the theatre . no , madam , you be mistaken ; I do not plume myself on my superior virtue . I do not say you be naturally well than your ancestress in her wild , rouge , gambling , flare tearing day ; or even than poor Polly Fogle , who be just take up for shoplifting , and would have be hang for it a hundred year ago . only , I be heartily thankful that my temptation be less , have quite enough to do with those of the present century . 
 so , if Harry Warrington rid down to Newmarket to the October meeting , and lose or win his money there ; if he make one of a party at the Shakspeare or Bedford Head ; if he din at White 's ordinary , and sit down to macco and lansquenet afterwards ; if he box the watch , and make his appearance at the roundhouse ; if he turn out for a short space a wild dissipate , harum - scarum young Harry Warrington ; I , know the weakness of human nature , be not go to be surprised ; and , quite aware of my own shortcoming , do not   intend to be very savage at my neighbour 's . Mr. Sampson be : in his chapel in Long Acre he whip Vice tremendously ; give sin no quarter ; out - curse Blasphemy with superior Anathemas ; knock Drunkenness down , and trample on the prostrate brute wallowing in the gutter ; drag out conjugal infidelity , and pound she with endless stone of rhetoric and , after service , come to dinner at the Star and Garter , make a bowl of punch for Harry and his friend at the Bedford Head , or take a hand at whist at Mr. Warrington 's lodging or my Lord March 's , or wherever there be a supper and good company for he . 
 I often think , however , in respect of Mr. Warrington 's doing at this period of his come to London , that I may have take my usual degrading and uncharitable view of he for , you see , I have not utter a single word of virtuous indignation against his conduct , and if it be not reprehensible , have certainly judge he most cruelly . o the truthful , o the beautiful , o Modesty , O Benevolence , o Pudor , O Mores , o Blushing Shame , o Namby Pamby each with your respective capital letter to your honoured name ! o Niminy , O Piminy ! how shall I dare for to go for to say that a young man ever be a young man ? 
 no doubt , dear young lady , I be calumniate Mr. Warrington accord to my heartless custom . as a proof here be a letter out of the Warrington collection , from Harry to his mother in which there be not a single word that would lead you to suppose he be lead a wild life . and such a letter from an only son to a fond and exemplary parent , we know must be true : 
 " bond STREET , LONDON , October 25 , 1756 . 
 " HONORD MADAM I take up my pen to acknowledge your honored favor of 10 July per Lively Virginia packet , which have duly come to hand , forward by our Bristol agent , and rejoice to hear that the prospect of the crop be so good . ' tis Tully who say that agriculture be the noble pursuit ; how delightful when that pursuit be also prophetable ! 
 " since my last , date from Tunbridge Wells , one or two insadence have occur of which it be nessasery   this word have be much operate upon with the penknife , but be leave sic , no doubt to the writer 's satisfaction .   I should advise my honored mother . our party there break up end of August : the partridge - shoot commencing . Baroness Bernstein , whose kindness to I have be most invariable , have be to Bath , her usual winter resort , and have make I a welcome present of a fifty - pound bill . I ride back with Rev. Mr. Sampson , whose instruction I find most valluble , and my cousin , Lady Maria , to Castlewood .   could Parson Sampson have be dictate the above remark to Mr. Warrington ?   I pay a fly visit on the way to my dear kind friend Col . and Mrs. Lambert , Oakhurst House , who send my honored mother their most affectionate remembrance . the young Miss Lambert , I grieve to say , be dellicate ; and her parent in some anxiety . 
 " at Castlewood I lament to state my stay be short , owe to a quarrel with my cousin William . he be a young man of violent passion , and alas ! addict to liquor , when he have no controul over they . in a triffling dispute about a horse , high word arise between we , and he ayme a blow at I or its equivulent which my Grandfathers my honored mother child could not brook . I rejoyne , and feld he to the ground , whent he be carry almost sencelis to bed . I send to enquire after his health in the morning : but have no further news of he , come away to London where I have be ever since with brief intavle of absence . 
 " know you would wish I to see my dear Grandfathers University of Cambridge , I ride thither lately in company with some friend , pass through part of hart , and lie at the famous bed of Ware . the October meeting be just begin at Cambridge when I go . I see the student in their gownd and capp , and ride over to the famous Newmarket Heath , where there happen to be some race my friend Lord Marchs horse Marrowbones by Cleaver come off winner of a large steak . it be an amusing day the jockey , horse , etc . , very different to our poor race at home the bet awful the rich nobleman here mix with the jox , and bett all round . Cambridge please I : especially King 's College Chapel , of a rich but elegant Gothick . 
 " I have be out into the world , and be make member of the Club at White 's , where I meet gentleman of the first fashion . my Lords Rockingham , Carlisle , Orford , Bolingbroke , Coventry be of my friend , introduce to I by my Lord March , of whom I have often write before . Lady Coventry be a fine woman , but thinn . every lady paint here , old and young ; so , if you and Mountain and Fanny wish to be in fashion , I must send you out some roogepot : everybody play eight , ten , card - table at every house on every receive - night . I be sorry to say all do not play fair , and some do not pay fair . I have be oblige to sit down , and do as Rome do , and have actually see lady whom I could name take my counter from before my face ! 
 " one day , his regiment the 20th be parade in St. James 's Park , a friend of mine , Mr. Wolfe , do I the honour to present I to his Royal Highness the Captain - General , who be most gracious ; a fat , jolly Prince , if I may speak so without disrespect , remind I in his manner of that unhappy General Braddock ; whom we know to our sorrow last year . when he hear my name , and how dear George have serve and fall in Braddock 's unfortunate campaign , he talk a great deal with I ; ask why a young fellow like I do not serve too ; why I do not go to the King of Prussia , who be a great general , and see a campaign or two ; and whether that would not be well than dawdle about at rout and card - party in London ? I say , I would like to go with all my heart , but be an only son now , on leave from my mother , and belong to our estate in Virginia . his Royal Highness say , Mr. Braddock have write home account of Mrs. Esmond 's loyalty , and that he would gladly serve I . Mr. Wolfe and I have wait on he since , at his Royal Highness 's house in Pall Mall . the latter , who be still quite a young man , make the Scots campaign with his Highness , whom Mr. Dempster love so much at home . to be sure , he be too severe : if anything can be top severe against rebel in arm . 
 " Mr. Draper have have half the Stock , my late Papa 's property , transfer to my name . until there can be no doubt of that painful loss in our family which I would give my right hand to replace , the remain stock must remain in the trustee ' name in behalf of he who inherit it . ah , dear mother ! there be no day , scarce any hour , when I do not   think of he . I wish he be by I often . I feel like as if I be well when I be think of he , and would like , for the honour of my family , that he be represent of it here instead of honored madam , your dutiful and affectionate son , HENRY ESMOND WARRINGTON . " 
 " P.S. I be like your sex , who always , they say , put their chief news in a poscrip . I have something to tell you about a person to whom my heart be engage . I shall write more about it , which there be no hurry . safice she be a nobleman 's daughter , and her family as good as our own . " 
 " CLARGIS STREET , LONDON , October 23 , 1756 . 
 " I think , my good sister , we have be all our life a little more than kin and less than kind , to use the word of a poet whom your dear father love dearly . when you be bear in our Western Principallitie , my mother be not as old as Isaac 's ; but even then I be much more than old enough to be yours . and though she give you all she could leave or give , include the little portion of love that ought to have be my share , yet , if we can have good will for one another , we may learn to do without affection : and some little kindness you owe I , for your son 's sake ; as well as your father 's , whom I love and admire more than any man I think ever I know in this world : he be great than almost all , though he make no noyse in it . I have see very many who have , and , believe I , have find but few with such good head and good hart as Mr. Esmond . 
 " have we be well acquaint , I might have give you some advice regard your young gentleman 's introduction to Europe , which you would have take or not , as people do in this world . at least you would have se afterwards , ' what she counsel I be right , and have Harry do as Madam Beatrix wisht , it have be well for he . ' my good sister , it be not for you to know , or for I to whom you never write to tell you , but your boy in come to England and Castlewood find but ill friend there ; except one , an old aunt , of whom all kind of evil hath be speak and se these fifty year past and not without cawse too , perhaps . 
 " now , I must tell Harry 's mother what will doubtless scarce astonish she , that almost everybody who know he love he . he be prudent of his tongue , generous of his money , as bold as a lyon , with an imperious domineering way that set well upon he ; you know whether he be handsome or not : my dear , I like he none the less for not be over witty or wise , and never care for your sett - the - Thames afire gentleman , who be so much more clever than their neighbour . your father 's great friend , Mr. Addison , seem to I but a supercillious prig , and his follower , Sir Dick Steele , be not pleasant in his cupp , nor out of them . and   revenon a luy   your Master Harry will certainly , pot burn the river up with his wit . of book - learning he be as ignorant as any lord in England , and for this I hold he none the bad . if Heaven have not give he a turn that way , ' tis of no use try to bend he . 
 " consider the place he be to hold in his own colony when he return , and the stock he come from , let I tell you , that he hath not mean enough allow he to support his station , and be likely to make the more depence from the narrowness of his income from sheer despair break out of all bound , and become extravagant , which be not his turn . but he like to live as well as the rest of his company , and , between ourselves , have fall into some of the finist and most rakish in England . he think ' tis for the honour of the family not to go back , and many a time call for ortolan and champaign when he would as leaf dine with a stake and a mugg of beer . and in this kind of spirit I have no doubt from what he hath tell I in his talk   which be very naif , as the French say , that his mamma hath encourage he in his high opinion of himself . we woman like our belonging to have it , however little we love to pay the cost . will you have your ladd make a figar in London ? trebble his allowance at the very least , and his Aunt Bernstein   with his honored mamma 's permission   will add a little more on to whatever summ you give he . otherwise he will be spend the little capital I learn he have in this country , which , when a ladd once begin to manger , there be very soon an end to the loaf . please God , I shall be able to leave Henry Esmond 's grandson something at my death ; but my saving be small , and the pension with which my gracious Sovereign hath endow I die with I . as for feu M. de Bernstein , he leave only debt at his decease : the officer of his Majesty 's Electoral Court of Hannover be but scantily pay . 
 " a lady who be at present very high in his Majesty 's confidence hath take a great phancy to your ladd , and will take an early occasion to bring he to the Sovereign 's favorable notice . his Royal Highness the Duke he hath see . if live in America he must , why should not Mr. Esmond Warrington return as Governor of Virginia , and with a title to his name ? that be what I hope for he . 
 " meanwhile , I must be candid with you , and tell you I fear he hath entangle himself here in a very silly engagement . even to marry an old woman for money be scarce pardonable the game ne valant gueres la chandelle Mr. Bernstein , when alive , more than once assure I of this fact , and I believe he , poor gentleman ! to engage yourself to an old woman without money , and to marry she merely because you have promise she , this seem to I a follie which only very young lad fall into , and I fear Mr. Warrington be one . how , or for what consideration , I know not , but my niece Maria Esmond hath escamote a promise from Harry . he know nothing of her anteceden , which I do . she hath lay herself out for twenty husband these twenty year past . I care not how she hath get the promise from he . ' tis a sin and a shame that a woman more than forty year old should surprize the honour of a child like that , and hold he to his word . she be not the woman she pretend to be . a horse jockey   he saith   can not take he in but a woman ! 
 " I write this news to you advisedly , displeasant as it must be . perhaps ' twill bring you to England : but I would be very cautious , above all , very gentle , for the bitt will instantly make his high spirit restive . I fear the property be entail , so that threat of cut he off from it will not move Maria . otherwise I know she to be so mercenary that   though she really hath a great phancy for this handsome ladd   without money she would not hear of he . all I could , and more than I ought , I have do to prevent the match . what and more I will not say in writing ; but that I be , for Henry Esmond 's sake , his grandson 's sincere friend , and madam , your faithful sister and servant , BEATRIX BARONESS DE BERNSTEIN . 
 " to Mrs. Esmond Warrington of Castlewood , in Virginia . " 
 on the back of this letter be write , in Madam Esmond 's hand , " my sister Bernstein 's letter , receive with Henry 's December 24 on receipt of which it be determine my son should instantly go home . " 




 CHAPTER XLII . Fortunatus Nimium 

 though Harry Warrington persist in his determination to keep that dismal promise which his cousin have extract from he , we trust no benevolent reader will think so ill of he as to suppose that the engagement be to the young fellow 's taste , and that he would not be heartily glad to be rid of it . very likely the beating administer to poor Will be to this end ; and Harry may have think , " a boxing - match between we be sure to bring on a quarrel with the family ; in the quarrel with the family , Maria may take her brother 's side . I , of course , will make no retraction or apology . will , in that case , may call I to account , when I know which be the well man . in the midst of the feud , the agreement may come to an end , and I may be a free man once more . " 
 so honest Harry lay his train , and fire it : but , the explosion over , no harm be find to be do , except that William Esmond 's nose be swollen , and his eye black for a week . he do not send a challenge to his cousin , Harry Warrington ; and , in consequence , neither kill Harry , nor be kill by he . will be knock down , and he get up again . how many man of sense would do the same , could they get their little account settle in a private place , with nobody to tell how the score be pay ! Maria by no mean take her family 's side in the quarrel , but declare for her cousin , as do my lord , when advise of the disturbance . will have strike the first blow , Lord Castlewood say , by the chaplain 's showing . it be not the first or the tenth time he have be find quarrel in his cup . Mr. Warrington only show a proper spirit in resent the injury , and it be for Will , not for Harry , to ask pardon . 
 Harry say he would accept no apology as long as his horse be not return or his bet pay . the chronicler have not be able to find out , from any of the paper which have come under his view , how that affair of the bet be finally arrange ; but ' tis certain the cousin presently meet in the house of various friend , and without maul each other . 
 Maria 's eld brother have be at first quite willing that his sister , who have remain unmarried for so many year , and on the train of whose robe , in her long course over the path of life , so many briar , so much mud , so many rent and stain have naturally gather , should marry with any bridegroom who present himself , and if with a gentleman from Virginia , so much the well . she would retire to his wigwam in the forest , and there be dispose of . in the natural course of thing , Harry would survive his elderly bride , and might console himself or not , as he prefer , after her departure . 
 but , after an interview with Aunt Bernstein , which his lordship have on his come to London , he change his opinion : and even go so far as to try and dissuade Maria from the match ; and to profess a pity for the young fellow who be make to undergo a life of misery on account of a silly promise give at one - and - twenty ! 
 Misery , indeed ! Maria be at a loss to know why he be to be miserable . pity , forsooth ! my lord at Castlewood have think it be no pity at all . Maria know what pity mean . her brother have be with Aunt Bernstein : Aunt Bernstein have offer money to break this match off . she understand what my lord mean , but Mr. Warrington be a man of honour , and she could trust he . away , upon this , walk my lord to White 's , or to whatever haunt he frequent . it be probable that his sister have guess too accurately what the nature of his conversation wit Madame Bernstein have be . 
 " and so , " think he , " the end of my virtue be likely to be that the Mohock will fall a prey to other , and that there be no earthly use in my spar he . ' quem deus vult ' what be that schoolmaster 's adage ? if I do not   have he , somebody else will , that be clear . my brother have have a slice ; my dear sister want to swallow the whole of he bodily . here have I be at home respect his youth and innocence forsooth , decline to play beyond the value of a sixpence , and act guardian and Mentor to he . why , I be but a fool to fatten a goose for other people to feed off ! not many a good action have I do in this life , and here be this one , that serve to benefit whom ? other folk . talk of remorse ! by all the fire and fury , the remorse I have be for thing I have not   do and might have do ! why do I spare Lucretia ? she hat I ever after , and her husband go the way for which he be predestine . why have I let this lad off ? that March and the rest , who do not   want he , may pluck he ! and I have a bad repute ; and I be the man people point at , and call the wicked lord , and against whom woman warn their son ! Pardi , I be not a penny bad , only a great deal more unlucky than my neighbour , and ' tis only my cursed weakness that have be my great enemy ! " here , manifestly , in set down a speech which a gentleman only think , a chronicler overdraw his account with the patient reader , who have a right not to accept this draft on his credulity . but have not Livy , and Thucydides , and a score more of historian , make speech for their hero , which we know the latter never think of deliver ? how much more may we then , know my Lord Castlewood 's character so intimately as we do , declare what be pass in his mind , and transcribe his thought on this paper ? what ? a whole pack of the wolf be on the hunt after this lamb , and will make a meal of he presently , and one hungry old hunter be to stand by , and not have a single cutlet ? who have not admire that noble speech of my Lord Clive , when reproach on his return from India with make rather too free with jaghire , lakh , gold mohur , diamond , pearl , and what not ? " upon my life , " say the hero of Plassy , " when I think of my opportunity , I be surprised I take so little ! " 
 to tell disagreeable story of a gentleman , until one be in a manner force to impart they , be always painful to a feeling mind . hence , though I have know , before the very first page of this history be write , what sort of a person my Lord Castlewood be , and in what esteem he be hold by his contemporary , I have keep back much that be unpleasant about he , only allow the candid reader to perceive that he be a nobleman who ought not to be at all of our liking . it be true that my Lord March , and other gentleman of whom he complain , would have think no more of bet with Mr. Warrington for his last shilling , and take their winning , than they would scruple to pick the bone of a chicken ; that they would take any advantage of the game , or their superior skill in it , of the race , and their private knowledge of the horse engage ; in so far , they follow the practice of all gentleman : but when they play , they play fair ; and when they lose , they pay . 
 now Madame Bernstein be loth to tell her virginian nephew all she know to his family 's discredit ; she be even touch by my lord 's forbearance in regard to Harry on his first arrival in Europe ; and please with his lordship 's compliance with her wish in this particular . but in the conversation which she have with her nephew Castlewood regard Maria 's design on Harry , he have speak his mind out with his usual cynicism , vote himself a fool for have spar a lad whom no sparing would eventually keep from ruin ; point out Mr. Harry 's undeniable extravagance and spendthrift associate , his night at faro and hazard , and his ride to Newmarket , and ask why he alone should keep his hand from the young fellow ? in vain Madame Bernstein plead that Harry be poor . Bah ! he be heir to a principality which ought to have be his , Castlewood 's , and might have set up their ruin family .   indeed Madame Bernstein think Mr. Warrington 's virginian property much great than it be .   be there not money - lender in the town who would give he money on postobit in plenty ? Castlewood know as much to his cost : he have apply to they in his father 's lifetime , and the curse crew have eat up two - third of his miserable income . he speak with such desperate candour and ill - humour , that Madame Bernstein begin to be alarmed for her favourite , and determine to caution he at the first opportunity . 
 that evening she begin to pen a billet to Mr. Warrington : but all her life long she be slow with her pen , and dislike use it . " I never know any good come of write more than bon jour or business , " she use to say . " what be the use of write ill , when there be so many clever people who can do it well ? and even then it be well leave alone . " so she send one of her man to Mr. Harry 's lodging , bid he come and drink a dish of tea with her next day , when she propose to warn he . 
 but the next morning she be indispose , and could not receive Mr. Harry when he come : and she keep her chamber for a couple of day , and the next day there be a great engagement , and the next day Mr. Harry be off on some expedition of his own . in the whirl of London life , what man see his neighbour , what brother his sister , what schoolfellow his old friend ? ever so many day pass before Mr. Warrington and his aunt have that confidential conversation which the latter desire . 
 she begin by scold he mildly about his extravagance and madcap frolic   though , in truth , she be charm with he for both   he reply that young man will be young man , and that it be in dutifully wait in attendance on his aunt , he have make the acquaintance with whom he mostly live at present . she then with some prelude , begin to warn he regard his cousin , Lord Castlewood ; on which he break into a bitter laugh , and say the good - natured world have tell he plenty about Lord Castlewood already . " to say of a man of his lordship 's rank , or of any gentleman , ' do not   play with he , ' be more than I like to do , " continue the lady ; " but ... " 
 " oh , you may say on , aunt ! " say Harry , with something like an imprecation on his lip . 
 " and have you play with your cousin already ? " ask the young man 's worldly old monitress . 
 " and lose and win , madam ! " answer Harry , gallantly . " it do not   become I to say which . if we have a bout with a neighbour in Virginia , a bottle , or a pack of card , or a quarrel , we do not   go home and tell our mother . I mean no offence , aunt ! " and , blushing , the handsome young fellow go up and kiss the old lady . he look very brave and brilliant , with his rich lace , his fair face and hair , his fine new suit of velvet and gold . on take leave of his aunt he give his usual sumptuous benefaction to her servant , who crowd round he . it be a rainy wintry day , and my gentleman , to save his fine silk stocking , must come in a chair . " to White 's ! " he call out to the chairman , and away they carry he to the place where he pass a great deal of his time . 
 our Virginian 's friend might have wish that he have be a less sedulous frequenter of that house of entertainment ; but so much may be say in favour of Mr. Warrington that , have engage in play , he fight his battle like a hero . he be not fluster by good luck , and perfectly calm when the chance go against he . if Fortune be proverbially fickle to man at play , how many man be fickle to Fortune , run away frightened from her advance ; and desert she , who , perhaps , have never think of leave they but for their cowardice . " by George , Mr. Warrington , " say Mr. Selwyn , wake up in a rare fit of enthusiasm , " you deserve to win ! you treat your luck as a gentleman should , and as long as she remain with you , behave to she with the most perfect politeness . si celere quatit penna you know the rest no ? well , you be not much the bad off you will call her ladyship 's coach , and make she a bow at the step . look at Lord Castlewood yonder , pass the box . do you ever hear a fellow curse and swear so at lose five or six piece ? she must be a jade indeed , if she long give she favour to such a niggardly canaille as that ! " 
 " we do not   consider our family canaille , sir , " say Mr. Warrington , " and my Lord Castlewood be one of they . " 
 " I forget . I forget , and ask your pardon ! and I make you my compliment upon my lord , and Mr. Will Esmond , his brother , " say Harry 's neighbour at the hazard - table . " the box be with I . five be the main ! deuce Ace ! my usual luck . virtute mea I involvo ! " and he sink back in his chair . 
 whether it be upon this occasion of take the box , that Mr. Harry throw the fifteen main mention in one of those other letter of Mr. Walpole 's , which have not come into his present learn editor 's hand , I know not ; but certain it be , that on his first appearance at White 's , Harry have five or six evening of prodigious good luck , and seem more than ever the Fortunate Youth . the five hundred pound withdraw from his patrimonial inheritance have multiply into thousand . he buy fine clothe , purchase fine horse , give grand entertainment , make handsome present , live as if he have be as rich as Sir James Lowther , or his Grace of Bedford , and yet the five thousand pound never seem to diminish . no wonder that he give where giving be so easy ; no wonder that he be generous with Fortunatus 's purse in his pocket . I say no wonder that he give , for such be his nature . other Fortunati tie up the endless purse , drink small beer , and go to bed with a tallow candle . 
 during this vein of his luck , what must Mr. Harry do , but find out from Lady Maria what her ladyship 's debt be , and pay they off to the last shilling . her stepmother and half - sister , who do not love she , he treat to all sort of magnificent present . " have you not well get yourself arrest , will ? " my lord sardonically say to his brother . " although you bit he in that affair of the horse , the Mohock will certainly take you out of pawn . " it be then that Mr. William feel a true remorse , although not of that humble kind which send the repentant Prodigal to his knee . " confound it , " he groan , " to think that I have let this fellow slip for such a little matter as forty pound ! why , he be good for a thousand at least . " 
 as for Maria , that generous creature accept the good fortune send she with a grateful heart ; and be ready to accept as much more as you please . have pay off her debt to her various milliner , tradesman , and purveyor , she forthwith proceed to contract new one . Mrs. Betty , her ladyship 's maid , go round inform the tradespeople that her mistress be about to contract a matrimonial alliance with a young gentleman of immense fortune ; so that they might give my lady credit to any amount . have hear the same story twice or thrice before , the tradesfolk might not give it entire credit , but their bill be pay : even to Mrs. Pincott , of Kensington , my lady show no rancour , and affably order fresh supply from she : and when she drive about from the mercer to the toy - shop , and from the toy - shop to the jeweller in a coach , with she maid and Mr. Warrington inside , they think she a fortunate woman indeed , to have secure the Fortunate Youth , though they might wonder at the taste of this latter in have select so elderly a beauty . Mr. Sparks , of Tavistock Street , Covent Garden , take the liberty of wait upon Mr. Warrington at his lodging in Bond Street , with the pearl necklace and the gold etwee which he have buy in Lady Maria 's company the day before ; and ask whether he , Sparks , should leave they at his honour 's lodging , or send they to her ladyship with his honour 's compliment ? Harry add a ring out of the stock which the jeweller happen to bring with he , to the necklace and the etwee ; and sumptuously bid that individual to send he in the bill , take a majestic leave of Mr. Sparks , who retire , bow even to Gumbo , as he quit his honour 's presence . 
 nor do his bounty end here . Ere many day the pleased young fellow drive up in his phaeton to Mr. Sparks ' shop , and take a couple of trinket for two young lady , whose parent have be kind to he , and for whom he entertain a sincere regard . " ah ! " think he , " how I wish I have my poor George 's wit , and genius for poetry ! I would send these present with pretty verse to Hetty and Theo . I be sure , if goodwill and real regard could make a poet of I , I should have no difficulty in find rhyme . " and so he call in Parson Sampson , and they concoct a billet together . 




 CHAPTER XLIII . in which Harry fly high 

 so Mr. Harry Warrington , of Virginia , have his lodging in Bond Street , London , England , and live upon the fat of the land , and drink bumper of the good wine thereof . his title of Fortunate Youth be pretty generally recognise . be young , wealthy , good - look , and fortunate , the fashionable world take he by the hand and make he welcome . and do not , my dear brother , let we cry out too loudly against the selfishness of the world for be kind to the young , handsome , and fortunate , and frown upon you and I , who may be , for argument 's sake , old , ugly , and the miserable dog under the sun . if I have a right to choose my acquaintance , and at the club , let we say prefer the company of a lively , handsome , well - dress , gentleman like young man , who amuse I , to that of a slouching , ill - wash , misanthropic h - murderer , a ceaselessly prating coxcomb , or what not ; have not society the aggregate you and I a right to the same choice ? Harry be like because he be likeable ; because he be rich , handsome , jovial , well - bear , well - breed , brave ; because , with jolly toper , he like a jolly song and a bottle ; because , with gentleman sportsman , he love any game that be a - foot or a - horseback ; because , with lady , he have a modest blushing timidity which render the lad interesting ; because , to those humbler than himself in degree he be always magnificently liberal , and anxious to spare annoyance . our Virginian be very grand , and high and mighty , to be sure ; but , in those time , when the distinction of rank yet obtain , to be high and distant with his inferior , bring no unpopularity to a gentleman . remember that , in those day , the Secretary of State always knelt when he go to the king with his despatch of a morning , and the Under - Secretary never dare to sit down in his chief 's presence . if I be Secretary of State   and such there have be amongst man of letter since Addison 's day   I should not like to kneel when I go in to my audience with my despatch - bog . if I be under - Secretary , I should not like to have to stand , whilst the Right Honourable Benjamin or the Right Honourable Sir Edward look over the paper . but there be a modus in rebus : there be certain line which must be draw : and I be only half pleased for my part , when Bob Bowstreet , whose connection with letter be through Policeman X and Y , and Tom Garbage , who be an esteemed contributor to the Kennel Miscellany , propose to join fellowship as brother literary man , slap I on the back , and call I old boy , or by my christian name . 
 as much pleasure as the town could give in the winter season of 1756 - 57 , Mr. Warrington have for the asking . there be opera for he , in which he take but moderate delight .   a prodigious deal of satire be bring to bear against these italian opera , and they be assail for be foolish , Popish , unmanly , unmeaning ; but people go , nevertheless .   there be the theatre , with Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard at one house , and Mrs. Clive at another . there be masquerade and ridotto frequent by all the fine society ; there be their lordship ' and ladyship ' own private drum and assembly , which begin and end with card , and which Mr. Warrington do not like so well as White 's , because the play there be neither so high nor so fair as at the club - table . 
 one day his kinsman , Lord Castlewood , take he to court , and present Harry to his Majesty , who be now come to town from Kensington . but that gracious sovereign either do not like Harry 's introducer , or have other reason for be sulky . his Majesty only say , " oh , hear of you from Lady Yarmouth . the Earl of Castlewood "   turn to his lordship , and speak in German   ' shall tell he that he play too much ! " and so say , the Defender of the Faith turn his royal back . 
 Lord Castlewood shrink back quite frightened at this cold reception of his august master . 
 " what do he say ? " ask Harry . 
 " his Majesty think they play too high at White 's , and be displeased , " whisper the nobleman . 
 " if he do not want we , we have well not come again , that be all , " say Harry , simply . " I never , somehow , consider that german fellow a real king of England . " 
 " hush ! for Heaven 's sake , hold your confound colonial tongue ! " cry out my lord . " do not   you see the wall here have ear ! " 
 " and what then ? " ask Mr. Warrington . " why , look at the people ! hang I , if it be not quite a curiosity ! they be all shake hand with I , and bow to I , and flatter I just now ; and at present they avoid I as if I be the plague ! " 
 " shake hand , nephew , " say a broad - face , broad - shoulder gentleman , in a scarlet - laced waistcoat , and a great old - fashioned wig . " I hear what you say . I have ear like the wall , look you . and , now , if other people show you the cold shoulder , I will give you my hand ; " and so say , the gentleman put out a great brown hand , with which he grasp Harry 's . " something of my brother about your eye and face . though I suppose in your island you grow more wiry and thin like . I be thine uncle , child . my name be Sir Miles Warrington . my lord know I well enough . " 
 my lord look very frightened and yellow . " yes , my dear Harry . this be your paternal uncle , Sir Miles Warrington . " 
 " might as well have come to see we in Norfolk , as dangle about play the fool at Tunbridge Wells , Mr. Warrington , or Mr. Esmond , which do you call yourself ? " say the Baronet . " the old lady call herself Madam Esmond , do not   she ? " 
 " my mother be not ashamed of her father 's name , nor be I , uncle , " say Mr. Harry , rather proudly . 
 " well say , lad ! come home and eat a bit of mutton with Lady Warrington , at three , in Hill Street , that be if you can do without your White 's kickshaw . you need not look frightened , my Lord Castlewood ! I shall tell no tale out of school . " 
 " I I be sure Sir Miles Warrington will act as a gentleman ! " say my lord , in much perturbation . 
 " belike , he will , " growl the Baronet , turn on his heel . " and thou wilt come , young man , at three ; and mind , good roast mutton wait for nobody . Thou hast a great look of thy father . Lord bless we , how we use to beat each other ! he be small than I , and in course young ; but many a time he have the good of it . take it he be henpecke when he marry , and Madam Esmond take the spirit out of he when she get he in her island . Virginia be an island . ai not   it an island ? " 
 Harry laugh , and say " no ! " and the jolly Baronet , go off , say , " well , island or not , thou must come and tell all about it to my lady . she will know whether ' tis an island or not . " 
 " my dear Mr. Warrington , " say my lord , with an appealing look , " I need not tell you that , in this great city , every man have enemy , and that there be a great , great deal of detraction and scandal . I never speak to you about Sir Miles Warrington , precisely because I do know he , and because we have have difference together . should he permit himself remark to my disparagement , you will receive they cum grano , and remember that it be from an enemy they come . " and the pair walk out of the King 's apartment and into Saint James 's Street . Harry find the news of his cold reception at court have already precede he to White 's . the King have turn his back upon he . the King be jealous of Harry 's favour with the favourite . Harry be au mieux with Lady Yarmouth . a score of gentleman wish he a compliment upon his conquest . before night it be a settled matter that this be amongst the other victory of the Fortunate Youth . 
 Sir Miles tell his wife and Harry as much , when the young man appear at the appoint hour at the Baronet 's dinner - table , and he rally Harry in his simple rustic fashion . the lady , at first a grand and stately personage , tell Harry , on their further acquaintance , that the reputation which the world have make for he be so bad , that at first she have give he but a frigid welcome . with the young lady , Sir Miles 's daughter , it be " how d'ye do , cousin ? " and " no , thank you , cousin , " and a number of prim curtsey to the Virginian , as they greet he and take leave of he . the little boy , the heir of the house , din at table , under the care of his governor ; and , have his glass of port by papa after dinner , give a loose to his innocent tongue , and ask many question of his cousin . at last the innocent youth say , after look hard in Harry 's face , " be you wicked , cousin Harry ? you do not   look very wicked ! " 
 " my dear Master Miles ! " expostulate the tutor , turn very red . 
 " but you know you say he be wicked ! " cry the child . 
 " we be all miserable sinner , Miley , " explain papa . " have not   you hear the clergyman say so every Sunday ? " 
 " yes , but not so very wicked as cousin Harry . be it true that you gamble , cousin , and drink all night with wicked man , and frequent the company of wicked woman ? you know you say so , Mr. Walker and mamma say so , too , that Lady Yarmouth be a wicked woman . " 
 " and you be a little pitcher , " cry papa : " and my wife , nephew Harry , be a staunch Jacobite you will not   like she the bad for that . take Miles to his sister , Mr. Walker , and Topsham shall give thee a ride in the park , child , on thy little horse . " the idea of the little horse console Master Miles ; for , when his father order he away to his sister , he have begin to cry bitterly , bawl out that he would far rather stay with his wicked cousin . 
 " they have make you a sad reputation among them , nephew ! " say the jolly Baronet . " my wife , you must know , of late year , and since the death of my poor eld son , have take to , to , hum ! to Tottenham Court Road and Mr. Whitfield 's preaching : and we have have one Ward about the house , a friend of Mr. Walker 's yonder , who have recount sad story about you and your brother at home . " 
 " about I , Sir Miles , as much as he please , " cry Harry , warm with port : " but I will break any man 's bone who dare say a word against my brother ! why , sir , that fellow be not fit to buckle my dear George 's shoe ; and if I find he repeat at home what he dare to say in our house in Virginia , I promise he a second caning . " 
 " you seem to stand up for your friend , nephew Harry , " say the Baronet . " fill thy glass , lad , thou art not as bad as thou hast be paint . I always tell my lady so . I drink Madam Esmond Warrington 's health , of Virginia , and will have a full bumper for that toast . " 
 Harry , as in duty bind , empty his glass , fill again , and drank Lady Warrington and Master Miles . 
 " Thou wouldst be heir to four thousand acre in Norfolk , do he die , though , " say the Baronet . 
 " God forbid , sir , and be praise that I have acre enough in Virginia of my own ! " say Mr. Warrington . he go up presently and take a dish of coffee with Lady Warrington : he talk to the young lady of the house . he be quite easy , pleasant , and natural . there be one of they somewhat like Fanny Mountain , and this young lady become his special favourite . when he go away , they all agree their wicked cousin be not near so wicked as they have imagine he to be : at any rate , my lady have strong hope of rescue he from the pit . she send he a good book that evening , whilst Mr. Harry be at White 's ; with a pretty note , pray that Law 's Call might be of service to he : and , this despatch , she and her daughter go off to a rout at the house of a minister 's lady . but Harry , before he go to White 's , have drive to his friend Mr. Sparks , in Tavistock Street , and purchase more trinket for his female cousin " from their aunt in Virginia , " he say . you see , he be full of kindness : he kindle and warm with prosperity . there be man on whom wealth hath no such fortunate influence . it harden base heart : it make those who be mean and servile , mean and proud . if it should please the god to try I with ten thousand a year , I will , of course , meekly submit myself to their decree , but I will pray they to give I strength enough to bear the trial . all the girl in Hill Street be delighted at get the present from Aunt Warrington in Virginia and address a collective note , which must have astonish that good lady when she receive it in spring - time , when she and Mountain and Fanny be on a visit to grim desert Castlewood , when the snow have clear away and a thousand peach - tree flush with blossom . " poor boy ! " the mother think " this be some present he give his cousin in my name , in the time of his prosperity nay , of his extravagance and folly . how quickly his wealth have pass away ! but he ever have a kind heart for the poor mountain ; and we must not forget he in his need . it behove we to be more than ever careful of our own expense , my good people ! " and so , I dare say , they warm themselves by one log , and eat of one dish , and work by one candle . and the widow 's servant , whom the good soul begin to pinch more and more I fear , lie , stole , and cheat more and more : and what be save in one way , be steal in another . 
 one afternoon , Mr. Harry sate in his Bond Street lodging , array in his dressing - gown , sip his chocolate , surround by luxury , encase in satin , and yet envelop in care . a few week previously when the luck be with he , and he be scatter his benefaction to and fro , he have royally tell Parson Sampson to get together a list of his debt which he , Mr. Warrington , would pay . accordingly Sampson have go to work , and have get together a list , not of all his debt no man ever do set down all , but such a catalogue as he think sufficient to bring in to Mr. Warrington , at whose breakfast - table the divine have humbly wait until his honour should choose to attend it . 
 Harry appear at length , very pale and languid , in curl - paper , and scarce any appetite for his breakfast ; and the chaplain , fumble with his schedule in his pocket , humbly ask if his patron have have a bad night ? he have be bring home from White 's by two chairman at five o'clock in the morning ; have catch a confound cold , for one of the window of the chair would not shut , and the rain and snow come in , finally , be in such a bad humour , that all poor Sampson 's quirk and joke could scarcely extort a smile from he . 
 at last , to be sure , Mr. Warrington burst into a loud laugh . it be when the poor chaplain , after a sufficient discussion of muffin , egg , tea , the news , the theatre , and so forth , pull a paper out of his pocket and in a piteous tone say , " here be that schedule of debt which your honour ask for two hundred and forty - three pound every shilling I owe in the world , thank Heaven ! that be ahem ! every shilling of which the payment will in the least inconvenience I and I need not tell my dear patron that I shall consider he my saviour and benefactor ! " 
 it be then that Harry , take the paper and eye the chaplain with rather a wicked look , burst into a laugh , which be , however , anything but jovial . wicked execration , moreover , accompany this outbreak of humour , and the luckless chaplain feel that his petition have come at the wrong moment . 
 " confound it , why do not   you bring it on Monday ? " Harry ask . 
 " confound I , why do I not bring it on Monday ? " echo the chaplain 's timid soul . " it be my luck my usual luck . have the card be against you , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " yes : a plague on they . Monday night , and last night , have both go against I . do not   be frightened , chaplain , there be money enough in the locker yet . but I must go into the City and get some . " 
 " what , sell out , sir ? " ask his reverence , with a voice that be reassure , though it intend to be alarm . 
 " sell out , sir ? yes ! I borrow a hundred off Mackreth in counter last night , and must pay he at dinner - time . I will do your business for you nevertheless , and never fear , my good Mr. Sampson . come to breakfast to - morrow , and we will see and deliver your reverence from the Philistines . " but though he laugh in Sampson 's presence , and strove to put a good face upon the matter , Harry 's head sink down on his chest when the parson quit he , and he sate over the fire , beat the coal about with the poker , and give utterance to many disjoint naughty word , which show , but do not relieve , the agitation of his spirit . 
 in this mood , the young fellow be interrupt by the appearance of a friend , who , on any other day even on that one when his conscience be so uneasy be welcome to Mr. Warrington . this be no other than Mr. Lambert , in his military dress , but with a cloak over he , who have come from the country , have be to the Captain - General 's levee that morning , and have come thence to visit his young friend in Bond Street . 
 Harry may have think Lambert 's greeting rather cold ; but be occupy with his own affair , he put away the notion . how be the lady of Oakhurst , and Miss Hetty , who be ail when he pass through in the autumn ? purely ? Mr. Warrington be very glad . they be come to stay a while in London with their friend , Lord Wrotham ? Mr. Harry be delighted though it must be confess his face do not exhibit any peculiar sign of pleasure when he hear the news . 
 " and so you live at White 's , and with the great folk ; and you fare sumptuously every day , and you pay your court at St. James 's , and make one at my Lady Yarmouth 's rout , and at all the card - party in the Court end of the town ? " ask the Colonel . 
 " my dear Colonel , I do what other folk do , " say Harry , with rather a high manner . 
 " other folk be rich folk than some folk , my dear lad . " 
 " Sir ! " say Mr. Warrington , " I would thank you to believe that I owe nothing for which I can not pay ! " 
 " I should never have speak about your affair , " say the other , not notice the young man 's haughty tone , " but that you yourself confide they to I . I hear all sort of story about the Fortunate Youth . only at his Royal Highness 's even today , they be say how rich you be already , and I do not undeceive they " 
 " Colonel Lambert , I can not help the world gossip about I ! " cry Mr. Warrington , more and more impatient . 
 " and what prodigious sum you have win . eighteen hundred one night two thousand another six or eight thousand in all ! oh ! there be gentleman from White 's at the levee too , I can assure you , and the army can fling a main as well as you civilian ! " 
 " I wish they would meddle with their own affair , " say Harry , scowl at his old friend . 
 " and I , too , you look as if you be go to say . well , my boy , it be my affair and you must let Theo 's father and Hetty 's father , and Harry Warrington 's father 's old friend say how it be my affair . " here the Colonel draw a packet out of his pocket , whereof the lappet and the coat - tail and the general pocket accommodation be much more ample than in the scant military garment of present warrior . " look you , Harry . these trinket which you send with the kind heart in the world to people who love you , and would cut off their little hand to spare you needless pain , could never be buy by a young fellow with two or three hundred a year . why , a nobleman might buy these thing , or a rich City banker , and send they to his to his daughter , let we say . " 
 " Sir , as you say , I mean only kindness , " say Harry , blush burning - red . 
 " but you must not give they to my girl , my boy . hester and Theodosia Lambert must not be dress up with the winning off the gaming - table , save your presence . it go to my heart to bring back the trinket . Mrs. Lambert will keep she present , which be of small value , and send you her love and a God bless you and so say I , Harry Warrington , with all my heart . " here the good Colonel 's voice be much move , and his face grow very red , and he pass his hand over his eye ere he hold it out . 
 but the spirit of rebellion be strong in Mr. Warrington . he rise up from his seat , never offer to take the hand which his senior hold out to he . " give I leave to tell Colonel Lambert , " he say , " that I have have somewhat too much advice from he . you be for ever volunteer it , sir , and when I do not   ask it . you make it your business to inquire about my gain at play , and about the company I keep . what right have you to control my amusement or my companion ? I strive to show my sense of your former kindness by little present to your family , and you fle you bring they back . " 
 " I can not   do otherwise , Mr. Warrington , " say the Colonel , with a very sad face . 
 " such a slight may mean nothing here , sir , but in our country it mean war , sir ! " cry Mr. Warrington . " God forbid I should talk of draw a sword against the father of lady who have be as mother and sister to I : but you have wound my heart , Colonel Lambert you have , I will not   say insult , but humiliate I , and this be a treatment I will bear from no man alive ! my servant will attend you to the door , sir ! " say which , and rustle in his brocade dressing - gown , Mr. Warrington , with much state , walk off to his bedroom . 




 CHAPTER XLIV . contain what might , perhaps , have be expect 

 on the rejection of his peace - offering , our warlike young american chief choose to be in great wrath not only against Colonel Lambert , but the whole of that gentleman 's family . " he have humiliate I before the girl ! " think the young man . " he and Mr. Wolfe , who be forever preach morality to I , and give themselves air of superiority and protection , have again be hold I up to the family as a scapegrace and prodigal . they be so virtuous that they will not   shake I by the hand , forsooth ; and when I want to show they a little common gratitude , they fle my present in my face ! " 
 " why , sir , the thing must be worth a little fortune ! " say Parson Sampson , cast an eye of covetousness on the two morocco box , in which , on their white satin cushion , repose Mr. Sparks 's golden gewgaw . 
 " they cost some money , Sampson , " say the young man . " not that I would grudge ten time the amount to people who have be kind to I . " 
 " no , faith , sir , not if I know your honour ! " interject Sampson , who never lose a chance of praise his young patron to his face . 
 " the repeater , they tell I , be a great bargain , and worth a hundred pound at Paris . little Miss Hetty I remember say that she long to have a repeat watch . " 
 " oh , what a love ! " cry the chaplain , " with a little circle of pearl on the back , and a diamond knob for the handle ! why , ' twould win any woman 's heart , Sir ! " 
 " there pass an apple - woman with a basket . I have a mind to fle the thing out to she ! " cry Mr. Warrington , fiercely . 
 when Harry go out upon business , which take he to the City and the Temple , his parasite do not follow he very far into the Strand ; but turn away , own that he have a terror of Chancery Lane , its inhabitant , and precinct . Mr. Warrington go then to his broker , and they walk to the Bank together , where they do some little business , at the end of which , and after the signing of a trifling signature or two , Harry depart with a certain number of crisp bank - note in his pocket . the broker take Mr. Warrington to one of the great dining - house for which the City be famous then as now ; and afterwards show Mr. Warrington the virginian walk upon ' Change , through which Harry pass rather shamefacedly . what would a certain lady in Virginia say , he think , if she know that he be carry off in that bottomless gambler 's pocket a great portion of his father 's patrimony ? those be all Virginia merchant , think he , and they be all talk to one another about I , and all say , " that be young Esmond , of Castlewood , on the Potomac , Madam Esmond 's son ; and he have be lose his money at play , and he have be sell out so much , and so much , and so much . " 
 his spirit do not rise until he have pass under the traitor ' head of Temple Bar , and be fairly out of the City . from the Strand Mr. Harry walk home , look in at St. James 's Street by the way ; but there be nobody there as yet , the company not come to the Chocolate - House till a later hour . 
 arrive at home , Mr. Harry pull out his bundle of bank - note ; put three of they into a sheet of paper , which he seal carefully , have previously write within the sheet the word , " much good may they do you . H. E. W. " and this packet he direct to the Reverend Mr. Sampson , leave it on the chimney - glass , with direction to his servant to give it to that divine when he should come in . 
 and now his honour 's phaeton be bring to the door , and he step in , think to drive round the park ; but the rain come on , or the east wind blow , or some other reason arise , his honour turn his horse ' head down St. James 's Street , and be back at White 's at about three o'clock . scarce anybody have come in yet . it be the hour when folk be at dinner . there , however , be my cousin Castlewood , lounge over the Public Advertiser , have just come off from his duty at Court hard by . 
 Lord Castlewood be yawn over the Public Advertiser . what shall they do ? shall they have a little piquet ? Harry have no objection to a little piquet . " just for an hour , " say Lord Castlewood . " I dine at Arlington Street at four . " " just for an hour , " say Mr. Warrington ; and they call for card . 
 " or shall we have them in upstairs ? " say my lord . " out of the noise ? " 
 " certainly , out of the noise , " say Harry . 
 at five o'clock a half - dozen of gentleman have come in after their dinner , and be at card , or coffee , or talk . the folk from the ordinary have not leave the table yet . there the gentleman of White 's will often sit till past midnight . 
 one toothpick point over the coffee - house blind into the street . " whose phaeton ? " ask Toothpick 1 of Toothpick 2 . 
 " the Fortunate Youth 's , " say no . 2 . 
 " not so fortunate the last three night . luck confoundedly against he . lost , last night , thirteen hundred to the table . Mr. Warrington be here to - day , John ? " 
 " Mr. Warrington be in the house now , sir . in the little tea - room with Lord Castlewood since three o'clock . they be play at piquet , " say John . 
 " what fun for Castlewood ! " say no . 1 , with a shrug . 
 the second gentleman growl out an execration . " curse the fellow ! " he say . " he have no right to be in this club at all . he do not   pay if he lose . gentleman ought not to play with he . Sir Miles Warrington tell I at court the other day , that Castlewood have owe he money on a bet these three year . " 
 " Castlewood , " say no . 1 , " do not   lose if he play alone . a large company flurry he , you see that be why he do not   come to the table . " and the facetious gentleman grin , and show all his tooth , polished perfectly clean . 
 " let us go up and stop them , " growl no . 2 . 
 " why ? " ask the other . " much well look out a - window . Lamplighter go up the ladder famous sport . look at that old putt in the chair : do you ever see such an old quiz ? " 
 " who be that just go out of the house ? as I live , it be Fortunatus ! he seem to have forget that his phaeton have be here , wait all the time . I bet you two to one he have be lose to Castlewood . " 
 " Jack , do you take I to be a fool ? " ask the one gentleman of the other . " pretty pair of horse the youth have get . how he be flog them ! " and they see Mr. Warrington gallop up the street , and scared coachman and chairman clear before he : presently my Lord Castlewood be see to enter a chair , and go his way . 
 Harry drive up to his own door . it be but a few yard , and those poor horse have be beat the pavement all this while in the rain . Mr. Gumbo be engage at the door in conversation with a countrifie - look lass , who trip off with a curtsey . Mr. Gumbo be always engage with some pretty maid or other . 
 " Gumbo , have Mr. Sampson be here ? " ask Gumbo 's master from his driving - seat . 
 " no , sar . Mr. Sampson have not be here ! " answer Mr. Warrington 's gentleman . Harry bid he to go upstairs and bring down a letter address to Mr. Sampson . 
 " address to Mr. Sampson ? oh yes , sir , " say Mr. Gumbo , who can not   read . 
 " a seal letter , stupid ! on the mantelpiece , in the glass ! " say Harry ; and Gumbo leisurely retire to fetch that document . as soon as Harry have it , he turn his horse ' head towards St. James 's Street , and the two gentleman , still yawn out of the window at White 's , behold the Fortunate Youth , in an instant , back again . 
 as they pass out of the little tea - room where he and Lord Castlewood have have their piquet together , Mr. Warrington have see that several gentleman have enter the play - room , and that there be a bank there . some be already steadily at work , and have their gaming jacket on : they keep such coat at the club , which they put on when they have a mind to sit down to a regular night 's play . 
 Mr. Warrington go to the clerk 's desk , pay his account of the previous night , and , sit down at the table , call for fresh counter . this have be decidedly an unlucky week with the Fortunate Youth , and to - night be no more fortunate than previous night have be . he call for more counter , and more presently . he be a little pale and silent , though very easy and polite when talk to . but he can not win . 
 at last he get up . " hang it ! stay and mend your luck ! " say Lord March , who be sit by his side with a heap of counter before he , green and white . " take a hundred of mine , and go on ! " 
 " I have have enough for to - night , my lord , " say Harry , and rise and go away , and eat a broiled bone in the coffee - room , and walk back to his lodging some time about midnight . a man after a great catastrophe commonly sleep pretty well . it be the waking in the morning which be sometimes queer and unpleasant . last night you propose to Miss Brown : you quarrel over your cup with Captain Jones , and valorously pull his nose : you play at card with Colonel Robinson , and give he oh , how many I o U 's ! these thought , with a fine headache , assail you in the morning watch . what a dreary , dreary gulf between to - day and yesterday ! it seem as if you be year old . can not   you leap back over that chasm again , and be it not possible that yesterday be but a dream ? there you be , in bed . no daylight in at the window yet . pull your nightcap over your eye , the blanket over your nose , and sleep away yesterday . Psha , man , it be but a dream ! oh no , no ! the sleep will not   come . the watchman bawl some hour what hour ? Harry mind he that he have get the repeat watch under his pillow which he have buy for Hester . Ting , ting , ting ! the repeat watch sing out six time in the darkness , with a little supplementary performance indicate the half - hour . poor dear little hester ! so bright , so gay , so innocent ! he would have like she to have that watch . what will Maria say ?   oh , that old Maria ! what a bore she be begin to be ! he think .   what will Madam Esmond at home say when she hear that he have lose every shilling of his ready money of his patrimony ? all his winning , and five thousand pound besides , in three night . Castlewood could not have play he false ? no . my lord know piquet well than Harry do , but he would not deal unfairly with his own flesh and blood . no , no . Harry be glad his kinsman , who want the money , have get it . and for not one more shilling than he possess , would he play . it be when he count up his loss at the gaming - table , and find they would cover all the remainder of his patrimony , that he pass the box and leave the table . but , o curse bad company ! o extravagance and folly ! o humiliation and remorse ! " will my mother at home forgive I ? " think the young prodigal . " oh , that I be there , and have never leave it ! " 
 the dreary London dawn peep at length through shutter and curtain . the housemaid enter to light his honour 's fire and admit the dun morning into his window . her Mr. Gumbo presently follow , who warm his master 's dressing - gown and set out his shaving - plate and linen . then arrive the hairdresser to curl and powder his honour , whilst he read his morning 's letter ; and at breakfast - time come that inevitable Parson Sampson , with eager look and servile smile , to wait on his patron . the parson would have return yesterday accord to mutual agreement , but some jolly fellow keep he to dinner at the St. Alban 's , and , faith , they make a night of it . 
 " oh , Parson ! " groan Harry , " ' twas the bad night you ever make in your life ! look here , sir ! " 
 " here be a broken envelope with the word , ' much good may it do you , ' write within , " say the chaplain , glance at the paper . 
 " look on the outside , sir ! " cry Mr. Warrington . " the paper be direct to you . " the poor chaplain 's countenance exhibit great alarm . " have some one break it open , sir ? " he ask . 
 " some one , yes . I break it open , Sampson . have you come here as you propose yesterday afternoon , you would have find that envelope full of bank - note . as it be , they be all drop at the infernal macco - table last night . " 
 " what , all ? " say Sampson . 
 " yes , all , with all the money I bring away from the city , and all the ready money I have leave in the world . in the afternoon I play piquet with my cous with a gentleman at White 's and he ease I of all the money I have about I . remember that there be still some money leave here , unless you have fetch it , I come home and carry it back and leave it at the macco - table , with every shilling besides that belong to I and great heaven , Sampson , what be the matter , man ? " 
 " it be my luck , it be my usual luck , " cry out the unfortunate chaplain , and fairly burst into tear . 
 " what ! you be not whimper like a baby at the loss of a loan of a couple of hundred pound ? " cry out Mr. Warrington , very fierce and angry . " leave the room , Gumbo ! confound you ! why be you always poke your woolly head in at that door ! " 
 " some one below want to see master with a little bill , " say Mr. Gumbo . 
 " tell he to go to Jericho ! " roar out Mr. Warrington . " let I see nobody ! I be not at home , sir , at this hour of the morning ! " 
 a murmur or two , a scuffle be hear on the landing - place , and silence finally ensue . Mr. Warrington 's scorn and anger be not diminish by this altercation . he turn round savagely upon unhappy Sampson , who sit with his head bury in his breast . 
 " had not   you well take a bumper of brandy to keep your spirit up , Mr. Sampson ? " he ask . " hang it , man ! do not   be snivel like a woman ! " 
 " oh , it be not I ! " say Sampson , toss his head . " I be use to it , sir . " 
 " not you ! who , then ? be you cry because somebody else be hurt , pray ? " ask Mr. Warrington . 
 " yes , sir ! " say the chaplain , with some spirit ; " because somebody else be hurt , and through my fault . I have lodge for many year in London with a bootmaker , a very honest man : and , a few day since , have a perfect reliance upon upon a friend who have promise to accommodate I with a loan I borrow sixty pound from my landlord which he be about to pay to his own . I can not   get the money . my poor landlord 's good will be seize for rent ; his wife and dear young child will be turn into the street ; and this honest family will be ruin through my fault . but , as you say , Mr. Warrington , I ought not to snivel like a woman . I will remember that you help I once , and will bid you farewell , sir . " 
 and , take his broad - leaf hat , Mr. Chaplain walk out of the room . 
 an execration and a savage laugh , I be sorry to say , burst out of Harry 's lip at this sudden movement of the chaplain 's . he be in such a passion with himself , with circumstance , with all people round about he , that he scarce know where to turn , or what he say . Sampson hear the savage laughter , and then the voice of Harry call from the stair , " Sampson , Sampson ! hang you ! come back ! it be a mistake ! I beg your pardon ! " but the chaplain be cut to the soul , and walk on . Harry hear the door of the street as the parson slam it . it thump on his own breast . he enter his room , and sink back on his luxurious chair there . he be Prodigal , amongst the swine his foul remorse ; they have trip he up , and be wallow over he . gambling , extravagance , debauchery , dissolute life , reckless companion , dangerous woman they be all upon he in a herd , and be trample upon the prostrate young sinner . 
 Prodigal be not , however , yet utterly overcome , and have some fight leave in he . dash the filthy importunate brute aside , and , as it be , kick his ugly remembrance away from he , Mr. Warrington seize a great glass of that fire - water which he have recommend to poor humiliate Parson Sampson , and , fling off his fine damask robe , rang for the trembling Gumbo , and order his coat . " not that ! " roar he , as Gumbo bring he a fine green coat with plat button and a gold cord . " a plain suit the plainer the well ! the black clothe . " and Gumbo bring the mourning - coat which his master have discard for some month past . 
 Mr. Harry then take : 1 , his fine new gold watch ; 2 , his repeater   that which he have buy for Hetty , which he put into his other fob ; 3 , his necklace , which he have purchase for Theo ; 4 , his ring , of which my gentleman must have half a dozen at least   with the exception of his grandfather 's old seal ring , which he kiss and lay down on the pincushion again ; 5 , his three gold snuff box : and 6 , his purse , knit by his mother , and contain three shilling and sixpence and a pocket - piece bring from Virginia : and , put on his hat , issue from his door . 
 at the landing he be meet by Mr. Ruff , his landlord , who bow and cringe and put into his honour 's hand a strip of paper a yard long . " much oblige if Mr. Warrington will settle . Mrs. Ruff have a large account to make up to - day . " Mrs. Ruff be a milliner . Mr. Ruff be one of the head - waiter and aide - de - camp of Mr. Mackreth , the proprietor of White 's Club . the sight of the landlord do not add to the lodger 's good - humour . 
 " perhaps his honour will have the kindness to settle the little account ? " ask Mr. Ruff . 
 " of course I will settle the account , " say Harry , glumly look down over Mr. Ruffs head from the stair above he . 
 " perhaps Mr. Warrington will settle it now ? " 
 " no , Sir , I will not settle it now ! " say Mr. Warrington , bully forward . 
 " I be very very much in want of money , sir , " plead the voice under he . " Mrs. Ruff be " 
 " hang you , sir , get out of the way ! " cry Mr. Warrington , ferociously , and drive Mr. Ruff backward to the wall , send he almost topsy - turvy down his own landing , he tramp down the stair , and walk forth into Bond Street . 
 the Guards be at exercise at the King 's Mews at Charing Cross , as Harry pass , and he hear their drum and fife , and look in at the gate , and see they at drill . " I can shoulder a musket at any rate , " think he to himself gloomily , as he stride on . he cross St. Martin 's Lane   where he transact some business , and so make his way into Long Acre , and to the bootmaker 's house where friend Sampson lodge . the woman of the house say Mr. Sampson be not at home , but have promise to be at home at one ; and , as she know Mr. Warrington , show he up to the parson 's apartment , where he sate down , and , for want of occupation , try to read an unfinished sermon of the chaplain 's . the subject be the Prodigal Son . Mr. Harry do not take very accurate cognisance of the sermon . 
 presently he hear the landlady 's shrill voice on the stair , pursue somebody who ascend , and Sampson rush into the room , follow by the sob woman . 
 at see Harry , Sampson start , and the landlady stop . absorb in her own domestic care , she have doubtless forget that a visitor be await her lodger . " there be only thirteen pound in the house , and he will be here at one , I tell you ! " she be bawl out , as she pursue her victim . 
 " hush , hush ! my good creature ! " cry the gasp chaplain , point to Harry , who rise from the window - seat . " do not   you see Mr. Warrington ? I have   business with he most important business . it will be all right , I tell you ! " and he soothe and coax Mrs. Landlady out of the room , with the crowd of anxious little one hang at her coat . 
 " Sampson , I have come to ask your pardon again , " say Mr. Warrington , rise up . " what I say to - day to you be very cruel and unjust , and unlike a gentleman . " 
 " not a word more , sir , " say the other , coldly and sadly , bow and scarcely press the hand which Harry offer he . 
 " I see you be still angry with I , " Harry continue . 
 " Nay , sir , an apology be an apology . a man of my station can ask for no more from one of your . no doubt you do not mean to give I pain . and what if you do ? and you be not the only one of the family who have , " he say , as he look piteously round the room . " I wish I have never know the name of Esmond or Castlewood , " he continue , " or that place yonder of which the picture hang over my fireplace , and where I have bury myself these long , long year . my lord , your cousin , take a fancy to I , say he would make my fortune , have keep I as his dependant till fortune have pass by I , and now refuse I my due . " 
 " how do you mean your due , Mr. Sampson ? " ask Harry . 
 " I mean three year ' salary which he owe I as chaplain of Castlewood . see you could give I no money , I go to his lordship this morning and ask he . I fall on my knee , and ask he , sir . but his lordship have none . he give I civil word , at least   save your presence , Mr. Warrington , but no money that be , five guinea , which he declare be all he have and which I take . but what be five guineas amongst so many oh , those poor little child ! those poor little child ! " 
 " Lord Castlewood say he have no money ? " cry out Harry . " he win eleven hundred pound , yesterday , of I at piquet which I pay he out of this pocket - book . " 
 " I dare say , sir , I dare say , sir . one can not   believe a word his lordship say , sir , " say Mr. Sampson ; " but I be think of execution in this house , and ruin upon these poor folk to - morrow . " 
 " that need not happen , " say Mr. Warrington . " here be eighty guineas , Sampson . as far as they go , God help you ! ' tis all I have to give you . I wish to my heart I could give more as I promise ; but you do not come at the right time , and I be a poor devil now until I get my remittance from Virginia . " 
 the chaplain give a wild look of surprise , and turn quite white . he fling himself down on his knee and seize Harry 's hand . 
 " great power , sir ! " say he , " be you a guardian angel that Heaven hath send I ? you quarrel with my tear this morning , Mr. Warrington . I can not   help they now . they burst , sir , from a grateful heart . a rock of stone would pour they forth , sir , before such goodness as your ! may Heaven eternally bless you , and give you prosperity ! may my unworthy prayer be hear in your behalf , my friend , my good benefactor ! may " 
 " Nay , nay ! get up , friend get up , Sampson ! " say Harry , whom the chaplain 's adulation and fine phrase rather annoyed . 
 " I be glad to have be able to do you a service sincerely glad . there there ! do not   be on your knee to I ! " 
 " to Heaven who send you to I , sir ! " cry the chaplain . " Mrs. Weston ! Mrs. Weston ! " 
 " what be it , sir ? " say the landlady , instantly , who , indeed , have be at the door the whole time . " we be save , Mrs. Weston ! we be save ! " cry the chaplain . " Kneel , kneel , woman , and thank our benefactor ! raise your innocent voice , child , and bless he ! " a universal whimper arise round Harry , which the chaplain lead off , whilst the young Virginian stand , simper and well please , in the midst of this congregation . they would worship , do what he might . one of the child , not understand the kneeling order , and stand up , the mother fetch she a slap on the ear , cry , " drat it , Jane , kneel down , and bless the gentleman , I tell ' ee ! " ... we leave they perform this sweet benedictory service . Mr. Harry walk off from Long Acre , forget almost the grief of the former four or five day , and tingle with the consciousness of have do a good action . 
 the young woman with whom Gumbo have be converse on that evening when Harry drive up from White 's to his lodging , be Mrs. Molly , from Oakhurst , the attendant of the lady there . wherever that fascinating Gumbo go , he leave friend and admirer in the servants'-hall . I think we say it be on a Wednesday evening he and Mrs. Molly have fetch a walk together , and they be perform the amiable courtesy incident upon parting , when Gumbo 's master come up , and put an end to their twilight whispering and what not . 
 for many hour on Wednesday , on Thursday , on Friday , a pale little maiden sate at a window in Lord Wrotham 's house , in Hill Street , her mother and sister wistfully watch she . she would not go out . they know whom she be expect . he pass the door once , and she might have think he be come , but he do not . he go into a neighbouring house . Papa have never tell the girl of the present which Harry have send , and only whisper a word or two to their mother regard his quarrel with the young Virginian . 
 on Saturday night there be an opera of Mr. Handel 's , and papa bring home ticket for the gallery . Hetty go this evening . the change would do she good , Theo think , and and , perhaps there might be somebody amongst the fine company ; but somebody be not there ; and Mr. Handel 's fine music fall blank upon the poor child . it might have be Signor Bononcini 's , and she would have scarce know the difference . 
 as the child be undress and take off those smart new satin sack in which they appear at the Opera , look so fresh and so pretty amongst all the tawdry rouge folk , Theo remark how very sad and woebegone Mrs. Molly their maid appear . Theo be always anxious when other people seem in trouble ; not so Hetty , now , who be suffer , poor thing , one of the most selfish malady which ever visit mortal . have you ever be amongst insane people , and remark how they never , never think of any but themselves ? 
 " what be the matter , molly ? " ask kind Theo : and indeed , Molly have be long to tell her young lady . " oh , Miss Theo ! oh , Miss Hetty ! " she say . " how ever can I tell you ? Mr. Gumbo have be here , Mr. Warrington 's coloured gentleman , miss ; and he say Mr. Warrington have be take by two bailiff this evening , as he come out of Sir Miles Warrington 's house three door off . " 
 " silence ! " cry Theo , quite sternly . who be it that give those three shriek ? it be Mrs. Molly , who choose to scream , because Miss Hetty have fall faint from her chair . 




 CHAPTER XLV . in which Harry find two uncle 

 we have all of we , no doubt , have a fine experience of the world , and a vast variety of character have pass under our eye ; but there be one sort of man not an uncommon object of satire in novel and play of whom I confess to have meet with scarce any specimen at all in my intercourse with this sinful mankind . I mean , mere religious hypocrite , preach for ever , and not believe a word of their own sermon ; infidel in broad brim and sable , expound , exhorting , comminating , blessing , without any faith in their own paradise , or fear about their pandemonium . look at those candid troop of hobnail clump to church on a Sunday evening ; those rustle maid - servant in their ribbon whom the young apprentice follow ; those little regiment of schoolboy ; those trim young maiden and staid matron , march with their glistening prayer - book , as the chapel bell chink yonder   pass Ebenezer , very likely , where the congregation of umbrella , great bonnet , and patten , be by this time assemble under the flare gas - lamp . look at those ! how many of they be hypocrite , think you ? very likely the maid - servant be think of her sweetheart : the grocer be cast about how he can buy that parcel of sugar , and whether the County Bank will take any more of his paper : the head - schoolboy be con Latin verse for Monday 's exercise : the young scapegrace remember that after his service and sermon , there will be papa 's exposition at home , but that there will be pie for supper : the clerk who call out the psalm have his daughter in trouble , and drone through his response scarcely aware of their meaning : the very moment the parson hide his face on his cushion , he may be think of that bill which be come due on Monday . these people be not heavenly - minded ; they be of the world , worldly , and have not yet get their foot off of it ; but they be not hypocrite , look you . folk have their religion in some handy mental lock - up , as it be a valuable medicine , to be take in ill health ; and a man administer his nostrum to his neighbour , and recommend his private cure for the other 's complaint . " my dear madam , you have spasm ? you will find these drop infallible ! " " you have be take too much wine , my good sir ? by this pill you may defy any evil consequence from too much wine , and take your bottle of port daily . " of spiritual and bodily physic , who be more fond and eager dispenser than woman ? and we know that , especially a hundred year ago , every lady in the country have her still - room , and her medicine chest , her pill , powder , potion , for all the village round . 
 my Lady Warrington take charge of the conscience and the digestion of her husband 's tenant and family . she have the faith and health of the servants'-hall in keeping . Heaven can tell whether she know how to doctor they rightly : but , be it pill or doctrine , she administer one or the other with equal belief in her own authority , and her disciple swallow both obediently . she believe herself to be one of the most virtuous , self - deny , wise , learn woman in the world ; and , din this opinion perpetually into the ear of all round about she , succeed in bring not few person to join in her persuasion . 
 at Sir Miles 's dinner there be so fine a sideboard of plate , and such a number of man in livery , that it require some presenter : of mind to perceive that the beer be of the small which the butler bring round in the splendid tankard , and that there be but one joint of mutton on the grand silver dish . when Sir Miles call the King 's health , and smack his jolly lip over his wine , he eye it and the company as if the liquor be ambrosia . he ask Harry Warrington whether they have port like that in Virginia ? he say that be nothing to the wine Harry should taste in Norfolk . he praise the wine so , that Harry almost believe that it be good , and wink into his own glass , try to see some of the merit which his uncle perceive in the ruby nectar . 
 just as we see in many a well - regulate family of this present century , the Warringtons have their two paragon . of the two grown daughter , the one be the great beauty , the other the great genius and angel of any young lady then alive , as Lady Warrington tell Harry . the eld , the Beauty , be engage to dear Tom Claypool , the fond mother inform her cousin Harry in confidence . but the second daughter , the Genius and Angel , be for ever set upon our young friend to improve his wit and moral . she sing to he at the harpsichord rather out of tune for an angel , Harry think ; she be ready with advice , instruction , conversation with almost too much instruction and advice , think Harry , who would have far prefer the society of the little cousin who remind he of Fanny Mountain at home . but the last - mention young maiden after dinner retire to her nursery commonly . Beauty go off on her own avocation ; mamma have to attend to her poor or write her voluminous letter ; papa doze in his arm - chair ; and the Genius remain to keep her young cousin company . 
 the calm of the house somehow please the young man , and he like to take refuge there away from the riot and dissipation in which he ordinarily live . certainly no welcome could be kind than that which he get . the door be open to he at all hour . if Flora be not at home , Dora be ready to receive he . Ere many day ' acquaintance , he and his little cousin Miles have be to have a galloping - match in the Park , and Harry , who be kind and generous to every man alive who come near he , have in view the purchase of a little horse for his cousin , far well than that which the boy ride , when the circumstance occur which bring all our poor Harry 's coach and horse to a sudden breakdown . 
 though Sir Miles Warrington have imagine Virginia to be an island , the lady be much well instruct in geography , and anxious to hear from Harry all about his home and his native country . he , on his part , be not averse to talk about it . he describe to they the length and breadth of his estate ; the river which it coast ; the produce which it bore . he have have with a friend a little practice of survey in his boyhood . he make a map of his county , with some fine town here and there , which , in truth , be but log - hut   but , for the honour of his country , he be desirous that they should wear as handsome a look as possible . here be Potomac ; here be James river ; here be the wharf whence his mother 's ship and tobacco be bring to the sea . in truth , the estate be as large as a county . he do not brag about the place overmuch . to see the handsome young fellow , in a fine suit of velvet and silver lace , make his draught , point out this hill and that forest or town , you might have imagine he a travel prince describe the realm of the queen his mother . he almost fancy himself to be so at time . he have mile where gentleman in England have acre . not only Dora listen but the beauteous Flora bow her fair head and hear he with attention . why , what be young Tom Claypool , their brother baronet 's son in Norfolk with his great boot , his great voice , and his heirdom to a poor five thousand acre , compare to this young american prince and charming stranger ? Angel as she be , Dora begin to lose her angelic temper , and to twit Flora for a flirt . Claypool in his red waistcoat , would sit dumb before the splendid Harry in his ruffle and lace , talk of March and Chesterfield , Selwyn and Bolingbroke , and the whole company of macaronis . Mamma begin to love Harry more and more as a son . she be anxious about the spiritual welfare of those poor Indians , of those poor negro in Virginia . what could she do to help dear Madam Esmond   a precious woman , she know !   in the good work ? she have a serious butler and housekeeper : they be delighted with the spiritual behaviour and sweet musical gift of Gumbo . 
 " ah ! Harry , Harry ! you have be a sad wild boy ! why do you not come soon to we , sir , and not lose your time amongst the spendthrift and the vain world ? but ' tis not yet too late . we must reclaim thee , dear Harry ! must not   we , Sir Miles ? must not   we Dora ? must not   we , Flora ? " 
 the three lady all look up to the ceiling . they will reclaim the dear prodigal . it be which shall reclaim he most . Dora sit by and watch Flora . as for mamma when the girl be away , she talk to he more and more seriously , more and more tenderly . she will be a mother to he in the absence of his own admirable parent . she give he a hymn - book . she kiss he on the forehead . she be actuate by the pure love , tenderness , religious regard , towards her dear , wayward , wild , amiable nephew . 
 whilst these sentimentality be go on , it be to be presume that Mr. Warrington keep his own counsel about his affair out - of - door , which we have see be in the very bad condition . he who have be favour by fortune for so many week be suddenly desert by she , and a few day have serve to kick down all his heap of winning . do we say that my Lord Castlewood , his own kinsman , have deal unfairly by the young Virginian , and in the course of a couple of afternoon ' closet practice have rob he ? we would insinuate nothing so disrespectful to his lordship 's character ; but he have win from Harry every shilling which properly belong to he , and would have play he for his reversion , but that the young man fling up his hand when he see himself so far beat , and declare that he must continue the battle no more . remember that there still remain a spar out of the wreck , as it be that portion which he have set aside for poor Sampson Harry venture it at the gaming - table ; but that last resource go down along with the rest of Harry 's possession , and Fortune flutter off in the storm , leave the luckless adventurer almost naked on the shore . 
 when a man be young and generous and hearty the loss of money scarce afflict he . Harry would sell his horse and carriage , and diminish his train of life . if he want immediate supply of money , would not his Aunt Bernstein be his banker , or his kinsman who have win so much from he , or his kind Uncle Warrington and Lady Warrington who be always talk virtue and benevolence , and declare that they love he as a son ? he would call upon these , or any one of they whom he might choose to favour , at his leisure ; meanwhile , Sampson 's story of his landlord 's distress touch the young gentleman , and , in order to raise a hasty supply for the clergyman , he carry off all his trinket to a certain pawnbroker 's shop in St. Martin 's Lane . 
 now this broker be a relative or partner of that very Mr. Sparks of Tavistock Street , from whom Harry have purchase purchase do we say ? no ; take the trinket which he have intend to present to his Oakhurst friend ; and it chance that Mr. Sparks come to visit his brother - tradesman very soon after Mr. Warrington have dispose of his good . recognise immediately the little enamel diamond - handle repeater which he have sell to the Fortunate Youth , the jeweller break out into expression regard Harry which I will not mention here , be already accuse of speak much too plainly . a gentleman who be acquaint with a pawnbroker , we may be sure have a bailiff or two amongst his acquaintance ; and those bailiff have follower who , at the bidding of the impartial Law , will touch with equal hand the fierce captain 's epaulet or the fine macaroni 's shoulder . the very gentleman who have seize upon Lady Maria at Tunbridge be set upon her cousin in London . they easily learn from the garrulous Gumbo that his honour be at Sir Miles Warrington 's house in Hill Street , and whilst the black be court Mrs. Lambert 's maid at the adjoining mansion , Mr. Costigan and his assistant lie in wait for poor Harry , who be enjoy the delight of intercourse with a virtuous family circle assemble round his aunt 's table . never have Uncle Miles be more cordial , never have Aunt Warrington be more gracious , gentle , and affectionate ; Flora look unusually lovely , Dora have be more than ordinarily amiable . at parting , my lady give he both her hand , and call benediction from the ceiling down upon he . Papa have say in his most jovial manner , " hang it , nephew ! when I be thy age I should have kiss two such fine girl as Do and Flo ere this , and my own flesh and blood too ! do not   tell I ! I should , my Lady Warrington ! odd - fish ! ' tis the boy blush , and not the girl ! I think I suppose they be use to it . he , he ! " 
 " Papa ! " cry the virgin . 
 " Sir Miles ! " say the august mother at the same instant . 
 " there , there ! " say papa . " a kiss will not   do no harm , and will not   tell no tale : will it , nephew Harry ? " I suppose , during the utterance of the above three brief phrase , the harmless little osculatory operation have take place , and blush cousin Harry have touch the damask cheek of cousin Flora and cousin Dora . 
 as he go downstairs with his uncle , mamma make a speech to the girl , look , as usual , up to the ceiling , and say , " what precious quality your poor dear cousin have ! what shrewdness mingle with his simplicity , and what a fine genteel manner , though upon mere worldly elegance I set little store . what a dreadful pity to think that such a vessel should ever be lose ! we must rescue he , my love . we must take he away from those wicked companion , and those horrible Castlewoods not that I would speak ill of my neighbour . but I shall hope , I shall pray , that he may be rescue from his evil course ! " and again Lady Warrington eye the cornice in a most determined manner , as the girl wistfully look towards the door behind which their interesting cousin have just vanish . 
 his uncle will go downstairs with he . he call " God bless you , my boy ! " most affectionately : he press Harry 's hand , and repeat his valuable benediction at the door . as it close , the light from the hall within have sufficiently illuminate Mr. Warrington 's face and figure , two gentleman , who have be stand on the opposite side of the way , advance rapidly , and one of they take a strip of paper out of his pocket , and put his hand upon Mr. Warrington 's shoulder , declare he his prisoner . a hackney - coach be in attendance , and poor Harry go to sleep in Chancery Lane . 
 oh , to think that a virginian prince 's back should be slap by a ragged bailiff follower ! that Madam Esmond 's son should be in a spunge - house in Cursitor Street ! I do not envy our young prodigal his rest on that dismal night . let we hit he now he be down , my beloved young friend . let we imagine the sting of remorse keep he wakeful on his dingy pillow ; the horrid jollification of other harden inmate of the place ring in his ear from the room hard by , where they sit boozing ; the rage and shame and discomfiture . no pity on he , I say , my honest young gentleman , for you , of course , have never indulge in extravagance or folly , or pay the reckoning of remorse . 




 CHAPTER XLVI . chain and Slavery 

 remorse for past misdeed and folly Harry sincerely feel , when he find himself a prisoner in that dismal lock - up house , and wrath and annoyance at the idea of be subject to the indignity of arrest ; but the present unpleasantry he feel sure could only be momentary . he have twenty friend who would release he from his confinement : to which of they should he apply , be the question . Mr. Draper , the man of business , who have be so obsequious to he : his kind uncle the Baronet , who have offer to make his house Harry 's home , who love he as a son : his cousin Castlewood , who have win such large sum from he : his noble friend at the Chocolate - House , his good Aunt Bernstein any one of these Harry feel sure would give he a help in his trouble , though some of the relative , perhaps , might administer to he a little scolding for his imprudence . the main point be , that the matter should be transact quietly , for Mr. Warrington be anxious that as few as possible of the public should know how a gentleman of his prodigious importance have be subject to such a vulgar process as an arrest . as if the public do not end by know everything it care to know . as if the dinner I shall have to - day , and the hole in the stocking which I wear at this present writing , can be keep a secret from some enemy or other who have a mind to pry it out though my boot be on , and my door be lock when I dress myself ! I mention that hole in the stocking for sake of example merely . the world can pry out everything about we which it have a mind to know . but then there be this consolation , which man will never accept in their own case , that the world do not   care . consider the amount of scandal it have be force to hear in its time , and how weary and blase it must be of that kind of intelligence . you be take to prison , and fancy yourself indelibly disgrace ? you be bankrupt under odd circumstance ? you drive a queer bargain with your friend and be find out , and imagine the world will punish you ? Psha ! your shame be only vanity . go and talk to the world as if nothing have happen , and nothing have happen . tumble down ; brush the mud off your clothe ; appear with a smile countenance , and nobody care . do you suppose Society be go to take out its pocket - handkerchief and be inconsolable when you die ? why should it care very much , then , whether your worship grace yourself or disgrace yourself ? whatever happen it talk , meet , joke , yawn , have its dinner , pretty much as before . therefore do not   be so conceited about yourself as to fancy your private affair of so much importance , mi fili . whereas Mr. Harry Warrington chafe and fume as though all the world be tingle with the touch of that hand which have be lay on his sublime shoulder . 
 " a pretty sensation my arrest must have create at the club ! " think Harry . " I suppose that Mr. Selwyn will be cut all sort of joke about my misfortune , plague take he ! everybody round the table will have hear of it . March will tremble about the bet I have with he ; and , faith , ' twill be difficult to pay he when I lose . they will all be set up a whoop of congratulation at the Savage , as they call I , be take prisoner . how shall I ever be able to appear in the world again ? whom shall I ask to come to my help ? no , " think he , with his mingled acuteness and simplicity , " I will not send in the first instance to any of my relation or my noble friend at White 's . I will have Sampson 's counsel . he have often be in a similar predicament , and will know how to advise I . " accordingly , as soon as the light of dawn appear , after an almost intolerable delay for it seem to Harry as if the sun have forget to visit Cursitor Street in his round that morning and as soon as the inmate of the house of bondage be stir , Mr. Warrington despatch a messenger to his friend in Long Acre , acquaint the chaplain with the calamity just befall he , and beseech his reverence to give he the benefit of his advice and consolation . 
 Mr. Warrington do not know , to be sure , that to send such a message to the parson be as if he say , " I be fall amongst the lion . come down , my dear friend , into the pit with I . " Harry very likely think Sampson 's difficulty be over ; or , more likely still , be so much engross with his own affair and perplexity , as to bestow little thought upon his neighbour 's . have send off his missive , the captive 's mind be somewhat more at ease , and he condescend to call for breakfast , which be bring to he presently . the attendant who serve he with his morning repast ask he whether he would order dinner , or take his meal at Mrs. Bailiff 's table with some other gentleman ? no . Mr. Warrington would not order dinner . he should quit the place before dinner - time , he inform the chamberlain who wait on he in that grim tavern . the man go away , think no doubt that this be not the first young gentleman who have announce that he be go away ere two hour be over . " well , if your honour do stay , there be good beef and carrot at two o'clock , " say the sceptic , and close the door on Mr. Harry and his solitary meditation . 
 Harry 's messenger to Mr. Sampson bring back a message from that gentleman to say that he would be with his patron as soon as might be : but ten o'clock come , eleven o'clock , noon , and no Sampson . no Sampson arrive , but about twelve Gumbo with a portmanteau of his master 's clothe , who fling himself , roar with grief , at Harry 's foot : and with a thousand vow of fidelity , express himself ready to die , to sell himself into slavery over again , to do anything to rescue his beloved Master Harry from this calamitous position . Harry be touch with the lad 's expression of affection , and tell he to get up from the ground where he be grovel on his knee , embrace his master 's . " all you have to do , sir , be to give I my clothe to dress , and to hold your tongue about this business . mind you , not a word , sir , about it to anybody ! " say Mr. Warrington , severely . 
 " oh no , sir , never to nobody ! " say Gumbo , look most solemnly , and proceed to dress his master carefully , who have need of a change and a toilette after his yesterday 's sudden capture , and night 's dismal rest . accordingly Gumbo fling a dash of powder in Harry 's hair , and array his master carefully and elegantly , so that he make Mr. Warrington look as fine and splendid as if he have be step into his chair to go to St. James 's . 
 indeed all that love and servility could do Mr. Gumbo faithfully do for his master , for whom he have an extreme regard and attachment . but there be certain thing beyond Gumbo 's power . he could not undo thing which be do already ; and he could not help lie and excuse himself when press upon point disagreeable to himself . the language of slave be lie   I mean black slave and white . the creature slink away and hide with subterfuge , as a hunted animal run to his covert at the sight of man , the tyrant and pursuer . strange relic of feudality , and consequence of our ever - so - old social life ! our domestic   be they not man , too , and brother ?   be all hypocrite before we . they never speak naturally to we , or the whole truth . we should be indignant : we should say , confound their impudence : we should turn they out of door if they do . but quo me rapis , o my unbridled hobby ? 
 well , the truth be , that as for swear not to say a word about his master 's arrest such an oath as that be impossible to keep for , with a heart full of grief , indeed , but with a tongue that never could cease wagging , bragging , joking , and lie , Mr. Gumbo have announce the woeful circumstance to a prodigious number of his acquaintance already , chiefly gentleman of the shoulder - knot and worst lace . we have see how he carry the news to Colonel Lambert 's and Lord Wrotham 's servant : he have proclaim it at the footman 's club to which he belong , and which be frequent by the gentleman of some of the first nobility . he have subsequently condescend to partake of a mug of ale in Sir Miles Warrington 's butler 's room , and there have repeat and embellish the story . then he have go off to Madame Bernstein 's people , with some of whom he be on term of affectionate intercourse , and have inform that domestic circle of his grief and , his master be capture , and there be no earthly call for his personal service that evening , Gumbo have step up to Lord Castlewood 's , and inform the gentry there of the incident which have just come to pass . so when , lay his hand on his heart , and with gush flood of tear , Gumbo say , in reply to his master 's injunction , " oh no , master ! nebber to nobody ! " we be in a condition to judge of the degree of credibility which ought to be give to the lad 's statement . 
 the black have long complete his master 's toilet : the dreary breakfast be over : slow as the hour go to the prisoner , still they be pass one after another , but no Sampson come in accordance with the promise send in the morning . at length , some time after noon , there arrive , not Sampson , but a billet from he , seal with a moist wafer , and with the ink almost yet wet . the unlucky divine 's letter run as follow : 
 " oh , sir , dear sir , I have do all that a man can at the command and in the behalf of his patron ! you do not know , sir , to what you be subject I , do you ? else , if I be to go to prison , why do I not share your , and why be I in a lock - up house three door off ? 
 " yes . such be the fact . as I be hasten to you , know full well the danger to which I be subject : but what danger will I not affront at the call of such a benefactor as Mr. Warrington hath be to I ? I be seize by two villain who have a writ against I , and who have lodge I at Naboth 's , hard by , and so close to your honour , that we could almost hear each other across the garden wall of the respective house where we be confine . 
 " I have much and of importance to say , which I do not care to write down on paper regard your affair . may they mend ! may my cursed fortune , too , well themselves , be the prayer of 
 " your honour 's afflict chaplain - in - Ordinary , J. S. " 
 and now , as Mr. Sampson refuse to speak , it will be our duty to acquaint the reader with those matter whereof the poor chaplain do not care to discourse on paper . 
 Gumbo 's loquacity have not reach so far as Long Acre , and Mr. Sampson be ignorant of the extent of his patron 's calamity until he receive Harry 's letter and messenger from Chancery Lane . the divine be still ardent with gratitude for the service Mr. Warrington have just confer on he , and eager to find some mean to succour his distressed patron . he know what a large sum Lord Castlewood have win from his cousin , have din in company with his lordship on the day before , and now run to Lord Castlewood 's house , with a hope of arouse he to some pity for Mr. Warrington . Sampson make a very eloquent and touching speech to Lord Castlewood about his kinsman 's misfortune , and speak with a real kindness and sympathy , which , however , fail to touch the nobleman to whom he address himself . 
 my lord peevishly and curtly put a stop to the chaplain 's passionate pleading . " do I not tell you , two day since , when you come for money , that I be as poor as a beggar , Sampson , " say his lordship , " and have anybody leave I a fortune since ? the little sum I win from my cousin be swallow up by other . I not only can not   help Mr. Warrington , but , as I pledge you my word , not be in the least aware of his calamity , I have positively write to he this morning to ask he to help I . " and a letter to this effect do actually reach Mr. Warrington from his lodging , whither it have be despatch by the penny post . 
 " I must get he money , my lord . I know he have scarcely anything leave in his pocket after relieve I . be I to pawn my cassock and band , he must have money , " cry the chaplain . 
 " amen . go and pawn your band , your cassock , anything you please . your enthusiasm do you credit , " say my lord ; and resume the reading of his paper , whilst , in the deep despondency , poor Sampson leave he . 
 my Lady Maria meanwhile have hear that the chaplain be with her brother , and conjecture what might be the subject on which they have be talk . she seize upon the parson as he issue from out his fruitless interview with my lord . she draw he into the dining - room : the strong mark of grief and sympathy be in her countenance . " tell I , what be this have happen to Mr. Warrington ? " she ask . 
 " your ladyship , then , know ? " ask the chaplain . 
 " have I not be in mortal anxiety ever since his servant bring the dreadful news last night ? " ask my lady . " we have it as we come from the opera from my Lady Yarmouth 's box my lord , my Lady Castlewood , and I. " 
 " his lordship , then , do know ? " continue Sampson . 
 " Benson tell the news when we come from the playhouse to our tea , " repeat Lady Maria . 
 the chaplain lose all patience and temper at such duplicity . " this be too bad , " he say , with an oath ; and he tell Lady Maria of the conversation which he have just have with Lord Castlewood , and of the latter 's refusal to succour his cousin , after win great sum of money from he , and with much eloquence and feeling , of Mr. Warrington 's most generous behaviour to himself . 
 then my Lady Maria break out with a series of remark regard her own family , which be by no mean complimentary to her own kith and kin . although not accustomed to tell truth commonly , yet , when certain family fall out , it be wonderful what a number of truth they will tell about one another . with tear , imprecation , I do not like to think how much strong language , Lady Maria burst into a furious and impassioned tirade , in which she touch upon the history of almost all her noble family . she compliment the man and the lady alike ; she shriek out interrogatory to Heaven , inquire why it have make such   never mind what name she call her brother , sister , uncle , aunt , parent ; and , embolden with wrath , she dash at her brother 's library door , so shrill in her outcry , so furious in her demeanour , that the alarmed chaplain , fear the scene which might ensue , make for the street . 
 my lord , look up from the book or other occupation which engage he , regard the furious woman with some surprise , and select a good strong oath to fle at she , as it be , and check her onset . 
 but , when rouse , we have see how courageous Maria could be . Afraid as she be ordinarily of her brother , she be not in a mood to be frighten now by any language of abuse or sarcasm at his command . 
 " so , my lord ! " she call out , " you sit down with he in private to card , and pigeon he ! you get the poor boy 's last shilling , and you will not   give he a guinea out of his own winning now he be penniless ! " 
 " so that infernal chaplain have be tell tale ! " say my lord . 
 " dismiss he : do ! pay he his wage , and let he go , he will be glad enough ! " cry Maria . 
 " I keep he to marry one of my sister , in case he be want , " say Castlewood , glare at she . 
 " what can the woman be in a family where there be such man ? " say the lady . 
 " Effectivement ! " say my lord , with a shrug of his shoulder . 
 " what can we be , when our father and brother be what they be ? we be bad enough , but what be you ? I say , you neither have courage no , nor honour , nor common feeling . as your equal will not   play with you , my Lord Castlewood , you must take this poor lad out of Virginia , your own kinsman , and pigeon he ! oh , it be a shame a shame ! " 
 " we be all play our own game , I suppose . have not   you play and win one , Maria ? be it you that be squeamish of a sudden about the poor lad from Virginia ? have Mr. Harry cry off , or have your ladyship get a well offer ? " cry my Lord . " if you will not   have he , one of the Warrington girl will , I promise you ; and the old Methodist woman in Hill Street will give he the choice of either . be you a fool , Maria Esmond ? a great fool , I mean , than in common ? " 
 " I should be a fool if I think that either of my brother could act like an honest man , Eugene ! " say Maria . " I be a fool to expect that you will be other than you be ; that if you find any relative in distress you will help he ; that if you can meet with a victim you will not   fleece he . " 
 " fleece he ! Psha ! what folly be you talk ! have you not see , from the course which the lad have be run for month past , how he would end ? if I have not win his money , some other would ? I never grudge thee thy little plan regard he . why shouldst thou fly in a passion , because I have just put out my hand to take what he be offer to all the world ? I reason with you , I do not   know why , Maria . you should be old enough to understand reason , at any rate . you think this money belong of right to Lady Maria Warrington and her child ? I tell you that in three month more every shilling would have find its way to White 's macco - table , and that it be much well spend in pay my debt . so much for your ladyship 's anger , and tear , and menace , and naughty language . see ! I be a good brother , and repay they with reason and kind word . " 
 " my good brother might have give a little more than kind word to the lad from whom he have just take hundred , " interpose the sister of this affectionate brother . 
 " great heaven , Maria ! do not   you see that even out of this affair , unpleasant as it seem , a clever woman may make her advantage , " cry my lord . Maria say she fail to comprehend . 
 " as thus . I name no name ; I meddle in no person 's business , have quite enough to do to manage my own cursed affair . but suppose I happen to know of a case in another family which may be applicable to ours . it be this . a green young lad of tolerable expectation , come up from the country to his friend in town never mind from what country : never mind to what town . an elderly female relative , who have be drag her spinsterhood about these how many year shall we say ? extort a promise of marriage from my young gentleman , never mind on what condition . " 
 " my lord , do you want to insult your sister as well as to injure your cousin ? " ask Maria . 
 " my good child , do I say a single word about fleece or cheat , or pigeone , or do I fly into a passion when you insult I ? I know the allowance that must be make for your temper , and the natural folly of your sex . I say I treat you with soft word I go on with my story . the elderly relative extract a promise of marriage from the young lad , which my gentleman be quite unwilling to keep . no , he will not   keep it . he be utterly tired of his elderly relative : he will plead his mother 's refusal : he will do anything to get out of his promise . " 
 " yes ; if he be one of we Esmonds , my Lord Castlewood . but this be a man of honour we be speak of , " cry Maria , who , I suppose , admired truth in other , however little she see it in her own family . 
 " I do not contradict either of my dear sister 's remark . one of we would fling the promise to the wind , especially as it do not exist in writing . " 
 " my lord ! " gasp out Maria . 
 " Bah ! I know all . that little coup of Tunbridge be play by the Aunt Bernstein with excellent skill . the old woman be the good man of our family . while you be arrest , your box be search for the Mohock 's letter to you . when you be let loose , the letter have disappear , and you say nothing , like a wise woman , as you be sometimes . you still hanker after your Cherokee . Soit . a woman of your mature experience know the value of a husband . what be this little loss of two or three hundred pound ? " 
 " not more than three hundred , my lord ? " interpose Maria . 
 " eh ! never mind a hundred or two , more or less . what be this loss at card ? a mere bagatelle ! you be play for a principality . you want your kingdom in Virginia ; and if you listen to my opinion , the little misfortune which have happen to your swain be a piece of great good - fortune to you . " 
 " I do not   understand you , my lord . " 
 " c'est possible ; but sit down , and I will explain what I mean in a manner suit to your capacity . " and so Maria Esmond , who have advance to her brother like a rag lion , now sate down at his foot like a gentle lamb . 
 Madame de Bernstein be not a little move at the news of her nephew 's arrest , which Mr. Gumbo bring to Clarges Street on the night of the calamity . she would have cros - examine the black , and have further particular respect Harry 's mishap ; but Mr. Gumbo , anxious to carry his intelligence to other quarter , have vanish when her ladyship send for he . her temper be not improve by the news , or by the sleepless night which she spend . I do not envy the dame de compagnie who play card with she , or the servant who have to lie in her chamber . an arrest be an everyday occurrence , as she know very well as a woman of the world . into what difficulty have her scapegrace of a nephew fall ? how much money should she be call upon to pay to release he ? and have he run through all his own ? provide he have not commit himself very deeply , she be quite disposed to aid he . she like even his extravagance and folly . he be the only be in the world on whom , for long , long year , that weary woman have be able to bestow a little natural affection . so , on their different bed , she and Harry be lie wakeful together ; and quite early in the morning the messenger which each send forth on the same business may have cross each other . 
 Madame Bernstein 's messenger be despatch to the chamber of her man of business , Mr. Draper , with an order that Mr. D. should ascertain for what sum Mr. Warrington have be arrest , and forthwith repair to the Baroness . Draper 's emissary speedily find out that Mr. Warrington be lock up close beside they , and the amount of detainer against he so far . be there other creditor , as no doubt there be , they would certainly close upon he when they be make acquainted with his imprisonment . 
 to Mr. Sparks , the jeweller , for those unlucky present , so much ; to the landlord in Bond Street , for board , fire , lodge , so much : these be at present the only claim against Mr. Warrington , Mr. Draper find . he be ready , at a signal from her ladyship , to settle they at a moment . the jeweller 's account ought especially to be pay , for Mr. Harry have act most imprudently in take good from Mr. Sparks on credit , and pledge they with a pawnbroker . he must have be under some immediate pressure for money ; intend to redeem the good immediately , mean nothing but what be honourable of course ; but the affair would have an ugly look , if make public , and have well be settle out of hand . " there can not be the least difficulty regard a thousand pound more or less , for a gentleman of Mr. Warrington 's rank and expectation , " say Madame de Bernstein . not the least : her ladyship know very well that there be fund belong to Mr. Warrington , on which money could be at once raise with her ladyship 's guarantee . 
 should he go that instant and settle the matter with Messrs. Amos ? Mr. Harry might be back to dine with she at two , and to confound the people at the club , " who be no doubt rejoice over his misfortune , " say the compassionate Mr. Draper . 
 but the Baroness have other view . " I think , my good Mr. Draper , " she say , " that my young gentleman have sow wild oats enough ; and when he come out of prison I should like he to come out clear , and without any liability at all . you be not aware of all his . " 
 " no gentleman ever do tell all his debt , madam , " say Mr. Draper ; " no one I ever have to deal with . " 
 " there be one which the silly boy have contract , and from which he ought to be release , Mr. Draper . you remember a little circumstance which occur at Tunbridge Wells in the autumn ? about which I send up my man case to you ? " 
 " when your ladyship please to recall it , I remember it not otherwise , " say Mr. Draper , with a bow . " a lawyer should be like a popish confessor , what be tell he be a secret for ever , and for everybody . " so we must not whisper Madame Bernstein 's secret to Mr. Draper ; but the reader may perhaps guess it from the lawyer 's conduct subsequently . 
 the lawyer feel pretty certain that ere long he would receive a summon from the poor young prisoner in Cursitor Street , and wait for that invitation before he visit Mr. Warrington . six - and - thirty hour pass ere the invitation come , during which period Harry pass the dreariest two day which he ever remember to have spend . 
 there be no want of company in the lock - up house , the bailiff 's room be nearly always full ; but Harry prefer the dingy solitude of his own room to the society round his landlady 's table , and it be only on the second day of his arrest , and when his purse be empty by the heavy charge of the place , that he make up his mind to apply to Mr. Draper . he despatch a letter then to the lawyer at the Temple , inform he of his plight , and desire he , in an emphatic postscript , not to say one word about the matter to his aunt , Madame de Bernstein . 
 he have make up his mind not to apply to the old lady except at the very last extremity . she have treat he with so much kindness that he revolt from the notion of trespassing on her bounty , and for a while try to please himself with the idea that he might get out of durance without she even know that any misfortune at all have befall he . there seem to he something humiliating in petition a woman for money . no ! he would apply first to his male friend , all of whom might help he if they would . it have be his intention to send Sampson to one or other of they as a negotiator , have not the poor fellow be capture on his way to succour his friend . 
 Sampson go , Harry be oblige to have recourse to his own negro servant , who be keep on the trot all day between Temple Bar and the Court end of the town with letter from his unlucky master . firstly , then , Harry send off a most private and confidential letter to his kinsman , the right Honourable the Earl of Castlewood , say how he have be cast into prison , and beg Castlewood to lend he the amount of the debt . " please to keep my application , and the cause of it , a profound secret from the dear lady , " write poor Harry . 
 " be ever anything so unfortunate ? " write back Lord Castlewood , in reply . " I suppose you have not get my note of yesterday ? it must be lie at your lodging , where I hope in heaven ! you will soon be , too . my dear Mr. Warrington , think you be as rich as Croesus otherwise I never should have sate down to card with you I write to you yesterday , beg you to lend I some money to appease some hungry dun whom I do not   know how else to pacify . my poor fellow ! every shilling of your money go to they , and but for my peer 's privilege I might be hob - and - nob with you now in your dungeon . may you soon escape from it , be the prayer of your sincere castlewood . " 
 this be the result of application number one : and we may imagine that Mr. Harry read the reply to his petition with rather a blank face . never mind ! there be kind , jolly Uncle Warrington . only last night his aunt have kiss he and love he like a son . his uncle have call down blessing on his head , and profess quite a paternal regard for he . with a feeling of shyness and modesty in presence of those virtuous parent and family . Harry have never say a word about his wild doing , or his horse - racing , or his gambling , or his extravagance . it must all out now . he must confess himself a Prodigal and a Sinner , and ask for their forgiveness and aid . so Prodigal sate down and compose a penitent letter to Uncle Warrington , and expose his sad case , and besought he to come to the rescue . be not that a bitter nut to crack for our haughty young Virginian ? hour of mortification and profound thought as to the pathos of the composition do Harry pass over that letter ; sheet after sheet of Mr. Amos 's sixpence - a - sheet letter - paper do he tear up before the missive be complete , with which poor blubber Gumbo   much vilify by the bailiff 's follower and parasite , whom he be rob , as they conceive , of their perquisite   go his way . 
 at evening the faithful negro bring back a thick letter in his aunt 's handwriting . Harry open the letter with a trembling hand . he think it be full of bank - note . ah I ! it contain a sermon   Daniel in the Lions ' Den   by Mr. Whitfield , and a letter from Lady Warrington say that , in Sir Miles 's absence from London , she be in the habit of open his letter , and hence , perforce , be become acquainted with a fact which she deplore from her inmost soul to learn , namely , that her nephew Warrington have be extravagant and be in debt . of course , in the absence of Sir Miles , she could not hope to have at command such a sum as that for which Mr. Warrington write , but she send he her heartfelt prayer , her deep commiseration , and a discourse by dear Mr. Whitfield , which would comfort he in his present   alas ! she fear not undeserved   calamity . she add profuse reference to particular Scriptural chapter which would do he good . if she might speak of thing worldly , she say , at such a moment , she would hint to Mr. Warrington that his epistolary orthography be anything but correct . she would not fail for her part to comply with his express desire that his dear cousin should know nothing of this most painful circumstance , and with every wish for his welfare here and elsewhere , she subscribe herself his love aunt , MARGARET WARRINGTON . 
 Poor Harry hide his face between his hand , and sate for a while with elbow on the greasy table blankly star into the candle before he . the bailiff 's servant , who be touch by his handsome face , suggest a mug of beer for his honour , but Harry could not drink , nor eat the meat that be place before he . Gumbo , however , could , whose grief do not deprive he of appetite , and who , blubber the while , finish all the beer , and all the bread and the meat . meanwhile , Harry have finish another letter , with which Gumbo be commission to start again , and away the faithful creature run upon his errand . 
 Gumbo run as far as White 's Club , to which house he be order in the first instance to carry the letter , and where he find the person to whom it be address . even the prisoner , for whom time pass so slowly , be surprised at the celerity with which his negro have perform his errand . 
 at least the letter which Harry expect have not take long to write . " my lord write it at the hall - porter 's desk , while I stand there then with Mr Mr. Morris , " say Gumbo , and the letter be to this effect : 
 " DEAR SIR I be sorry I can not comply with your wish , I be short of money at present , have pay large sum to you as well as to other gentleman . your obediently , MARCH and R. 
 " Henry Warrington , Esq . " 
 " do Lord March say anything ? " ask Mr. Warrington look very pale . 
 " he say it be the cool thing he ever know . so do Mr. Morris . he show he your letter , Master Harry . yes , Mr. Morris say , ' dam his imperence ! ' " add Gumbo . 
 Harry burst into such a yell of laughter that his landlord think he have good news , and run in in alarm lest he be about to lose his tenant . but by this time poor Harry 's laughter be over , and he be fling down in his chair gaze dismally in the fire . 
 " I I should like to smoke a pipe of Virginia " he groan . 
 Gumbo burst into tear : he fling himself at Harry 's knee . he kiss his knee and his hand . " oh , master , my dear master , what will they say at home ? " he sob out . 
 the jailor be touch at the sight of the black 's grief and fidelity , and at Harry 's pale face as he sink back in his chair quite overcome and beat by his calamity . 
 " your honour be not   eat anything these two day , " the man say , in a voice of rough pity . " pluck up a little , sir . you be not   the first gentleman who have be in and out of grief before this . let I go down and get you a glass of punch and a little supper . " 
 " my good friend , " say Harry , a sickly smile play over his white face , " you pay ready money for everything in this house , do not   you ? I must tell you that I have not   a shilling leave to buy a dish of meat . all the money I have I want for letter - paper . " 
 " oh , master , my master ! " roar out Gumbo . " look here , my dear Master Harry ! here be plenty of money here 's twenty - three five - guineas . here 's gold moidore from Virginia here no , not that that be keepsake the girl give I . take everything everything . I go sell myself to - morrow morning ; but here be plenty for to - night , master ! " 
 " God bless you , Gumbo ! " Harry say , lay his hand on the lad 's woolly head . " you be free if I be not , and Heaven forbid I should not take the offer help of such a friend as you . bring I some supper : but the pipe too , mind the pipe too ! " and Harry eat his supper with a relish : and even the turnkey and bailiff 's follower , when Gumbo go out of the house that night , shake hand with he , and ever after treat he well . 




 CHAPTER XLVII . visitor in Trouble 

 Mr. Gumbo 's generous and feel conduct soothe and soften the angry heart of his master , and Harry 's second night in the spunging - house be pass more pleasantly than the first . somebody at least there be to help and compassionate with he . still , though soften in that one particular spot , Harry 's heart be hard and proud towards almost all the rest of the world . they be selfish and ungenerous , he think . his pious Aunt Warrington , his lordly friend March , his cynical cousin Castlewood , all have be try , and be find want . not to avoid twenty year of prison would he stoop to ask a favour of one of they again . fool that he have be , to believe in their promise , and confide in their friendship ! there be no friendship in this cursed , cold , selfish country . he would leave it . he would trust no Englishman , great or small . he would go to Germany , and make a campaign with the king ; or he would go home to Virginia , bury himself in the wood there , and hunt all day ; become his mother 's factor and land - steward ; marry Polly Broadbent , or Fanny Mountain ; turn regular tobacco - grower and farmer ; do anything , rather than remain amongst these english fine gentleman . so he arise with an outwardly cheerful countenance , but an angry spirit ; and at an early hour in the morning the faithful Gumbo be in attendance in his master 's chamber , have come from Bond Street , and bring Mr. Harry 's letter thence . " I want to bring some more clothe , " honest Gumbo say ; " but Mr. Ruff , the landlord , he would not   let I bring no more . " 
 Harry do not care to look at the letter : he open one , two , three ; they be all bill . he open a fourth ; it be from the landlord , to say that he would allow no more of Mr. Warrington 's thing to go out of the house , that unless his bill be pay he should sell Mr. W. 's good and pay himself : and that his black man must go and sleep elsewhere . he would hardly let Gumbo take his own clothe and portmanteau away . the black say he have find refuge elsewhere with some friend at Lord Wrotham 's house . " with Colonel Lambert 's people , " say Mr. Gumbo , look very hard at his master . " and Miss Hetty she fall down in a faint , when she hear you take up ; and Mr. Lambert , he very good man , and he say to I this morning , he say , ' Gumbo , you tell your master if he want I he send to I , and I come to he . ' " 
 Harry be touch when he hear that Hetty have be afflict by his misfortune . he do not believe Gumbo 's story about her fainting ; he be accustom to translate his black 's language and to allow for exaggeration . but when Gumbo speak of the Colonel the young Virginian 's spirit be darken again . " I send to Lambert " he think , grind his tooth , " the man who insult I , and fling my present back in my face ! if I be starve I would not ask he for a crust ! " and presently , be dress , Mr. Warrington call for his breakfast , and despatch Gumbo with a brief note to Mr. Draper in the Temple , require that gentleman 's attendance . 
 " the note be as haughty as if he be write to one of his negro , and not to a freeborn english gentleman , " Draper say ; whom indeed Harry have always treat with insufferable condescension . " it be all very well for a fine gentleman to give himself air ; but for a fellow in a spunge - house ! hang he ! " say Draper , " I have   a great mind not to go ! " nevertheless , Mr. Draper do go , and find Mr. Warrington in his misfortune even more arrogant than he have ever be in the day of his utmost prosperity . Mr. W. sit on his bed , like a lord , in a splendid gown with his hair dress . he motion his black man to fetch he a chair . 
 " excuse I , madam , but such haughtiness and air I be not   accustom to ! " say the outraged attorney . 
 " take a chair and go on with your story , my good Mr. Draper ! " say Madame de Bernstein , smile , to whom he go to report proceeding . she be amuse at the lawyer 's anger . she like her nephew for be insolent in adversity . 
 the course which Draper be to pursue in his interview with Harry have be arrange between the Baroness and her man of business on the previous day . draper be an able man , and likely in most case to do a client good service : he fail in the present instance because he be pique and angry , or , more likely still , because he could not understand the gentleman with whom he have to deal . I presume that he who cast his eye on the present page be the most gentle of reader . Gentleman , as you unquestionably be , then , my dear sir , have you not remark in your dealing with people who be no gentleman , that you offend they not know the how or the why ? so the man who be no gentleman offend you in a thousand way of which the poor creature have no idea himself . he do or say something which provoke your scorn . he perceive that scorn   be always on the watch , and uneasy about himself , his manner and behaviour   and he rag . you speak to he naturally , and he fancy still that you be sneer at he . you have indifference towards he , but he hat you , and hat you the bad because you do not   care . " Gumbo , a chair to Mr. Draper ! " say Mr. Warrington , fold his brocaded dressing - gown round his leg as he sit on the dingy bed . " sit down , if you please , and let we talk my business over . much oblige to you for come so soon in reply to my message . have you hear of this piece of ill - luck before ? " 
 Mr. Draper have hear of the circumstance . " bad news travel quick , Mr. Warrington , " he say ; " and I be eager to offer my humble service as soon as ever you should require they . your friend , your family , will be much pain that a gentleman of your rank should be in such a position . " 
 " I have be very imprudent , Mr. Draper . I have live beyond my mean . "   Mr. Draper bow .   " I play in company with gentleman who be much rich than myself , and a cursed run of ill - luck have carry away all my ready money , leave I with liability to the amount of five hundred pound , and more . " 
 " five hundred now in the office , " say Mr. Draper . 
 " well , this be such a trifle that I think by send to one or two friend , yesterday , I could have pay my debt and go home without far to do . I have be mistake ; and will thank you to have the kindness to put I in the way of raise the money as soon as may be . " 
 Mr. Draper say " Hm ! " and pull a very grave and long face . 
 " why , sir , it can be do ! " say Mr. Warrington , star at the lawyer . 
 it not only could be do , but Mr. Draper have propose to Madame Bernstein on the day before instantly to pay the money , and release Mr. Warrington . that lady have declare she intend to make the young gentleman her heir . in common with the rest of the world , Draper believe Harry 's hereditary property in Virginia to be as great in money - value as in extent . he have note in his pocket , and Madame Bernstein 's order to pay they under certain condition : nevertheless , when Harry say , " it can be do ! " draper pull his long face , and say , " it can be do in time , sir ; but it will require a considerable time . to touch the property in England which be yours on Mr. George Warrington 's death , we must have the event prove , the trustee release : and who be to do either ? Lady Esmond Warrington in Virginia , of course , will not allow her son to remain in prison , but we must wait six month before we hear from she . have your Bristol agent any authority to honour your draft ? " 
 " he be only authorise to pay I two hundred pound a year , " say Mr. Warrington . " I suppose I have no resource , then , but to apply to my aunt , Madame de Bernstein . she will be my security . " 
 " her ladyship will do anything for you , sir ; she have say so to I , often and often , " say the lawyer ; " and , if she give the word at that moment you can walk out of this place . " 
 " go to she , then , from I , Mr. Draper . I do not want to have trouble my relation : but rather than continue in this horrible needless imprisonment , I must speak to she . say where I be , and what have befall I . disguise nothing ! and tell she , that I confide in her affection and kindness for I to release I from this this disgrace , " and Mr. Warrington 's voice shake a little , and he pass his hand across his eye . 
 " Sir , " say Mr. Draper , eye the young man , " I be with her ladyship yesterday , when we talk over the whole of this here most unpleasant I will not   say as you do , disgraceful business . " 
 " what do you mean , sir ? do Madame de Bernstein know of my misfortune ? " ask Harry . 
 " every circumstance , sir ; the pawn the watch , and all . " 
 Harry turn burn red . " it be an unfortunate business , the pawn they watch and thing which you have never pay for , " continue the lawyer . the young man start up from the bed , look so fierce that Draper feel a little alarmed . 
 " it may lead to litigation and unpleasant remark be make , in court , sir . they barrister respect nothing ; and when they get a feller in the box " 
 " Great Heaven , sir , you do not   suppose a gentleman of my rank can not   take a watch upon credit without intend to cheat the tradesman ? " cry Harry , in the great agitation . 
 " of course you mean everything that be honourable ; only , you see , the law may not   happen to think so , " say Mr. Draper , wink his eye .   " hang the supercilious beast ; I touch he there !   your aunt say it be the most imprudent thing ever she hear of to call it by no bad name . " 
 " you call it by no bad name yourself , Mr. Draper ? " say Harry , speak each word very slow , and evidently try to keep a command of himself . 
 Draper do not like his look . " Heaven forbid that I should say anything as between gentleman and gentleman , but between I and my client , it be my duty to say , ' Sir , you be in a very unpleasant scrape , ' just as a doctor would have to tell his patient , ' Sir , you be very ill . ' " 
 " and you can not   help I to pay this debt off , and you have come only to tell I that I may be accuse of roguery ? " say Harry . 
 " of obtain good under false pretence ? most undoubtedly , yes . I can not   help it , sir . do not   look as if you would knock I down .   curse he , I be make he wince , though .   a young gentleman , who have only two hundred a year from his ma ' , order diamond and watch , and take them to a pawnbroker . you ask I what people will think of such behaviour , and I tell you honestly . do not   be angry with I , Mr. Warrington . " 
 " go on , sir ! " say Harry , with a groan . 
 the lawyer think the day be his own . " but you ask if I can not   help to pay this debt off ? and I say yes and that here be the money in my pocket to do it now , if you like not mine , sir , my honoured client 's , your aunt , Lady Bernstein . but she have a right to impose her condition , and I have   bring them with I . " 
 " tell they , sir , " say Mr. Harry . 
 " they be not hard . they be only for your own good : and if you say yes , we can call a hackney - coach , and go to Clarges Street together , which I have promise to go there , whether you will or no . Mr. Warrington , I name no name , but there be a question of marriage between you and a certain party . " 
 " ah ! " say Harry ; and his countenance look more cheerful than it have yet do . 
 " to that marriage my noble client , the Baroness , be most averse have other view for you , and think it will be your ruin to marry a party , of noble birth and title it be true ; but , excuse I , not of first - rate character , and so much old than yourself . you have give an imprudent promise to that party . " 
 " yes ; and she have it still , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " it have be recover . she drop it by an accident at Tunbridge , " say Mr. Draper , ' so my client inform I ; indeed her ladyship show it I , for the matter of that . it be write in bl " 
 " never mind , sir ! " cry Harry , turn almost as red as the ink which he have use to write his absurd promise , of which the madness and folly have smite he with shame a thousand time over . 
 " at the same time letter , write to you , and compromise a noble family , be recover , " continue the lawyer . " you have lose them . it be no fault of your . you be away when they be find again . you may say that that noble family , that you yourself , have a friend such as few young man have . well , sir , there be no earthly promise to bind you only so many idle word say over a bottle , which very likely any gentleman may forget . say you will not   go on with this marriage give I and my noble friend your word of honour . cry off , I say , Mr. W. ! do not   be such a d fool , save your presence , as to marry an old woman who have jilt score of man in her time . say the word , and I step downstairs , pay every shilling against you in the office , and put you down in my coach , either at your aunt 's or at White 's Club , if you like , with a couple of hundred in your pocket . say yes ; and give we your hand ! there be no use in sit grin behind these bar all day ! " 
 so far Mr. Draper have have the good of the talk . Harry only long himself to be rid of the engagement from which his aunt want to free he . his foolish flame for Maria Esmond have die out long since . if she would release he , how thankful would he be ! " come ! give we your hand , and say do ! " say the lawyer , with a knowing wink . " do not   stand shilly - shallying , sir . Law bless you , Mr. W. , if I have marry everybody I promise , I should be like the Grand Turk , or Captain Macheath in the play ! " 
 the lawyer 's familiarity disgust Harry , who shrink from Draper , scarcely know that he do so . he fold his dress gown round he , and step back from the other 's proffered hand . " give I a little time to think of the matter , if you please , Mr. Draper , " he say , " and have the goodness to come to I again in an hour . 
 " very good , sir , very good , sir ! " say the lawyer , bite his lip , and , as he seize up his hat , turn very red . " Most party would not want an hour to consider about such an offer as I make you : but I suppose my time must be your , and I will come again , and see whether you be to go or to stay . good morning , sir , good morning : " and he go his way , growl curse down the stair . " will not   take my hand , will not   he ? will tell I in an hour 's time ! hang his impudence ! I will show he what an hour be ! " 
 Mr. Draper go to his chamber in dudgeon then ; bully his clerk all round , send off a messenger to the Baroness , to say that he have wait on the young gentleman , who have demand a little time for consideration , which be for form 's sake , as he have no doubt ; the lawyer then see client , transact business , go out to his dinner in the most leisurely manner ; and then finally turn his step towards the neighbouring Cursitor Street . " he will be at home when I call , the haughty beast ! " say Draper , with a sneer . " the Fortunate Youth in his room ? " the lawyer ask of the sheriff 's officer 's aide - de - camp who come to open the double door . 
 " Mr. Warrington be in his apartment , " say the gentleman , " but " and here the gentleman wink at Mr. Draper , and lay his hand on his nose . 
 " but what , Mr. Paddy from Cork ? " say the lawyer . 
 " my name be Costigan ; I familee be noble , and I neetive place be the irish methrawpoli , Mr. Six - and - eightpence ! " say the janitor , scowl at Draper . a rich odour of spirituous liquor fill the little space between the double door where he hold the attorney in conversation . 
 " confound you , sir , let I pass ! " bawl out Mr. Draper . 
 " I can hear you perfectly well , six - and - eightpence , except your h 's , which you dthrop out of your conversation . I will thank ye not to call neem , I good friend , or I finger and your nose will have to make an intimate hic - quaintance . walk in , sir ! be polite for the future to your shuparior in birth and manner , though they may be your infarior in temporary station . confound the kay ! walk in , sir , I say ! Madam , I have the honour of salute ye most respectfully ! " 
 a lady with her face cover with a capuchin , and far hide by her handkerchief , utter a little exclamation as of alarm as she come down the stair at this instant and hurry past the lawyer . he be press forward to look at she for Mr. Draper be very cavalier in his manner to woman but the bailiff 's follower thrust his leg between Draper and the retreating lady , cry , " keep your own distance , if you plaise ! this way , madam ! I at once recognise your ladysh " here he close the door on Draper 's nose , and leave that attorney to find his own way to his client upstairs . 
 at six o'clock that evening the old Baroness de Bernstein be pace up and down her drawing - crutch , and for ever run to the window when the noise of a coach be hear pass in Clarges Street . she have delay her dinner from hour to hour : she who scold so fiercely , on ordinary occasion , if her cook be five minute after his time . she have order two cover to be lay , plate to be set out , and some extra dish to be prepare as if for a little fete . four five o'clock pass , and at six she look from the window , and a coach actually stop at her door . 
 " Mr. Draper " be announce , and enter bow profoundly . 
 the old lady tremble on her stick . " where be the boy ? " she say quickly . " I tell you to bring he , sir ! how dare you come without he ? " 
 " it be not my fault , madam , that Mr. Warrington refuse to come . " and Draper give his version of the interview which have just take place between himself and the young Virginian . 




 CHAPTER XLVIII . an apparition 

 go off in his wrath from his morning 's conversation with Harry , Mr. Draper think he hear the young prisoner speak behind he ; and , indeed , Harry have rise , and utter a half - exclamation to call the lawyer back . but he be proud , and the other offend : Harry check word , and Draper do not choose to stop . it wind Harry 's pride to be oblige to humble himself before the lawyer , and to have to yield from mere lack and desire of money . " an hour hence will do as well , " think Harry , and lapse sulkily on to the bed again . no , he do not care for Maria Esmond ! no : he be ashamed of the way in which he have be entrap into that engagement . a wily and experienced woman , she have cheat his boyish ardour . she have take unfair advantage of he , as her brother have at play . they be his own flesh and blood , and they ought to have spar he . instead , one and the other have make a prey of he , and have use he for their selfish end . he think how they have betray the right of hospitality : how they have make a victim of the young kinsman who come confide within their gate . his heart be sore wound : his head sink back on his pillow : bitter tear wet it . " have they come to Virginia , " he think , " I have give they a different welcome ! " 
 he be rouse from this mood of despondency by Gumbo 's grinning face at his door , who say a lady be come to see Master Harry , and behind the lad come the lady in the capuchin , of whom we have just make mention . Harry sit up , pale and haggard , on his bed . the lady , with a sob , and almost ere the servant - man withdraw , run towards the young prisoner , put her arm round his neck with real emotion and a maternal tenderness , sob over his pale cheek and kiss it in the midst of plentiful tear , and cry out 
 " oh , my Harry ! do I ever , ever think to see thee here ? " 
 he start back , scar as it seem at her presence , but she sink down at the bedside , and seize his feverish hand , and embrace his knee . she have a real regard and tenderness for he . the wretched place in which she find he , his wretched look , fill her heart with a sincere love and pity . 
 " I I think none of you would come ! " say poor Harry , with a groan . 
 More tear , more kiss of the hot young hand , more clasp and pressure with her , be the lady 's reply for a moment or two . 
 " oh , my dear ! my dear ! I can not bear to think of thee in misery , " she sob out . 
 harden though it might be , that heart be not all marble that dreary life not all desert . Harry 's mother could not have be fonder , nor her tone more tender than those of his kinswoman now kneel at his foot . 
 " some of the debt , I fear , be owe to my extravagance ! " she say   and this be true . " you buy trinket and jewel in order to give I pleasure . oh , how I hate they now ! I little think I ever could ! I have bring they all with I , and more trinket here ! and here ! and all the money I have in the world ! " 
 and she pour brooch , ring , a watch , and a score or so of guineas into Harry 's lap . the sight of which strangely agitated and immensely touch the young man . 
 " Dearest , kind cousin ! " he sob out . 
 his lip find no more word to utter , but yet , no doubt they serve to express his gratitude , his affection , his emotion . 
 he become quite gay presently , and smile as he put away some of the trinket , his present to Maria , and tell she into what danger he have fall by sell other good which he have purchase on credit ; and how a lawyer have insult he just now upon this very point . he would not have his dear Maria 's money he have enough , quite enough for the present : but he value she twenty guineas as much as if they have be twenty thousand . he would never forget her love and kindness : no , by all that be sacred he would not ! his mother should know of all her goodness . it have have cheer he when he be just on the point of break down under his disgrace and misery . might Heaven bless she for it ! there be no need to pursue beyond this , the cousin ' conversation . the dark day seem bright to Harry after Maria 's visit : the imprisonment not so hard to bear . the world be not all selfish and cold . here be a fond creature who really and truly love he . even Castlewood be not so bad as he have think . he have express the deep grief at not be able to assist his kinsman . he be hopelessly in debt . every shilling he have win from Harry he have lose on the next day to other . anything that lie in his power he would do . he would come soon and see Mr. Warrington : he be in wait to - day , and as much a prisoner as Harry himself . so the pair talk on cheerfully and affectionately until the darkness begin to close in , when Maria , with a sigh , bade Harry farewell . 
 the door scarcely close upon she , when it open to admit draper . 
 " your humble servant , sir , " say the attorney . his voice jar upon Harry 's ear , and his presence offend the young man . 
 " I have expect you some hour ago , sir , " he curtly say . 
 " a lawyer 's time be not always his own , sir , " say Mr. Draper , who have just be in consultation with a bottle of port at the Grecian . " never mind , I be at your order now . presume it be all right , Mr. Warrington . pack your trunk ? why , now there you be in your bedgown still . let I go down and settle whilst you call in your black man and titivate a bit . I have   a coach at the door , and we will be off and dine with the old lady . " 
 " be you go to dine with the Baroness de Bernstein , pray ? " 
 " not I no such honour . have my dinner already . it be you be a - go to dine with your aunt , I suppose ? " 
 " Mr. Draper , you suppose a great deal more than you know , " say Mr. Warrington , look very fierce and tall , as he fold his brocade dressing - gown round he . 
 " great goodness , sir , what do you mean ? " ask Draper . 
 " I mean , sir , that I have consider , and , that have give my word to a faithful and honourable lady , it do not become I to withdraw it . " 
 " confound it , sir ! " shriek the lawyer , " I tell you she have lose the paper . there be nothing to bind you nothing . why she be old enough to be " 
 " enough , sir , " say Mr. Warrington , with a stamp of his foot . " you seem to think you be talk to some other pettifogger . I take it , Mr. Draper , you be not accustomed to have dealing with man of honour . " 
 " Pettifogger , indeed ! " cry draper in a fury . " man of honour , indeed ! I would have you to know , Mr. Warrington , that I be as good a man of honour as you . I do not   know so many gambler and horse - jockey , perhaps . I have not   gamble away my patrimony , and live as if I be a nobleman on two hundred a year . I have not   buy watch on credit , and pawn touch I if you dare , sir , " and the lawyer spring to the door . 
 " that be the way out , sir . you can not   go through the window , because it be bar , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " and the answer I take to my client be no , then ! " scream out Draper . 
 Harry step forward , with his two hand clench . " if you utter another word , " he say , " I will " the door be shut rapidly the sentence be never finish , and Draper go away furious to Madame de Bernstein , from whom , though he give she the good version of his story , he get still fiercer language than he have receive from Mr. Warrington himself . 
 " what ? shall she trust I , and I desert she ? " say Harry , stalk up and down his room in his flowing , rustle brocade . " dear , faithful , generous woman ! if I lie in prison for year , I will be true to she . " 
 her lawyer dismiss after a stormy interview , the desolate old woman be fain to sit down to the meal which she have hop to share with her nephew . the chair be before she which he be to have fill , the glass shin by the silver . one dish after another be lay before she by the silent major - domo , and taste and push away . the man press his mistress at last . " it be eight o'clock , " he say . " you have have nothing all day . it be good for you to eat . " she could not eat . she would have her coffee . let case go get her her coffee . the lacquey bear the dish off the table , leave their mistress sit at it before the vacant chair . 
 presently the old servant re - enter the room without his lady 's coffee and with a strange scared face , and say , " Mr. WARRINGTON ! " 
 the old woman utter an exclamation , get up from her armchair , but sink back in it tremble very much . " so you be come , sir , be you ? " she say , with a fond shake voice . " bring back the Ah ! " here she scream , " gracious God , who be it ? " her eye star wildly : her white face look ghastly through her rouge . she cling to the arm of her chair for support , as the visitor approach she . 
 a gentleman whose face and figure exactly resemble Harry Warrington and whose voice , when he speak , have tone strangely similar , have follow the servant into the room . he bow towards the Baroness . 
 " you expect my brother , madam ? " he say " I be but now arrive in London . I go to his house . I meet his servant at your door , who be bear this letter for you . I think I would bring it to your ladyship before go to he , " and the stranger lay down a letter before Madam Bernstein . 
 " be you " gasp out the Baroness " be you my nephew , that we suppose be " 
 " be kill and be alive ! I be George Warrington , madam and I ask his kinsfolk what have you do with my brother ? " 
 " look , George ! " say the bewildered old lady " I expect he here to - night that chair be set for he I have be wait for he , sir , till now till I be quite faint I do not   like I do not   like be alone . do stay an sup with I ! " 
 " Pardon I , madam . please God , my supper will be with Harry tonight ! " 
 " bring he back . bring he back here on any condition ! it be but five hundred pound ! here be the money , sir , if you need it ! " 
 " I have no want , madam . I have money with I that can not   be well employ than in my brother 's service . " 
 " and you will bring he to I , sir ! say you will bring he to I ! " 
 Mr. Warrington make a very stately bow for answer , and quit the room , pass by the amazed domestic , and call with an air of authority to Gumbo to follow he . 
 have Mr. Harry receive no letter from home ? Master Harry have not open all his letter the last day or two . have he receive no letter announce his brother 's escape from the french settlement and return to Virginia ? oh no ! no such letter have come , else Master Harry certainly tell Gumbo . quick , horse ! quick by Strand to Temple Bar ! here be the house of Captivity and the Deliverer come to the rescue ! 




 CHAPTER XLIX . friend in need 

 Quick , hackneycoach steed , and bear George Warrington through Strand and Fleet Street to his imprisoned brother 's rescue ! any one who remember Hogarth 's picture of a London hackneycoach and a London street road at that period , may fancy how weary the quick time be , and how long seem the journey : scarce any light , save those carry by link - boy ; badly hung coach ; bad pavement ; great hole in the road , and vast quagmire of winter mud . that drive from Piccadilly to Fleet Street seem almost as long to our young man , as the journey from Marlborough to London which he have perform in the morning . 
 he have write to Harry , announce his arrival at Bristol . he have previously write to his brother , give the great news of his existence and his return from captivity . there be war between England and France at that time ; the french privateer be for ever on the look - out for british merchant - ship , and seize they often within sight of port . the letter bear the intelligence of George 's restoration must have be on board one of the many american ship of which the French take possession . the letter tell of George 's arrival in England be never open by poor Harry ; it be lie at the latter 's apartment , which it reach on the third morning after Harry 's captivity , when the angry Mr. Ruff have refuse to give up any single item more of his lodger 's property . 
 to these apartment George first go on his arrival in London , and ask for his brother . scared at the likeness between they , the maid - servant who open the door scream , and run back to her mistress . the mistress not like to tell the truth , or to own that poor Harry be actually a prisoner at her husband 's suit , say Mr. Warrington have leave his lodging ; she do not know where Mr. Warrington be . George know that Clarges Street be close to Bond Street . often and often have he look over the London map . Aunt Bernstein would tell he where Harry be . he might be with she at that very moment . George have read in Harry 's letter to Virginia about Aunt Bernstein 's kindness to Harry . even Madam Esmond be soften by it   and especially touch by a letter which the Baroness write the letter which cause George to pack off post - haste for Europe , indeed . she heartily hop and trust that Madam Beatrix have find occasion to repent of her former bad way . it be time , indeed , at her age ; and Heaven know that she have plenty to repent of ! I have know a harmless , good old soul of eighty , still bepommelle and stone by irreproachable lady of the strait sect of the Pharisees , for a little slip which occur long before the present century be bear , or she herself be twenty year old . Rachel Esmond never mention her eld daughter : Madam Esmond Warrington never mention her sister . no . in spite of the order for remission of the sentence in spite of the handwriting on the floor of the Temple there be a crime which some folk never will pardon , and regard which female virtue , especially , be inexorable . 
 I suppose the Virginians ' agent at Bristol have tell George fearful story of his brother 's doing . Gumbo , whom he meet at his aunt 's door , as soon as the lad recover from his terror at the sudden reappearance of the master whom he suppose dead , have leisure to stammer out a word or two respect his young master 's whereabout , and present pitiable condition ; and hence Mr. George 's sternness of demeanour when he present himself to the old lady . it seem to he a matter of course that his brother in difficulty should be rescue by his relation . oh , George , how little you know about London and London way ! whenever you take your walk abroad how many poor you meet if a philanthropist be for rescue all of they , not all the wealth of all the province of America would suffice he ! 
 but the feeling and agitation display by the old lady touch her nephew 's heart when , jolt through the dark street towards the house of his brother 's captivity , George come to think of his aunt 's behaviour . " she do feel my poor Harry 's misfortune , " he think to himself , " I have be too hasty in judge she . " again and again , in the course of his life , Mr. George have to rebuke himself with the same crime of be too hasty . how many of we have not ? and , alas , the mischief do , there be no repentance will mend it . quick , coachman ! we be almost as slow as you be in get from Clarges Street to the Temple . poor Gumbo know the way to the bailiff 's house well enough . again the bell be set ring . the first door be open to George and his negro ; then that first door be lock warily upon they , and they find themselves in a little passage with a little jewish janitor ; then a second door be unlocked , and they enter into the house . the jewish janitor stare , as by his flare tallow - torch he see a second Mr. Warrington before he . come to see that gentleman ? yes . but wait a moment . this be Mr. Warrington 's brother from America . Gumbo must go and prepare his master first . step into this room . there be a gentleman already there about Mr. W. 's business   the porter say , and another upstairs with he now . there be no end of people have be about he . 
 the room into which George be introduce be a small apartment which go by the name of Mr. Amos 's office , and where , by a gutter candle , and talk to the bailiff , sit a stout gentleman in a cloak and a laced hat . the young porter carry his candle , too , precede Mr. George , so there be a sufficiency of light in the apartment . 
 " we be not angry any more , Harry ! " say the stout gentleman , in a cheery voice , get up and advance with an outstretched hand to the new - comer . " thank God , my boy ! Mr. Amos here say , there will be no difficulty about James and I be your bail , and we will do your business by breakfast - time in the morning . why ... angel and minister of grace ! who be you ? " and he start back as the other have hold of his hand . 
 but the stranger grasp it only the more strongly . " God bless you , sir ! " he say , " I know who you be . you must be Colonel Lambert , of whose kindness to he my poor Harry write . and I be the brother whom you have hear of , sir ; and who be leave for dead in Mr. Braddock 's action ; and come to life again after eighteen month amongst the French ; and live to thank God and thank you for your kindness to my Harry , " continue the lad with a falter voice . 
 " James ! James ! here be news ! " cry Mr. Lambert to a gentleman in red , who now enter the room . " here be the dead come alive ! here be Harry Scapegrace 's brother come back , and with his scalp on his head , too ! "   George have take his hat off , and be stand by the light .   " this be my brother - bail , Mr. Warrington ! this be Lieutenant - Colonel James Wolfe , at your service . you must know there have be a little difference between Harry and I , Mr. George . he be pacify , be he , James ? " 
 " he be full of gratitude , " say Mr. Wolfe , after make his bow to Mr. Warrington . 
 " Harry write home about Mr. Wolfe , too , sir , " say the young man , " and I hope my brother 's friend will be so kind as to be mine . " 
 " I wish he have none other but we , Mr. Warrington . Poor Harry 's fine folk have be too fine for he , and have end by land he here . " 
 " Nay , your honour , I have do my good to make the young gentleman comfortable ; and , know your honour before , when you come to bail Captain Watkins , and that your security be perfectly good , if your honour wish , the young gentleman can go out this very night , and I will make it all right with the lawyer in the morning , " say Harry 's landlord , who know the rank and respectability of the two gentleman who have come to offer bail for his young prisoner . 
 " the debt be five hundred and odd pound , I think ? " say Mr. Warrington . " with a hundred thank to these gentleman , I can pay the amount at this moment into the officer ' hand , take the usual acknowledgment and caution . but I can never forget , gentleman , that you help my brother at his need , and , for do so , I say thank you , and God bless you , in my mother 's name and mine . " 
 Gumbo have , meanwhile , go upstairs to his master 's apartment , where Harry would probably have scold the negro for return that night , but that the young gentleman be very much soothe and touch by the conversation he have have with the friend who have just leave he . he be sit over his pipe of Virginia in a sad mood   for , somehow , even Maria 's goodness and affection , as she have just exhibit they , have not altogether console he ; and he have think , with a little dismay , of certain consequence to which that very kindness and fidelity bind he , when Mr. Wolfe 's homely feature and eager outstretched hand come to cheer the prisoner , and he hear how Mr. Lambert be below , and the errand upon which the two officer have come . in spite of himself , Lambert would be kind to he . in spite of Harry 's ill - temper , and needless suspicion and anger , the good gentleman be determined to help he if he might to help he even against Mr. Wolfe 's own advice , as the latter frankly tell Harry , " for you be wrong , Mr. Warrington , " say the Colonel , " and you would not   be set right ; and you , a young man , use hard word and unkind behaviour to your senior , and what be more , one of the good gentleman who walk God 's earth . you see , sir , what his answer hath be to your wayward temper . you will bear with a friend who speak frankly with you ? Martin Lambert hath act in this as he always doth , as the good Christian , the good friend , the most kind and generous of man . Nay , if you want another proof of his goodness , here it be : he have convert I , who , as I do not   care to disguise , be angry with you for your treatment of he , and have absolutely bring I down here to be your bail . let we both cry Peccavimus ! Harry , and shake our friend by the hand ! he be sit in the room below . he would not come here till he know how you would receive he . " 
 " I think he be a good man ! " groan out Harry . " I be very angry and wild at the time when he and I meet last , Colonel Wolfe . Nay , perhaps he be right in send back those trinket , hurt as I be at his do so . go down to he , will you be so kind , sir ? and tell he I be sorry , and ask his pardon , and and , God bless he for his generous behaviour . " and here the young gentleman turn his head away , and rub his hand across his eye . 
 " tell he all this thyself , Harry ! " cry the Colonel , take the young fellow 's hand . " no deputy will ever say it half so well . come with I now . " 
 " you go first , and I will I will follow , on my word I will . see ! I be in my morning - gown ! I will but put on a coat and come to he . give he my message first . just just prepare he for I ! " say poor Harry , who know he must do it , but yet do not much like that process of eat of humble - pie . 
 Wolfe go out smile understand the lad 's scruple well enough , perhaps . as he open the door , Mr. Gumbo enter it ; almost forget to bow to the gentleman , profusely courteous as he be on ordinary occasion , his eye glare round , his great mouth grin himself in a state of such high excitement and delight that his master remark his condition . 
 " what , Gum ? what have happen to thee ? Hast thou get a new sweetheart ? " 
 no , Gum have not get no new sweetheart , master . 
 " give I my coat . what have bring thee back ? " 
 Gum grin prodigiously . " I have see a ghost , mas'r ! " he say . 
 " a ghost ! and whose , and where ? " 
 " Whar ? see he at Madame Bernstein 's house . come with he here in the coach ! he downstair now with Colonel Lambert ! " Whilst Gumbo be speak , as he be put on his master 's coat , his eye be roll , his head be wag , his hand be tremble , his lip be grin . 
 " ghost what ghost ? " say Harry , in a strange agitation . " be anybody be my mother come ? " 
 " no , sir ; no , Master Harry ! " Gumbo 's head roll nearly off its violent convolution , and his master , look oddly at he , fling the door open , and go rapidly down the stair . 
 he be at the foot of it , just as a voice within the little office , of which the door be open , be say , " and for do so , I say thank you , and God bless you , in my mother 's name and mine . " 
 " whose voice be that ? " call out Harry Warrington , with a strange cry in his own voice . 
 " it be the ghost 's , mas'r ! " say Gumbo , from behind ; and Harry run forward to the room , where , if you please , we will pause a little minute before we enter . the two gentleman who be there , turn their head away . the lost be find again . the dead be alive . the prodigal be on his brother 's heart , his own full of love , gratitude , repentance . 
 " come away , James ! I think we be not want any more here , " say the Colonel . " good - night , boy . some lady in Hill Street will not   be able to sleep for this strange news . or will you go home and sup with them , and tell they the story ? " 
 no , with many thank , the boy would not go and sup to - night . they have story of their own to tell . " quick , Gumbo , with the trunk ! good - bye , Mr. Amos ! " Harry feel almost unhappy when he go away . 




 CHAPTER L. contain a great deal of the Finest Morality 

 when first we have the honour to be present to Sir Miles Warrington at the King 's drawing - room , in St. James 's Palace , I confess that I , for one look at his jolly round face , his broad round waistcoat , his hearty country manner , expect that I have light upon a most eligible and agreeable acquaintance at last , and be about to become intimate with that noble speciman of the human race , the bepraised of song and man , the good old English country gentleman . in fact , to be a good old country gentleman be to hold a position nearest the god , and at the summit of earthly felicity . to have a large unencumbered rent - roll , and the rent regularly pay by adore farmer , who bless their star at have such a landlord as his honour ; to have no tenant hold back with his money , except just one , perhaps , who do so in order to give occasion to Good Old Country Gentleman to show his sublime charity and universal benevolence of soul ; to hunt three day a week , love the sport of all thing , and have perfect good health and good appetite in consequence ; to have not only good appetite , but a good dinner ; to sit down at church in the midst of a chorus of blessing from the villager , the first man in the parish , the benefactor of the parish , with a consciousness of consummate desert , say , " have mercy upon we , miserable sinner , " to be sure , but only for form 's sake , because the word be write in the book , and to give other folk an example a G. O. C. G. a miserable sinner ! so healthy , so wealthy , so jolly , so much respect by the vicar , so much honour by the tenant , so much beloved and admire by his family , amongst whom his story of grouse in the gunroom cause laughter from generation to generation ; this perfect be a miserable sinner ! allon donc ! give any man good health and temper , five thousand a year , the adoration of his parish , and the love and worship of his family , and I will defy you to make he so heartily dissatisfied with his spiritual condition as to set himself down a miserable anything . if you be a Royal Highness , and go to church in the most perfect health and comfort , the parson wait to begin the service until your R. H. come in , would you believe yourself to be a miserable , etc . ? you might when rack with gout , in solitude , the fear of death before your eye , the doctor have cut off your bottle of claret , and order arrowroot and a little sherry , you might then be humiliate , and acknowledge your own shortcoming , and the vanity of thing in general ; but , in high health , sunshine , spirit , that word miserable be only a form . you can not   think in your heart that you be to be pity much for the present . if you be to be miserable , what be Colin Ploughman , with the ague , seven child , two pound a year rent to pay for his cottage , and eight shilling a week ? no : a healthy , rich , jolly , country gentleman , if miserable , have a very supportable misery : if a sinner , have very few people to tell he so . 
 it may be he become somewhat selfish ; but at least he be satisfied with himself . except my lord at the castle , there be nobody for mile and mile round so good or so great . his admirable wife minister to he , and to the whole parish , indeed : his child bow before he : the vicar of the parish reverence he : he be respect at quarter - session : he cause poacher to tremble : off go all hat before he at market : and round about his great coach , in which his spotless daughter and sublime lady sit , all the country - town tradesman cringe , bareheade , and the farmeer ' woman drop innumerable curtsey . from their cushion in the great coach the lady look down beneficently , and smile on the poor folk . they buy a yard of ribbon with affability ; they condescend to purchase an ounce of salt , or a packet of flower - seed : they deign to cheapen a goose : their drive be like a royal progress ; a happy people be suppose to press round they and bless they . tradesman bow , farmer ' wife bob , town - boy , wave their ragged hat , cheer the red - faced coachman as he drive the fat bay , and cry , " Sir Miles for ever ! throw we a halfpenny , my lady ! " 
 but suppose the market - woman should hide her fat goose when Sir Miles 's coach come , out of terror lest my lady , spy the bird , should insist on purchase it a bargain ? suppose no copper ever be know to come out of the royal coach window ? suppose Sir Miles regale his tenant with notoriously small beer , and his poor with especially thin broth ? this may be our fine old english gentleman 's way . there have be not a few fine english gentleman and lady of this sort ; who patronise the poor without ever relieve they , who call out " amen ! " at church as loud as the clerk ; who go through all the form of piety , and discharge all the etiquette of old english gentlemanhood ; who buy virtue a bargain , as it be , and have no doubt they be honour she by the purchase . poor Harry in his distress ask help from his relation : his aunt send he a tract and her blessing ; his uncle have business out of town , and could not , of course , answer the poor boy 's petition . how much of this behaviour go on daily in respectable life , think you ? you can fancy Lord and Lady Macbeth concoct a murder , and come together with some little awkwardness , perhaps , when the transaction be do and over ; but my Lord and Lady Skinflint , when they consult in their bedroom about give their luckless nephew a help hand , and determine to refuse , and go down to family prayer , and meet their child and domestic , and discourse virtuously before they , and then remain together , and talk nose to nose , what can they think of one another ? and of the poor kinsman fall among the thief , and groan for help unheeded ? how can they go on with those virtuous air ? how can they dare look each other in the face ? 
 Dare ? do you suppose they think they have do wrong ? do you suppose skinflint be torture with remorse at the idea of the distress which call to he in vain , and of the hunger which he send empty away ? not he . he be indignant with Prodigal for be a fool : he be not ashamed of himself for be a curmudgeon . what ? a young man with such opportunity throw they away ? a fortune spend amongst gambler and spendthrift ? horrible , horrible ! take warning , my child , by this unfortunate young man 's behaviour , and see the consequence of extravagance . accord to the great and always establish Church of the Pharisees , here be an admirable opportunity for a moral discourse , and an assertion of virtue . " and to think of his deceive we so ! " cry out Lady Warrington . 
 " very sad , very sad , my dear ! " say Sir Miles , wag his head . 
 " to think of so much extravagance in one so young ! " cry Lady Warrington . " Cards , bet , feast at tavern of the most wicked profusion , carriage and rid horse , the company of the wealthy and profligate of his own sex , and , I fear , of the most iniquitous person of our . " 
 " Hush , my Lady Warrington ! " cry her husband , glance towards the spotless Dora and Flora , who hold down their blushing head , at the mention of the last naughty person . 
 " no wonder my poor child hide their face ! " mamma continue . " my dear , I wish even the existence of such creature could be keep from you ! " 
 " they can not   go to an opera , or the park , without see them , to be sure , " say Sir Miles . 
 " to think we should have introduce such a young serpent into the bosom of our family ! and have leave he in the company of that guileless darling ! " and she point to Master Miles . 
 " who be a serpent , mamma ? " inquire that youth . " first you say cousin Harry be bad : then he be good : now he be bad again . which be he , Sir Miles ? " 
 " he have fault , like all of we , Miley , my dear . your cousin have be wild , and you must take warning by he . " 
 " be not my eld brother , who die my naughty brother be not he wild too ? he be not kind to I when I be quite a little boy . he never give I money , nor toy , nor ride with I , nor why do you cry , mamma ? sure I remember how Hugh and you be always fight " 
 " Silence , sir ! " cry out papa and the girl in a breath . " do not   you know you be never to mention that name ? " 
 " I know I love Harry , and I do not   love Hugh , " say the sturdy little rebel . " and if cousin Harry be in prison , I will give he my half - guinea that my godpapa give I , and anything I have yes , anything , except except my little horse and my silver waistcoat and and Snowball and Sweetlips at home and and , yes , my custard after dinner . " this be in reply to a hint of sister Dora . " but I would give he some of it , " continue Miles , after a pause . 
 " shut thy mouth with it , child , and then go about thy business , " say papa , amuse . Sir Miles Warrington have a considerable fund of easy humour . 
 " who would have think he should ever be so wild ? " mamma go on . 
 " Nay . Youth be the season for wild oat , my dear . " 
 " that we should be so mislead in he ! " sigh the girl . 
 " that he should kiss we both ! " cry papa . 
 " Sir Miles Warrington , I have no patience with that sort of vulgarity ! " say the majestic matron . 
 " which of you be the favourite yesterday , girl ? " continue the father . 
 " Favourite , indeed ! I tell he over and over again of my engagement to dear Tom I do , Dora why do you sneer , if you please ? " say the handsome sister . 
 " Nay , to do her justice , so do Dora too , " say papa . 
 " because Flora seem to wish to forget her engagement with dear Tom sometimes , " remark the sister . 
 " I never , never , never wish to break with Tom ! it be wicked of you to say so , Dora ! it be you who be for ever sneer at he : it be you who be always envious because I happen at least , because gentleman imagine that I be not ill - looking , and prefer I to some folk , in spite of all their learning and wit ! " cry Flora , toss her head over her shoulder , and look at the glass . 
 " why be you always look there , sister ? " say the artless Miles junior . " sure , you must know your face well enough ! " 
 " some people look at it just as often , child , who have not   near such good reason , " say papa , gallantly . 
 " if you mean I , Sir Miles , I thank you , " cry Dora . " my face be as Heaven make it , and my father and mother give it I . ' tis not my fault if I resemble my papa 's family . if my head be homely , at least I have get some brain in it . I envious of Flora , indeed , because she have find favour in the sight of poor Tom Claypool ! I should as soon be proud of captivate a ploughboy ! " 
 " pray , miss , be your Mr. Harry , of Virginia , much wise than Tom Claypool ? you would have have he for the asking ! " exclaim Flora . 
 " and so would you , miss , and have drop Tom Claypool into the sea ! " cry Dora . 
 " I would not . " 
 " you would . " 
 " I would not ; " and da capo go the conversation the shuttlecock of wrath be briskly battle from one sister to another . 
 " oh , my child ! be this the way you dwell together in unity ? " exclaim their excellent female parent , lay down her embroidery . " what an example you set to this Innocent ! " 
 " like to see them fight , my lady ! " cry the Innocent , rub his hand . 
 " at she , Flora ! worry she , Dora ! to it again , you little rogue ! " say facetious papa . " ' tis good sport , be not   it , Miley ? " 
 " oh , Sir Miles ! oh , my child ! these dispute be unseemly . they tear a fond mother 's heart , " say mamma , with majestic action , though bear the laceration of her bosom with much seeming equanimity . " what cause for thankfulness ought we to have that watchful parent have prevent any idle engagement between you and your misguided cousin . if we have be mistake in he , be it not a mercy that we have find out our error in time ? if either of you have any preference for he , your excellent good sense , my love , will teach you to overcome , to eradicate , the vain feeling . that we cherish and be kind to he can never be a source of regret . ' tis a proof of our good - nature . what we have to regret , I fear , be , that your cousin should have prove unworthy of our kindness , and , come away from the society of gambler , play - actor , and the like , should have bring contamination pollution , I have almost say into this pure family ! " 
 " oh , bother mamma 's sermon ! " say Flora , as my lady pursue a harangue of which we only give the commencement here , but during which papa , whistle , gently quit the room on tiptoe , whilst the artless Miles junior wind his top and peg it under the robe of his sister . it have do hum , and stagger and tumble over , and expire in its usual tipsy manner , long ere Lady Warrington have finish her sermon . 
 " be you listen to I , my child ? " she ask , lay her hand on her darling 's head . 
 " yes , mother , " say he , with the whipcord in his mouth , and proceed to wind up his sportive engine . " you be a - say that Harry be very poor now , and that we ought not   to help he . that be what you be say ; be not   it , madam ? " 
 " my poor child , thou wilt understand I well when thou art old ! " say mamma , turn towards that ceiling to which her eye always have recourse . 
 " get out , you little wretch ! " cry one of the sister . the artless one have peg his top at Dora 's toe , and laugh with the glee of merry boyhood at his sister 's discomfiture . 
 but what be this ? who come here ? why do Sir Miles return to the drawing - room , and why do Tom Claypool , who stride after the Baronet , wear a countenance so disturbed ? 
 " here be a pretty business , my Lady Warrington ! " cry Sir Miles . " here be a wonderful wonder of wonder , girl ! " 
 " for goodness ' sake , gentleman , what be your intelligence ? " ask the virtuous matron . 
 " the whole town 's talk about it , my lady ! " say Tom Claypool puff for breath . 
 " Tom have see he , " continue Sir Miles . 
 " seen both of they , my Lady Warrington . they be at Ranelagh last night , with a regular mob after them . and so like , that but for their different ribbon you would hardly have tell one from the other . one be in blue , the other in brown ; but I be certain he have wear both the suit here . " 
 " what suit ? " 
 " what one , what other ? " call the girl . 
 " why , your fortunate youth , to be sure . " 
 " our precious Virginian , and heir to the principality ! " say Sir Miles . 
 " be my nephew , then , release from his incarceration ? " ask her ladyship . " and be he again plunge in the vortex of dissip " 
 " confound he ! " roar out the Baronet , with an expression which I fear be even strong . " what should you think , my Lady Warrington , if this precious nephew of mine should turn out to be an impostor ; by George ! no well than an adventurer ? " 
 " an inward monitor whisper I as much ! " cry the lady ; " but I dash from I the unworthy suspicion . speak , Sir Miles , we burn with impatience to listen to your intelligence . " 
 " I will speak , my love , when you have   do , " say Sir Miles . " well , what do you think of my gentleman , who come into my house , dine at my table , be treat as one of this family , kiss my " 
 " what ? " ask Tom Claypool , fire as red as his waistcoat . 
 " Hem ! kiss my wife 's hand , and be treat in the fond manner , by George ! what do you think of this fellow , who talk of his property and his principality , by Jupiter ! turn out to be a beggarly second son ! a beggar , my Lady Warrington , by " 
 " Sir Miles Warrington , no violence of language before these dear one ! I sink to the earth , confound by this unutterable hypocrisy . and do I entrust thee to a pretender , my blessed boy ? do I leave thee with an impostor , my innocent one ? " the matron cry , fondle her son . 
 " who be an impostor , my lady ? " ask the child . 
 " that confound young scamp of a Harry Warrington ! " bawl out papa ; on which the little Miles , after wear a puzzled look for a moment , and yield to I know not what hide emotion , burst out cry . 
 his admirable mother propose to clutch he to her heart , but he reject the pure caress , bawl only the loud , and kick frantically about the maternal gremium , as the butler announce " Mr. George Warrington , Mr. Henry Warrington ! " Miles be drop from his mother 's lap . Sir Miles 's face emulate Mr. Claypool 's waistcoat . the three lady rise up , and make three most frigid curtsey , as our two young man enter the room . 
 little Miles run towards they . he hold out a little hand . " oh , Harry ! no ! which be Harry ? you be my Harry , " and he choose rightly this time . " oh , you dear Harry ! I be so glad you be come ! and they have   be abuse you so ! " 
 " I be come to pay my duty to my uncle , " say the dark - haired Mr. Warrington ; " and to thank he for his hospitality to my brother Henry . " 
 " what , nephew George ? my brother 's face and eye ! boy both , I be delighted to see you ! " cry their uncle , grasp affectionately a hand of each , as his honest face radiate with pleasure . 
 " this indeed hath be a most mysterious and a most providential resuscitation , " say Lady Warrington . " only I wonder that my nephew Henry conceal the circumstance until now , " she add , with a sidelong glance at both young gentleman . 
 " he know it no more than your ladyship , " say Mr. Warrington . the young lady look at each other with downcast eye . 
 " indeed , sir ! a most singular circumstance , " say mamma , with another curtsey . " we have hear of it , sir ; and Mr. Claypool , our county neighbour , have just bring we the intelligence , and it even now form the subject of my conversation with my daughter . " 
 " yes , " cry out a little voice , " and do you know , Harry , father and mother say you be a a imp " 
 " Silence , my child ! screwby , convey Master Warrington to his own apartment ! these , Mr. Warrington or , I suppose I should say nephew George be your cousin . " two curtsey two cheese be make two hand be hold out . Mr. Esmond Warrington make a profound low bow , which embrace   and it be the only embrace which the gentleman offer   all three lady . he lay his hat to his heart . he say , " it be my duty , madam , to pay my respect to my uncle and cousin , and to thank your ladyship for such hospitality as you have be enable to show to my brother . " 
 " it be not much , nephew , but it be our good . ods bob ! " cry the hearty Sir Miles , " it be our good ! " 
 " and I appreciate it , sir , " say Mr. Warrington , look gravely round at the family . 
 " give we thy hand . not a word more , " say Sir Miles " what ? do you think I be a cannibal , and will not   extend the hand of hospitality to my dear brother 's son ? what say you , lad ? will you eat our mutton at three ? this be my neighbour , Tom Claypool , son to Sir Thomas Claypool , Baronet , and my very good friend . hey , Tom ! Thou wilt be of the party , Tom ? Thou know our brew , hey , my boy ? " 
 " yes , I know it , Sir Miles , " reply Tom , with no peculiar expression of rapture on his face . 
 " and thou shalt taste it , my boy , thou shalt taste it ! what be there for dinner , my Lady Warrington ? our food be plain , but plenty , lad plain , but plenty ! " 
 " we can not partake of it to - day , sir . we dine with a friend who occupy my Lord Wrotham 's house , your neighbour . Colonel Lambert Major - General Lambert he have just be make . " 
 " with two daughter , I think countrifie - look girl be they not ? " ask Flora . 
 " I think I have remark two little rather dowdy thing , " say Dora . 
 " they be as good girl as any in England ! " break out Harry , to whom no one have think of say a single word . his reign be over , you see . he be nobody . what wonder , then , that he should not be visible ? 
 " oh , indeed , cousin ! " say Dora , with a glance at the young man , who sate with burn cheek , chafe at the humiliation put upon he , but not know how or whether he should notice it . " oh , indeed , cousin ! you be very charitable or very lucky , I be sure ! you see angel where we only see ordinary little person . I be sure I could not imagine who be those odd - look people in Lord Wrotham 's coach , with his handsome livery . but if they be three angel , I have nothing to say . " 
 " my brother be an enthusiast , " interpose George . " he be often mistake about woman . " 
 " oh , really ! " say Dora , look a little uneasy . 
 " I fear my nephew Henry have indeed meet with some unfavourable specimen of our sex , " the matron remark , with a groan . 
 " we be so easily take in , madam we be both very young yet we shall grow old and learn well . " 
 " most sincerely , nephew George , I trust you may . you have my good wish , my prayer , for your brother 's welfare and your own . no effort of our have be want . at a painful moment , to which I will not far allude " 
 " and when my uncle Sir Miles be out of town , " say George , look towards the Baronet , who smile at he with affectionate approval . 
 " I send your brother a work which I think might comfort he , and I know might improve he . Nay , do not thank I ; I claim no credit ; I do but my duty a humble woman 's duty for what be this world 's good , nephew , compare to the welfare of a soul ? if I do good , I be thankful ; if I be useful , I rejoice . if , through my mean , you have be bring , Harry , to consider " 
 " oh ! the sermon , be it ? " break in downright Harry . " I have not   time to read a single syllable of it , aunt thank you . you see I do not   care much about that kind of thing but thank you all the same . " 
 " the intention be everything , " say Mr. Warrington , " and we be both grateful . our dear friend , General Lambert , intend to give bail for Harry ; but , happily , I have fund of Harry 's with I to meet any demand upon we . but the kindness be the same , and I be grateful to the friend who hasten to my brother 's rescue when he have most need of aid , and when his own relation happen so unfortunately to be out of town . " 
 " anything I could do , my dear boy , I be sure my brother 's son my own nephew od bobs ! you know that is , anything anything , you know ! " cry Sir Miles , bring his own hand into George 's with a generous smack . " you can not   stay and dine with we ? put off the Colonel the General do , now ! or name a day . my Lady Warrington , make my nephew name a day when he will sit under his grandfather 's picture , and drink some of his wine ! " 
 " his intellectual faculty seem more developed than those of his unlucky young brother , " remark my lady , when the young gentleman have take their leave . " the young must be reckless and extravagant about money indeed , for do you remark , Sir Miles , the loss of his reversion in Virginia the amount of which have , no doubt , be grossly exaggerated , but , nevertheless , must be something considerable do you , I say , remark that the ruin of Harry 's prospect scarcely seem to affect he ? " 
 " I should not   be at all surprised that the elder turn out to be as poor as the young one , " say Dora , toss her head . 
 " he ! he ! do you see that cousin George have one of cousin Harry 's suit of clothe on the brown and gold that one he wear when he go with you to the oratorio , Flora ? " 
 " do he take Flora to an oratorio ? " ask Mr. Claypool , fiercely . 
 " I be ill and could not   go , and my cousin go with she , " say Dora . 
 " far be it from I to object to any innocent amusement , much less to the music of Mr. Handel , dear Mr. Claypool , " say mamma . " music refine the soul , elevate the understanding , be hear in our church , and ' tis well know be practise by King David . your opera I shun as deleterious ; your ballet I would forbid to my child as most immoral ; but music , my dear ! may we enjoy it , like everything else in reason may we " 
 " there be the music of the dinner - bell , " say papa , rub his hand . " come , girl . screwby , go and fetch Master Miley . Tom take down my lady . " 
 " Nay , dear Thomas , I walk but slowly . go you with dear Flora downstair , " say Virtue . 
 but Dora take care to make the evening pleasant by talk of Handel and oratorio constantly during dinner . 




 CHAPTER LI . Conticuere Omnes 

 across the way , if the gracious reader will please to step over with we , he will find our young gentleman at Lord Wrotham 's house , which his lordship have lend to his friend the General , and that little family party assemble , with which we make acquaintance at Oakhurst and Tunbridge Wells . James Wolfe have promise to come to dinner ; but James be dance attendance upon Miss Lowther , and would rather have a glance from her eye than the fine kickshaw dress by Lord Wrotham 's cook , or the dessert which be promise for the entertainment at which you be just go to sit down . you will make the sixth . you may take Mr. Wolfe 's place . you may be sure he will not   come . as for I , I will stand at the sideboard and report the conversation . 
 note first , how happy the woman look ! when Harry Warrington be take by those bailiff , I have intend to tell you how the good Mrs. Lambert , hearing of the boy 's mishap , have fly to her husband , and have beg , implored , insist , that her Martin should help he . " never mind his rebeldom of the other day ; never mind about his be angry that his present be return of course anybody would be angry , much more such a high - spirited lad as Harry ! never mind about our be so poor , and want all our spare money for the boy at college ; there must be some way of get he out of the scrape . do you not get Charles Watkins out of the scrape two year ago ; and do he not pay you back every halfpenny ? yes ; and you make a whole family happy , bless be God ! and Mrs. Watkins pray for you and bless you to this very day , and I think everything have prosper with we since . and I have no doubt it have make you a major - general no earthly doubt , " say the fond wife . 
 now , as Martin Lambert require very little persuasion to do a kind action , he in this instance let himself be persuade easily enough , and have make up his mind to seek for friend James Wolfe , and give bail for Harry , he take his leave and his hat , and squeeze Theo 's hand , who seem to divine his errand   or perhaps that silly mamma have blab it , and kiss little Hetty 's flushed cheek , and away he go out of the apartment where the girl and their mother be sit , though he be follow out of the room by the latter . 
 when she be alone with he , that enthusiastic matron can not control her feeling any long . she fling her arm round her husband 's neck , kiss he a hundred and twenty - five time in an instant call God to bless he cry plentifully on his shoulder ; and in this sentimental attitude be discover by old Mrs. Quiggett , my lord 's housekeeper , who be bustle about the house , and , I suppose , be quite astounded at the conjugal phenomenon . 
 " we have have a tiff , and we be make it up ! do not   tell tale out of school , Mrs. Quiggett ! " say the gentleman , walk off . 
 " well , I never ! " say Mrs. Quiggett , with a shrill , strident laugh , like a venerable old cockatoo which white , hook - nose , long - live bird Mrs. Quiggett strongly resemble . " well , I never ! " say Quiggett , laugh and shake her old side till all her key , and , as one may fancy , her old rib clatter and jingle . 
 " oh , Quiggett ! " sob out Mrs. Lambert , " what a man that be ! " 
 " you have   be a - quarrelling , have you , mum , and make it up ? that be right . " 
 " quarrel with he ? he never tell a great story . my General be an angel , Quiggett . I should like to worship he . I should like to fall down at his boot and kiss them , I should ! there never be a man so good as my General . what have I do to have such a man ? how dare I have such a good husband ? " 
 " my dear , I think there be a pair of you , " say the old cockatoo ; " and what would you like for your supper ? " 
 when Lambert come back very late to that meal , and tell what have happen , how Harry be free , and how his brother have come to life , and rescue he , you may fancy what a commotion the whole of those people be in ! if Mrs. Lambert 's General be an angel before , what be he now ! if she want to embrace his boot in the morning , pray what further office of wallow degradation would she prefer in the evening ? little Hetty come and nestle up to her father quite silent , and drink a little drop out of his glass . Theo 's and mamma 's face beam with happiness , like two moon of brightness .... after supper , those four at a certain signal fall down on their knee glad homage pay in awful mirth - rejoicing , and with such pure joy as angel do , we read , for the sinner that repent . there come a great knocking at the door whilst they be so gather together . who can be there ? my lord be in the country mile off . it be past midnight now ; so late have they be , so long have they be talk ! I think Mrs. Lambert guess who be there . 
 " this be George , " say a young gentleman , lead in another . " we have be to Aunt Bernstein . we could not   go to bed , Aunt Lambert , without come to thank you too . you dear , dear , good " there be no more speech audible . Aunt Lambert be kiss Harry , Theo have snatch up Hetty who be as pale as death , and be hug she into life again . George Warrington stand with his hat off , and then   when Harry 's transaction be conclude   go up and kiss Mrs. Lambert 's hand : the General pass his across his eye . I protest they be all in a very tender and happy state . generous heart sometimes feel it , when Wrong be forgive , when Peace be restore , when love return that have be think lose . 
 " we come from Aunt Bernstein 's ; we see light here , you see ; we could not   go to sleep without say good - night to you all , " say Harry . " could we , George ? " 
 " ' tis certainly a famous nightcap you have bring we , boy , " say the General . " when be you to come and dine with we ? to - morrow ? " no , they must go to Madame Bernstein 's to - morrow . 
 the next day , then ? yes , they would come the next day and that be the very day we be write about : and this be the very dinner , at which , in the room of Lieutenant - Colonel James Wolfe , absent on private affair , my gracious reader have just be invite to sit down . 
 to sit down , and why , if you please ? not to a mere Barmecide dinner no , no but to hear MR . GEORGE ESMOND WARRINGTON 'S STATEMENT , which of course he be go to make . here they all sit not in my lord 's grand dining - room , you know , but in the snug study or parlour in front . the cloth have be withdraw , the General have give the King 's health , the servant have leave the room , the guest sit conticent , and so , after a little hemming and blushing , Mr. George proceed : 
 " I remember , at the table of our General , how the little Philadelphia agent , whose wit and shrewdness we have remark at home , make the very objection to the conduct of the campaign of which its disastrous issue show the justice . ' of course , ' say he , ' your Excellency 's troop once before Fort Duquesne , such a weak little place will never be able to resist such a general , such an army , such artillery , as will there be find attack it . but do you calculate , sir , on the difficulty of reach the place ? your Excellency 's march will be through wood almost untrodden , over road which you will have to make yourself , and your line will be some four mile long . this slender line , have to make its way through the forest , will be subject to endless attack in front , in rear , in flank , by enemy whom you will never see , and whose constant practice in war be the dexterous laying of ambuscade . ' ' Psha , sir ! ' say the General , ' the savage may frighten your raw american militia '   thank your Excellency for the compliment , Mr. Washington seem to say , who be sit at the table , ' but the Indians will never make any impression on his Majesty 's regular troop . ' ' I heartily hope not , sir , ' say Mr. Franklin , with a sigh ; and of course the gentleman of the General 's family sneer at the postmaster , as at a pert civilian who have no call to be give his opinion on matter entirely beyond his comprehension . 
 " we despise the Indians on our own side , and our commander make light of they and their service . our officer disgust the chief who be with we by outrageous behaviour to their woman . there be not above seven or eight who remain with our force . have we have a couple of hundred in our front on that fatal 9th of July , the event of the day must have be very different . they would have fling off the attack of the French Indians ; they would have prevent the surprise and panic which ensue . ' tis know now that the French have even get ready to give up their fort , never dream of the possibility of a defence , and that the French Indians themselves remonstrate against the audacity of attack such an overwhelming force as ours . 
 " I be with our General with the main body of the troop when the firing begin in front of we , and one aide - de - camp after another be send forwards . at first the enemy 's attack be answer briskly by our own advanced people , and our man huzzae and cheer with good heart . but very soon our fire grow slacker , whilst from behind every tree and bush round about we come single shot , which lay man after man low . we be march in orderly line , the skirmisher in front , the colour and two of our small gun in the centre , the baggage well guard bring up the rear , and be move over a ground which be open and clear for a mile or two , and for some half mile in breadth , a thick tangle covert of brushwood and tree on either side of we . after the firing have continue for some brief time in front , it open from both side of the environing wood on our advance column . the man drop rapidly , the officer in great number than the man . at first , as I say , these cheer and answer the enemy 's fire , our gun even open on the wood , and seem to silence the French in ambuscade there . but the hide rifle - firing begin again . our man halt , huddle up together , in spite of the shout and order of the General and officer to advance , and fire wildly into the brushwood of course make no impression . those in advance come run back on the main body frighten , and many of they wound . they report there be five thousand frenchman and a legion of yell indian devil in front , who be scalp our people as they fall . we could hear their cry from the wood around as our man drop under their rifle . there be no induce the people to go forward now . one aide - de - camp after another be send forward , and never return . at last it come to be my turn , and I be send with a message to Captain Fraser of Halkett 's in front , which he be never to receive nor I to deliver . 
 " I have not go thirty yard in advance when a rifle - ball strike my leg , and I fall straightway to the ground . I recollect a rush forward of Indians and Frenchmen after that , the former cry their fiendish war - cry , the latter as fierce as their savage ally . I be amazed and mortify to see how few of the whitecoat there be . not above a score pass I ; indeed there be not fifty in the accursed action in which two of the brave regiment of the british army be put to rout . 
 " one of they , who be half indian half Frenchman , with mocassin and a white uniform coat and cockade , see I prostrate on the ground , turn back and run towards I , his musket club over his head to dash my brain out and plunder I as I lay . I have my little fusil which my Harry give I when I go on the campaign ; it have fall by I and within my reach , luckily : I seize it , and down fall the Frenchman dead at six yard before I . I be save for that time , but bleed from my wound and very faint . I swoon almost in try to load my piece , and it drop from my hand , and the hand itself sink lifeless to the ground . 
 " I be scarcely in my sens , the yell and shot ring dimly in my ear , when I see an Indian before I , busy over the body of the Frenchman I have just shoot , but glance towards I as I lay on the ground bleed . he first rifle the Frenchman , tear open his coat , and feel in his pocket : he then scalp he , and with his bleed knife in his mouth advance towards I . I see he come as through a film , as in a dream I be powerless to move , or to resist he . 
 " he put his knee upon my chest : with one bloody hand he seize my long hair and lift my head from the ground , and as he lift it , he enable I to see a french officer rapidly advance behind he . 
 " good God ! it be young Florac , who be my second in the duel at Quebec . ' a moi , Florac ! ' I cry out . ' C'est Georges ! aide moi ! ' 
 " he start ; run up to I at the cry , lay his hand on the Indian 's shoulder , and call he to hold . but the savage do not understand French , or choose to understand it . he clutch my hair firm , and wave his dripping knife round it , motion to the french lad to leave he to his prey . I could only cry out again and piteously , ' a moi ! ' 
 " ' ah , canaille , tu veux du sing ? prend ! ' say Florac , with a curse ; and the next moment , and with an ugh , the Indian fall over my chest dead , with Florac 's sword through his body . 
 " my friend look round he . ' eh ! ' say he , ' la belle affaire ! where art thou wound ? in the leg ? ' he bind my leg tight round with his sash . ' the other will kill thee if they find thee here . ah , tien ! put I on this coat , and this hat with the white cockade . call out in French if any of our people pass . they will take thee for one of we . thou art Brunet of the Quebec Volunteers . God guard thee , Brunet ! I must go forward . ' tis a general debacle , and the whole of your redcoat be on the run , my poor boy . ' ah , what a rout it be ! what a day of disgrace for England ! 
 " Florac 's rough application stop the bleeding of my leg , and the kind creature help I to rest against a tree , and to load my fusil , which he place within reach of I , to protect I in case any other marauder should have a mind to attack I . and he give I the gourd of that unlucky french soldier , who have lose his own life in the deadly game which he have just play against I , and the drink the gourd contain serve greatly to refresh and invigorate I . take a mark of the tree against which I lay , and note the various bearing of the country , so as to be able again to find I , the young lad hasten on to the front . ' thou seest how much I love thee , George , ' he say , ' that I stay behind in a moment like this . ' I forget whether I tell thee Harry , that Florac be under some obligation to I . I have win money of he at card , at Quebec only play at his repeat entreaty and there be a difficulty about pay , and I remit his debt to I , and light my pipe with his note - of - hand . you see , sir , that you be not the only gambler in the family . 
 " at evening , when the dismal pursuit be over , the faithful fellow come back to I , with a couple of Indians , who have each reeking scalp at their belt , and whom he inform that I be a Frenchman , his brother , who have be wound early in the day , and must be carry back to the fort . they lay I in one of their blanket , and carry I , groan , with the trusty Florac by my side . have he leave I , they would assuredly have lay I down , plunder I , and add my hair to that of the wretch whose bleeding spoil hang at their girdle . he promise they brandy at the fort , if they bring I safely there : I have but a dim recollection of the journey : the anguish of my wound be extreme : I faint more than once . we come to the end of our march at last . I be take into the fort , and carry to the officer 's log - house , and lay upon Florac 's own bed . 
 " happy for I be my insensibility . I have be bring into the fort as a wound french soldier of the garrison . I hear afterwards , that during my delirium the few prisoner who have be make on the day of our disaster , have be bring under the wall of Duquesne by their savage captor , and there horribly burn , torture , and butcher by the Indians , under the eye of the garrison . " 
 as George speak , one may fancy a thrill of horror run through his sympathise audience . Theo take Hetty 's hand , and look at George in a very alarmed manner . Harry strike his fist upon the table , and cry , " the bloody , murderous , red - skin villain ! there will never be peace for we until they be all hunt down ! " 
 " they be offer a hundred and thirty dollar apiece for indian scalp in Pennsylvania , when I leave home , " say George , demurely , " and fifty for woman . " 
 " fifty for woman , my love ! do you hear that , Mrs. Lambert ? " cry the Colonel , lift up his wife 's hair . 
 " the murderous villain ! " say Harry , again . " hunt them down , sir ! hunt them down ! " 
 " I know not how long I lay in my fever , " George resume . " when I awake to my sens , my dear Florac be go . he and his company have be despatch on an enterprise against an english fort on the pennsylvanian territory , which the French claim , too . in Duquesne , when I come to be able to ask and understand what be say to I , there be not above thirty Europeans leave . the place might have be take over and over again , have any of our people have the courage to return after their disaster . 
 " my old enemy the ague - fever set in again upon I as I lie here by the river - side . ' tis a wonder how I ever survive . but for the goodness of a half - breed woman in the fort , who take pity on I , and tend I , I never should have recover , and my poor Harry would be what he fancy himself yesterday , our grandfather 's heir , our mother 's only son . 
 " I remember how , when Florac lay I in his bed , he put under my pillow my money , my watch , and a trinket or two which I have . when I wake to myself these be all go ; and a surly old sergeant , the only officer leave in the quarter , tell I , with a curse , that I be lucky enough to be leave with my life at all ; that it be only my white cockade and coat have save I from the fate which the other canaille of Rosbifs have deservedly meet with . 
 " at the time of my recovery the fort be almost empty of the garrison . the Indians have retire enrich with british plunder , and the chief part of the french regular be go upon expedition northward . my good Florac have leave I upon his service , consign I to the care of an invalided sergeant . Monsieur de Contrecoeur have accompany one of these expedition , leave an old lieutenant , Museau by name , in command at Duquesne . 
 " this man have long be out of France , and serve in the colony . his character , doubtless , have be indifferent at home ; and he know that , accord to the system pursue in France , where almost all promotion be give to the noblesse , he never would advance in rank . and he have make free with my guineas , I suppose , as he have with my watch , for I see it one day on his chest when I be sit with he in his quarter . 
 " Monsieur Museau and I manage to be pretty good friend . if I could be exchange , or send home , I tell he that my mother would pay liberally for my ransom ; and I suppose this idea excite the cupidity of the commandant , for a trapper come in the winter , whilst I still lay very ill with fever , Museau consent that I should write home to my mother , but that the letter should be in French , that he should see it , and that I should say I be in the hand of the Indians , and should not be ransom under ten thousand livre . 
 " in vain I say I be a prisoner to the troop of his Most christian Majesty , that I expect the treatment of a gentleman and an officer . Museau swear that letter should go , and no other ; that if I hesitate , he would fling I out of the fort , or hand I over to the tender mercy of his ruffian indian ally . he would not let the trapper communicate with I except in his presence . life and liberty be sweet . I resist for a while , but I be pull down with weakness , and shudder with fever ; I write such a letter as the rascal consent to let pass , and the trapper go away with my missive , which he promise , in three week , to deliver to my mother in Virginia . 
 " three week , six , twelve , pass . the messenger never return . the winter come and go , and all our little plantation round the fort , where the french soldier have clear corn - ground and plant garden and peach- and apple - tree down to the Monongahela , be in full blossom . Heaven know how I creep through the weary time ! when I be pretty well , I make drawing of the soldier of the garrison , and of the half - breed and her child   Museau 's child , and of Museau himself , whom , I be ashamed to say , I flatter outrageously ; and there be an old guitar leave in the fort , and I sing to it , and play on it some french air which I know , and ingratiate myself as good I could with my gaoler ; and so the weary month pass , but the messenger never return . 
 " at last news arrive that he have be shoot by some British Indians in Maryland : so there be an end of my hope of ransom for some month more . this make Museau very savage and surly towards I ; the more so as his sergeant inflame his rage by tell he that the indian woman be partial to I as I believe , poor thing , she be . I be always gentle with she , and grateful to she . my small accomplishment seem wonder in her eye ; I be ill and unhappy , too , and these be always claim to a woman 's affection . 
 " a captive pull down by malady , a ferocious gaoler , and a young woman touch by the prisoner 's misfortune sure you expect that , with these three prime character in a piece , some pathetic tragedy be go to be enact ? you , Miss Hetty , be about to guess that the woman save I ? " 
 " why , of course she do ! " cry mamma . 
 " what else be she good for ? " say Hetty . 
 " you , Miss Theo , have paint she already as a dark beauty be it not so ? a swift huntress " 
 " Diana with a baby , " say the Colonel . 
 " who scour the plain with her nymph , who bring down the game with her unerring bow , who be queen of the forest and I see by your look that you think I be madly in love with she ? " 
 " well , I suppose she be an interesting creature , Mr. George ? " say Theo , with a blush . 
 " what think you of a dark beauty , the colour of new mahogany with long straight black hair , which be usually dress with a hair - oil or pomade by no mean pleasant to approach , with little eye , with high cheek - bone , with a flat nose , sometimes ornament with a ring , with row of glass bead round her tawny throat , her cheek and forehead gracefully tattooed , a great love of finery , and inordinate passion for oh ! must I own it ? " 
 " for coquetry . I know you be go to say that ! " say Miss Hetty . 
 " for whisky , my dear Miss Hester in which appetite my gaoler partook ; so that I have often sate by , on the night when I be in favour with Monsieur Museau , and see he and his poor companion hob - and - nobbing together until they could scarce hold the noggin out of which they drank . in these evening entertainment , they would sing , they would dance , they would fondle , they would quarrel , and knock the can and furniture about ; and , when I be in favour , I be admit to share their society , for Museau , jealous of his dignity , or not willing that his man should witness his behaviour , would allow none of they to be familiar with he . 
 " whilst the result of the trapper 's mission to my home be yet uncertain , and Museau and I myself expect the payment of my ransom , I be treat kindly enough , allow to crawl about the fort , and even to go into the adjoining field and garden , always keep my parole , and duly return before gun - fire . and I exercise a piece of hypocrisy , for which , I hope , you will hold I excuse . when my leg be sound   the ball come out in the winter , after some pain and inflammation , and the wound heal up presently , I yet choose to walk as if I be disabled and a cripple ; I hobble on two stick , and cry ah ! and oh ! at every minute , hop that a day might come when I might treat my limb to a run . 
 " Museau be very savage when he begin to give up all hope of the first messenger . he fancy that the man might have get the ransom - money and flee with it himself . of course he be prepared to disown any part in the transaction , should my letter be discover . his treatment of I vary accord to his hope or fear , or even his mood for the time be . he would have I consign to my quarter for several day at a time ; then invite I to his tipsy supper - table , quarrel with I there , and abuse my nation ; or again break out into maudlin sentimentality about his native country of Normandy , where he long to spend his old age , to buy a field or two , and to die happy . 
 " ' eh , Monsieur Museau ! ' say I , ' ten thousand livre of your money would buy a pretty field or two in your native country ? you can have it for the ransom of I , if you will but let I go . in a few month you must be supersede in your command here , and then adieu the crown and the field in Normandy ! you have well trust a gentleman and a man of honour . let I go home , and I give you my word the ten thousand livre shall be pay to any agent you may appoint in France or in Quebec . ' 
 " ' ah , young traitor ! ' roar he , ' do you wish to tamper with my honour ? do you believe an officer of France will take a bribe ? I have a mind to consign thee to my black - hole , and to have thee shot in the morning . ' 
 " ' my poor body will never fetch ten thousand livre , ' say I ; ' and a pretty field in Normandy with a cottage ... ' 
 " ' and an orchard . ah , sacre bleu ! ' say Museau , whimpering , ' and a dish of tripe a la mode du pay ! ... " 
 " this talk happen between we again and again , and Museau would order I to my quarter , and then ask I to supper the next night , and return to the subject of Normandy , and cider , and trippe a la mode de Caen . my friend be dead now " 
 " he be hung , I trust ? " break in Colonel Lambert . 
 " and I need keep no secret about he . lady , I wish I have to offer you the account of a dreadful and tragical escape ; how I slay all the sentinel of the fort ; file through the prison window , destroy a score or so of watchful dragon , overcome a million of danger , and finally effect my freedom . but , in regard of that matter , I have no heroic deed to tell of , and own that , by bribery and no other mean , I be where I be . " 
 " but you would have fight , Georgy , if need be , " say Harry ; " and you could not   conquer a whole garrison , you know ! " and herewith Mr. Harry blush very much . 
 " see the woman , how disappointed they be ! " say Lambert . " Mrs. Lambert , you bloodthirsty woman , own that you be balk of a battle ; and look at Hetty , quite angry because Mr. George do not shoot the commandant . " 
 " you wish he be hang yourself , papa ! " cry Miss Hetty , " and I be sure I wish anything my papa wish . " 
 " Nay , lady , " say George , turn a little red , " to wink at a prisoner 's escape be not a very monstrous crime ; and to take money ? sure other folk besides frenchman have condescend to a bribe before now . although Monsieur Museau set I free , I be inclined , for my part , to forgive he . will it please you to hear how that business be do ? you see , Miss Hetty , I can not help be alive to tell it . " 
 " oh , George ! that be , I mean , Mr. Warrington ! that be , I mean , I beg your pardon ! " cry Hester . 
 " no pardon , my dear ! I never be angry yet or surprise that any one should like my Harry well than I . he deserve all the liking that any man or woman can give he . see , it be his turn to blush now , " say George . 
 " go on , Georgy , and tell they about the escape out of Duquesne ! " cry Harry , and he say to Mrs. Lambert afterwards in confidence , " you know he be always go on say that he ought never to have come to life again , and declare that I be well than he be . the idea of my be well than George , Mrs. Lambert ! a poor , extravagant fellow like I ! it be absurd ! " 




 CHAPTER LII . Intentique Ora tenebant 

 " we continue for month our weary life at the fort , and the commandant and I have our quarrel and reconciliation , our greasy game at card , our dismal duet with his asthmatic flute and my cracked guitar . the poor Fawn take her beating and her can of liquor as her lord and master choose to administer they ; and she nurse her papoose , or her master in the gout , or her prisoner in the ague ; and so matter go on until the beginning of the fall of last year , when we be visit by a hunter who have important news to deliver to the commandant , and such as set the little garrison in no little excitement . the Marquis de Montcalm have send a considerable detachment to garrison the fort already in the french hand , and to take up further position in the enemy 's that be , in the british possession . the troop have leave Quebec and Montreal , and be come up the St. Lawrence and the lake in bateaux , with artillery and large provision of warlike and other store . Museau would be supersede in his command by an officer of superior rank , who might exchange I , or who might give I up to the Indians in reprisal for cruelty practise by our own people on many and many an officer and soldier of the enemy . the man of the fort be eager for the reinforcement ; they would advance into Pennsylvania and New York ; they would seize upon Albany and Philadelphia ; they would drive the Rosbifs into the sea , and all America should be theirs from the Mississippi to Newfoundland . 
 " this be all very triumphant : but yet , somehow , the prospect of the french conquest do not add to Mr. Museau 's satisfaction . 
 " ' eh , commandant ! ' say I , " tis fort bien , but meanwhile your farm in Normandy , the pot of cider , and the trippe a la mode de Caen , where be they ? ' 
 " ' yes ; ' tis all very well , my garcon , ' say he . ' but where will you be when poor old Museau be supersede ? other officer be not good companion like I . very few man in the world have my humanity . when there be a great garrison here , will my successor give thee the indulgence which honest Museau have grant thee ? thou wilt be keep in a sty like a pig ready for kill . as sure as one of our officer fall into the hand of your brigand of frontier - man , and evil come to he , so surely wilt thou have to pay with thy skin for his . thou wilt be give up to our red ally to the brother of La Biche yonder . didst thou see , last year , what they do to thy countryman whom we take in the action with Braddock ? roasting be the very small punishment , ma foi be it not , La Biche ? ' 
 " and he enter into a variety of jocular description of torture inflict , eye burn out of their socket , tooth and nail wrench out , limb and body gash you turn pale , dear Miss Theo ! well , I will have pity , and will spare you the torture which honest Museau recount in his pleasant way as likely to befall I . 
 " La Biche be by no mean so affected as you seem to be , lady , by the recital of these horror . she have witness they in her time . she come from the Senecas , whose village lie near the great cataract between Ontario and Erie ; her people make war for the English , and against they : they have fight with other tribe ; and , in the battle between we and they , it be difficult to say whether whiteskin or redskin be most savage . 
 " ' they may chop I into cutlet and broil I , ' tis true , commandant , ' say I , coolly . ' but again , I say , you will never have the farm in Normandy . ' 
 " ' go get the whisky - bottle , La Biche , ' say Museau . 
 " ' and it be not too late , even now . I will give the guide who take I home a large reward . and again I say , I promise , as a man of honour , ten thousand livre to whom shall I say ? to one who shall bring I any token who shall bring I , say , my watch and seal with my grandfather 's arm which I have see in a chest somewhere in this fort . ' 
 " ' ah , scelerat ! ' roar out the commandant , with a hoarse yell of laughter . ' thou hast eye , thou ! all be good prize in war . ' 
 " ' think of a house in your village , of a fine field hard by with a half - dozen of cow of a fine orchard all cover with fruit . ' 
 " ' and Javotte at the door with her wheel , and a rascal of a child , or two , with cheek as red as the apple ! o my country ! o my mother ! " whimper out the commandant . ' quick , La Biche , the whisky ! ' 
 " all that night the commandant be deep in thought , and La Biche , too , silent and melancholy . she sate away from we , nurse her child , and whenever my eye turn towards she I see her be fix on I . the poor little infant begin to cry , and be order away by Museau , with his usual foul language , to the building which the luckless Biche occupy with her child . when she be go , we both of we speak our mind freely ; and I put such reason before monsieur as his cupidity could not resist . 
 " ' how do you know , ' he ask , ' that this hunter will serve you ? ' 
 " ' that be my secret , ' say I. but here , if you like , as we be not on honour , I may tell it . when they come into the settlement for their bargain , the hunter often stop a day or two for rest and drink and company , and our new friend love all these . he play at card with the man : he set his fur against their liquor : he enjoy himself at the fort , singing , dancing , and gamble with they . I think I say they like to listen to my song , and for want of well thing to do , I be often sing and guitar - scraping : and we would have many a concert , the man join in chorus , or dance to my homely music , until it be interrupt by the drum and the retraite . 
 " our guest the hunter be present at one or two of these concert , and I think I would try if possibly he understand English . after we have have our little stock of french song , I say , ' my lad , I will give you an english song , ' and to the tune of ' over the hill and far away , ' which my good old grandfather use to hum as a favourite air in Marlborough 's camp , I make some doggerel word : ' this long , long year , a prisoner drear ; ah , I ! I be tired of linger here : I will give a hundred guineas gay , to be over the hill and far away . ' 
 " ' what be it ? ' say the hunter . ' I do not   understand . ' 
 " " tis a girl to her lover , ' I answer ; but I see by the twinkle in the man 's eye that he understand I . 
 " the next day , when there be no man within hearing , the trapper show that I be right in my conjecture , for as he pass I he hum in a low tone , but in perfectly good English , ' over the hill and far away , ' the burden of my yesterday 's doggerel . 
 " ' if you be ready , ' say he , ' I be ready . I know who your people be , and the way to they . talk to the fawn , and she will tell you what to do . what ! you will not play with I ? ' here he pull out some card , and speak in French as two soldier come up . ' Milor est trop grand seigneur ? Bonjour , my lord ! ' 
 " and the man make I a mock bow , and walk away , shrug up his shoulder , to offer to play and drink elsewhere . 
 " I know now that the Biche be to be the agent in the affair , and that my offer to Museau be accept . the poor Fawn perform her part very faithfully and dexterously . I have not need of a word more with Museau ; the matter be understand between we . the Fawn have long be allow free communication with I . she have tend I during my wound and in my illness , help to do the work of my little chamber , my cooking , and so forth . she be free to go out of the fort , as I have say , and to the river and the field whence the corn and garden - stuff of the little garrison be bring in . 
 " have gamble away most of the money which he receive for his peltrie , the trapper now get together his store of flint , powder , and blanket , and take his leave . and , three day after his departure , the Fawn give I the signal that the time be come for I to make my little trial for freedom . 
 " when first wound , I have be take by my kind Florac and place on his bed in the officer ' room . when the fort be empty of all officer except the old lieutenant leave in command , I have be allow to remain in my quarter , sometimes be leave pretty free , sometimes be lock up and feed on prisoner ' ration , sometimes invite to share his mess by my tipsy gaoler . 
 " this officer ' house , or room , be of log like the half - dozen other within the fort , which mount only four gun of small calibre , of which one be on the bastion behind my cabin . look westward over this gun , you could see a small island at the confluence of the two river Ohio and Monongahela whereon Duquesne be situate . on the shore opposite this island be some tree . 
 " ' you see those tree ? ' my poor Biche say to I the day before , in her french jargon . ' he wait for you behind those tree . ' 
 " in the daytime the door of my quarter be open , and the Biche free to come and go . on the day before she come in from the field with a pick in her hand and a basketful of vegetable and potherb for soup . she sit down on a bench at my door , the pick rest against it , and the basket at her side . I stand talk to she for a while : but I believe I be so idiotic that I never should have think of put the pick to any use have she actually push it into my open door , so that it fall into my room . ' hide it ' she say ; ' want it soon . ' and that afternoon it be , she point out the tree to I . 
 " on the next day , she come , pretend to be very angry , and call out , ' my lord ! my lord ! why you not come to commandant 's dinner ? he very bad ! Entendez - vow ? ' and she peep into the room as she speak , and fling a coil of rope at I . 
 " ' I be come , La Biche , ' say I , and hobble after she on my crutch . as I go in to the commandant 's quarter she say , ' pour ce soir . ' and then I know the time be come . 
 " as for Museau , he know nothing about the matter . not he ! he growl at I , and say the soup be cold . he look I steadily in the face , and talk of this and that ; not only whilst his servant be present , but afterwards as we smoke our pipe and play our game at piquet ; whilst accord to she will not , the poor Biche sate cower in a corner . 
 " my friend 's whisky - bottle be empty ; and he say , with rather a know look , he must have another glass we must both have a glass that night . and rise from the table he stump to the inner room where he keep his fire - water under lock and key , and away from the poor Biche , who could not resist that temptation . 
 " as he turn his back the Biche raise herself ; and he be no soon go but she be at my foot , kiss my hand , press it to her heart , and burst into tear over my knee . I confess I be so troubled by this testimony of the poor creature 's silent attachment and fondness , the extent of which I scarce have suspect before , that when Museau return , I have not recover my equanimity , though the poor Fawn be back in her corner again and shroud in her blanket . 
 " he do not appear to remark anything strange in the behaviour of either . we sate down to our game , though my thought be so preoccupied that I scarcely know what card be before I . 
 " ' I gain everything from you to - night , milor , ' say he , grimly . ' we play upon parole . ' 
 " ' and you may count upon mine , ' I reply . 
 " ' eh ! ' tis all that you have ! ' say he . 
 " ' Monsieur , ' say I , ' my word be good for ten thousand livre ; ' and we continue our game . 
 " at last he say he have a headache , and would go to bed , and I understand the order too , that I be to retire . ' I wish you a good night , mon petit milor , ' say he , ' stay , you will fall without your crutch , ' and his eye twinkle at I , and his face wear a sarcastic grin . in the agitation of the moment I have quite forget that I be lame , and be walk away at a pace as good as a grenadier 's . 
 " ' what a vilain night ! ' say he , look out . in fact there be a tempest abroad , and a great roaring , and wind . ' bring a lanthorn , La Tulipe , and lock my lord comfortably into his quarter ! ' he stand a moment look at I from his own door , and I see a glimpse of the poor Biche behind he . 
 " the night be so rainy that the sentry prefer their box , and do not disturb I in my work . the log - house be build with upright post , deeply fix in the ground , and horizontal log lay upon it . I have to dig under these , and work a hole sufficient to admit my body to pass . I begin in the dark , soon after tattoo . it be some while after midnight before my work be do , when I lift my hand up under the log and feel the rain from without fall upon it . I have to work very cautiously for two hour after that , and then creep through to the parapet and silently fling my rope over the gun ; not without a little tremor of heart , lest the sentry should see I and send a charge of lead into my body . 
 " the wall be but twelve foot , and my fall into the ditch easy enough . I wait a while there , look steadily under the gun , and try to see the river and the island . I hear the sentry pace up above and hum a tune . the darkness become more clear to I ere long , and the moon rise , and I see the river shin before I , and the dark rock and tree of the island rise in the water . 
 " I make for this mark as swiftly as I could , and for the clump of tree to which I have be direct . oh , what a relief I have when I hear a low voice hum there , ' over the hill and far away ' ! " 
 when Mr. George come to this part of his narrative , Miss Theo , who be seat by a harpsichord , turn round and dash off the tune on the instrument , whilst all the little company break out into the merry chorus . 
 " our way , " the speaker go on , " lie through a level tract of forest with which my guide be familiar , upon the right bank of the Monongahela . by daylight we come to a clear country , and my trapper ask I Silverheels be the name by which he go have I ever see the spot before ? it be the fatal field where Braddock have fall , and whence I have be wonderfully rescue in the summer of the previous year . now , the leaf be begin to be tint with the magnificent hue of our autumn . " 
 " ah , brother ! " cry Harry , seize his brother 's hand . " I be gamble and make a fool of myself at the Wells and in London , when my George be fly for his life in the wilderness ! oh , what a miserable spendthrift I have be ! " 
 " but I think thou art not unworthy to be call thy mother 's son , " say Mrs. Lambert , very softly , and with moistened eye . indeed , if Harry have err , to mark his repentance , his love , his unselfish joy and generosity , be to feel that there be hope for the humbled and kind young sinner . 
 " we presently cross the river " George resume , " take our course along the base of the western slope of the Alleghanies ; and through a grand forest region of oak and maple , and enormous poplar that grow a hundred foot high without a branch . it be the Indians whom we have to avoid , besides the outlying party of French . always of doubtful loyalty , the savage have be specially against we , since our ill - treatment of they , and the french triumph over we two year ago . 
 " I be but weak still , and our journey through the wilderness last a fortnight or more . as we advance , the wood become red and redder . the frost nip sharply of night . we light fire at our foot , and sleep in our blanket as good we might . at this time of year the hunter who live in the mountain get their sugar from the maple . we come upon more than one such family , camp near their tree by the mountain stream ; and they welcome we at their fire , and give we of their venison . so we pass over the two range of the Laurel Hills and the Alleghanies . the last day 's march of my trusty guide and myself take we down that wild , magnificent pass of Will 's Creek , a valley lie between cliff near a thousand foot high bald , white , and break into tower like huge fortification , with eagle wheel round the summit of the rock , and watch their nest among the crag . 
 " and hence we descend to Cumberland , whence we have march in the year before , and where there be now a considerable garrison of our people . oh ! you may think it be a welcome day when I see English colour again on the bank of our native Potomac ! " 




 CHAPTER LIII . where we remain at the Court end of the Town 

 George Warrington have relate the same story , which we have just hear , to Madame de Bernstein on the previous evening a portion , that be , of the history ; for the old lady nod off to sleep many time during the narration , only wake up when George pause , say it be most interesting , and order he to continue . the young gentleman hem'd and ha'd , and stutter , and blush , and go on , much against his will , and do not speak half so well as he do to his friendly little auditory in Hill Street , where Hetty 's eye of wonder and Theo 's sympathise look , and mamma 's kind face , and papa 's funny look , be applause sufficient to cheer any modest youth who require encouragement for his eloquence . as for mamma 's behaviour , the General say , ' twa as good as Mr. Addison 's trunk - maker , and she would make the fortune of any tragedy by simply be engage to cry in the front box . that be why we choose my Lord Wrotham 's house as the theatre where George 's first piece should be perform , wish that he should speak to advantage , and not as when he be hear by that sleepy , cynical old lady , to whom he have to narrate his adventure . 
 " very good and most interesting , I be sure , my dear sir , " say Madame Bernstein , put up three pretty little finger cover with a lace mitten , to hide a convulsive movement of her mouth . " and your mother must have be delighted to see you . " 
 George shrug his shoulder ever so little , and make a low bow , as his aunt look up at he for a moment with her keen old eye . 
 " have be delighted to see you " she continue drily , " and kill the fat calf , and and that kind of thing . though why I say calf , I do not   know , nephew George , for you never be the prodigal . I may say calf to thee , my poor Harry ! Thou hast be amongst the swine sure enough . and evil companion have rob the money out of thy pocket and the coat off thy back . 
 " he come to his family in England , madam , " say George , with some heat , " and his friend be your ladyship 's . " 
 " he could not have come to bad adviser , nephew Warrington , and so I should have tell my sister early , have she condescend to write to I by he , as she have do by you , " say the old lady , toss up her head . " hey ! hey ! " she say , at night , as she arrange herself for the rout to which she be go , to her waiting - maid : " this young gentleman 's mother be half sorry that he have come to life again , I could see that in his face . she be half sorry , and I be perfectly furious ! why do not   he lie still when he drop there under the tree , and why do that young Florac carry he to the fort ? I know those florac when I be at Paris , in the time of Monsieur le Regent . they be of the Floracs of Ivry . no great house before Henri IV . his ancestor be the king 's favourite . his ancestor he ! he ! his ancestress ! Brett ! entendez - vous ? give I my card - purse . I do not   like the grand air of this Monsieur George ; and yet he resemble , very much , his grandfather the same look and sometimes the same tone . you have hear of Colonel Esmond when I be young ? this boy have his eye . I suppose I like the Colonel 's because he love I . " 
 be engage , then , to a card - party , an amusement which she never miss , week - day or Sabbath , as long as she have strength to hold trump or sit in a chair , very soon after George have end his narration the old lady dismiss her two nephew , give to the eld a couple of finger and a very stately curtsey ; but to Harry two hand and a kindly pat on the cheek . 
 " my poor child , now thou art disinherit , thou wilt see how differently the world will use thee ! " she say . " there be only , in all London , a wicked , heartless old woman who will treat thee as before . here be a pocket - book for you , child ! do not lose it at Ranelagh to - night . that suit of yours do not become your brother half so well as it sit upon you ! you will present your brother to everybody , and walk up and down the room for two hour at least , child . be I you , I would then go to the Chocolate - House , and play as if nothing have happen . whilst you be there , your brother may come back to I and eat a bit of chicken with I . my Lady Flint give wretched supper , and I want to talk his mother 's letter over with he . Au revoir , gentleman ! " and she go away to she toilette . her chairman and flambeaux be already wait at the door . 
 the gentleman go to Ranelagh , where but a few of Mr. Harry 's acquaintance chance to be present . they pace the round , and meet Mr. Tom Claypool with some of his country friend ; they hear the music ; they drink tea in a box ; Harry be master of ceremony , and introduce his brother to the curiosity of the place ; and George be even more excited than his brother have be on his first introduction to this palace of delight . George love music much more than Harry ever do ; he hear a full orchestra for the first time , and a piece of Mr. Handel satisfactorily perform ; and a not unpleasing instance of Harry 's humility and regard for his eld brother be , that he could even hold George 's love of music in respect at a time when fiddle be vote effeminate and unmanly in England , and Britons be , every day , call upon by the patriotic print to sneer at the frivolous accomplishment of your Squallinis , Monsieurs , and the like . nobody in Britain be proud of his ignorance now . there be no conceit leave among we . there be no such thing as dulness . Arrogance be entirely unknown ... well , at any rate , art have obtain her letter of naturalisation , and live here on term of almost equality . if Mrs. Thrale choose to marry a music - master now , I do not   think her friend would shudder at the mention of her name . if she have a good fortune and keep a good cook , people would even go and dine with she in spite of the misalliance , and actually treat Mr. Piozzi with civility . 
 after Ranelagh , and pursuant to Madam Bernstein 's advice , George return to her ladyship 's house , whilst Harry show himself at the club , where gentleman be accustom to assemble at night to sup , and then to gamble . no one , of course , allude to Mr. Warrington 's little temporary absence , and Mr. Ruff , his ex - landlord , wait upon he with the utmost gravity and civility , and as if there have never be any difference between they . Mr. Warrington have cause his trunk and habiliment to be convey away from Bond Street in the morning , and he and his brother be now establish in apartment elsewhere . 
 but when the supper be do , and the gentleman , as usual , be about to seek the macco - table upstairs , Harry say he be not go to play any more . he have burn his finger already , and could afford no more extravagance . 
 " why , " say Mr. Morris , in a rather flippant manner , " you must have win more than you have lose , Mr. Warrington , after all be say and do . " 
 " and of course I do not   know my own business as well as you do , Mr. Morris , " say Harry sternly , who have not forget the other 's behaviour on hearing of his arrest ; " but I have another reason . a few month or day ago , I be heir to a great estate , and could afford to lose a little money . now , thank God , I be heir to nothing . " and he look round , blush not a little , to the knot of gentleman , his gaming associate , who be lounge at the table or gather round the fire . 
 " how do you mean , Mr. Warrington ? " cry my Lord March , " have you lose Virginia , too ? who have win it ? I always have a fancy to play you myself for that stake . " 
 " and grow an improved breed of slave in the colony , " say another . 
 " the right owner have win it . you have hear I tell of my twin eld brother ? " 
 " who be kill in that affair of Braddock 's two year ago ! yes . gracious goodness , my dear sir , I hope in heaven he have not come to life again ? " 
 " he arrive in London two day since . he have be a prisoner in a french fort for eighteen month ; he only escape a few month ago , and leave our house in Virginia very soon after his release . " 
 " you have not   have time to order mourning , I suppose , Mr. Warrington ? " ask Mr. Selwyn very good - naturedly , and simple Harry hardly know the meaning of his joke until his brother interpret it to he . 
 " hang I , if I do not   believe the fellow be absolutely glad of the reappearance of his confounded brother ! " cry my Lord March , as they continue to talk of the matter when the young Virginian have take his leave . 
 " these savage practise the simple virtue of affection they be barely civilised in America yet , " yawn Selwyn . 
 " they love their kindre , and they scalp their enemy , " simper Mr. Walpole . " it be not Christian , but natural . should not   you like to be present at a scalping - match , George , and see a fellow skin alive ? " 
 " a man 's eld brother be his natural enemy , " say Mr. Selwyn , placidly range his money and counter before he . 
 " torture be like broiled bone and pepper . you would not   relish simple hang afterwards , George ! " continue Horry . 
 " I be hang if there be any man in England who would like to see his eld brother alive , " say my lord . 
 " no , nor his father either , my lord ! " cry Jack Morris . 
 " first time I ever know you have one , Jack . give I counter for five hundred . " 
 " I say , ' tis all mighty fine about dead brother come to life again , " continue Jack . " who be to know that it be not   a scheme arrange between these two fellow ? here come a young fellow who call himself the Fortunate Youth , who say he be a Virginian Prince and the deuce know what , and who get into our society " 
 a great laugh ensue at Jack 's phrase of " our society . " 
 " who be to know that it be not   a cross ? " Jack continue . " the young one be to come first . he be to marry an heiress , and , when he have get she , up be to rise the eld brother ! when do this eld brother show ? why , when the young 's scheme be blow , and all be up with he ! who shall tell I that the fellow have not   be live in Seven dial , or in a cellar dining off tripe and cow - heel until my young gentleman be dispose of ? Dammy , as gentleman , I think we ought to take notice of it : and that this Mr. Warrington have be take a most outrageous liberty with the whole club . " 
 " who put he up ? it be March , I think , put he up ? " ask a bystander . 
 " yes . but my lord think he be put up a very different person . do not   you , March ? " 
 " hold your confound tongue , and mind your game ! " say the nobleman address : but Jack Morris 's opinion find not a few supporter in the world . many person agree that it be most indecorous of Mr. Harry Warrington to have ever believe in his brother 's death : that there be something suspicious about the young man 's first appearance and subsequent action , and , in fine , that regard these foreigner , adventurer , and the like , we ought to be especially cautious . 
 though he be out of prison and difficulty ; though he have his aunt 's liberal donation of money in his pocket ; though his dear brother be restore to he , whose return to life Harry never once think of deploring , as his friend at White 's suppose he would do ; though Maria have show herself in such a favourable light by her behaviour during his misfortune : yet Harry , when alone , feel himself not particularly cheerful , and smoke his pipe of Virginia with a troubled mind . it be not that he be depose from his principality ; the loss of it never once vex he ; he know that his brother would share with he as he would have do with his brother ; but after all those struggle and doubt in his own mind , to find himself poor , and yet irrevocably bind to his elderly cousin ! yes , she be elderly , there be no doubt about it . when she come to that horrible den in Cursitor Street and the tear wash her rouge off , why , she look as old as his mother ! her face be all wrinkle and yellow , and as he think of she he feel just such a qualm as he have when she be take ill that day in the coach on their road to Tunbridge . what would his mother say when he bring her home , and , Lord , what battle there would be between they ! he would go and live on one of the plantation the far from home the well and have a few negro , and farm as good he might , and hunt a good deal ; but at Castlewood or in her own home , such as he could make it for she , what a life for poor Maria , who have be use to go to court and to card and ball and assembly every night ! if he could be but the overseer of the estate oh , he would be an honest factor , and try and make up for his useless life and extravagance in these past day ! five thousand pound , all his patrimony and the accumulation of his long minority squander in six month ! he a beggar , except for dear George 's kindness , with nothing in life leave to he but an old wife , a pretty beggar , dress out in velvet and silver lace forsooth the poor lad be array in his good clothe a pretty figure he have make in Europe , and a nice end he be come to ! with all his fine friend at White 's and Newmarket , with all his extravagance , have he be happy a single day since he have be in Europe ? yes , three day , four day , yesterday evening , when he have be with dear dear Mrs. Lambert , and those affectionate kind girl , and that brave good Colonel . and the Colonel be right when he rebuke he for his spendthrift folly , and he have be a brute to be angry as he have be , and God bless they all for their generous exertion in his behalf ! such be the thought which Harry put into his pipe , and he smoke they whilst he wait his brother 's return from Madame Bernstein . 




 CHAPTER LIV . during which Harry sit smoke his Pipe at home 

 the maternal grandfather of our Virginians , the Colonel Esmond of whom frequent mention have be make , and who have quit England to reside in the New World , have devote some portion of his long american leisure to the composition of the memoir of his early life . in these volume , Madame de Bernstein   Mrs. Beatrice Esmond be her name as a spinster   play a very considerable part ; and as George have read his grandfather 's manuscript many time over , he have learn to know his kinswoman long before he see she , to know , at least , the lady , young , beautiful , and wilful , of half a century since , with whom he now become acquaint in the decline of her day . when cheek be fade and eye be dim , be it sad or pleasant , I wonder , for the woman who be a beauty no more , to recall the period of her bloom ! when the heart be wither , do the old love to remember how it once be fresh and beat with warm emotion ? when the spirit be languid and weary , do we like to think how bright they be in other day , the hope how buoyant , the sympathy how ready , the enjoyment of life how keen and eager ? so they fall the bud of prime , the rose of beauty , the florid harvest of summer , fall and wither , and the naked branch shiver in the winter . 
 " and that be a beauty once ! " think George Warrington , as his aunt , in her rouge and diamond , come in from her rout , " and that ruin be a splendid palace . crowd of lover have sigh before those decrepit foot , and be bewilder by the brightness of those eye . " he remember a firework at home , at Williamsburg , on the King 's birthday , and afterwards look at the skeleton - wheel and the socket of the exploded roman candle . the dazzle and brilliancy of Aunt Beatrice 's early career pass before he , as he think over his grandsire 's journal . Honest Harry have see they , too , but Harry be no bookman , and have not read the manuscript very carefully : nay , if he have , he would probably not have reason about it as his brother do , be by no mean so much inclined to moralise as his melancholy senior . 
 Mr. Warrington think that there be no cause why he should tell his aunt how intimate he be with her early history , and accordingly hold his peace upon that point . when their meal be over , she point with her cane to her escritoire , and bade her attendant bring the letter which lie under the inkstand there ; and George , recognise the superscription , of course know the letter to be that of which he have be the bearer from home . 
 " it would appear by this letter , " say the old lady , look hard at her nephew , " that ever since your return , there have be some difference between you and my sister . " 
 " indeed ? I do not know that Madam Esmond have allude to they , " George say . 
 the Baroness put a great pair of glass upon eye which shoot fire and kindle who know how many passion in old day , and , after glance over the letter , hand it to George , who read as follow : 
 " RICHMOND , VIRGINIA , December 26th , 1756 . 
 " HONOURED MADAM ! and SISTER ! I have receive , and thankfully acknowledge , your ladyship 's favour , per Rose packet , of October 23 ult . ; and straightway answer you at a season which should be one of goodwill and peace to all man : but in which Heaven hath nevertheless decree we should still bear our portion of earthly sorrow and trouble . my reply will be bring to you by my eld son , Mr. Esmond Warrington , who return to we so miraculously out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death   as our previous letter have inform my poor Henry , and who be desirous , not without my consent to his wish , to visit Europe , though he have be amongst we so short a while . I grieve to think that my dear Harry should have appear at home I mean in England under false colour , as it be ; and should have be present to his Majesty , to our family , and his own , as his father 's heir , whilst my dear son George be still alive , though dead to we . ah , madam ! during the eighteen month of his captivity , what anguish have his mother 's , his brother 's , heart undergone ! my Harry 's be the tender of any man be now alive . in the joy of see Mr. Esmond Warrington return to life , he will forget the worldly misfortune which befall he . he will return to   comparative   poverty without a pang . the most generous , the most obedient of human being , of son , he will gladly give up to his eld brother that inheritance which have be his own but for the accident of birth , and for the providential return of my son George . 
 " your beneficent intention towards dear Harry will be more than ever welcome , now he be reduce to a young brother 's slender portion ! many year since , an advantageous opportunity occur of provide for he in this province , and he would by this time have be master of a noble estate and negro , and have be enable to make a figure with most here , could his mother 's wish have be comply with , and his father 's small portion , now lie at small interest in the british fund , have be invest in this most excellent purchase . but the form of the law , and , I grieve to own , my eld son 's scruple , prevail , and this admirable opportunity be lose to I ! Harry will find the saving of his income have be carefully accumulate long , long may he live to enjoy they ! may Heaven bless you , dear sister , for what your ladyship may add to his little store ! as I gather from your letter , that the sum which have be allow to he have not be sufficient for his expense in the fine company which he have keep   and the grandson of the Marquis of Esmond one who have so nearly be his lordship 's heir may sure claim equality with any other nobleman in Great Britain , and have a sum by I which I have always intend for the poor child 's establishment , I entrust it to my eld son , who , to do he justice , hath a most sincere regard for his brother , to lay it out for Harry 's good advantage . " 
 " it take he out of prison yesterday , madam . I think that be the good use to which we could put it , " interpose George , at this stage of his mother 's letter . 
 " Nay , sir , I do not   know any such thing ! why not have keep it to buy a pair of colour for he , or to help towards another estate and some negro , if he have a fancy for home ? " cry the old lady . " besides , I have a fancy to pay that debt myself . " 
 " I hope you will let his brother do that . I ask leave to be my brother 's banker in this matter , and consider I have borrow so much from my mother , to be pay back to my dear Harry . " 
 " do you say so , sir ? give I a glass of wine ! you be an extravagant fellow ! read on , and you will see your mother think so . I drink to your health , nephew George ! ' tis good Burgundy . your grandfather never love Burgundy . he love claret , the little he drank . " 
 and George proceed with the letter : 
 " this remittance will , I trust , amply cover any expense which , owe to the mistake respect his position , dear Harry may have incur . I wish I could trust his eld brother 's prudence as confidently as my Harry 's ! but I fear that , even in his captivity , Mr. Esmond W. have learn little of that humility which become all Christians , and which I have ever endeavour to teach to my child . should you by chance show he these line , when , by the blessing of Heaven on those who go down to the sea in ship , the Great Ocean divide we ! he will know that a fond mother 's blessing and prayer follow both her child , and that there be no act I have ever do , no desire I have ever express   however little he may have be incline to obey it !   but hath be dictate by the fond wish for my dear boy ' welfare . " 
 " there be a scratch with a penknife , and a great blot upon the letter there , as if water have fall on it . your mother write well , George . I suppose you and she have a difference ? " say George 's aunt , not unkindly . 
 " yes , ma'am , many , " answer the young man , sadly . " the last be about a question of money of ransom which I promise to the old lieutenant of the fort who aid I to make my escape . I tell you he have a mistress , a poor indian woman , who help I , and be kind to I . six week after my arrival at home , the poor thing make her appearance at Richmond , have find her way through the wood by pretty much the same track which I have follow , and bring I the token which Museau have promise to send I when he connive to my flight . a command officer and a considerable reinforcement have arrive at Duquesne . charge , I do not   know of what peculation   for his messenger could not express herself very clearly , have be bring against this Museau . he have be put under arrest , and have try to escape ; but , less fortunate than myself , he have be shoot on the rampart , and he send the indian woman to I , with my grandfather 's watch , and a line scrawl in his prison on his deathbed , beg I to send ce que je scavais to a notary at Havre de Grace in France to be transmit to his relative at Caen in Normandy . my friend silverheel , the hunter , have help my poor indian on her way . I do not   know how she would have escape scalping else . but at home they receive the poor thing sternly . they hardly give she a welcome . I will not   say what suspicion they have regard she and I . the poor wretch fall to drink whenever she could find mean . I order that she should have food and shelter , and she become the jest of our negro , and form the subject of the scandal and tittle - tattle of the old fool in our little town . our Governor be , luckily , a man of sense , and I make interest with he , and procure a pass to send she back to her people . her very grief at part with I only serve to confirm the suspicion against she . a fellow preach against I from the pulpit , I believe ; I have to treat another with a cane . and I have a violent dispute with Madam Esmond a difference which be not heal yet because I insist upon pay to the heir Museau point out the money I have promise for my deliverance . you see that scandal flourish at the border of the wilderness , and in the New World as well as the Old . " 
 " I have suffer from it myself , my dear ! " say Madame Bernstein , demurely . " fill thy glass , child ! a little tass of cherry - brandy ! ' twill do thee all the good in the world . " 
 " as for my poor Harry 's marriage , " Madam Esmond 's letter go on , " though I know too well , from sad experience , the danger to which youth be subject , and would keep my boy , at any price , from they , though I should wish he to marry a person of rank , as become his birth , yet my Lady Maria Esmond be out of the question . her age be almost the same as mine ; and I know my brother Castlewood leave his daughter with the very small portion . my Harry be so obedient that I know a desire from I will be sufficient to cause he to give up this imprudent match . some foolish people once suppose that I myself once think of a second union , and with a person of rank very different from ours . no ! I know what be due to my child . as succeed to this estate after I , Mr. Esmond W. be amply provide for . let my task now be to save for his less fortunate young brother : and , as I do not love to live quite alone , let he return without delay to his fond and love mother . 
 " the report which your ladyship hath give of my Harry fill my heart with warm gratitude . he be all indeed a mother may wish . a year in Europe will have give he a polish and refinement which he could not acquire in our homely Virginia . Mr. Stack , one of our invaluable minister in Richmond , hath a letter from Mr. Ward my darling ' tutor of early day who know my Lady Warrington and her excellent family , and saith that my Harry have live much with his cousin of late . I be grateful to think that my boy have the privilege of be with his good aunt . may he follow her counsel , and listen to those around he who will guide he on the way of his good welfare ! Adieu , dear madam and sister ! for your kindness to my boy accept the grateful thank of a mother 's heart . though we have be divide hitherto , may these kindly tie draw we near and nearer . I be thankful that you should speak of my dear father so . he be , indeed , one of the good of man ! he , too , thank you , I know , for the love you have bear to one of his child ; and his daughter subscribe herself , with sincere thank , your ladyship 's most dutiful and grateful sister and servant , RACHEL ESMOND WN . 
 " P.S. I have communicate with my Lady Maria ; but there will no need to tell she and dear Harry that his mother or your ladyship hope to be able to increase his small fortune . the match be altogether unsuitable . " 
 " as far as regard myself , madam , " George say , lay down the paper , " my mother 's letter convey no news to I . I always know that Harry be the favourite son with Madam Esmond , as he deserve indeed to be . he have a hundred good quality which I have not the good fortune to possess . he have well look " 
 " Nay , that be not your fault , " say the old lady , slily look at he ; " and , but that he be fair and you be brown , one might almost pass for the other . " 
 Mr. George bow , and a faint blush ting his pale cheek . 
 " his disposition be bright , and mine be dark , " he continue ; " Harry be cheerful , and I be otherwise , perhaps . he know how to make himself belove by every one , and it have be my lot to find but few friend . " 
 " my sister and you have pretty little quarrel . there be such in old day in our family , " the Baroness say ; " and if Madam Esmond take after our mother " 
 " my mother have always describe her as an angel upon earth , " interpose George . 
 " eh ! that be a common character for people when they be dead ! " cry the Baroness ; " and Rachel Castlewood be an angel , if you like at least your grandfather think so . but let I tell you , sir , that angel be sometimes not very commode a vivre . it may be they be too good to live with us sinner , and the air down below here do not   agree with they . my poor mother be so perfect that she never could forgive I for be otherwise . ah , mon Dieu ! how she use to oppress I with those angelical air ! " 
 George cast down his eye , and think of his own melancholy youth . he do not care to submit more of his family secret to the cynical inquisition of this old worldling , who seem , however , to understand he in spite of his reticence . 
 " I quite comprehend you , sir , though you hold your tongue , " the Baroness continue . " a sermon in the morning : a sermon at night : and two or three of a Sunday . that be what people call be good . every pleasure cry fie upon ; all we worldly people excommunicate ; a ball an abomination of desolation ; a play a forbid pastime ; and a game of card perdition ! what a life ! Mon Dieu , what a life ! " 
 " we play at card every night , if we be so inclined , " say George , smile ; " and my grandfather love Shakspeare so much , that my mother have not a word to say against her father 's favourite author . " 
 " I remember . he could say whole page by heart ; though , for my part , I like Mr. Congreve a great deal well . and then , there be that dreadful , dreary Milton , whom he and Mr. Addison pretend to admire ! " cry the old lady , tap her fan . 
 " if your ladyship do not like Shakspeare , you will not quarrel with my mother for be indifferent to he , too , " say George . " and indeed I think , and I be sure , that you do not   do her justice . wherever there be any poor she relieve they ; wherever there be any sick she " 
 " she dose they with her horrible purge and bolus ! " cry the Baroness . " of course , just as my mother do ! " 
 " she do she good to cure they ! she act for the good , and perform her duty as far as she know it . " 
 " I do not   blame you , sir , for do your , and keep your own counsel about Madam Esmond , " say the old lady . " but at least there be one point upon which we all three agree that this absurd marriage must be prevent . do you know how old the woman be ? I can tell you , though she have tear the first leaf out of the family Bible at Castlewood . " 
 " my mother have not forget her cousin 's age , and be shock at the disparity between she and my poor brother . indeed , a city - breed lady of her time of life , accustom to London gaiety and luxury , would find but a dismal home in our virginian plantation . besides , the house , such as it be , be not Harry 's . he be welcome there , Heaven know ; more welcome , perhaps , than I , to whom the property come in natural reversion ; but , as I tell he , I doubt how his wife would would like our colony , " George say , with a blush , and a hesitation in his sentence . 
 the old lady laugh shrilly . " he , he ! nephew Warrington ! " she say , " you need not scruple to speak your mind out . I shall tell no tale to your mother : though ' tis no news to I that she have a high temper , and love her own way . Harry have hold his tongue , too ; but it need no conjurer to see who be the mistress at home , and what sort of a life my sister lead you . I love my niece , my Lady Molly , so well , that I could wish her two or three year of Virginia , with your mother reign over she . you may well look alarmed , sir ! Harry have say quite enough to show I who govern the family . " 
 " Madam , " say George , smile , " I may say as much as this , that I do not   envy any woman come into our house against my mother 's will : and my poor brother know this perfectly well . " 
 " what ? you two have talk the matter over ? no doubt you have . and the foolish child consider himself bind in honour of course he do , the gaby ! " 
 " he say Lady Maria have behave most nobly to he . when he be send to prison , she bring he her trinket and jewel , and every guinea she have in the world . this behaviour have touch he so , that he feel more deeply than ever bind to her ladyship . but I own my brother seem bind by honour rather than love such at least be his present feeling . " 
 " my good creature , " cry Madame Bernstein , " do not   you see that Maria bring a few twopenny trinket and a half - dozen guineas to Mr. Esmond , the heir of the great estate in Virginia , not to the second son , who be a beggar , and have just squander away every shilling of his fortune ? I swear to you , on my credit as a gentlewoman , that , know Harry 's obstinacy , and the misery he have in store for himself , I try to bribe Maria to give up her engagement with he , and only fail because I could not bribe high enough ! when he be in prison , I send my lawyer to he , with order to pay his debt immediately , if he would but part from she , but Maria have be beforehand with we , and Mr. Harry choose not to go back from his stupid word . let I tell you what have pass in the last month ! " and here the old lady narrate at length the history which we know already , but in that cynical language which be common in her time , when the fine folk and the most delicate lady call thing and people by name which we never utter in good company nowadays . and so much the well on the whole . we may not   be more virtuous , but it be something to be more decent : perhaps we be not more pure , but of a surety we be more cleanly . 
 Madame Bernstein talk so much , so long , and so cleverly , that she be quite pleased with herself and her listener ; and when she put herself into the hand of Mrs. Brett to retire for the night , inform the waiting - maid that she have change her opinion about her eld nephew , and that Mr. George be handsome , that he be certainly much witty than poor Harry   whom Heaven , it must be confess , have not furnish with a very great supply of brain , and that he have quite the bel air a something melancholy a noble and distinguished je ne scais quoy which remind she of the Colonel . have she ever tell Brett about the Colonel ? score of time , no doubt . and now she tell Brett about the Colonel once more . meanwhile , perhaps , her new favourite be not quite so well pleased with she as she be with he . what a strange picture of life and manner have the old lady unveil to her nephew ! how she rail at all the world round about she ! how unconsciously do she paint her own family her own self ; how selfish , one and all ; pursue what mean end ; grasp and scramble frantically for what petty prize ; ambitious for what shabby recompense ; trample from life 's beginning to its close through what scene of stale dissipation and fade pleasure ! " be these the inheritor of noble blood ? " think George , as he go home quite late from his aunt 's house , pass by door whence the last guest of fashion be issue , and where the chairman be yawn over their expire torch . " be these the proud possessor of ancestral honour and ancient name , and be their forefather , when in life , no well ? we have our pedigree at home with noble coat - of - arm emblazon all over the branch , and title date back before the Conquest and the Crusaders . when a knight of old find a friend in want , do he turn his back upon he , or an unprotected damsel , do he delude she and leave she ? when a nobleman of the early time receive a young kinsman , do he get the well of he at dice , and do the ancient chivalry cheat in horseflesh ? can it be that this wily woman of the world , as my aunt have represent , have inveigle my poor Harry into an engagement , that her tear be false , and that as soon as she find he poor she will desert he ? have we not well pack the trunk and take a cabin in the next ship bind for home ? " George reach his own door revolve these thought , and Gumbo come up yawn with a candle , and Harry be asleep before the extinguished fire , with the ash of his emptied pipe on the table beside he . 
 he start up ; his eye , for a moment dull by sleep , lighten with pleasure as he see his dear George . he put his arm round his brother with a boyish laugh . 
 " there he be in flesh and blood , thank God ! " he say ; " I be dream of thee but now , George , and that Ward be hear we our lesson ! dost thou remember the ruler , georgy ? why , bless my soul , ' tis three o'clock ! where have you be a - gad , Mr. George ? Hast thou sup ? I sup at White 's , but I be hungry again . I do not play , sir , no , no ; no more of that for young brother ! and my Lord March pay I fifty he lose to I . I bet against his horse and on the Duke of Hamilton 's ! they both ride the match at Newmarket this morning , and he lose because he be under weight . and he pay I , and he be as sulky as a bear . let we have one pipe , Georgy ! just one . " 
 and after the smoke the young man go to bed , where I , for one , wish they a pleasant rest , for sure it be a good and pleasant thing to see brother who love one another . 




 CHAPTER LV . between brother 

 of course our young man have have their private talk about home , and all the people and doing there , and each have impart to the other full particular of his history since their last meeting . how be Harry 's dog , and little Dempster , and good old Nathan , and the rest of the household ? be Mountain well , and Fanny grow to be a pretty girl ? so Parson Broadbent 's daughter be engage to marry Tom Barker of Savannah , and they be to go and live in Georgia ! Harry own that at one period he be very sweet upon Parson Broadbent 's daughter , and lose a great deal of pocket - money at card , and drink a great quantity of strong - water with the father , in order to have a pretext for be near the girl . but , Heaven help we ! Madam Esmond would never have consent to his throw himself away upon Polly Broadbent . so Colonel G. Washington 's wife be a pretty woman , very good - natured and pleasant , and with a good fortune ? he have bring she into Richmond , and pay a visit of state to Madam Esmond . George describe , with much humour , the awful ceremonial at the interview between these two personage , and the kill politeness of his mother to Mr. Washington 's young wife . " never mind , George , my dear ! " say Mrs. Mountain . " the Colonel have take another wife , but I feel certain that at one time two young gentleman I know of run a very near chance of have a tall stepfather six foot two in his boot . " to be sure , Mountain be for ever match - making in her mind . two people could not play a game at card together , or sit down to a dish of tea , but she fancy their conjunction be for life . it be she the foolish tattler who have set the report abroad regard the poor indian woman . as for Madam Esmond , she have repel the insinuation with scorn when Parson Stack bring it to she , and say , " I should as soon fancy Mr. Esmond steal the spoon , or marry a negro woman out of the kitchen . " but , though she disdain to find the poor Biche guilty , and even thank she for attend her son in his illness , she treat she with such a chilling haughtiness of demeanour , that the indian slunk away into the servant ' quarter , and there try to drown her disappointment with drink . it be not a cheerful picture that which George give of his two month at home . " the birthright be mine , Harry , " he say , " but thou art the favourite , and God help I ! I think my mother almost grudge it to I . why should I have take the pas , and precede your worship into the world ? have you be the eider , you would have have the good cellar , and ride the good nag , and be the most popular man in the country , whereas I have not a word to say for myself , and frighten people by my glum face : I should have be second son , and set up as lawyer , or come to England and get my degree , and turn parson , and say grace at your honour 's table . the time be out of joint , sir . o curse spite , that ever I be bear to set it right ! " 
 " why , georgy , you be talk verse , I protest you be ! " say Harry . 
 " I think , my dear , some one else talk those verse before I , " say George , with a smile . 
 " it be out of one of your book . you know every book that ever be write , that I do believe ! " cry Harry , and then tell his brother how he have see the two author at Tunbridge , and how he have take off his hat to they . " not that I care much about their book , not be clever enough . but I remember how my dear old George use to speak of them , " say Harry , with a choke in his voice , " and that be why I like to see they . I say , dear , it be like a dream see you over again . think of that bloody Indian with his knife at my George 's head ! I should like to give that Monsieur de Florac something for save you but I have not   get much now , only my little gold knee - buckle , and they be not   worth two guineas . " 
 " you have get the half of what I have , child , and we will divide as soon as I have pay the Frenchman , " George say . 
 on which Harry break out not merely into blessing but actual imprecation , indicate his intense love and satisfaction ; and he swear that there never be such a brother in the world as his brother George . indeed , for some day after his brother 's arrival his eye follow George about : he would lay down his knife and fork , or his newspaper , when they be sit together , and begin to laugh to himself . when he walk with George on the Mall or in Hyde Park , he would gaze round at the company , as much as to say , " look here , gentleman ! this be he . this be my brother , that be dead and be alive again ! can any man in Christendom produce such a brother as this ? " 
 of course he be of opinion that George should pay to Museau 's heir the sum which he have promise for his ransom . this question have be the cause of no small unhappiness to poor George at home . Museau dead , Madam Esmond argue with much eagerness , and not a little rancour , the bargain fall to the ground , and her son be free . the man be a rogue in the first instance . she would not pay the wage of iniquity . Mr. Esmond have a small independence from his father , and might squander his patrimony if he choose . he be of age , and the money be in his power ; but she would be no party to such extravagance , as give twelve thousand livre to a parcel of peasant in Normandy with whom we be at war , and who would very likely give it all to the priest and the pope . she would not subscribe to any such wickedness . if George want to squander away his father 's money   she must say that formerly he have not be so eager , and when Harry 's benefit be in question have refuse to touch a penny of it !   if he wish to spend it now , why not give it to his own flesh and blood , to poor Harry , who be suddenly deprive of his inheritance , and not to a set of priest - ride peasant in France ? this dispute have rag between mother and son during the whole of the latter 's last day in Virginia . it have never be settle . on the morning of George 's departure , Madam Esmond have come to his bedside after a sleepless night , and ask he whether he still persist in his intention to fle away his father 's property ? 
 he reply in a depth of grief and perplexity , that his word be pass , and he must do as his honour bid he . she answer that she would continue to pray that Heaven might soften his proud heart , and enable she to bear her heavy trial : and the last view George have of his mother 's face be as she stand yet a moment by his bedside , pale and with tearless eye , before she turn away and slowly leave his chamber . 
 " where didst thou learn the art of win over everybody to thy side , Harry ? " continue George ; " and how be it that you and all the world begin by be friend ? teach I a few lesson in popularity , nay , I do not   know that I will have they ; and when I find and hear certain people hate I , I think I be rather pleased than angry . at first , at Richmond , Mr. Esmond Warrington , the only prisoner who have escape from Braddock 's field the victim of so much illness and hardship be a favourite with the town - folk , and receive privately and publicly with no little kindness . the parson glorify my escape in a sermon ; the neighbour come to visit the fugitive ; the family coach be order out , and Madam Esmond and I pay our visit in return . I think some pretty little cap be set at I . but these our mother rout off , and frighten with the prodigious haughtiness of her demeanour ; and my popularity be already at the decrease before the event occur which put the last finishing stroke to it . I be not jolly enough for the officer , and do not   care for their drinking - bout , dice - box , and swearing . I be too sarcastic for the lady , and their tea and tattle stupefy I almost as much as the man 's blustering and horse - talk . I can not tell thee , Harry , how lonely I feel in that place , amidst the scandal and squabble : I regret my prison almost , and find myself more than once wish for the freedom of thought , and the silent ease of Duquesne . I be very shy , I suppose : I can speak unreservedly to very few people . before most , I sit utterly silent . when we two be at home , it be thou who use to talk at table , and get a smile now and then from our mother . when she and I be together we have no subject in common , and we scarce speak at all until we begin to dispute about law and divinity . 
 " so the gentleman have determine I be supercilious , and a dull companion   and , indeed , I think their opinion be right , and the lady think I be cold and sarcastic , could never make out whether I be in earnest or no , and , I think , generally vote I be a disagreeable fellow , before my character be go quite away ; and that go with the appearance of the poor Biche . oh , a nice character they make for I , my dear ! " cry George , in a transport of wrath , " and a pretty life they lead I after Museau 's unlucky messenger have appear amongst we ! the boy hoot the poor woman if she appear in the street ; the lady drop I half - curtsey , and walk over to the other side . that precious clergyman go from one tea - table to another preaching on the horror of seduction , and the lax principle which young man learn in popish country and bring back thence . the poor fawn 's appearance at home a few week after my return home , be declare to be a scheme between she and I ; and the well inform agree that she have wait on the other side of the river until I give she the signal to come and join I in Richmond . the officer banter I at the coffee - house , and crack their clumsy joke about the woman I have select . oh , the world be a nice charitable world ! I be so enraged that I think of go to Castlewood and live alone there , for our mother find the place dull , and the great consolation in precious Mr. Stack 's ministry , when the news arrive of your female perplexity , and I think we be all glad that I should have a pretext for come to Europe . " 
 " I should like to see any of the infernal scoundrel who say word against you , and break their rascally bone , " roar out Harry , stride up and down the room . 
 " I have to do something like it for Bob Clubber . " 
 " what ! that little sneaking , backbiting , toad - eat wretch , who be always hang about my lord at Greenway Court , and spunge on every gentleman in the country ? if you whip he , I hope you whip he well , George ? " 
 " we be bind over to keep the peace ; and I offer to go into Maryland with he and settle our difference there , and of course the good folk say , that have make free with the seventh commandment I be inclined to break the sixth . so , by this and by that and be as innocent of the crime impute to I as you be I leave home , my dear Harry , with as awful a reputation as ever a young gentleman earn . " 
 ah , what an opportunity be there here to moralise ! if the esteemed reader and his humble servant could but know could but write down in a book could but publish , with illustration , a collection of the lie which have be tell regard each of we since we come to man 's estate , what a harrowing and thrilling work of fiction that romance would be ! not only be the world inform of everything about you , but of a great deal more . not long since the kind postman bring a paper contain a valuable piece of criticism , which state " this author state he be bear in such and such a year . it be a lie . he be bear in the year so and so . " the critic know well : of course he do . another   and both come from the country which give MULLIGAN birth   warn some friend , say , " do not   speak of New South Wales to he . he have a brother there , and the family never mention his name . " but this subject be too vast and noble for a mere paragraph . I shall prepare a memoir , or let we have rather , par une societe de gens de lettre , a series of biography , of life of gentleman , as tell by their dear friend whom they do not   know . 
 George have relate his exploit as champion and martyr , of course Harry have to unbosom himself to his brother , and lie before his eld an account of his private affair . he give up all the family of Castlewood my lord , not for get the well of he at play ; for Harry be a sporting man , and expect to pay when he lose , and receive when he win ; but for refuse to aid the chaplain in his necessity , and dismiss he with such false and heartless pretext . about Mr. will he have make up his mind , after the horse - deal matter , and freely mark his sense of the latter 's conduct upon Mr. Will 's eye and nose . respect the Countess and Lady Fanny , Harry speak in a manner more guard , but not very favourable . he have hear all sort of story about they . the Countess be a card - play old cat ; Lady Fanny be a desperate flirt . who tell he ? well , he have hear the story from a person who know they both very well indeed . in fact , in those day of confidence , of which we make mention in the last volume , Maria have freely impart to her cousin a number of anecdote respect her stepmother and her half - sister , which be by no mean in favour of those lady . 
 but in respect to Lady Maria herself , the young man be staunch and hearty . " it may be imprudent : I do not   say no , George . I may be a fool : I think I be . I know there will be a dreadful piece of work at home , and that Madam and she will fight . well ! we must live apart . our estate be big enough to live on without quarrel , and I can go elsewhere than to Richmond or Castlewood . when you come to the property , you will give I a bit at any rate , Madam will let I off at an easy rent or I will make a famous farmer or factor . I can not   and will not   part from Maria . she have act so nobly by I , that I should be a rascal to turn my back on she . think of she bring I every jewel she have in the world , dear brave creature ! and fling they into my lap with her last guineas , and and God bless she ! " here Harry dash his sleeve across his eye , with a stamp of his foot , and say , " no , brother , I will not   part with she not to be make Governor of Virginia tomorrow ; and my dear old George would never advise I to do so , I know that . " 
 " I be send here to advise you , " George reply . " I be send to break the marriage off , if I can : and a more unhappy one I can not   imagine . but I can not   counsel you to break your word , my boy . " 
 " I know you could not ! what be say be say , George . I have make my bed , and must lie on it , " say Mr. Harry , gloomily . 
 such have be the settlement between our two young worthy , when they first talk over Mr. Harry 's love affair . but after George 's conversation with his aunt , and the further knowledge of his family , which he acquire through the information of that keen old woman of the world , Mr. Warrington , who be naturally of a sceptical turn , begin to doubt about Lady Maria , as well as regard her brother and sister , and look at Harry 's engagement with increase distrust and alarm . be it for his wealth that Maria want Harry ? be it his handsome young person that she long after ? be those story true which Aunt Bernstein have tell of she ? certainly he could not advise Harry to break his word ; but he might cast about in his mind for some scheme for put Maria 's affection to the trial ; and his ensue conduct , which appear not very amiable , I suppose result from this deliberation . 




 CHAPTER LVI . Ariadne 

 my Lord Castlewood have a house in Kensington Square spacious enough to accommodate the several member of his noble family , and convenient for their service at the palace hard by , when his Majesty dwell there . her ladyship have her evening , and give her card - party here for such as would come ; but Kensington be a long way from London a hundred year since , and George Selwyn say he for one be afraid to go , for fear of be rob of a night , whether by footpad with crape over their face , or by lady in rouge at the quadrille - table , we have no mean of say . about noon on the day after Harry have make his reappearance at White 's , it chance that all his virtuous kinsfolk partook of breakfast together , even Mr. will be present , who be to go into wait in the afternoon . 
 the lady come first to their chocolate : they Mr. will join in his court suit ; finally , my lord appear , languid , in his bedgown and nightcap , have not yet assume his wig for the day . here be news which will have bring home from the Star and Garter last night , when he sup in company with some man who have hear it at White 's and see it at Ranelagh ! 
 " heard what ? see what ? " ask the head of the house , take up his Daily Advertiser . 
 " ask Maria ! " say Lady Fanny . my lord turn to his eld sister , who wear a face of portentous sadness , and look as pale as a tablecloth . 
 " ' tis one of Will 's usual elegant and polite invention , " say Maria . 
 " no , " swear Will , with several of his oath ; " it be no invention of his . Tom Claypool of Norfolk see them both at Ranelagh ; and Jack Morris come out of White 's , where he hear the story from Harry Warrington 's own lip . curse he , I be glad of it ! " roar Will , slap the table . " what do you think of your Fortunate Youth , your Virginian , whom your lordship make so much of , turn out to be a second son ? " 
 " the eld brother not dead ? " say my lord . 
 " no more dead than you be . never be . it be my belief that it be a cross between the two . " 
 " Mr. Warrington be incapable of such duplicity ! " cry Maria . 
 " I never encourage the fellow , I be sure you will do I justice there , " say my lady . " nor do fanny : not we , indeed ! " 
 " not we , indeed ! " echo my Lady Fanny . 
 " the fellow be only a beggar , and , I dare say , have not pay for the clothe on his back , " continue Will . " I be glad of it , for , hang he , I hate he ! " 
 " you do not   regard he with favourable eye ; especially since he black your , Will ! " grin my lord . " so the poor fellow have find his brother , and lose his estate ! " and here he turn towards his sister Maria , who , although she look the picture of woe , must have suggest something ludicrous to the humourist near whom she sate ; for his lordship , have gaze at she for a minute , burst into a shrill laugh , which cause the poor lady 's face to flush , and presently her eye to pour over with tear . " it be a shame ! it be a shame ! " she sob out , and hide her face in her handkerchief . Maria 's stepmother and sister look at each other . " we never quite understand your lordship 's humour , " the former lady remark , gravely . 
 " I do not   see there be the least reason why you should , " say my lord , coolly . " Maria , my dear , pray excuse I if I have say that is , do anything , to hurt your feeling . " 
 " done anything ! you pillage the poor lad in his prosperity , and laugh at he in his ruin ! " say Maria , rise from table , and glare round at all her family . 
 " excuse I , my dear sister , I be not laugh at he , " say my lord , gently . 
 " oh , never mind at what or whom else , my lord ! you have take from he all he have to lose . all the world point at you as the man who feed on his own flesh and blood . and now you have his all , you make merry over his misfortune ! " and away she rustle from the room , fling look of defiance at all the party there assemble . 
 " tell we what have happen , or what you have hear , will , and my sister 's grief will not interrupt we . " and will tell , at great length , and with immense exultation at Harry 's discomfiture , the story now buzz through all London , of George Warrington 's sudden apparition . Lord Castlewood be sorry for Harry : Harry be a good , brave lad , and his kinsman like he , as much as certain worldly folk like each other . to be sure he play Harry at card , and take the advantage of the market upon he ; but why not ? the peach which other man would certainly pluck , he might as well devour . eh ! if that be all my conscience have to reproach I with , I need not be very uneasy ! my lord think . " where do Mr. Warrington live ? " 
 will express himself ready to enter upon a state of reprobation if he know or care . 
 " he shall be invite here , and treat with every respect , " say my lord . 
 " include piquet , I suppose ! " growl Will . 
 " or will you take he to the stable , and sell he one of your bargain of horseflesh , will ? " ask Lord Castlewood . " you would have win of Harry Warrington fast enough , if you could ; but you cheat so clumsily at your game that you get pay with a cudgel . I desire , once more , that every attention may be pay to our cousin Warrington . " 
 " and that you be not to be disturb , when you sit down to play , of course , my lord ! " cry Lady Castlewood . 
 " Madam , I desire fair play , for Mr. Warrington , and for myself , and for every member of this amiable family , " retort Lord Castlewood , fiercely . 
 " heaven help the poor gentleman if your lordship be go to be kind to he , " say the stepmother , with a curtsey ; and there be no knowing how far this family dispute might have be carry , have not , at this moment , a phaeton drive up to the house , in which be seat the two young Virginians . 
 it be the carriage which our young Prodigal have purchase in the day of his prosperity . he drive it still : George sate in it by his side ; their negro be behind they . Harry have be for meekly give the whip and rein to his brother , and cede the whole property to he . " what business have a poor devil like I with horse and carriage , georgy ? " Harry have humbly say . " beyond the coat on my back , and the purse my aunt give I , I have nothing in the world . you take the driving - seat , brother ; it will ease my mind if you will take the driving - seat . " George laughingly say he do not know the way , and Harry do ; and that , as for the carriage , he would claim only a half of it , as he have already do with his brother 's wardrobe . " but a bargain be a bargain ; if I share thy coat , thou must divide my breech ' pocket , Harry ; that be but fair dealing ! " again and again Harry swear there never be such a brother on earth . how he rattle his horse over the road ! how pleased and proud he be to drive such a brother ! they come to Kensington in famous high spirit ; and Gumbo 's thunder upon Lord Castlewood 's door be worthy of the big footman in all St. James 's . 
 only my Lady Castlewood and her daughter Lady Fanny be in the room into which our young gentleman be usher . will have no particular fancy to face Harry , my lord be not dress , Maria have her reason for be away , at least till her eye be dry . when we drive up to friend ' house nowadays in our coach - and - six , when John carry up our noble name , when , finally , we enter the drawing - room with our good hat and good Sunday smile foremost , do it ever happen that we interrupt a family row ! that we come simper and smile in , and step over the delusive ash of a still burn domestic heat ? that in the interval between the hall - door and the drawing - room , Mrs. , Mr. , and the Misses Jones have group themselves in a family tableau ; this girl artlessly arrange flower in a vase , let we say ; that one recline over an illuminated work of devotion ; mamma on the sofa , with the butcher 's and grocer 's book push under the cushion , some elegant work in her hand , and a pretty little foot push out advantageously ; while honest Jones , far from say , " curse that Brown , he be always call here ! " hold out a kindly hand , show a pleased face , and exclaim , " what , Brown my boy , delight to see you ! hope you have   come to lunch ! " I say , do it ever happen to we to be make the victim of domestic artifice , the spectator of domestic comedy get up for our special amusement ? oh , let we be thankful , not only for face , but for mask ! not only for honest welcome , but for hypocrisy , which hide unwelcome thing from we ! whilst I be talk , for instance , in this easy , chatty way , what right have you , my good sir , to know what be really pass in my mind ? it may be that I be rack with gout , or that my eld son have just send I in a thousand pound ' worth of college - bill , or that I be writhe under an attack of the Stoke Pogis Sentinel , which have just be send I under cover , or that there be a dreadfully scrappy dinner , the evident remain of a party to which I do not   invite you , and yet I conceal my agony , I wear a merry smile ; I say , " what ! come to take pot - luck with we , Brown my boy ! Betsy ! put a knife and fork for Mr. Brown . eat ! welcome ! fall to ! it be my good ! " I say that humbug which I be perform be beautiful self - denial that hypocrisy be true virtue . oh , if every man speak his mind what an intolerable society our would be to live in ! 
 as the young gentleman be announce , Lady Castlewood advance towards they with perfect ease and good - humour . " we have hear , Harry , " she say , look at the latter with a special friendliness , " of this most extraordinary circumstance . my Lord Castlewood say at breakfast that he should wait on you this very day , Mr. Warrington , and , cousin Harry , we intend not to love you any the less because you be poor . " 
 " we shall be able to show now that it be not for your acre that we like you , Harry ! " say Lady Fanny , follow her mamma 's lead . 
 " and I to whom the acre have fall ? " say Mr. George , with a smile and a bow . 
 " oh , cousin , we shall like you for be like Harry ! " reply the arch Lady Fanny . 
 ah ! who that have see the world , have not admire that astonishing ease with which fine lady drop you and pick you up again ? both the lady now address themselves almost exclusively to the young brother . they be quite civil to Mr. George : but with Mr. Harry they be fond , they be softly familiar , they be gently kind , they be affectionately reproachful . why have Harry not be for day and day to see they ? 
 " well to have have a dish of tea and a game at piquet with they than with some other folk , " say Lady Castlewood . " if we have win enough to buy a paper of pin from you we should have be content ; but young gentleman do not   know what be for their own good , " say mamma . 
 " now you have no more money to play with , you can come and play with we , cousin ! " cry fond Lady Fanny , lift up a finger , " and so your misfortune will be good fortune to we . " 
 George be puzzle . this welcome of his brother be very different from that to which he have look . all these compliment and attention pay to the young brother , though he be without a guinea ! perhaps the people be not so bad as they be paint ? the Blackest of all Blacks be say not to be of quite so dark a complexion as some folk describe he . 
 this affectionate conversation continue for some twenty minute , at the end of which period my Lord Castlewood make his appearance , wig on head , and sword by side . he greet both the young man with much politeness : one not more than the other . " if you be to come to we and I , for one , cordially rejoice to see you what a pity it be you do not come a few month early ! a certain evening at piquet would then most likely never have take place . a young son would have be more prudent . " 
 " yes , indeed , " say Harry . 
 " or a kinsman more compassionate . but I fear that love of play run in the blood of all of we . I have it from my father , and it have make I the poor peer in England . those fair lady whom you see before you be not exempt . my poor brother will be a martyr to it ; and what I , for my part , win on one day , I lose on the next . ' tis shocking , positively , the rage for play in England . all my poor cousin 's bank - note part company from I within twenty - four hour after I get they . " 
 " I have play , like other gentleman , but never to hurt myself , and never indeed care much for the sport , " remark Mr. Warrington . 
 " when we hear that my lord have play with Harry , we do so scold he , " cry the lady . 
 " but if it have not be I , thou know , cousin Warrington , some other person would have have thy money . ' tis a poor consolation , but as such Harry must please to take it , and be glad that friend win his money , who wish he well , not stranger , who care nothing for he , and fleece he . " 
 " eh ! a tooth out be a tooth out , though it be your brother who pull it , my lord ! " say Mr. George , laugh . " Harry must bear the penalty of his fault , and pay his debt , like other man . " 
 " I be sure I have never say or think otherwise . ' tis not like an Englishman to be sulky because he be beat , " say Harry . 
 " your hand , cousin ! you speak like a man ! " cry my lord , with delight . the lady smile to each other . 
 " my sister , in Virginia , have know how to bring up her son as gentleman ! " exclaim Lady Castlewood , enthusiastically . 
 " I protest you must not be grow so amiable now you be poor , cousin Harry ! " cry cousin Fanny . " why , mamma , we do not know half his good quality when he be only Fortunate Youth and Prince of Virginia ! you be exactly like he , cousin George , but I vow you can not   be as amiable as your brother ! " 
 " I be the Prince of Virginia , but I fear I be not the Fortunate Youth , " say George , gravely . 
 Harry be begin , " by Jove , he be the good " when the noise of a harpsichord be hear from the upper room . the lad blush : the lady smile . 
 " ' Tis Maria , above , " say Lady Castlewood . " let some of we go up to she . " 
 the lady rise , and make way towards the door ; and Harry follow they , blush very much . George be about to join the party , but Lord Castlewood check he . " Nay , if all the lady follow your brother " his lordship say , " let I at least have the benefit of your company and conversation . I long to hear the account of your captivity and rescue , cousin George ! " 
 " oh , we must hear that too ! " cry one of the lady , linger . 
 " I be greedy , and should like it all by myself , " say Lord Castlewood , look at her very sternly ; and follow the woman to the door , and close it upon they with a low bow . 
 " your brother have no doubt acquaint you with the history of all that have happen to he in this house , cousin George ? " ask George 's kinsman . 
 " yes , include the quarrel with Mr. Will and the engagement to my Lady Maria , " reply George , with a bow . " I may be pardon for say that he hath meet with but ill fortune here , my lord . " 
 " which no one can deplore more cordially than myself . my brother live with horse jockey and trainer , and the wild blood of the town , and between we there be very little sympathy . we should not all live together , be we not so poor . this be the house which our grandmother occupy before she go to America and marry Colonel Esmond . much of the furniture belong to she . " George look round the wainscote parlour with some interest . " our house have not flourish in the last twenty year ; though we have a promotion of rank a score of year since , owe to some interest we have at court , then . but the malady of play have be the ruin of we all . I be a miserable victim to it : only too proud to sell myself and title to a roturiere , as many nobleman , less scrupulous , have do . Pride be my fault , my dear cousin . I remember how I be bear ! " and his lordship lay his hand on his shirt - frill , turn out his toe , and look his cousin nobly in the face . 
 Young George Warrington 's natural disposition be to believe everything which everybody say to he . when once deceive , however , or undeceive about the character of a person , he become utterly incredulous , and he salute this fine speech of my lord 's with a sardonical , inward laughter , preserve his gravity , however , and scarce allow any of his scorn to appear in his word . 
 " we have all our fault , my lord . that of play hath be condone over and over again in gentleman of our rank . have heartily forgive my brother , surely I can not presume to be your lordship 's judge in the matter ; and instead of play and losing , I wish sincerely that you have both play and win ! " 
 " so do I , with all my heart ! " say my lord with a sigh . " I augur well for your goodness when you can speak in this way , and for your experience and knowledge of the world , too , cousin , of which you seem to possess a great share than most young man of your age . your poor Harry hath the good heart in the world ; but I doubt whether his head be very strong . " 
 " not very strong , indeed . but he hath the art to make friend wherever he go , and in spite of all his imprudence most people love he . " 
 " I do we all do , I be sure ! as if he be our brother ! " cry my lord . 
 " he have often describe in his letter his welcome at your lordship 's house . my mother keep they all , you may be sure . Harry 's style be not very learn , but his heart be so good , that to read he be well than wit . " 
 " I may be mistake , but I fancy his brother possess a good heart and a good wit , too ! " say my lord , obstinately gracious . 
 " I be as Heaven make I , cousin ; and perhaps some more experience and sorrow than have fall to the lot of most young man . " 
 " this misfortune of your poor brother I mean this piece of good fortune , your sudden reappearance have not quite leave Harry without resource ? " continue Lord Castlewood , very gently . 
 " with nothing but what his mother can leave he , or I , at her death , can spare he . what be the usual portion here of a young brother , my lord ? " 
 " eh ! a young brother here be you know in fine , everybody know what a young brother be , " say my lord , and shrug his shoulder and look his guest in the face . 
 the other go on : " we be the good of friend , but we be flesh and blood : and I do not   pretend to do more for he than be usually do for young brother . why give he money ? that he should squander it at card or horse - racing ? my lord , we have card and jockey in Virginia , too ; and my poor Harry hath distinguish himself in his own country already , before he come to your . he inherit the family fail for dissipation . " 
 " poor fellow , poor fellow , I pity he ! " 
 " our estate , you see , be great , but our income be small . we have little more money than that which we get from England for our tobacco and very little of that too for our tobacco come back to we in the shape of good , clothe , leather , grocery , ironmongery , nay , wine and beer for our people and ourselves . Harry may come back and share all these : there be a nag in the stable for he , a piece of venison on the table , a little ready money to keep his pocket warm , and a coat or two every year . this will go on whilst my mother live , unless , which be far from improbable , he get into some quarrel with Madam Esmond . then , whilst I live he will have the run of the house and all it contain : then , if I die leave child , he will be less and less welcome . his future , my lord , be a dismal one , unless some strange piece of luck turn up on which we be fool to speculate . henceforth he be doom to dependence , and I know no bad lot than to be dependent on a self - willed woman like our mother . the mean he have to make himself respect at home he hath squander away here . he have fling his patrimony to the dog , and poverty and subserviency be now his only portion . " Mr. Warrington deliver this speech with considerable spirit and volubility , and his cousin hear he respectfully . 
 " you speak well , Mr. Warrington . have you ever think of public life ? " say my lord . 
 " of course I have think of public life like every man of my station every man , that is , who care for something beyond a dice - box or a stable , " reply George . " I hope , my lord , to be able to take my own place , and my unlucky brother must content himself with his . this I say advisedly , have hear from he of certain engagement which he have form , and which it would be misery to all party be he to attempt to execute now . " 
 " your logic be very strong , " say my lord . " shall we go up and see the lady ? there be a picture above - stair which your grandfather be say to have execute . before you go , my dear cousin , you will please to fix a day when our family may have the honour of receive you . Castlewood , you know , be always your home when we be there . it be something like your Virginian Castlewood , cousin , from your account . we have beef , and mutton , and ale , and wood , in plenty ; but money be woefully scarce amongst we . " 
 they ascend to the drawing - room , where , however , they find only one of the lady of the family . this be my Lady Maria , who come out of the embrasure of a window , where she and Harry Warrington have be engage in talk . 
 George make his good bow , Maria her low curtsey . " you be indeed wonderfully like your brother , " she say , give he her hand . " and from what he say , cousin George , I think you be as good as he be . " 
 at the sight of her swollen eye and tearful face George feel a pang of remorse . " poor thing ! " he think . " Harry have be vaunt my generosity and virtue to she , and I have beer , play the selfish eld brother downstairs ! how old she look ! how could he ever have a passion for such a woman as that ? " how ? because he do not see with your eye , Mr. George . he see rightly too now with his own , perhaps . I never know whether to pity or congratulate a man on come to his sens . 
 after the introduction a little talk take place , which for a while Lady Maria manage to carry on in an easy manner : but though lady in this matter of social hypocrisy be , I think , far more consummate performer than man , after a sentence or two the poor lady break out into a sob , and , motion Harry away with her hand , fairly flee from the room . 
 Harry be rush forward , but stop check by that sign . my lord say his poor sister be subject to these fit of nerve , and have already be ill that morning . after this event our young gentleman think it be needless to prolong their visit . Lord Castlewood follow they downstairs , accompany they to the door , admire their nag in the phaeton , and wave they a friendly farewell . 
 " and so we have be coax and cuddle in the window , and we part good friend , Harry ? be it not so ? " say George to his charioteer . 
 " oh , she be a good woman ! " cry Harry , lash the horse . " I know you will think so when you come to know she . " 
 " when you take her home to Virginia ? a pretty welcome our mother will give she . she will never forgive I for not break the match off , nor you for make it . " 
 " I can not   help it , George ! do not   you be pop your ugly head so close to my ear , Gumbo ! after what have pass between we , I be bind in honour to stand by she . if she see no objection , I must find none . I tell she all . I tell she that Madam would be very rusty at first ; but that she be very fond of I , and must end by relent . and when you come to the property , I tell she that I know my dearest George so well , that I might count upon share with he . " 
 " the deuce you do ! let I tell you , my dear , that I have be tell my Lord Castlewood quite a different story . that as an eld brother I intend to have all my right there , do not   flog that near horse so and that you can but look forward to poverty and dependence . " 
 " what ! you will not   help I ? " cry Harry , turn quite pale . 
 " George , I do not   believe it , though I hear it out of your own mouth ! there be a minute 's pause after this outbreak , during which Harry do not even look at his brother , but sate , gaze blindly before he , the picture of grief and gloom . he be drive so near to a road - post that the carriage might have be upset but for George 's pull the rein . 
 " you have well take the rein , sir , " say Harry . " I tell you you have well take they . " 
 " do you ever know I fail you , Harry ? " George ask . 
 " no , " say the other , " not till now " the tear be roll down his cheek as he speak . 
 " my dear , I think one day you will say I have do my duty . " 
 " what have you do ? ask Harry . 
 " I have say you be a young brother that you have spend all your patrimony , and that your portion at home must be very slender . be it not true ? " 
 " yes , but I would not have believe it , if ten thousand man have tell I , " say Harry . " whatever happen to I , I think I could trust you , George Warrington . " and in this frame of mind Harry remain during the rest of the drive . 
 their dinner be serve soon after their return to their lodging , of which Harry scarce eat any , though he drink freely of the wine before he . 
 " that wine be a bad consoler in trouble , Harry , " his brother remark . 
 " I have no other , sir , " say Harry , grimly ; and have drunk glass after glass in silence , he presently seize his hat , and leave the room . 
 he do not return for three hour . George , in much anxiety about his brother , have not leave home meanwhile , but read his book , and smoke the pipe of patience . " it be shabby to say I would not aid he , and , God help I , it be not true . I will not   leave he , though he marry a blackamoor , " think George " have I not do he harm enough already , by come to life again ? where have he go ; have he go to play ? " 
 " good God ! what have happen to thee ? " cry George Warrington , presently , when his brother come in , look ghastly pale . 
 he come up and take his brother 's hand . " I can take it now , Georgy , " he say . " perhaps what you do be right , though . I for one will never believe that you would throw your brother off in distress . I will tell you what . at dinner , I think suddenly , I will go back to she and speak to she . I will say to she , ' Maria , poor as I be , your conduct to I have be so noble , that , by heaven ! I be yours to take or to leave . if you will have I , here I be : I will enlist : I will work : I will try and make a livelihood for myself somehow , and my bro my relation will relent , and give we enough to live on . ' that be what I determine to tell she ; and I do , George . I run all the way to Kensington in the rain look , I be splash from head to foot , and find they all at dinner , all except Will , that be . I speak out that very moment to they all , sit round the table , over their wine . ' Maria , ' say I , ' a poor fellow want to redeem his promise which he make when he fancy he be rich . will you take he ? ' I find I have plenty of word , and do not   hem and stutter as I be do now . I speak ever so long , and I end by say I would do my good and my duty by she , so help I God ! 
 " when I have do , she come up to I quite kind . she take my hand , and kiss it before the rest . ' my dearest , good Harry ! ' she say   those be her word , I do not   want otherwise to be praise myself , ' you be a noble heart , and I thank you with all mine . but , my dear , I have long see it be only duty , and a foolish promise make by a young man to an old woman , that have hold you to your engagement . to keep it would make you miserable , my dear . I absolve you from it , thank you with all my heart for your fidelity , and blessing and love my dear cousin always . ' and she come up and kiss I before they all , and go out of the room quite stately , and without a single tear . they be all cry , especially my lord , who be sob quite loud . I do not   think he have so much feeling . and she , George ? oh , be not   she a noble creature ? " 
 " here be her health ! " cry George , fill one of the glass that still stand before he . 
 " Hip , hip , huzzay ! " say Harry . he be wild with delight at be free . 




 CHAPTER LVII . in which Mr. Harry 's Nose continue to be put out of joint 

 Madame de Bernstein be scarcely less pleased than her virginian nephew at the result of Harry 's final interview with Lady Maria . George inform the Baroness of what have pass , in a billet which he send to she the same evening ; and shortly afterwards her nephew Castlewood , whose visit to his aunt be very rare , come to pay his respect to she , and frankly speak about the circumstance which have take place ; for no man know well than my Lord Castlewood how to be frank upon occasion , and now that the business between Maria and Harry be end what need be there of reticence or hypocrisy ? the game have be play , and be over : he have no objection now to speak of its various move , stratagem , finesse . " she be my own sister , " say my lord , affectionately ; ' she will not   have many more chance many more such chance of marry and establish herself . I might not approve of the match in all respect , and I might pity your ladyship 's young virginian favourite : but of course such a piece of good fortune be not to be throw away , and I be bind to stand by my own flesh and blood . " 
 " your candour do your lordship honour , " say Madame de Bernstein , " and your love for your sister be quite edify ! " 
 " Nay , we have lose the game , and I be speak sans rancune . it be not for you , who have win , to bear malice , " say my lord , with a bow . 
 Madame de Bernstein protest she be never in her life in well humour . " Confess , now , Eugene , that visit of Maria to Harry at the spunging - house that touch give up of all his present to she , be a stroke of thy invention ? " 
 " pity for the young man , and a sense of what be due from Maria to her friend her affiance lover in misfortune , sure these be motif sufficient to make her act as she do , " reply Lord Castlewood , demurely . 
 " but ' twa you advise she , my good nephew ? " 
 Castlewood , with a shrug of his shoulder , own that he do advise his sister to see Mr. Henry Warrington . " but we should have win , in spite of your ladyship , " he continue , " have not the eld brother make his appearance . and I have be try to console my poor Maria by show she what a piece of good fortune it be after all , that we lose . " 
 " suppose she have marry Harry , and then cousin George have make his appearance ? " remark the Baroness . 
 " effectivement , " cry Eugene , take snuff . " as the grave be to give up its dead , let we be thankful to the grave for disgorge in time ! I be bind to say , that Mr. George Warrington seem to be a man of sense , and not more selfish than other eld son and man of the world . my poor molly fancy that he might be a what shall I say ? a greenhorn perhaps be the term like his young brother . she fondly hop that he might be incline to go share and share alike with Twin junior ; in which case , so infatuated be she about the young fellow , that I believe she would have take he . ' Harry Warrington , with half a loaf , might do very well , ' say I , ' but Harry Warrington with no bread , my dear ! ' " 
 " how no bread ? " ask the Baroness . 
 " well , no bread except at his brother 's side - table . the elder say as much . " 
 " what a hard - hearted wretch ! " cry Madame de Bernstein . 
 " ah , bah ! I play with you , aunt , carte sur table ! Mr. George only do what everybody else would do ; and we have no right to be angry with he , really we have not . molly herself acknowledge as much , after her first burst of grief be over , and I bring she to listen to reason . the silly old creature ! to be so wild about a young lad at her time of life ! " 
 " ' twas a real passion , I almost do believe , " say Madame de Bernstein . 
 " you should have hear she take leave of he . c'etait touchant , ma parole d'honneur ! I cry . before George , I could not help myself . the young fellow with muddy stocking , and his hair about his eye , fling himself amongst we when we be at dinner ; make his offer to Molly in a very frank and noble manner , and in good language too ; and she reply . Begad , it put I in mind of Mrs. Woffington in the new Scotch play , that Lord Bute 's man have write Douglas what d'ye call it ? she cling round the lad : she bid he adieu in heartrende accent . she step out of the room in a stately despair no more chocolate , thank you . if she have make a mauvais pas no one could retire from it with more dignity . ' twas a masterly retreat after a defeat . we be starve out of our position , but we retire with all the honour of war . " 
 " molly will not   die of the disappointment ! " say my lord 's aunt , sip her cup . 
 my lord snarl a grin , and show his yellow tooth . " he , he ! " he say , ' she hath once or twice before have the malady very severely , and recover perfectly . it do not   kill , as your ladyship know , at Molly 's age . " 
 how should her ladyship know ? she do not marry Doctor Tusher until she be advanced in life . she do not become Madame de Bernstein until still later . Old Dido , a poet remark , be not ignorant of misfortune , and hence learn to have compassion on the wretched . 
 People in the little world , as I have be tell , quarrel and fight , and go on abuse each other , and be not reconcile for ever so long . but people in the great world be surely wise in their generation . they have difference ; they cease see each other . they make it up and come together again , and no question be ask . a stray prodigal , or a stray puppy - dog , be thus bring in under the benefit of an amnesty , though you know he have be away in ugly company . for six month past , ever since the Castlewoods and Madame de Bernstein have be battle for possession of poor Harry Warrington , these two branch of the Esmond family have remain apart . now , the question be settle , they be free to meet again , as though no difference ever have separate they : and Madame de Bernstein drive in her great coach to Lady Castlewood 's rout , and the Esmond lady appear smile at Madame de Bernstein 's drum , and love each other just as much as they previously have do . 
 " so , sir , I hear you have act like a hard - hearted monster about your poor brother Harry ! " say the Baroness , delight , and menace George with her stick . 
 " I act but upon your ladyship 's hint , and desire to see whether it be for himself or his reputed money that his kinsfolk want to have he , " reply George , turn rather red . 
 " Nay , Maria could not marry a poor fellow who be utterly penniless , and whose eld brother say he would give he nothing ! " 
 " I do it for the good , madam , " say George , still blush . 
 " and so thou didst , o thou hypocrite ! " cry the old lady . 
 " Hypocrite , madam ! and why ? " ask Mr. Warrington , draw himself up in much state . 
 " I know all , my infant ! " say the Baroness in French . " thou art very like thy grandfather . come , that I embrace thee ! Harry have tell I all , and that thou hast divide thy little patrimony with he ! " 
 " it be but natural , madam . we have have common heart and purse since we be bear . I but feign hard - heartedness in order to try those people yonder , " say George , with fill eye . 
 " and thou wilt divide Virginia with he too ? " ask the Bernstein . 
 " I do not   say so . it be not just , " reply Mr. Warrington . " the land must go to the eld bear , and Harry would not have it otherwise : and it may be I shall die , or my mother outlive the pair of we . but half of what be mine be his : and he , it must be remember , only be extravagant because he be mistake as to his position . " 
 " but it be a knight of old , it be a Bayard , it be the grandfather come to life ! " cry Madame de Bernstein to her attendant , as she be retire for the night . and that evening , when the lad leave she , it be to poor Harry she give the two finger , and to George the rouged cheek , who blush , for his part , almost as deep as that often - dye rise , at such a mark of his old kinswoman 's favour . 
 although Harry Warrington be the least envious of man , and do honour to his brother as in all respect his chief , guide , and superior , yet no wonder a certain feeling of humiliation and disappointment oppress the young man after his deposition from his eminence as Fortunate Youth and heir to boundless virginian territory . our friend at Kensington might promise and vow that they would love he all the well after his fall ; Harry make a low bow and profess himself very thankful ; but he could not help perceive , when he go with his brother to the state entertainment with which my Lord Castlewood regale his new - find kinsman , that George be all in all to his cousin : have all the talk , compliment , and petit soin for himself , whilst of Harry no one take any notice save poor Maria , who follow he with wistful look , pursue he with eye convey dismal reproach , and , as it be , blame he because she have leave he . " ah ! " the eye seem to say , " ' tis mighty well of you , Harry , to have accept the freedom which I give you ; but I have no intention , sir , that you should be so pleased at be let off . " she give he up , but yet she do not quite forgive he for take she at her word . she would not have he , and yet she would . oh , my young friend , how delightful be the beginning of a love - business , and how undignified , sometimes , the end ! what a romantic vista be before young Damon and young Phillis   or middle - aged ditto ditto   when , their artless love make known to each other , they twine their arm round each other 's waist and survey that charming pay du tendre which lie at their foot ! into that country , so link together , they will wander from now until extreme old age . there may be rock and roar river , but will not Damon 's strong true love enable he to carry Sweetheart over they ? there may be dragon and danger in the path , but shall not his courageous sword cut they down ? then at eve , how they will rest cuddle together , like two pretty babe in the wood , the moss their couch , the star their canopy , their arm their mutual pillow ! this be the wise plan young folk make when they set out on the love journey ; and o I ! they have not get a mile when they come to a great wall and find they must walk back again . they be squabble with the post - boy at Barnet   the first stage on the Gretna Road , I mean , and , behold , perhaps Strephon have not get any money , or here be papa with a whacking horsewhip , who take Miss back again , and lock she up cry in the schoolroom . the parting be heart - breaking ; but , when she have marry the banker and have eight child , and he have become , it may be , a prosperous barrister , it may be , a seedy raff who have go twice or thrice into the Gazette ; when , I say , in after year Strephon and Delia meet again , be not the meeting ridiculous ? nevertheless , I hope no young man will fall in love , have any doubt in his mind as to the eternity of his passion . ' tis when a man have have a second or third amorous attack that he begin to grow doubtful ; but some woman be romantic to the end , and from eighteen to eight - and - fifty   for what I know   be always expect their heart to break . in fine , when you have be in love and be so no more , when the King of France , with twenty thousand man , with colour fly , music playing , and all the pomp of war , have march up the hill , then proceed to march down again , he and you be in an absurd position . 
 this be what Harry Warrington , no doubt , feel when he go to Kensington and encounter the melancholy , reproachful eye of his cousin . yes ! it be a foolish position to be in ; but it be also melancholy to look into a house you have once live in , and see black casement and emptiness where once shine the fire of welcome . melancholy ? yes ; but , ha ! how bitter , how melancholy , how absurd to look up as you pass sentimentally by No . 13 , and see somebody else grin out of window , and evidently on the good term with the landlady . I always feel hurt , even at an inn which I frequent , if I see other folk ' trunk and boot at the door of the room which be once mine . have those boot loll on the sofa which once I recline on ? I kick you from before I , you muddy , vulgar highlow ! 
 so consider that his period of occupation be over , and Maria 's room , if not give up to a new tenant , be , at any rate , to let , Harry do not feel very easy in his cousin 's company , nor she possibly in his . he find either that he have nothing to say to she , or that what she have to say to he be rather dull and commonplace , and that the red lip of a white - neck pipe of Virginia be decidedly more agreeable to he now than Maria 's soft accent and most melancholy moue . when George go to Kensington , then , Harry do not care much about go , and plead other engagement . 
 at his uncle 's house in Hill Street the poor lad be no well amuse , and , indeed , be treat by the virtuous people there with scarce any attention at all . the lady do not scruple to deny themselves when he come ; he could scarce have believe in such insincerity after their caress , their welcome , their repeat vow of affection ; but happen to sit with the lambert for an hour after he have call upon his aunt , he see her ladyship 's chairman arrive with an empty chair , and his aunt step out and enter the vehicle , and not even blush when he make she a bow from the opposite window . to be deny by his own relation to have that door which have open to he so kindly , slam in his face ! he would not have believe such a thing possible , poor simple Harry say . perhaps he think the door - knocker have a tender heart , and be not make of brass ; not more changed than the head of that knocker be my Lady Warrington 's virtuous face when she pass her nephew . 
 " my father 's own brother 's wife ! what have I do to offend she ? oh , Aunt Lambert , Aunt Lambert , do you ever see such cold - heartedness ? " cry out Harry , with his usual impetuosity . 
 " do we make any difference to you , my dear Harry ? " say Aunt Lambert , with a side look at her young daughter . " the world may look coldly at you , but we do not   belong to it : so you may come to we in safety . " 
 " in this house you be different from other people , " reply Harry . " I do not   know how , but I always feel quiet and happy somehow when I come to you . " 
  " Quis I uno vivit felicior ? aut magis hac est 
  Optandum vita dicere quis potuit ? " 
 call out General Lambert . " do you know where I get these verse , Mr. Gownsman ? " and he address his son from college , who be come to pass an Easter holiday with his parent . " you get they out of Catullus , sir , " say the scholar . 
 " I get they out of no such thing , sir . I get they out of my favourite Democritus Junior out of old Burton , who have provide many indifferent scholar with learning ; " and who and Montaigne , be favourite author with the good General . 




 CHAPTER LVIII . where we do what cat may do 

 we have say how our Virginians , with a wisdom not uncommon in youth , have choose to adopt strong Jacobite opinion , and to profess a prodigious affection for the exile royal family . the banished prince have recognise Madam Esmond 's father as Marquis of Esmond , and she do not choose to be very angry with an unfortunate race , that , after all , be so willing to acknowledge the merit of her family . as for any little scandal about her sister , Madame de Bernstein , and the Old Chevalier , she toss away from she with scorn the recollection of that odious circumstance , assert , with perfect truth , that the two first monarch of the House of Hanover be quite as bad as any stuart in regard to their domestic morality . but the king de facto be the king , as well as his Majesty de jure . De Facto have be solemnly crown and anoint at church , and have likewise utterly discomfited De Jure , when they come to battle for the kingdom together . Madam 's clear opinion be , then , that her son owe it to themselves as well as the sovereign to appear at his royal court . and if his Majesty should have be minded to confer a lucrative post , or a blue or red ribbon upon either of they , she , for her part , would not have be in the least surprised . she make no doubt but that the King know the Virginian Esmonds as well as any other member of his nobility . the lad be specially command , then , to present themselves at court , and , I dare say , their mother would have be very angry have she know that George take Harry 's laced coat on the day when he go to make his bow at Kensington . 
 a hundred year ago the King 's drawing - room be open almost every day to his nobility and gentry ; and loyalty especially since the war have begin could gratify itself a score of time in a month with the august sight of the sovereign . a wise avoidance of the enemy 's ship of war , a gracious acknowledgment of the inestimable loss the British Isles would suffer by the seizure of the royal person at sea , cause the monarch to forgo those visit to his native Hanover which be so dear to his royal heart , and compel he to remain , it must be own , unwillingly amongst his love Britons . a hanoverian lady , however , whose virtue have endear she to the prince , strove to console he for his enforced absence from Herrenhausen . and from the lip of the Countess of Walmoden   on whom the imperial beneficence have gracefully confer a high title of british honour   the revered Defender of the Faith could hear the accent of his native home . 
 to this beloved Sovereign , Mr. Warrington request his uncle , an assiduous courtier , to present he ; and as Mr. Lambert have to go to court likewise , and thank his Majesty for his promotion , the two gentleman make the journey to Kensington together , engage a hackney - coach for the purpose , as my Lord Wrotham 's carriage be now want by its rightful owner , who have return to his house in town . they alight at Kensington Palace Gate , where the sentry on duty know and salute the good General , and hence modestly make their way on foot to the summer residence of the sovereign . walk under the portico of the Palace , they enter the gallery which lead to the great black marble staircase   which hath be so richly decorate and paint by Mr. Kent , and then pass through several room , richly hang with tapestry and adorn with picture and busto , until they come to the King 's great drawing - room , where that famous " Venus " by Titian be , and , amongst other masterpiece , the picture of " St. Francis adore the infant saviour , " perform by Sir Peter Paul Rubens ; and here , with the rest of the visitor to the court , the gentleman wait until his Majesty issue from his private apartment , where he be in conference with certain personage who be call in the newspaper language of that day his M - j - ty 's M - n - st - rs . 
 George Warrington , who have never be in a palace before , have leisure to admire the place , and regard the people round he . he see fine picture for the first time too , and I dare say delighted in that charming piece of Sir Athony Vandyck , represent King Charles the First , his queen and Family , and the noble picture of " Esther before Ahasuerus , " paint by Tintoret , and in which all the figure be dress in the magnificent venetian habit . with the contemplation of these work he be so enraptured , that he scarce hear all the remark of his good friend the General , who be whisper into his young companion 's almost heedless ear the name of some of the personage round about they . 
 " yonder , " say Mr. Lambert , " be two of my Lords of the Admiralty , Mr. Gilbert Elliot and Admiral Boscawen : your Boscawen , whose fleet fire the first gun in your water two year ago . that stout gentleman all belate with gold be Mr. Fox , that be Minister , and be now content to be Paymaster with a great salary . 
 " he carry the auri fame on his person . why , his waistcoat be a perfect Potosi ! " say George . 
 " Aliena appeten how go the text ? he love to get money and to spend it , " continue General Lambert . " Yon be my Lord Chief Justice Willes , talk to my Lord of Salisbury , Doctor Headley , who , if he serve his God as he serve his king , will be translate to some very high promotion in Heaven . he belong to your grandfather 's time , and be love by Dick Steele and hat by the Dean . with they be my Lord of London , the learn Doctor Sherlock . my lord of the lawn sleeve have lose half their honour now . I remember when I be a boy in my mother 's hand , she make I go down on my knee to the Bishop of Rochester ; he who go over the water , and become Minister to somebody who shall be nameless Perkin 's Bishop . that handsome fair man be Admiral Smith . he be president of poor Byng 's court - martial , and strove in vain to get he off his penalty ; Tom of Ten Thousand they call he in the fleet . the french Ambassador have he break , when he be a lieutenant , for make a french man - of - war low topsail to he , and the King make Tom a captain the next day . that tall , haughty - look man be my Lord George Sackville , who , now I be a Major - General myself , will treat I somewhat well than a footman . I wish my stout old Blakeney be here ; he be the soldier 's darling , and as kind and brave as yonder poker of a nobleman be brave and I be your lordship 's very humble servant . this be a young gentleman who be just from America , and be in Braddock 's sad business two year ago . " 
 " oh , indeed ! " say the poker of a nobleman . " I have the honour of speak to Mr. ? " 
 " to Major - General Lambert , at your lordship 's service , and who be in his Majesty 's some time before you enter it . that , Mr. Warrington , be the first commoner in England , Mr. Speaker Onslow . where be your uncle ? I shall have to present you myself to his Majesty if Sir Miles delay much long . " as he speak , the worthy General address himself entirely to his young friend , make no sort of account of his colleague , who stalk away with a scared look as if amazed at the other 's audacity . a hundred year ago , a nobleman be a nobleman , and expect to be admire as such . 
 Sir Miles 's red waistcoat appear in sight presently , and many cordial greeting pass between he , his nephew , and General Lambert : for we have describe how Sir Miles be the most affectionate of man . so the General have quit my Lord Wrotham 's house ? it be time , as his lordship himself wish to occupy it ? very good ; but consider what a loss for the neighbour ! 
 " we miss you , we positively miss you , my dear General , " cry Sir Miles . " my daughter be in love with those lovely young lady upon my word , they be ; and my Lady Warrington and my girl be debate over and over again how they should find an opportunity of make the acquaintance of your charming family . we feel as if we be old friend already ; indeed we do , General , if you will permit I the liberty of say so ; and we love you , if I may be allow to speak frankly , on account of your friendship and kindness to our dear nephews : though we be a little jealous , I own a little jealous of they , because they go so often to see you . often and often have I say to my Lady Warrington , ' my dear , why do not   we make acquaintance with the General ? why do not   we ask he and his lady to come over in a family way and dine with some other plain country gentlefolk ? ' carry my most sincere respect to Mrs. Lambert , I pray , sir ; and thank she for her goodness to these young gentleman . my own flesh and blood , sir ; my dear , dear brother 's boy ! " he pass his hand across his manly eye : he be choke almost with generous and affectionate emotion . 
 whilst they be discourse George Warrington the while restrain his laughter with admirable gravity the door of the King 's apartment open , and the page enter , precede his Majesty . he be follow by his burly son , his Royal Highness the Duke , a very corpulent Prince , with a coat and face of blaze scarlet : behind they come various gentleman and officer of state ; among whom George at once recognise the famous Mr. Secretary Pitt , by his tall stature , his eagle eye and beak , his grave and majestic presence . as I see that solemn figure pass , even a hundred year off , I protest I feel a present awe , and a desire to take my hat off . I be not frightened at George the Second ; nor be my eye dazzle by the portentous appearance of his Royal Highness the Duke of Culloden and Fontenoy ; but the Great Commoner , the terrible Cornet of Horse ! his figure bestride our narrow isle of a century back like a Colossus ; and I hush as he pass in his gouty shoe , his thunderbolt hand wrap in flannel . perhaps as we see he now , issue with dark look from the royal closet , angry scene have be pass between he and his august master . he have be bore that old monarch for hour with prodigious long speech , full of eloquence , voluble with the noble phrase upon the commonest topic ; but , it must be confess , utterly repulsive to the little shrewd old gentleman , " at whose foot he lay himself , " as the phrase be , and who have the most thorough dislike for fine boedry and for fine brose too ! the sublime Minister pass solemnly through the crowd ; the company range itself respectfully round the wall ; and his Majesty walk round the circle , his royal son lag a little behind , and engage select individual in conversation for his own part . 
 the monarch be a little , keen , fresh - coloured old man , with very protrude eye , attire in plain , old - fashioned , snuff - colour clothe and brown stocking , his only ornament the blue ribbon of his order of the Garter . he speak in a german accent , but with ease , shrewdness , and simplicity , address those individual whom he have a mind to notice , or pass on with a bow . he know Mr. Lambert well , who have serve under his Majesty at Dettingen , and with his royal son in Scotland , and he congratulate he good - humouredly on his promotion . 
 " it be not always , " his Majesty be pleased to say , " that we can do as we like ; but I be glad when , for once , I could give myself that pleasure in your case , General ; for my army contain no well officer as you . " 
 the veteran blush and bow , deeply gratified at this speech . meanwhile , the Best of Monarchs be look at Sir Miles Warrington   whom his Majesty know perfectly , as the eager recipient of all favour from all Ministers , and at the young gentleman by his side . 
 " who be this ? " the Defender of the faith condescend to ask , point towards George Warrington , who stand before his sovereign in a respectful attitude , clothe in poor Harry 's good embroider suit . 
 with the deep reverence Sir Miles inform his king , that the young gentleman be his nephew , Mr. George Warrington , of Virginia , who ask leave to pay his humble duty . 
 " this , then , be the other brother ? " the Venerated Prince deign to observe . " he come in time , else the other brother would have spend all the money . my Lord Bishop of Salisbury , why do you come out in this bitter weather ? you have much well stay at home ! " and with this , the revered wielder of Britannia 's sceptre pass on to other lord and gentleman of his court . Sir Miles Warrington be deeply affect at the royal condescension . he clap his nephew 's hand . " God bless you , my boy , " he cry ; " I tell you that you would see the great monarch and the fine gentleman in the world . be he not so , my Lord Bishop ? " 
 " that , that he be ! " cry his lordship , clasp his ruffle hand , and turn his fine eye up to the sky , " the good of prince and of man . " 
 " that be Master Louis , my Lady Yarmouth 's favourite nephew , " say Lambert , point to a young gentleman who stand with a crowd round he ; and presently the stout Duke of Cumberland come up to our little group . 
 his Royal Highness hold out his hand to his old companion - in - arm . " congratulate you on your promotion , Lambert , " he say good - naturedly . Sir Miles Warrington 's eye be ready to burst out of his head with rapture . 
 " I owe it , sir , to your Royal Highness 's good office , " say the grateful General . 
 " not at all ; not at all : ought to have have it a long time before . always be a good officer ; perhaps there will be some employment for you soon . this be the gentleman whom James Wolfe introduce to I ? " 
 " his brother , sir . " 
 " oh , the real Fortunate Youth ! you be with poor Ned Braddock in America a prisoner , and lucky enough to escape . come and see I , sir , in Pall Mall . bring he to my levee , Lambert . " and the broad back of the Royal Prince be turn to our friend . 
 " it be rain ! you come on foot , General Lambert ? you and George must come home in my coach . you must and shall come home with I , I say . by George , you must ! I will have no denial , " cry the enthusiastic Baronet ; and he drive George and the General back to Hill Street , and present the latter to my Lady Warrington and his darling , Flora and Dora , and insist upon their partaking of a collation , as they must be hungry after their ride . " what , there be only cold mutton ? well , an old soldier can eat cold mutton . and a good glass of my Lady Warrington 's own cordial , prepare with her own hand , will keep the cold wind out . delicious cordial ! Capital mutton ! our own , my dear General , " say the hospitable Baronet , " our own from the country , six year old if a day . we keep a plain table ; but all the Warringtons since the Conqueror have be remarkable for their love of mutton ; and our meal may look a little scanty , and be , for we be plain people , and I be oblige to keep my rascal of servant on board - wage . can not   give they seven - year - old mutton , you know . " 
 Sir Miles , in his nephew 's presence and hearing , describe to his wife and daughter George 's reception at court in such flattering term that George hardly know himself , or the scene at which he have be present , or how to look his uncle in the face , or how to contradict he before his family in the midst of the astonishing narrative he be relate . Lambert sit by for a while with open eye . he , too , have be at Kensington . he have see none of the wonder which Sir Miles describe . 
 " we be proud of you , dear George . we love you , my dear nephew we all love you , we be all proud of you " 
 " yes ; but I like Harry well , " say a little voice . 
 " not because you be wealthy ! screwby , take Master Miles to his governor . go , dear child . not because you be blest with great estate and an ancient name ; but because , George , you have put to good use the talent with which Heaven have adorn you ; because you have fight and bleed in your country 's cause , in your monarch 's cause , and as such be indeed worthy of the favour of the good of sovereign . General Lambert , you have kindly condescend to look in on a country family , and partake of our unpretende meal . I hope we may see you some day when our hospitality be a little less homely . yes , by George , General , you must and shall name a day when you and Mrs. Lambert , and your dear girl , will dine with we . I will take no refusal now , by George I will not , " bawl the knight . 
 " you will accompany we , I trust , to my drawing - room ? " say my lady , rise . 
 Mr. Lambert plead to be excuse ; but the lady on no account would let dear George go away . no , positively , he should not go . they want to make acquaintance with their cousin . they must hear about that dreadful battle and escape from the Indians . Tom Claypool come in and hear some of the story . Flora be listen to it with her handkerchief to her eye , and little Miles have just say 
 " why do you take your handkerchief , Flora ? you be not cry a bit . " 
 be a man of great humour , Martin Lambert , when he go home , could not help entertain his wife with an account of the new family with which he have make acquaintance . a certain can not word call humbug have lately come into vogue . will it be believe that the General use it to designate the family of this virtuous country gentleman ? he describe the eager hospitality of the father , the pompous flattery of the mother , and the daughter ' look of admiration ; the toughness and security of the mutton , and the abominable taste and odour of the cordial ; and we may be sure Mrs. Lambert contrast Lady Warrington 's recent behaviour to poor Harry with her present conduct to George . 
 " be this Miss Warrington really handsome ? " ask Mrs Lambent . 
 " yes ; she be very handsome indeed , and the most astounding flirt I have ever set eye on , " reply the General . 
 " the hypocrite ! I have no patience with such people ! " cry the lady . 
 to which the General , strange to say , only reply by the monosyllable " Bo ! " 
 " why do you say ' Bo ! ' Martin ? " ask the lady . 
 " I say ' Bo ! ' to a goose , my dear , " answer the General . 
 and his wife vow she do not know what he mean , or of what he be think , and the General say 
 " of course not . " 




 CHAPTER LIX . in which we be treat to a play 

 the real business of life , I fancy , can form but little portion of the novelist 's budget . when he be speak of the profession of arm , in which man can show courage or the reverse , and in treating of which the writer naturally have to deal with interesting circumstance , action , and character , introduce recital of danger , devotedness , heroic death , and the like , the novelist may perhaps venture to deal with actual affair of life : but otherwise , they scarcely can enter into our story . the main part of Ficulnus 's life , for instance , be spend in sell sugar , spice and cheese ; of Causidicus 's in pore over musty volume of black - letter law ; of Sartorius 's in sit , cross - legged , on a board after measure gentleman for coat and breech . what can a story - teller say about the professional existence of these man ? would a real rustical history of hobnail and eighteenpence a day be endurable ? in the day whereof we be write , the poet of the time choose to represent a shepherd in pink breech and a chintz waistcoat , dance before his flock , and play a flageolet tie up with a blue satin ribbon . I say , in reply to some objection which have be urge by potent and friendly critic , that of the actual affair of life the novelist can not be expect to treat with the almost single exception of war before name . but law , stockbroking , polemical theology , linen - drapery , apothecary - business , and the like , how can writer manage fully to develop these in their story ? all author can do , be to depict man out of their business in their passion , love , laughter , amusement , hatred , and what not and describe these as well as they can , take the business part for grant , and leave it as it be for subaudition . 
 thus , in talk of the present or the past world , I know I be only dangle about the theatre - lobby , coffee - house , ridottos , pleasure - haunt , fair - booth , and feasting- and fiddle - room of life ; that , meanwhile , the great serious past or present world be plod in its chamber , toil at its humdrum loom , or jog on its accustomed labour , and we be only see our character away from their work . Corydon have to cart the litter and thresh the barley , as well as to make love to Phillis ; Ancillula have to dress and wash the nursery , to wait at breakfast and on her miss , to take the child out , etc . , before she can have her brief sweet interview through the area - railing with Boopis , the policeman . all day long have his heel to beat the stale pavement before he have the opportunity to snatch the hasty kiss or the furtive cold pie . it be only at moment , and away from these labour , that we can light upon one character or the other ; and hence , though most of the person of whom we be write have doubtless their grave employment and avocation , it be only when they be disengage and away from their work , that we can bring they and the equally disengage reader together . 
 the macaroni and fine gentleman at White 's and Arthur 's continue to show poor Harry Warrington such a very cold shoulder , that he seek their society less and less , and the Ring and the Mall and the gaming - table know he no more . Madame de Bernstein be for her nephew 's brave the indifference of the world , and vow that it would be conquer , if he would but have courage to face it ; but the young man be too honest to wear a smile face when he be discontent ; to disguise mortification or anger ; to parry slight by adroit flattery or cunning impudence ; as many gentleman and gentlewoman must and do who wish to succeed in society . 
 " you pull a long face , Harry , and complain of the world 's treatment of you , " the old lady say . " Fiddlededee , sir ! everybody have to put up with impertinence : and if you get a box on the ear now you be poor and cast down , you must say nothing about it , bear it with a smile , and if you can , revenge it ten year after . Moi qui vous parle , sir ! do you suppose I have have no humble - pie to eat ? all of we in our turn be call upon to swallow it : and , now you be no long the Fortunate Youth , be the Clever Youth , and win back the place you have lose by your ill luck . go about more than ever . go to all the rout and party to which you be ask , and to more still . be civil to everybody to all woman especially . only of course take care to show your spirit , of which you have plenty . with economy , and by your brother 's , I must say , admirable generosity , you can still make a genteel figure . with your handsome person , sir , you can not   fail to get a rich heiress . Tenez ! you should go amongst the merchant in the City , and look out there . they will not   know that you be out of fashion at the Court end of the town . with a little management , there be not the least reason , sir , why you should not make a good position for yourself still . when do you go to see my Lady Yarmouth , pray ? why do you not improve that connexion ? she take a great fancy to you . I desire you will be constant at her ladyship 's evening , and lose no opportunity of pay court to she . " 
 thus the old woman who have love Harry so on his first appearance in England , who have be so eager for his company , and please with his artless conversation , be take the side of the world , and turn against he . instead of the smile and kiss with which the fickle old creature use once to greet he , she receive he with coldness ; she become peevish and patronising ; she cast gibe and scorn at he before her guest , make his honest face flush with humiliation , and awake the keen pang of grief and amazement in his gentle , manly heart . Madame de Bernstein 's servant , who use to treat he with such eager respect , scarcely pay he now any attention . my lady be often indispose or engage when he call on she ; her people do not press he to wait ; do not volunteer to ask whether he would stay and dine , as they use in the day when he be the Fortunate Youth and companion of the wealthy and great . Harry carry his woe to Mrs. Lambert . in a passion of sorrow he tell she of his aunt 's cruel behaviour to he . he be stricken down and dismay by the fickleness and heartlessness of the world in its treatment of he . while the good lady and her daughter would move to and fro , and busy themselves with the care of the house , our poor lad would sit glum in a window - seat , heart - sick and silent . 
 " I know you be the good people alive , " he would say to the lady , " and the kind , and that I must be the dull company in the world yes , that I be . " 
 " well , you be not very lively , Harry , " say Miss Hetty , who begin to command he , and perhaps to ask herself , " what ? be this the gentleman whom I take to be such a hero ? " 
 " if he be unhappy , why should he be lively ? " ask Theo , gently . " he have a good heart , and be pain at his friend ' desertion of he . sure there be no harm in that ? " 
 " I would have too much spirit to show I be hurt , though , " cry Hetty , clench her little fist . " and I would smile , though that horrible old paint woman box my ear . she be horrible , mamma . you think so yourself , Theo ! Own , now , you think so yourself ! you say so last night , and act she come in on her crutch , and grin round to the company . " 
 " I may not   like she , " say Theo , turn very red . " but there be no reason why I should call Harry 's aunt name before Harry 's face . " 
 " you provoke thing ; you be always right ! " cry Hetty , " and that be what make I so angry . indeed , Harry , it be very wrong of I to make rude remark about any of your relation . " 
 " I do not   care about the other , Hetty ; but it seem hard that this one should turn upon I . I have get to be very fond of she ; and you see , it make I mad , somehow , when people I be very fond of turn away from I , or act unkind to I . " 
 " suppose George be to do so ? " ask Hetty . you see , it be George and Hetty , and Theo and Harry , amongst they now . 
 " you be very clever and very lively , and you may suppose a number of thing ; but not that , Hetty , if you please , " cry Harry , stand up and look very resolute and angry . " you do not   know my brother as I know he or you would not   take such a liberty as to suppose my brother George could do anything unkind or unworthy ! " Mr. Harry be quite in a flush as he speak . 
 Hetty turn very white . then she look up at Harry , and then she do not say a single word . 
 then Harry say , in his simple way , before take leave , " I be very sorry , and I beg your pardon , Hetty , if I say anything rough , or that seem unkind ; but I always fight up if anybody say anything against George . " 
 Hetty do not answer a word out of her pale lip , but give he her hand , and drop a prim little curtsey . 
 when she and Theo be together at night , make curl - paper confidence , " oh ! " say Hetty , " I think it would be so happy to see he every day , and be so glad when papa say we be to stay in London ! and now I do see he , you see , I go on offend he . I can not   help offend he ; and I know he be not clever , Theo . but oh ! be not   he good , and kind , and brave ? do not   he look handsome when he be angry ? " 
 " you silly little thing , you be always try to make he look handsome , " Theo reply . 
 it be Theo and Hetty , and Harry and George , among these young people , then ; and I dare say the reason why General Lambert choose to apply the monosyllable " Bo " to the mother of his daughter , be as a rebuke to that good woman for the inveterate love of sentiment and propensity to match - making which belong to she   and every other woman in the world whose heart be worth a fig ; and as a hint that Madam Lambert be a goose if she fancy the two virginian lad be go to fall in love with the young woman of the Lambert house . Little Het might have her fancy ; little girl will ; but they get it over : " and you know , Molly "   which dear , soft - hearted Mrs. Lambert could not deny , " you fancy somebody else before you fancy I , " say the General ; but Harry have evidently not be smite by Hetty ; and now he be supersede , as it be , by have an eld brother over he , and could not even call the coat upon his back his own , Master Harry be no great catch . 
 " oh yes : now he be poor we will show he the door , as all the rest of the world do , I suppose , " say Mrs. Lambert . 
 " that be what I always do , be not   it , molly ? turn my back on my friend in distress ? " ask the General . 
 " no , my dear ! I be a goose , now , and that I own , Martin ! " say the wife , have recourse to the usual pocket - handkerchief . 
 " let the poor boy come to we and welcome : ours be almost the only house in this selfish place where so much can be say for he . he be unhappy , and to be with we put he at ease ; in God 's name let he be with we ! " say the kind - hearted officer . accordingly , whenever poor crestfallen Hal want a dinner , or an evening 's entertainment , Mr. Lambert 's table have a corner for he . so be George welcome , too . he go among the lambert , not at first with the cordiality which Harry feel for these people , and inspire among they : for George be cold in his manner , and more mistrustful of himself and other than his twin - brother : but there be a goodness and friendliness about the family which touch almost all people who come into frequent contact with they ; and George soon learn to love they for their own sake , as well as for their constant regard and kindness to his brother . he could not but see and own how sad Harry be , and pity his brother 's depression . in his sarcastic way , George would often take himself to task before his brother for come to life again , and say , " Dear Harry , I be George the Unlucky , though you have cease to be Harry the Fortunate . Florac would have do much well not to pass his sword through that Indian 's body , and to have leave my scalp as an ornament for the fellow 's belt . I say he would , sir ! at White 's the people would have respect you . our mother would have weep over I , as a defunct angel , instead of be angry with I for again supplant her favourite you be her favourite , you deserve to be her favourite : everybody 's favourite : only , if I have not come back , your favourite , Maria , would have insist on marry you ; and that be how the god would have revenge themselves upon you for your prosperity . " 
 " I never know whether you be laugh at I or yourself , George " say the brother . I never know whether you be serious or jesting . 
 " precisely my own case , Harry , my dear ! " say George . 
 " but this I know , that there never be a well brother in the world ; and never well people than the lambert . " 
 " never be truer word say ! " cry George , take his brother 's hand . 
 " and if I be unhappy , ' tis not your fault nor their fault nor perhaps mine , George , " continue the young . " ' tis fate , you see , ' tis the have nothing to do . I must work ; and how , George ? that be the question . " 
 " we will see what our mother say . we must wait till we hear from she , " say George . 
 " I say , George ! do you know , I do not   think I should much like go back to Virginia ? " say Harry , in a low , alarmed voice . 
 " what ! in love with one of the lass here ? " 
 " love them like sister with all my heart , of course , dearest , good girl ! but , have come out of that business , thank to you , I do not   want to go back , you know . no ! no ! it be not for that I fancy stay in Europe well than go home . but , you see , I do not   fancy hunting , duck - shooting , tobacco - planting , whist - playing , and go to sermon , over and over and over again , for all my life , George . and what else be there to do at home ? what on earth be there for I to do at all , I say ? that be what make I miserable . it would not matter for you to be a young son you be so clever you would make your way anywhere ; but , for a poor fellow like I , what chance be there ? until I do something , George , I shall be miserable , that be what I shall ! " 
 " have I not always say so ? art thou not come round to my opinion ? " 
 " what opinion , George ? you know pretty much whatever you think , I think , George ! " say the dutiful junior . 
 " that Florac have well have leave the Indian to take my scalp , my dear ! " 
 at which Harry burst away with an angry exclamation ; and they continue to puff their pipe in friendly union . 
 they live together , each go his own gait ; and not much intercourse , save that of affection , be carry on between they . Harry never would venture to meddle with George 's book , and would sit as dumb as a mouse at the lodging whilst his brother be study . they remove presently from the Court end of the town , Madame de Bernstein pishing and pshae at their change of residence . but George take a great fancy to frequent Sir Hans Sloane 's new reading - room and museum , just set up in Montagu House , and he take cheerful lodging in Southampton Row , Bloomsbury , look over the delightful field towards Hampstead , at the back of the Duke of Bedford 's garden . and Lord Wrotham 's family come to Mayfair , and Mr. Lambert have business which detain he in London , have to change his house , too , and engage furnish apartment in Soho , not very far off from the dwelling of our young man ; and it be , as we have say , with the lambert that Harry , night after night , take refuge . 
 George be with they often , too ; and , as the acquaintance ripen , he frequent their house with increase assiduity , find their company more to his taste than that of Aunt Bernstein 's polite circle of gambler , than Sir Miles Warrington 's port and mutton , or the daily noise and clatter of the coffee - house . and as he and the Lambert lady be alike stranger in London , they partook of its pleasure together , and , no doubt , go to Vauxhall and Ranelagh , to Marybone Gardens , and the play , and the Tower , and wherever else there be honest amusement to be have in those day . Martin Lambert love that his child should have all the innocent pleasure which he could procure for they , and Mr. George , who be of a most generous , open - handed disposition , like to treat his friend likewise , especially those who have be so admirably kind to his brother . 
 with all the passion of his heart Mr. Warrington love a play . he have never enjoy this amusement in Virginia , and only once or twice at Quebec , when he visit Canada ; and when he come to London , where the two house be in their full glory , I believe he think he never could have enough of the delightful entertainment . anything he like himself , he naturally wish to share amongst his companion . no wonder that he be eager to take his friend to the theatre , and we may be sure our young countryfolk be not unwilling . shall it be Drury Lane or Covent Garden , lady ? there be Garrick and Shakspeare at Drury Lane . well , will it be believe , the lady want to hear the famous new author whose piece be be play at Covent Garden ? 
 at this time a star of genius have arise , and be blaze with quite a dazzle brilliancy . the great Mr. John Home , of Scotland , have produce a tragedy , than which , since the day of the ancient , there have be nothing more classic and elegant . what have Mr. Garrick mean by refuse such a masterpiece for his theatre ? say what you will about Shakspeare ; in the work of that undoubted great poet   who have begin to grow vastly more popular in England since Monsieur Voltaire attack he   there be many barbarism that could not but shock a polite auditory ; whereas , Mr. Home , the modern author , know how to be refine in the very midst of grief and passion ; to represent death , not merely as awful , but graceful and pathetic ; and never condescend to degrade the majesty of the Tragic Muse by the ludicrous apposition of buffoonery and familiar punning , such as the eld playwright certainly have resort to . besides , Mr. Home 's performance have be admire in quarter so high , and by personage whose taste be know to be as elevate as their rank , that all Britons could not but join in the plaudit for which august hand have give the signal . such , it be say , be the opinion of the very good company , in the coffee - house , and amongst the wit about town . why , the famous Mr. Gray , of Cambridge , say there have not be for a hundred year any dramatic dialogue of such a true style ; and as for the poet 's native capital of Edinburgh , where the piece be first bring out , it be even say that the triumphant scot call out from the pit   in their dialect , " where be Wully Shakspeare noo ? " 
 " I should like to see the man who could beat Willy Shakspeare ? " say the General , laugh . 
 " mere national prejudice , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " Beat Shakspeare , indeed ! " cry Mrs. Lambert . 
 " Pooh , pooh ! you have cry more over Mr. Sam Richardson than ever you do over Mr. Shakspeare , Molly ! " remark the General . " I think few woman love to read Shakspeare : they say they love it , but they do not . " 
 " oh , papa ! " cry three lady , throw up three pair of hand . 
 " well , then , why do you all three prefer Douglas ? and you , boy , who be such Tories , will you go see a play which be write by a Whig Scotchman , who be actually make prisoner at Falkirk ? " 
 " Relicta non bene parmula , " say Mr. Jack the scholar . 
 " Nay ; it be relicta bene parmula , " cry the General . " it be the Highlanders who fling their targe down , and make fierce work among we redcoat . if they have fight all their field as well as that , and young Perkin have not turn back from Derby " 
 " I know which side would be rebel , and who would be call the Young Pretender , " interpose George . 
 " Hush ! you must please to remember my cloth , Mr. Warrington , " say the General , with some gravity ; " and that the cockade I wear be a black , not a white one ! well , if you will not love Mr. Home for his politic , there be , I think , another reason , George , why you should like he . " 
 " I may have Tory fancy , Mr. Lambert , but I think I know how to love and honour a good Whig , " say George , with a bow to the General : " but why should I like this Mr. Home , sir ? " 
 " because , be a presbyterian clergyman , he have commit the heinous crime of write a play , and his brother - parson have bark out an excommunication at he . they take the poor fellow 's mean of livelihood away from he for his performance ; and he would have starve , but that the young Pretender on our side of the water have give he a pension . " 
 " if he have be persecute by the parson , there be hope for he , " say George , smile . " and henceforth I declare myself ready to hear his sermon . " 
 " Mrs. Woffington be divine in it , though not generally famous in tragedy . Barry be draw tear from all eye ; and Garrick be wild at have refuse the piece . girl , you must bring each half a dozen handkerchief ! as for mamma , I can not trust she ; and she positively must be leave at home . " 
 but mamma persist she would go ; and , if need be to weep , she would sit and cry her eye out in a corner . they all go to Covent Garden , then ; the most of the party duly prepare to see one of the masterpiece of the age and drama . could they not all speak long page of Congreve ; have they not weep and kindle over Otway and Rowe ? o ye past literary glory , that be to be eternal , how long have you be dead ? who know much more now than where your graf be ? poor , neglect Muse of the bygone theatre ! she pip for we , and we will not dance ; she tear her hair , and we will not weep . and the Immortals of our time , how soon shall they be dead and bury , think you ? how many will survive ? how long shall it be ere Nox et Domus Plutonia shall overtake they ? 
 so away go the pleased party to Covent Garden to see the tragedy of the immortal John Home . the lady and the General be convey in a glass coach , and find the young man in wait to receive they at the theatre door . hence they elbow their way through a crowd of torch - boy , and a whole regiment of footman . little Hetty fall to Harry 's arm in this expedition , and the blushing Miss Theo be hand to the box by Mr. George . Gumbo have keep the place until his master arrive , when he retire , with many bow , to take his own seat in the footman 's gallery . they have good place in a front box , and there be luckily a pillar behind which mamma could weep in comfort . and opposite they they have the honour to see the august hope of the empire , his Royal Highness George Prince of Wales , with the Princess Dowager his mother , whom the people greet with loyal , but not very enthusiastic , plaudit . that handsome man stand behind his Royal Highness be my Lord Bute , the Prince 's Groom of the Stole , the patron of the poet whose performance they have come to see , and over whose work the Royal party have already weep more than once . 
 how can we help it , if during the course of the performance , Mr. Lambert would make his joke and mar the solemnity of the scene ? at first , as the reader of the tragedy well know , the character be occupy in make a number of explanation . Lady Randolph explain how it be that she be so melancholy . married to Lord Randolph somewhat late in life , she own , and his lordship perceive , that a dead lover yet occupy all her heart ; and her husband be fain to put up with this dismal , second - hand regard , which be all that my lady can bestow . hence , an invasion of Scotland by the Danes be rather a cause of excitement than disgust to my lord , who rush to meet the foe , and forget the dreariness of his domestic circumstance . welcome , Vikings and norseman ! blow , northern blast , the invader ' keel to Scotland 's shore ! Randolph and other hero will be on the beach to give the foeman a welcome ! his lordship have no soon disappear behind the tree of the forest , but Lady Randolph begin to explain to her confidante the circumstance of her early life . the fact be , she have make a private marriage , and what would the confidante say , if , in early youth , she , Lady Randolph , have lose a husband ? in the cold bosom of the earth be lodge the husband of her youth , and in some cavern of the ocean lie her child and his ! 
 up to this the General behave with as great gravity as any of his young companion to the play ; but when Lady Randolph proceed to say , " alas ! hereditary evil be the cause of my misfortune , " he nudge George Warrington , and look so droll , that the young man burst out laugh . 
 the magic of the scene be destroy after that . these two gentleman go on crack joke during the whole of the subsequent performance , to their own amusement , but the indignation of their company , and perhaps of the people in the adjacent box . Young Douglas , in those day , use to wear a white satin ' shape " slash at the leg and body , and when Mr. Barry appear in this droll costume , the General vow it be the exact dress of the Highlanders in the late war . the Chevalier 's guard , he declare , have all white satin slash breech , and red boot " only they leave they at home , my dear , " add this wag . not one pennyworth of sublimity would he or George allow henceforth to Mr. Home 's performance . as for Harry , he sate in very deep meditation over the scene ; and when Mrs. Lambert offer he a penny for his thought , he say , " that he think , Young Norval , Douglas , what - d'ye - call-'em , the fellow in white satin who look as old as his mother be very lucky to be able to distinguish himself so soon . I wish I could get a chance , Aunt Lambert , " say he , drum on his hat ; on which mamma sigh , and Theo , smile , say , " we must wait , and perhaps the Danes will land . " 
 " how do you mean ? " ask simple Harry . 
 " oh , the Danes always land , pour qui scait attendre ! " say kind Theo , who have hold of her sister 's little hand , and , I dare say , feel its pressure . 
 she do not behave unkindly that be not in Miss Theo 's nature but somewhat coldly to Mr. George , on whom she turn she back , address remark , from time to time , to Harry . in spite of the gentleman 's scorn , the woman choose to be affect . a mother and son , meet in love and parting in tear , will always awaken emotion in female heart . 
 " look , papa ! there be an answer to all your joke ! " say Theo , point towards the stage . 
 at a part of the dialogue between Lady Randolph and her son , one of the grenadier on guard on each side of the stage , as the custom of those day be , could not restrain his tear , and be visibly weep before the side - box . 
 " you be right , my dear , " say papa . 
 " do not   I tell you she always be ? " interpose Hetty . 
 " yonder sentry be a well critic than we be , and a touch of nature master we all . " 
 " taman usque recurrit ! " cry the young student from college . 
 George feel abash somehow , and interested too . he have be sneer , and theo sympathising . her kindness be well nay , wise than his scepticism , perhaps . nevertheless , when , at the beginning of the fifth act of the play , young Douglas , draw his sword and look up at the gallery , bawl out 
  " Ye glorious star ! high heaven 's resplendent host ! 
  to whom I oft have of my lot complain , 
  hear and record my soul 's unaltered wish 
  living or dead , let I but be renowne ! 
  may Heaven inspire some fierce gigantic dane 
  to give a bold defiance to our host ! 
  before he speak it out , I will accept , 
  like Douglas conquer , or like Douglas die ! " 
 the god , to whom Mr. Barry appeal , salute this heroic wish with immense applause , and the General clap his hand prodigiously . his daughter be rather disconcert . 
 " this Douglas be not only brave , but he be modest ! " say papa . 
 " I own I think he need not have ask for a gigantic dane , " say Theo , smile , as Lady Randolph enter in the midst of the gallery thunder . 
 when the applause have subside , Lady Randolph be make to say 
  " my son , I hear a voice ! " 
 " I think she do hear a voice ! " cry papa . " why , the fellow be bellow like a bull of Bashan . " and the General would scarcely behave himself from thenceforth to the end of the performance . he say he be heartily glad that the young gentleman be put to death behind the scene . when Lady Randolph 's friend describe how her mistress have " fly like lightning up the hill , and plunge herself into the empty air , " Mr. Lambert say he be delighted to be rid of she . " and as for that story of her early marriage , " say he , " I have my very strong doubt about it . " 
 " Nonsense , Martin ! look , child ! their Royal Highnesses be move . " 
 the tragedy over , the Princess Dowager and the Prince be , in fact , retire ; though , I dare say , the latter , who be always fond of a farce , would have be far well pleased with that which follow than he have be with Mr. Home 's dreary tragic masterpiece . 




 CHAPTER LX . which treat of Macbeth , a supper , and a Pretty Kettle of 

 fish 
 when the performance be conclude , our friend take coach for Mr. Warrington 's lodging , where the Virginians have provide an elegant supper . Mr. Warrington be eager to treat they in the handsome manner , and the General and his wife accept the invitation of the two bachelor , please to think that they could give their young friend pleasure . General and Mrs. Lambert , their son from college , their two bloom daughter , and Mr. Spencer of the Temple , a new friend whom George have meet at the coffee - house , form the party , and partook with cheerfulness of the landlady 's fare . the order of their sitting I have not be able exactly to ascertain ; but , somehow , Miss Theo have a place next to the chicken and Mr. George Warrington , whilst Miss Hetty and a ham divide the attention of Mr. Harry . Mrs. Lambert must have be on George 's right hand , so that we have but to settle the three place of the General , his son , and the Templar . 
 Mr. Spencer have be at the other theatre , where , on a former day , he have actually introduce George to the greenroom . the conversation about the play be resume , and some of the party persist in be delighted with it . 
 " as for what our gentleman say , sir , " cry Mrs. Lambert to Mr. Spencer , " you must not believe a word of it . ' tis a delightful piece , and my husband and Mr. George behave as ill as possible . " 
 " we laugh in the wrong place , and when we ought to have cry , " the General own , " that be the truth . " 
 " you cause all the people in the box about we to look round and cry ' hush ! ' you make the pit folk say , ' silence in the box , yonder ! ' such behaviour I never know , and quite blush for you , Mr. Lambert ! " 
 " Mamma think it be a tragedy , and we think it be a piece of fun , " say the General . " George and I behave perfectly well , do not   we , Theo ? " 
 " not when I be look your way , papa ! " theo reply . at which the General ask , " be there ever such a saucy baggage see ? " 
 " you know , sir , I do not   speak till I be bid , " Theo continue , modestly . " I own I be very much move by the play , and the beauty and acting of Mrs. Woffington . I be sorry that the poor mother should find her child , and lose he . I be sorry , too , papa , if I ought not   to have be sorry ! " add the young lady , with a smile . 
 " woman be not so clever as man , you know , Theo , " cry Hetty from her end of the table , with a sly look at Harry . " the next time we go to the play , please , brother Jack , pinch we when we ought to cry , or give we a nudge when it be right to laugh . " 
 " I wish we could have have the fight , " say General Lambert , " the fight between little Norval and the gigantic Norwegian that would have be rare sport : and you should write , Jack , and suggest it to Mr. Rich , the manager . " 
 " I have not see that : but I see Slack and Broughton at Marybone Gardens ! " say Harry , gravely ; and wonder if he have say something witty , as all the company laugh so ? " it would require no giant , " he add , " to knock over yonder little fellow in the red boot . I , for one , could throw he over my shoulder . " 
 " Mr. Garrick be a little man . but there be time when he look a giant , " say Mr. Spencer . " how grand he be in Macbeth , Mr. Warrington ! how awful that dagger - scene be ! you should have see our host , lady ! I present Mr. Warrington , in the greenroom , to Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard , and Lady Macbeth do he the honour to take a pinch out of his box . " 
 " do the wife of the Thane of Cawdor sneeze ? " ask the General , in an awful voice . 
 " she thank Mr. Warrington , in tone so hollow and tragic , that he start back , and must have upset some of his rappee , for Macbeth sneeze thrice . " 
 " Macbeth , Macbeth , Macbeth ! " cry the General . 
 " and the great philosopher who be stand by Mr. Johnson , say , ' you must mind , Davy , lest thy sneeze should awaken Duncan ! ' who , by the way , be talk with the three witch as they sit against the wall . " 
 " what ! have you be behind the scene at the play ? oh , I would give world to go behind the scene ! " cry Theo . 
 " and see the rope pull , and smell the tallow - candle , and look at the pasteboard gold , and the tinsel jewel , and the paint old woman , Theo ? no . do not look too close , " say the sceptical young host , demurely drink a glass of hock . " you be angry with your papa and I . " 
 " Nay , George ! " cry the girl . 
 " Nay ? I say , yes ! you be angry with we because we laugh when you be disposed to be cry . if I may speak for you , sir , as well as myself , " say George   with a bow to his guest , General Lambert , " I think we be not inclined to weep , like the lady , because we stand behind the author 's scene of the play , as it be . look close up to the young hero , we see how much of he be rant and tinsel ; and as for the pale , tragical mother , that her pallor be white chalk , and her grief her pocket - handkerchief . own now , Theo , you think I very unfeeling ? " 
 " if you find it out , sir , without my own it , what be the good of my confessing ? " say Theo . 
 " suppose I be to die ? " go on George , " and you see Harry in grief , you would be see a genuine affliction , a real tragedy ; you would grieve too . but you would not   be affect if you see the undertaker in weeper and a black cloak ! " 
 " indeed , but I should , sir ! " say Mrs. Lambert ; " and so , I promise you , would any daughter of mine . " 
 " perhaps we might find weeper of our own , Mr. Warrington , " say Theo , " in such a case . " 
 " would you ? " cry George , and his cheek and Theo 's simultaneously flush up with red ; I suppose because they both see Hetty 's bright young eye watch they . 
 " the elder writer understand but little of the pathetic , " remark Mr. Spencer , the Temple wit . 
 " what do you think of Sophocles and Antigone ? " call out Mr. John Lambert . 
 " Faith , our wit trouble themselves little about he , unless an Oxford gentleman come to remind we of he ! I do not mean to go back far than Mr. Shakspeare , who , as you will all agree , do not understand the elegant and pathetic as well as the modern . have he ever approach Belvidera , or Monimia , or Jane Shore ; or can you find in his comic female character the elegance of Congreve ? " and the Templar offer snuff to the right and left . 
 " I think Mr. Spencer himself must have try his hand ? " ask some one . 
 " many gentleman of leisure have . Mr. Garrick , I own , have have a piece of mine and return it . " 
 " and I confess that I have four act of a play in one of my box , " say George . 
 " I will be bind to say it be as good as any of them , " whisper Harry to his neighbour . 
 " be it a tragedy or a comedy ? " ask Mrs. Lambert . 
 " oh , a tragedy , and two or three dreadful murder at least ! " George reply . 
 " let we play it , and let the audience look to their eye ! yet my chief humour be for a tyrant , " say the General . 
 " the tragedy , the tragedy ! go and fetch the tragedy this moment , Gumbo ! " call Mrs. Lambert to the black . Gumbo make a low bow and say , " Tragedy ? yes , madam . " 
 " in the great cowskin trunk , Gumbo , " George say , gravely . 
 Gumbo bow and say , " yes , sir , " with still superior gravity . 
 " but my tragedy be at the bottom of I do not   know how much linen , package , book , and boot , Hetty . " 
 " never mind , let we have it , and fle the linen out of window ! " cry Miss Hetty . 
 " and the great cowskin trunk be at our agent 's at Bristol : so Gumbo must get post - horse , and we can keep it up till he return the day after to - morrow , " say George . 
 the lady groan a comical " oh ! " and papa , perhaps more seriously , say , " let we be thankful for the escape . let we be think of go home too . our young gentleman have treat we nobly , and we will all drink a parting bumper to Madam Esmond Warrington of Castlewood , in Virginia . suppose , boy , you be to find a tall , handsome stepfather when you get home ? lady as old as she have be know to marry before now . " 
 " to Madam Esmond Warrington , my old schoolfellow ! " cry Mrs. Lambert . " I shall write and tell she what a pretty supper her son have give we : and , Mr. George , I will not   say how ill you behave at the play ! " and , with this last toast , the company take leave ; the General 's coach and servant , with a flambeau , be in wait to carry his family home . 
 after such an entertainment as that which Mr. Warrington have give , what could be more natural or proper than a visit from he to his guest , to inquire how they have reach home and rest ? why , their coach might have take the open country behind Montague House , in the direction of Oxford Road , and be waylay by footpad in the field . the lady might have catch cold or sleep ill after the excitement of the tragedy . in a word , there be no reason why he should make any excuse at all to himself or they for visit his kind friend ; and he shut his book early at the Sloane Museum , and perhaps think , as he walk away thence , that he remember very little about what he have be read . 
 pray what be the meaning of this eagerness , this hesitation , this pshaing and shilly - shallying , these doubt , this tremor as he knock at the door of Mr. Lambert 's lodging in Dean Street , and survey the footman who come to his summon ? do any young man read ? do any old one remember ? do any weary , worn , disappointed pulseless heart recall the time of its full beat and early throbbing ? it be ever so many hundred year since some of we be young ; and we forget , but do not all forget . no , madam , we remember with advantage , as Shakspeare 's Harry promise his soldier they should do if they survive Agincourt and that day of St. Crispin . wear old charger turn out to grass , if the trumpet sound over the hedge , may we not kick up our old heel , and gallop a minute or so about the paddock , till we be bring up roar ? I do not care for clown and pantaloon now , and think the fairy ugly , and her verse insufferable : but I like to see child at a pantomime . I do not dance , or eat supper any more ; but I like to watch Eugenio and Flirtilla twirl round in a pretty waltz , or Lucinda and Ardentio pull a cracker . burn your little finger , child ! blaze out little kindly flame from each other 's eye ! and then draw close together and read the motto   that old namby - pamby motto , so stale and so new !   I say , let her lip read it , and his construe it ; and so divide the sweetmeat , young people , and crunch it between you . I have no tooth . bitter almond and sugar disagree with I , I tell you ; but , for all that , shall not bonbon melt in the mouth ? 
 we follow John upstairs to the General 's apartment , and enter with Mr. George Esmond Warrington , who make a prodigious fine bow . there be only one lady in the room , seat near a window : there be not often much sunshine in Dean Street : the young lady in the window be no especial beauty : but it be spring - time , and she be bloom vernally . a bunch of fresh rose be flush in her honest cheek . I suppose her eye be violet . if we live a hundred year ago , and write in the Gentleman 's or the London Magazine , we should tell Mr. Sylvanus Urban that her neck be the lily , and her shape the nymph 's : we should write an acrostic about she , and celebrate our Lambertella in an elegant poem , still to be read between a neat new engrave plan of the city of Prague and the King of Prussia 's camp , and a map of Maryland and the Delaware county . 
 here be Miss Theo blushing like a rose . what could mamma have mean an hour since by insist that she be very pale and tired , and have good not come out to - day with the rest of the party ? they be go to pay their compliment to my Lord Wrotham 's lady , and thank they for the house in their absence ; and papa be at the Horse Guards . he be in great spirit . I believe he expect some command , though mamma be in a sad tremor lest he should again be order abroad . 
 " your brother and mine be go to see our little brother at his school at the Chartreux . my brother be both to be clergyman , I think , " Miss Theo continue . she be assiduously hem at some article of boyish wear apparel as she talk . a hundred year ago , young lady be not afraid either to make shirt , or to name they . mind , I do not   say they be the bad or the well for that plain stitching or plain speaking : and have not the least desire , my dear young lady , that you should make pudding or I should black boot . 
 so Harry have be with they ? " he often come , almost every day , " Theo say , look up in George 's face . " poor fellow ! he like we well than the fine folk , who do not   care for he now now he be no long a fine folk himself , " add the girl , smile . " why have you not set up for the fashion , and frequent the chocolate - house and the racecourse , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " have my brother get so much good out of his gay haunt or his grand friend , that I should imitate he ? " 
 " you might at least go to Sir Miles Warrington ; sure his arm be open to receive you . her ladyship be here this morning in her chair , and to hear her praise of you ! she declare you be in a certain way to preferment . she say his Royal Highness the Duke make much of you at court . when you be a great man will you forget we , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " yes , when I be a great man I will , Miss Lambert . " 
 " well ! Mr. George , then " 
 " Mr. George ! " 
 " when papa and mamma be here , I suppose there need be no mistering , " say Theo , look out of the window , ever so little frightened . " and what have you be do , sir ? read book , or write more of your tragedy ? be it go to be a tragedy to make we cry , as we like they , or only to frighten we , as you like they ? " 
 " there be plenty of killing , but , I fear , not much cry . I have not meet many woman . I have not be very intimate with those . I daresay what I have write be only take out of book or parody from poem which I have read and imitate like other young man . woman do not speak to I , generally ; I be say to have a sarcastic way which displease they . " 
 " perhaps you never care to please they ? " inquire Miss Theo , with a blush . 
 " I displease you last night ; you know I do ? " 
 " yes ; only it can not   be call displeasure , and afterwards think I be wrong . " 
 " do you think about I at all when I be away , Theo ? " 
 " yes , George that be , Mr. well , George ! I think you and papa be right about the play ; and , as you say , that it be no real sorrow , only affectation , which be move we . I wonder whether it be good or ill fortune to see so clearly ? Hetty and I agree that we would be very careful , for the future , how we allow ourselves to enjoy a tragedy . so , be careful when yours come ! what be the name of it ? " 
 " he be not christen . will you be the godmother ? the name of the chief character be " but at this very moment mamma and Miss Hetty arrive from their walk ; and mamma straightway begin protest that she never expect to see Mr. Warrington at all that day that be , she think he might come that is , it be very good of he to come , and the play and the supper of yesterday be all charming , except that Theo have a little headache this morning . 
 " I dare say it be well now , mamma , " say Miss Hetty . 
 " indeed , my dear , it never be of any consequence ; and I tell mamma so , " say Miss Theo , with a toss of her head . 
 then they fall to talk about Harry . he be very low . he must have something to do . he be always go to the Military Coffee - House , and perpetually pore over the King of Prussia 's campaign . it be not fair upon he , to bid he remain in London , after his deposition , as it be . he say nothing , but you could see how he regret his previous useless life , and feel his present dependence , by the manner in which he avoid his former haunt and associate . pass by the guard at St. James 's , with John Lambert , he have say to brother Jack , " why may not   I be a soldier too ? I be as tall as yonder fellow , and can kill with a fowling - piece as well as any man I know . but I can not   earn so much as sixpence a day . I have squander my own bread , and now I be eat half my brother 's . he be the good of brother , but so much the more shame that I should live upon he . do not   tell my brother , Jack Lambert . " " and my boy promise he would not   tell , " say Mrs. Lambert . no doubt . the girl be both out of the room when their mother make this speech to George Warrington . he , for his part , say he have write home to his mother that half his little patrimony , the other half likewise , if want , be at Harry 's disposal , for purchase a commission , or for any other project which might bring he occupation or advancement . 
 " he have get a good brother , that be sure . let we hope for good time for he , " sigh the lady . 
 " the Danes always come pour qui scait attendre , " George say , in a low voice . 
 " what , you hear that ? ah , George ! my Theo be an ah ! never mind what she be , George Warrington , " cry the pleased mother , with brimful eye . " Bah ! I be go to make a gaby of myself , as I do at the tragedy . " 
 now Mr. George have be revolve a fine private scheme , which he think might turn to his brother 's advantage . after George 's presentation to his Royal Highness at Kensington , more person than one , his friend General Lambert include , have tell he that the Duke have inquire regard he , and have ask why the young man do not come to his levee . importunity so august could not but be satisfied . a day be appoint between Mr. Lambert and his young friend , and they go to pay their duty to his Royal Highness at his house in Pall Mall . 
 when it come to George 's turn to make a bow , the Prince be especially gracious ; he speak to Mr. Warrington at some length about Braddock and the war , and be apparently pleased with the modesty and intelligence of the young gentleman 's answer . George ascribe the failure of the expedition to the panic and surprise certainly , but more especially to the delay occasion by the rapacity , selfishness , and unfair dealing of the people of the colony towards the King 's troop who be come to defend they . " could we have move , sir , a month soon , the fort be certainly ours , and the little army have never be defeat , " Mr. Warrington say ; in which observation his Royal Highness entirely concur . 
 " I be tell you save yourself , sir , mainly by your knowledge of the french language , " the Royal Duke then affably observe . Mr. Warrington modestly mention how he have be in the french colony in his youth , and have opportunity of acquire that tongue . 
 the Prince   who have a great urbanity when well please , and the fine sense of humour   condescend to ask who have teach Mr. Warrington the language ; and to express his opinion , that , for the pronunciation , the french lady be by far the good teacher . 
 the young virginian gentleman make a low bow , and say it be not for he to gainsay his Royal Highness ; upon which the Duke be good enough to say   in a jocose manner   that Mr. Warrington be a sly dog . 
 Mr. W. remain respectfully silent , the Prince continue , most kindly : " I take the field immediately against the French , who , as you know , be threaten his Majesty 's Electoral dominion , if you have a mind to make the campaign with I , your skill in the language may be useful , and I hope we shall be more fortunate than poor Braddock ! " every eye be fix on a young man to whom so great a Prince offer so signal a favour . 
 and now it be that Mr. George think he would make his very cleverest speech . " Sir , " he say , " your Royal Highness 's most kind proposal do I infinite honour , but " 
 " but what , sir ? " say the Prince , star at he . 
 " but I have enter myself of the Temple , to study our law , and to fit myself for my duty at home . if my have be wound in the service of my country be any claim on your kindness , I would humbly ask that my brother , who know the french language as well as myself , and have far more strength , courage , and military genius , might be allow to serve your Royal Highness ; in the place of " 
 " enough , enough , sir ! " cry out the justly irritated son of the monarch . " what ? I offer you a favour , and you hand it over to your brother ? Wait , sir , till I offer you another ! " and with this the Prince turn his back upon Mr. Warrington , just as abruptly as he turn it on the French a few month afterwards . 
 " oh , George ! oh , George ! here be a pretty kettle of fish ! " groan General Lambert , as he and his young friend walk home together . 




 CHAPTER LXI . in which the Prince march up the Hill and down again 

 we understand the respectful indignation of all loyal Britons when they come to read of Mr. George Warrington 's conduct towards a gallant and gracious Prince , the beloved son of the good of monarchs , and the Captain - General of the british army . what an inestimable favour have not the young man slight ! what a chance of promotion have he not throw away ! will Esmond , whose language be always rich in blasphemy , employ his very strong curse in speak of his cousin 's behaviour , and express his delight that the confound young Mohock be cut his own throat . Cousin Castlewood say that a savage gentleman have a right to scalp himself if he like ; or perhaps , he add charitably , our cousin Mr. Warrington hear enough of the war - whoop in Braddock 's affair , and have no more stomach for fight . Mr. Will rejoice that the young brother have go to the deuce , and he rejoice to think that the elder be follow he . the first time he meet the fellow , will say , he should take care to let Mr. George know what he think of he . 
 " if you intend to insult George , at least you have well take care that his brother Harry be out of hearing ! " cry Lady Maria on which we may fancy more curse utter by Mr. Will , with regard to his twin kinsfolk . 
 " Ta , ta , ta ! " say my lord . " no more of this squabbling ! we can not   be all warrior in the family ! " 
 " I never hear your lordship lay claim to be one ! " say Maria . 
 " never , my dear ; quite the contrary ! will be our champion , and one be quite enough in the house . so I dare say with the two mohock ; George be the student , and Harry be the fight man . when you intend to quarrel , will , what a pity it be you have not George , instead of t'other , to your hand ! " 
 " your lordship 's hand be famous at piquet , " say Will 's mother . 
 " it be a pretty one , " say my lord , survey his finger , with a simper . " my Lord Hervey 's glove and mine be of a size . yes , my hand , as you say , be more fit for card than for war . your , my Lady Castlewood , be pretty dexterous , too . how I bless the day when you bestow it on my lamented father ! " in this play of sarcasm , as in some other game of skill , his lordship be not sorry to engage , have a cool head , and be able to beat his family all round . 
 Madame de Bernstein , when she hear of Mr. Warrington 's bevue , be exceedingly angry , storm , and scold her immediate household ; and would have scold George but she be grow old , and have not the courage of her early day . moreover , she be a little afraid of her nephew , and respectful in her behaviour to he . " you will never make your fortune at court , nephew ! " she groan , when , soon after his discomfiture , the young gentleman go to wait upon she . 
 " it be never my wish , madam , " say Mr. George , in a very stately manner . 
 " your wish be to help Harry ? you might hereafter have be of service to your brother , have you accept the Duke 's offer . prince do not love to have their favour refuse , and I do not   wonder that his Royal Highness be offend . " 
 " General Lambert say the same thing , " George confess , turn rather red ; " and I see now that I be wrong . but you must please remember that I have never see a court before , and I suppose I be scarce likely to shine in one . " 
 " I think possibly not , my good nephew , " say the aunt , take snuff . 
 " and what then ? " ask George . " I never have ambition for that kind of glory , and can make myself quite easy without it . when his Royal Highness speak to I most kindly , as I own my thought be , I shall make a very bad soldier , and my brother would be a very good one . he have a hundred good quality for the profession , in which I be deficient ; and would have serve a Commanding Officer far well than I ever could . say the Duke be in battle , and his horse be shoot , as my poor chief 's be at home , would he not be well for a beast that have courage and strength to bear he anywhere , than with one that could not carry his weight ? " 
 " Au fait . his Royal Highness 's charger must be a strong one , my dear ! " say the old lady . 
 " Expende Hannibalem , " mutter George , with a shrug . " our Hannibal weigh no trifle . " 
 " I do not   quite follow you , sir , and your Hannibal , " the Baroness remark . 
 " when Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Lambert remonstrate with I as you have do , madam , " George rejoin , with a laugh , " I make this same defence which I be make to you . I say I offer to the Prince the good soldier in the family , and the two gentleman allow that my blunder at least have some excuse . who know but that they may set I right with his Royal Highness ? the taste I have have of battle have show I how little my genius incline that way . we see the Scotch play which everybody be talk about t'other night . and when the hero , young Norval , say how he long to follow to the field some warlike lord , I think to myself , ' how like my Harry be to he , except that he doth not brag . ' Harry be pin now for a red coat , and if we do not   mind , will take the shilling . he have the map of Germany for ever under his eye , and follow the King of Prussia everywhere . he be not afraid of man or god . as for I , I love my book and quiet good , and to read about battle in Homer or Lucan . " 
 " then what make a soldier of you at all , my dear ? and why do you not send Harry with Mr. Braddock , instead of go yourself ? " ask Madame de Bernstein . 
 " my mother love her young son the good , " say George , darkly . " besides , with the enemy invade our country , it be my duty , as the head of our family , to go on the campaign . have I be a Scotchman twelve year ago , I should have be a " 
 " Hush , sir ! or I shall be more angry than ever ! " say the old lady , with a perfectly pleased face . 
 George 's explanation might thus appease Madame de Bernstein , an old woman whose principle we fear be but loose : but to the loyal heart of Sir Miles Warrington and his lady , the young man 's conduct give a severe blow indeed ! " I should have think , " her ladyship say , " from my sister Esmond Warrington 's letter , that my brother 's widow be a woman of good sense and judgment , and that she have educate her son in a become manner . but what , Sir Miles , what , my dear Thomas Claypool , can we think of an education which have result so lamentably for both these young man ? " 
 " the elder seem to know a power of Latin , though , and speak the French and the German too . I hear he with the Hanover Envoy , at the Baroness 's rout , " say Mr. Claypool . " the French he jabber quite easy : and when he be at a loss for the High Dutch , he and the Envoy begin in Latin , and talk away till all the room star . " 
 " it be not language , but principle , Thomas Claypool ! " exclaim the virtuous matron . " what must Mr. Warrington 's principle be , when he could reject an offer make he by his Prince ? can he speak the High Dutch ? so much the more ought he to have accept his Royal Highness 's condescension , and make himself useful in the campaign ! look at our son , look at Miles ! " 
 " hold up thy head , Miley , my boy ! " say papa . 
 " I trust , Sir Miles , that , as a member of the House of Commons , as an english gentleman , you will attend his Royal Highness 's levee to - morrow , and say , if such an offer have be make to we for that child , we would have take it , though our boy be but ten year of age . " 
 " Faith , Miley , thou wouldst make a good little drummer or fifer ! " say papa . " shouldst like to be a little soldier , Miley ? " 
 " anything , sir , anything ! a Warrington ought to be ready at any moment to have himself cut in piece for his sovereign ! " cry the matron , point to the boy ; who , as soon as he comprehend his mother 's proposal , protest against it by a loud roar , in the midst of which he be remove by Screwby . in obedience to the conjugal order , Sir Miles go to his Royal Highness 's levee the next day , and make a protest of his love and duty , which the Prince deign to accept , say : 
 " nobody ever suppose that Sir Miles Warrington would ever refuse any place offer to he . " 
 a compliment gracious indeed , and repeat everywhere by Lady Warrington , as show how implicitly the august family on the throne could rely on the loyalty of the Warringtons . 
 accordingly , when this worthy couple see George , they receive he with a ghastly commiseration , such as our dear relative or friend will sometimes extend to we when we have do something fatal or clumsy in life ; when we have come badly out of our lawsuit ; when we enter the room just as the company have be abuse we ; when our banker have break ; or we for our sad part have have to figure in the commercial column of the London Gazette ; when , in a word , we be guilty of some notorious fault , or blunder , or misfortune . who do not know that face of pity ? whose dear relation have not so deplore he , not dead , but live ? not your ? then , sir , if you have never be in scrape ; if you have never sow a handful of wild oat or two ; if you have always be fortunate , and good , and careful , and butter have never melt in your mouth , and an imprudent word have never come out of it ; if you have never sin and repent , and be a fool and be sorry then , sir , you be a wiseacre who will not   waste your time over an idle novel , and it be not de te that the fable be narrate at all . 
 not that it be just on Sir Miles 's part to turn upon George , and be angry with his nephew for refuse the offer of promotion make by his Royal Highness , for Sir Miles himself have agree in George 's view of pursue quite other than a military career , and it be in respect to this plan of her son 's that Madam Esmond have write from Virginia to Sir Miles Warrington . George have announce to she his intention of enter at the Temple , and qualify himself for the magisterial and civil duty which , in the course of nature , he would be call to fulfil ; nor could any one applaud his resolution more cordially than his uncle Sir Miles , who introduce George to a lawyer of reputation , under whose guidance we may fancy the young gentleman read leisurely . Madam Esmond from home signify her approval of her son 's course , fully agree with Sir Miles   to whom and his lady she beg to send her grateful remembrance   that the British Constitution be the envy of the world , and the proper object of every english gentleman 's admire study . the chief point to which George 's mother object be the notion that Mr. Warrington should have to sit down in the Temple dinner - ball , and cut at a shoulder of mutton , and drink small - beer out of tin pannikin , by the side of rough student who wear gown like the parish - clerk . George 's loyal young brother share too this repugnance . anything be good enough for he , Harry say ; he be a young son , and prepare to rough it ; but George , in a gown , and dining in a mess with three nobody 's son off dirty pewter platter ! Harry never could relish this condescension on his brother 's part , or fancy George in his proper place at any except the high table ; and be sorry that a plan Madam Esmond hint at in her letter be not feasible viz . , that an application should be make to the Master of the Temple , who should be inform that Mr. George Warrington be a gentleman of most noble birth , and of great property in America , and ought only to sit with the very good company in the Hall . rather to Harry 's discomfiture , when he communicate his own and his mother 's idea to the gentleman 's new coffee - house friend , Mr. Spencer , Mr. Spencer receive the proposal with roar of laughter ; and I can not learn , from the Warrington paper , that any application be make to the Master of the Temple on this subject . besides his literary and historical pursuit , which be those he most especially love , Mr. Warrington study the law of his country , attend the court at Westminster , where he hear a Henley , a Pratt , a Murray , and those other great famous school of eloquence and patriotism , the two house of parliament . 
 gradually Mr. Warrington make acquaintance with some of the member of the House and the Bar ; who , when they come to know he , speak of he as a young gentleman of good part and good breeding , and in term so generally complimentary , that his good uncle 's heart relent towards he , and Dora and Flora begin once more to smile upon he . this reconciliation date from the time when his Royal Highness the Duke , after have be defeat by the French , in the affair of Hastenbeck , conclude the famous capitulation with the French , which his Majesty George II . refuse to ratify . his Royal Highness , as ' tis well know , fling up his commission after this disgrace , lay down his commander 's baton which , it must be confess , he have not wield with much luck or dexterity and never again appear at the head of army or in public life . the stout warrior would not allow a word of complaint against his father and sovereign to escape his lip ; but , as he retire with his wound honour , and as he would have no interest or authority more , nor any place to give , it may be suppose that Sir Miles Warrington 's anger against his nephew diminish as his respect for his Royal Highness diminish . 
 as our two gentleman be walk in St. James 's Park , one day , with their friend Mr. Lambert , they meet his Royal Highness in plain clothe and without a star , and make profound bow to the Prince , who be pleased to stop and speak to they . 
 he ask Mr. Lambert how he like my Lord Ligonier , his new chief at the Horse Guards , and the new duty there in which he be engage ? and , recognise the young man , with that fidelity of memory for which his royal race hath ever be remarkable , he say to Mr. Warrington : 
 " you do well , sir , not to come with I when I ask you in the spring . " 
 " I be sorry , then , sir , " Mr. Warrington say , make a very low reverence , " but I be more sorry now . " 
 on which the Prince say , " thank you , sir , " and , touch his hat , walk away . and the circumstance of this interview , and the discourse which pass at it , be relate to Mrs. Esmond Warrington in a letter from her young son , create so deep an impression in that lady 's mind , that she narrate the anecdote many hundred of time until all her friend and acquaintance know and , perhaps , be tired of it . 
 our gentleman go through the Park , and so towards the Strand , where they have business . and Mr. Lambert , point to the lion on the top of the Earl of Northumberland 's house at Charing Cross , say : 
 " Harry Warrington ! your brother be like yonder lion . " 
 " because he be as brave as one , " say Harry . 
 " because I respect virgin ! " say George , laugh . 
 " because you be a stupid lion . because you turn your back on the East , and absolutely salute the set sun . why , child , what earthly good can you get by be civil to a man in hopeless dudgeon and disgrace ? your uncle will be more angry with you than ever and so be I , sir . " but Mr. Lambert be always laugh in his waggish way , and , indeed , he do not look the least angry . 




 CHAPTER LXII . Arma Virumque 

 indeed , if Harry Warrington have a passion for military pursuit and study , there be enough of war stir in Europe , and enough talk in all society which he frequent in London , to excite and inflame he . though our own gracious Prince of the house of Hanover have be beat , the Protestant Hero , the King of Prussia , be fill the world with his glory , and win those astonishing victory in which I deem it fortunate on my own account that my poor Harry take no part ; for then his veracious biographer would have have to narrate battle the description whereof have be undertake by another pen . I be glad , I say , that Harry Warrington be not at Rossbach on that famous Gunpowder Fete - day , on the 5th of November , in the year 1757 ; nor at that tremendous slaughtering - match of Leuthen , which the prussian king play a month afterwards ; for these prodigious action will presently be narrate in other volume , which I and all the world be eager to behold . would you have this history compete with yonder book ? could my jaunty , yellow park - phaeton run counter to that grim chariot of thunder war ? could my meek little jog - trot Pegasus meet the shock of yon steed of foam bit and flame nostril ? dear , kind reader   with whom I love to talk from time to time , step down from the stage where our figure be perform , attire in the habit and use the parlance of past age , my kind , patient reader ! it be a mercy for both of we that Harry Warrington do not follow the king of the Borussians , as he be minded to do , for then I should have have to describe battle which Carlyle be go to paint ; and I do not   wish you should make odious comparison between I and that master . 
 Harry Warrington not only do not join the King of the Borussians , but he pin and chafe at not go . he lead a sulky useless life , that be the fact . he dangle about the military coffee - house . he do not care for read anything save a newspaper . his turn be not literary . he even think novel be stupid ; and , as for the lady cry their eye out over Mr. Richardson , he could not imagine how they could be move by any such nonsense . he use to laugh in a very hearty jolly way , but a little late , and some time after the joke be over . pray , why should all gentleman have a literary turn ? and do we like some of our friend the bad because they never turn a couplet in their life ? ruin , perforce idle , dependent on his brother for supply , if he read a book fall asleep over it , with no fitting work for his great strong hand to do how lucky it be that he do not get into more trouble ! why , in the case of Achilles himself , when he be send by his mamma to the court of King what - d'ye - call-'em in order to be put out of harm 's reach , what happen to he amongst a parcel of woman with whom he be make to idle his life away ? and how do Pyrrhus come into the world ? a powerful mettlesome young Achilles ought not to be lead - string by woman too much ; be out of his place dawdle by distaff or hand coffee - cup ; and when he be not fight , depend on it , be likely to fall into much bad mischief . 
 those soft - hearted woman , the two elder lady of the Lambert family , with whom he mainly consort , have an untiring pity and kindness for Harry , such as woman only and only a few of those can give . if a man be in grief , who cheer he ; in trouble , who console he ; in wrath , who soothe he ; in joy , who make he doubly happy ; in prosperity , who rejoice ; in disgrace , who back he against the world , and dress with gentle unguent and warm poultice the rankle wound make by the sling and arrow of outrageous Fortune ? who but woman , if you please ? you who be ill and sore from the buffet of Fate , have you one or two of these sweet physician ? return thank to the god that they have leave you so much of consolation . what gentleman be not more or less a Prometheus ? who have not his rock   ai , ai , his chain   ea , ea , and his liver in a deuce of a condition ? but the sea - nymph come the gentle , the sympathising ; they kiss our writhing foot ; they moisten our parch lip with their tear ; they do their bless good to console we Titans ; they do not   turn their back upon we after our overthrow . 
 now Theo and her mother be full of pity for Harry ; but Hetty 's heart be rather hard and seemingly savage towards he . she chafe that his position be not more glorious ; she be angry that he be still dependent and idle . the whole world be in arm , and could he not carry a musket ? it be harvest - time , and hundred of thousand of reaper be out with their flash sickle ; could he not use his , and cut down his sheaf or two of glory ? 
 " why , how savage the little thing be with he ! " say papa , after a scene in which , accord to she will not , Miss Hetty have be fire little shot into that quivering target which come and set itself up in Mrs. Lambert 's drawing - room every day . 
 " her conduct be perfectly abominable ! " cry mamma ; ' she deserve to be whip , and send to bed . " 
 " perhaps , mother , it be because she like he well than any of we do , " say Theo , " and it be for his sake that Hetty be angry . if I be fond of of some one , I should like to be able to admire and respect he always to think everything he do right and my gentleman well than all the gentleman in the world . " 
 " the truth be , my dear , " answer Mrs. Lambert , " that your father be so much well than all the world , he have spoil we . do you ever see any one to compare with he ? " 
 " very few , indeed , " own Theo , with a blush . 
 " very few . who be so good - temper ? " 
 " I think nobody , mamma , " Theo acknowledge . 
 " or so brave ? " 
 " why , I dare say Mr. Wolfe , or Harry , or Mr. George , be very brave . " 
 " or so learn and witty ? " 
 " I be sure Mr. George seem very learn , and witty too , in his way , " say Theo ; " and his manner be very fine you own they be . Madame de Bernstein say they be , and she hath see the world . indeed , Mr. George have a lofty way with he , which I do not   see in other people ; and , in read book , I find he choose the fine noble thing always , and love they in spite of all his satire . he certainly be of a satirical turn , but then he be only bitter against mean thing and people . no gentleman hath a more tender heart I be sure ; and but yesterday , after he have be talk so bitterly as you say , I happen to look out of window , and see he stop and treat a whole crowd of little child to apple at the stall at the corner . and the day before yesterday , when he be come and bring I the Moliere , he stop and give money to a beggar , and how charmingly , sure , he read the French ! I agree with he though about Tartuffe , though ' tis so wonderfully clever and lively , that a mere villain and hypocrite be a figure too mean to be make the chief of a great piece . Iago , Mr. George say , be near as great a villain ; but then he be not the first character of the tragedy , which be Othello , with his noble weakness . but what fine lady and gentleman Moliere represent so Mr. George think and but oh , I do not   dare to repeat the verse after he . " 
 " but you know they by heart , my dear ? " ask Mrs. Lambert . 
 and Theo reply , " oh yes , mamma ! I know they by ... nonsense ! " 
 I here fancy osculation , palpitation , and exit Miss Theo , blush like a rose . why have she stop in her sentence ? because mamma be look at she so oddly . and why be mamma look at she so oddly ? and why have she look after Mr. George when he be go away , and look for he when he be come ? ah , and why do cheek blush , and why do rose bloom ? Old Time be still a - flying . old spring and bud time ; old summer and bloom time ; old autumn and seed time ; old winter time , when the cracking , shiver old tree - top be bald or cover with snow . 
 a few minute after George arrive , Theo would come downstairs with a flutter heart , may be , and a sweet nosegay in her cheek , just cull , as it be , fresh in his honour ; and I suppose she must have be constantly at that window which command the street , and whence she could espy his generosity to the sweep , or his purchase from the apple - woman . but if it be Harry who knock , she remain in her own apartment with her work or her book , send her sister to receive the young gentleman , or her brother when the elder be at home from college , or Doctor Crusius from the Chartreux give the young leave to go home . and what good eye Theo must have have and often in the evening , too to note the difference between Harry 's yellow hair and George 's dark lock and between their figure , though they be so like that people continually be mistake one for the other brother . now it be certain that Theo never mistook one or t'other ; and that Hetty , for her part , be not in the least excited , or rude , or pert , when she find the black - haired gentleman in her mother 's drawing - room . 
 our friend could come when they like to Mr. Lambert 's house , and stay as long as they choose ; and , one day , he of the golden lock be sit on a couch there , in an attitude of more than ordinary idleness and despondency , when who should come down to he but Miss Hetty ? I say it be a most curious thing   though the girl would have go to the rack rather than own any collusion , that when Harry call , Hetty appear ; when George arrive , Theo somehow come ; and so , accord to the usual dispensation , it be Miss Lambert , junior , who now arrive to entertain the young Virginian . 
 after usual ceremony and compliment we may imagine that the lady say to the gentleman : 
 " and pray , sir , what make your honour look so glum this morning ? " 
 " ah , Hetty ! " say he , " I have nothing else to do but to look glum . I remember when we be boy and I a rare idle one , you may be sure I would always be ask my tutor for a holiday , which I would pass very likely swing on a gate , or make duck and drake over the pond , and those do - nothing day be always the most melancholy . what have I get to do now from morning till night ? " 
 " Breakfast , walk dinner , walk tea , supper , I suppose ; and a pipe of your Virginia , " say Miss Hetty , toss her head . 
 " I tell you what , when I go back with Charley to the Chartreux , t'other night , I have a mind to say to the master , ' teach I , sir . here be a boy know a deal more latin and Greek , at thirteen , than I do , who be ten year old . I have nothing to do from morning till night , and I might as well go to my book again , and see if I can repair my idleness as a boy . ' why do you laugh , Hetty ? " 
 " I laugh to fancy you at the head of a class , and call up by the master ! " cry Hetty . 
 " I should not   be at the head of the class , " Harry say , humbly . " George might be at the head of any class , but I be not a bookman , you see ; and when I be young neglect myself , and be very idle . we would not let our tutor cane we much at home , but , if we have , it might have do I good . " 
 Hetty drub with her little foot , and look at the young man sit before her strong , idle , melancholy . 
 " upon my word , it might do you good now ! " she be minded to say . " what do Tom say about the caning at school ? do his account of it set you long for it , pray ? " she ask . 
 " his account of his school , " Harry answer simply , " make I see that I have be idle when I ought to have work , and that I have not a genius for book , and for what be I good ? only to spend my patrimony when I come abroad , or to lounge at coffee - house or racecourse , or to gallop behind dog when I be at home . I be good for nothing , I be . " 
 " what , such a great , brave , strong fellow as you good for nothing ? " cry Het . " I would not confess as much to any woman , if I be twice as good for nothing ! " 
 " what be I to do ? I ask for leave to go into the army , and Madam Esmond do not answer I . ' tis the only thing I be fit for . I have no money to buy . have spend all my own , and so much of my brother 's , I can not and will not   ask for more . if my mother would but send I to the army , you know I would jump to go . " 
 " eh ! a gentleman of spirit do not want a woman to buckle his sword on for he or to clean his firelock ! what be that our papa tell we of the young gentleman at court yesterday ? Sir John Armytage " 
 " Sir John Armytage ? I use to know he when I frequent White 's and the club - house a fine , noble young gentleman , of a great estate in the North . " 
 " and engage to be married to a famous beauty , too Miss Howe , my Lord Howe 's sister but that , I suppose , be not an obstacle to gentleman ? " 
 " an obstacle to what ? " ask the gentleman . 
 " an obstacle to glory ! " say Miss Hetty . " I think no woman of spirit would say ' stay ! ' though she adore her lover ever so much , when his country say ' go ! ' Sir John have volunteer for the expedition which be prepare , and be at court yesterday his Majesty ask he when he would be ready to go ? ' tomorrow , please your Majesty , ' reply Sir John , and the king say , that be a soldier 's answer . my father himself be long to go , though he have mamma and all we brat at home . oh dear , oh dear ! why be not   I a man myself ? both my brother be for the Church ; but , as for I , I know I should have make a famous little soldier ! " and , so speak , this young person stride about the room , wear a most courageous military aspect , and look as bold as Joan of Arc . 
 Harry behold she with a tender admiration . " I think , " say he , " I would hardly like to see a musket on that little shoulder , nor a wound on that pretty face , Hetty . " 
 " wound ! who fear wound ? " cry the little maid . " musket ? if I could carry one , I would use it . you man fancy that we woman be good for nothing but to make pudding or stitch sampler . why be not   I a man , I say ? George be read to we yesterday out of Tasso look , here it be , and I think the verse apply to I . see ! here be the book , with the mark in it where we leave off . " 
 " with the mark in it ? " say Harry dutifully . 
 " yes ! it be about a woman who be disappointed because because her brother do not go to war , and she say of herself 
  " ' alas ! why do not Heaven these member frail 
  with lively force and vigour strengthen , so 
  that I this silken gown ... ' " 
 " silken gown ? " say downright Harry , with a look of inquiry . 
 " well , sir , I know ' tis but Calimanco ; but so it be in the book 
  " ' ... this silken gown and slender veil 
  Might for a breastplate and a helm forgo ; 
  then should not heat , nor cold , nor rain , nor hail , 
  nor storm that fall , nor blust're wind that blow , 
  withhold I ; but I would , both day and night , 
  in pitch field or private combat , fight ' 
 " Fight ? yes , that I would ! why be both my brother to be parson , I say ? one of my papa 's child ought to be a soldier ! " 
 Harry laugh , a very gentle , kind laugh , as he look at she . he feel that he would not like much to hit such a tender little warrior as that . 
 " why , " say he , hold a finger out , " I think here be a finger nigh as big as your arm . how would you stand up before a great , strong man ? I should like to see a man try and injure you , though ; I should just like to see he ! you little , delicate , tender creature ! do you suppose any scoundrel would dare to do anything unkind to you ? " and , excite by this flight of his imagination , Harry fall to walk up and down the room , too , chafe at the idea of any rogue of a Frenchman dare to be rude to Miss Hester Lambert . 
 it be a belief in this silent courage of his which subjugate Hetty , and this quality which she suppose he to possess , which cause she specially to admire he . Miss Hetty be no more bold , in reality , than Madam Erminia , whose speech she have be read out of the book , and about whom Mr. Harry Warrington never hear one single word . he may have be in the room when brother George be read his poetry out to the lady , but his thought be busy with his own affair , and he be entirely bewilder with your Clotildas and Erminias , and giant , and enchanter , and nonsense . no , Miss Hetty , I say and believe , have nothing of the virago in her composition ; else , no doubt , she would have take a fancy to a soft young fellow with a literary turn , or a genius for play the flute , accord to the law of contrast and nature provide in those case ; and who have not hear how great , strong man have an affinity for frail , tender little woman ; how tender little woman be attract by great , honest , strong man ; and how your burly hero and champion of war be constantly henpecke ? if Mr. Harry Warrington fall in love with a woman who be like Miss Lambert in disposition , and if he marry she without be conjurer , I think we may all see what the end will be . 
 so , whilst Hetty be fire her little sarcasm into Harry , he for a while scarcely feel that they be sting he , and let she shoot on without so much as take the trouble to shake the little arrow out of his hide . do she mean by her sneer and innuendo to rouse he into action ? he be too magnanimous to understand such small hint . do she mean to shame he by say that she , a weak woman , would don the casque and breastplate ? the simple fellow either melt at the idea of she be in danger , or at the notion of her fighting fall a - laugh . 
 " pray what be the use of have a strong hand if you only use it to hold a skein of silk for my mother ? " cry Miss Hester ; " and what be the good of be ever so strong in a drawing - room ? nobody want you to throw anybody out of window , Harry ! a strong man , indeed ! I suppose there be a strong at Bartholomew Fair . James Wolfe be not a strong man . he seem quite weakly and ill . when he be here last he be cough the whole time , and as pale as if he have see a ghost . " 
 " I never could understand why a man should be frighten at a ghost , " say Harry . 
 " pray , have you see one , sir ? " ask the pert young lady . 
 " no . I think I do once at home when we be boy ; but it be only Nathan in his night - shirt ; but I be not   frighten when I think he be a ghost . I believe there be no such thing . our nurse tell a pack of lie about them , " say Harry , gravely . " George be a little frightened ; but then he be " here he pause . 
 " then George be what ? " ask Hetty . 
 " George be different from I , that be all . our mother be a bold woman as ever you see , but she scream at see a mouse always do can not   help it . it be her nature . so , you see , perhaps my brother can not   bear ghost . I do not   mind them . " 
 " George always say you would have make a well soldier than he . " 
 " so I think I should , if I have be allow to try . but he can do a thousand thing well than I , or anybody else in the world . why do not   he let I volunteer on Braddock 's expedition ? I might have get knock on the head , and then I should have be pretty much as useful as I be now , and then I should not   have ruin myself , and bring people to point at I and say that I have disgrace the name of Warrington . why may not   I go on this expedition , and volunteer like Sir John Armytage ? oh , Hetty ! I be a miserable fellow that be what I be , " and the miserable fellow pace the room at double quick time . " I wish I have never come to Europe , " he groan out . 
 " what a compliment to we ! thank you , Harry ! " but presently , on an appealing look from the gentleman , she add , " be you be you think of go home ? " 
 " and have all Virginia jeering at I ! there be not a gentleman there that would not , except one , and he my mother do not   like . I should be ashamed to go home now , I think . you do not   know my mother , Hetty . I be not   afraid of most thing ; but , somehow , I be of she . what shall I say to she , when she say , ' Harry , where be your patrimony ? ' ' spend , mother , ' I shall have to say . ' what have you do with it ? ' ' waste it , mother , and go to prison after . ' ' who take you out of prison ? ' ' Brother George , ma'am , he take I out of prison ; and now I be come back , have do no good for myself , with no profession , no prospect , no nothing only to look after negro , and be scold at home ; or to go to sleep at sermon ; or to play at card , and drink , and fight cock at the tavern about . ' how can I look the gentleman of the country in the face ? I be ashamed to go home in this way , I say . I must and will do something ! what shall I do , Hetty ? ah ! what shall I do ? " 
 " do ? what do Mr. Wolfe do at Louisbourg ? Ill as he be , and in love as we know he to be , he do not   stop to be nurse by his mother , Harry , or to dawdle with his sweetheart . he go on the King 's service , and hath come back cover with honour . if there be to be another great campaign in America , papa say he be sure of a great command . " 
 " I wish he would take I with he , and that a ball would knock I on the head and finish I , " groan Harry . " you speak to I , Hetty , as though it be my fault that I be not in the army , when you know I would give give , forsooth , what have I to give ? yes ! my life to go on service ! " 
 " life indeed ! " say Miss Hetty , with a shrug of her shoulder . 
 " you do not   seem to think that of much value , Hetty , " remark Harry , sadly . " no more it be to anybody . I be a poor useless fellow . I be not even free to throw it away as I would like , be under order here and at home . " 
 " order indeed ! why under order ? " cry Miss Hetty . " be not   you tall enough , and old enough , to act for yourself , and must you have George for a master here , and your mother for a schoolmistress at home ? if I be a man , I would do something famous before I be two - and - twenty year old , that I would ! I would have the world speak of I . I would not   dawdle at apron - string . I would not   curse my fortune I would make it . I vow and declare I would ! " 
 now , for the first time , Harry begin to wince at the word of his young lecturer . 
 " no negro on our estate be more a slave than I be , Hetty , " he say , turn very red as he address she ; " but then , Miss Lambert , we do not   reproach the poor fellow for not be free . that be not   generous . at least , that be not   the way I understand honour . perhaps with woman it be different , or I may be wrong , and have no right to be hurt at a young girl tell I what my fault be . perhaps my fault be not my fault only my cursed luck . you have be talk ever so long about this gentleman volunteering , and that man win glory , and crack up their courage as if I have none of my own . I suppose , for the matter of that , I be as well provide as other gentleman . I do not   brag but I be not afraid of Mr. Wolfe , nor of Sir John Armytage , nor of anybody else that ever I see . how can I buy a commission when I have   spend my last shilling , or ask my brother for more who have already halve with I ? a gentleman of my rank can not   go a common soldier else , by Jupiter , I would ! and if a ball finish I , I suppose Miss Hetty Lambert would not   be very sorry . it be not   kind , Hetty I do not   think it of you . " 
 " what be it I have say ? " ask the young lady . " I have only say Sir John Armytage have volunteer , and Mr. Wolfe have cover himself with honour , and you begin to scold I ! how can I help it if Mr. Wolfe be brave and famous ? be that any reason you should be angry , pray ? " 
 " I do not   say angry , " say Harry , gravely . " I say I be hurt . " 
 " oh , indeed ! I think such a little creature as I be could not   hurt anybody ! I be sure ' tis mighty complimentary to I to say that a young lady whose arm be no big than your little finger can hurt such a great strong man as you ! " 
 " I scarce think you would try , Hetty , " the young man say . " you see , I be not use to this kind of welcome in this house . " 
 " what be it , my poor boy ? " ask kind Mrs. Lambert , look in at the door at this juncture , and find the youth with a very woeworn countenance . 
 " oh , we have hear the story before , mamma ! " say Hetty , hurriedly . " Harry be make his old complaint of have nothing to do . and he be quite unhappy ; and he be tell we so over and over again , that be all . " 
 " so be you hungry over and over again , my dear ! be that a reason why your papa and I should leave off give you dinner ? " cry mamma , with some emotion . " will you stay and have our , Harry ? ' tis just three o'clock ! " Harry agree to stay , after a few faint negation . " my husband din abroad . we be but three woman , so you will have a dull dinner , " remark Mrs. Lambert . 
 " we shall have a gentleman to enliven we , mamma , I dare say ! " say Madam Pert , and then look in mamma 's face with that admirable gaze of blank innocence which Madam Pert know how to assume when she have be specially and successfully wicked . 
 when the dinner appear . Miss Hetty come downstairs , and be exceedingly chatty , lively , and entertaining . Theo do not know that any little difference have occur   such , alas , my christian friend , will happen in the most charming family , do not know , I say , that anything have happen until Hetty 's uncommon sprightliness and gaiety rouse her suspicion . Hetty would start a dozen subject of conversation the King of Prussia , and the news from America ; the last masquerade , and the highwayman shoot near Barnet ; and when her sister , admire this volubility , inquire the reason of it , with her eye , 
 " oh , my dear , you need not nod and wink at I ! " cry Hetty . " Mamma ask Harry on purpose to enliven we , and I be talk until he begin , just like the fiddle at the playhouse , you know , Theo ! first the fiddle . then the play . pray begin , Harry ! " 
 " hester ! " cry mamma . 
 " I merely ask Harry to entertain we . you say yourself , mother , that we be only three woman , and the dinner would be dull for a gentleman ; unless , indeed , he choose to be very lively . " 
 " I be not that on most day and , Heaven know , on this day less than most , " say poor Harry . 
 " why on this day less than another ? Tuesday be as good a day to be lively as Wednesday . the only day when we must not   be lively be Sunday . well , you know it be , ma'am ! we must not   sing , nor dance , nor do anything on Sunday . " 
 and in this naughty way the young woman go on for the rest of the evening , and be compliment by her mother and sister when poor Harry take his leave . he be not ready of wit , and could not fle back the taunt which Hetty cast against he . Nay , have he be able to retort , he would have be silent . he be too generous to engage in that small war , and choose to take all hester 's sarcasm without an attempt to parry or evade they . very likely the young lady watch and admire that magnanimity , while she try it so cruelly . and after one of her fit of ill - behaviour , her parent and friend have not the least need to scold she , as she candidly tell they , because she suffer a great deal more than they would ever have have she , and her conscience punish she a great deal more severely than her kind elder would have think of do . I suppose she lie awake all that night , and toss and tumble in her bed . I suppose she wet her pillow with tear , and should not mind about her sobbing : unless it keep her sister awake ; unless she be unwell the next day , and the doctor have to be fetch ; unless the whole family be to be put to discomfort ; mother to choke over her dinner in flurry and indignation ; father to eat his roast - beef in silence and with bitter sauce ; everybody to look at the door each time it open , with a vague hope that Harry be come in . if Harry do not come , why at least do not George come ? think Miss Theo . 
 some time in the course of the evening come a billet from George Warrington , with a large nosegay of lilacs , per Mr. Gumbo . " ' I send my good duty and regard to Mrs. Lambert and the lady , ' " George say , " ' and humbly beg to present to Miss Theo this nosegay of lilacs , which she say she love in the early spring . you must not thank I for they , please , but the gardener of Bedford House , with whom I have make great friend by present he with some dried specimen of a virginian plant which some lady do not   think as fragrant as lilacs . 
 " ' I have be in the garden almost all the day . it be alive with sunshine and spring ; and I have be compose two scene of you know what , and polish the verse which the Page sing in the fourth act , under Sybilla 's window , which she can not hear , poor thing , because she have just have her head off . ' " 
 " provoking ! I wish he would not always sneer and laugh ! the verse be beautiful , " say Theo . 
 " you really think so , my dear ? how very odd ! " remark papa . 
 Little Het look up from her dismal corner with a faint smile of humour . Theo 's secret be a secret for nobody in the house , it seem . can any young people guess what it be ? our young lady continue to read : 
 " ' Spencer have ask the famous Mr. Johnson to breakfast to - morrow , who condescend to hear the play , and who will not , I hope , be too angry because my heroine undergo the fate of his in Irene . I have hear he come up to London himself as a young man with only his tragedy in his wallet . shall I ever be able to get mine play ? can you fancy the catcall music begin , and the pit hiss at that perilous part of the fourth act , where my executioner come out from the closet with his great sword , at the awful moment when he be call upon to amputate ? they say Mr. Fielding , when the pit hiss at a part of one of his piece , about which Mr. Garrick have warn he , say , ' hang they , they have find it out , have they ? ' and finish his punch in tranquillity . I suppose his wife be not in the box . there be some woman to whom I would be very unwilling to give pain , and there be some to whom I would give the good I have . ' " 
 " whom can he mean ? the letter be to you , my dear . I protest he be make love to your mother before my face ! " cry papa to Hetty , who only give a little sigh , put her hand in her father 's hand , and then withdraw it . 
 " ' to whom I would give the good I have . to - day it be only a bunch of lilac . to - morrow it may be what ? a branch of rue a sprig of bay , perhaps anything , so it be my good and my all . 
 " ' I have have a fine long day , and all to myself . what do you think of Harry play truant ? ' "   here we may imagine , what they call in France , or what they use to call , when man dare to speak or citizen to hear , sensation dans l'auditoire . 
 " ' I suppose Carpezan weary the poor fellow 's existence out . certain it be he have be miserable for week past ; and a change of air and scene may do he good . this morning , quite early , he come to my room , and tell I he have take a seat in the Portsmouth machine , and propose to go to the Isle of Wight , to the army there . ' " 
 the army ! Hetty look very pale at this announcement , and her mother continue : 
 " ' and a little portion of it , namely , the thirty - second regiment , be command by Lieutenant - Colonel Richmond Webb the nephew of the famous old General under whom my grandfather Esmond serve in the great war of Marlborough . Mr. Webb meet we at our uncle 's , accost we very politely , and give we an invitation to visit he at his regiment . let my poor brother go and listen to his darling music of fife and drum ! he bid I tell the lady that they should hear from he . I kiss their hand , and go to dress for dinner , at the Star and Garter , in Pall Mall . we be to have Mr. Soame Jenyns , Mr. Cambridge , Mr. Walpole , possibly , if he be not too fine to dine in a tavern ; a young Irishman , a Mr. Bourke , who they say be a wonder of eloquence and learn in fine , all the wit of Mr. Dodsley 's shop . quick , Gumbo , a coach , and my french grey suit ! and if gentleman ask I , ' who give you that sprig of lilac you wear on your heart - side ? ' I shall call a bumper , and give Lilac for a toast . ' " 
 I fear there be no more rest for Hetty on this night than on the previous one , when she have behave so mutinously to poor Harry Warrington . some secret resolution must have inspire that gentleman , for , after leave Mr. Lambert 's table , he pace the street for a while , and appear at a late hour in the evening at Madame de Bernstein 's house in Clarges Street . her ladyship 's health have be somewhat ailing of late , so that even her favourite rout be deny she , and she be sit over a quiet game of ecarte , with a divine of whom our last news be from a lock - up house hard by that in which Harry Warrington have be himself confine . George , at Harry 's request , have pay the little debt under which Mr. Sampson have suffer temporarily . he have be at his living for a year . he may have pay and contract ever so many debt , have be in and out of jail many time since we see he . for some time past he have be back in London stout and hearty as usual , and ready for any invitation to card or claret . Madame de Bernstein do not care to have her game interrupt by her nephew , whose conversation have little interest now for the fickle old woman . next to the very young , I suppose the very old be the most selfish . alas , the heart harden as the blood cease to run . the cold snow strike down from the head , and check the glow of feeling . who want to survive into old age after abdicate all his faculty one by one , and be san tooth , san eye , san memory , san hope , san sympathy ? how fare it with those patriarch of old who live for their nine century , and when be life 's condition so change that , after threescore year and ten , it become but a vexation and a burden ? 
 get no reply but yes and no to his brief speech , poor Harry sit a while on a couch opposite his aunt , who shrug her shoulder , have she back to her nephew , and continue her game with the chaplain . Sampson sit opposite Mr. Warrington , and could see that something disturb he . his face be very pale , and his countenance disturb and full of gloom . " something have happen to he , ma'am , " he whisper to the Baroness . 
 " bah ! " she shrug her shoulder again , and continue to deal her card . " what be the matter with you , sir , " she at last say , at a pause in the game , " that you have such a dismal countenance ? Chaplain , that last game make we even , I think ! " 
 Harry get up from his place . " I be go on a journey : I be come to bid you good - bye , aunt , " he say , in a very tragical voice . 
 " on a journey ! be you go home to America ? I mark the king , Chaplain , and play he . " 
 no , Harry say : he be not go to America yet go to the Isle of Wight for the present . 
 " indeed ! a lovely spot ! " say the Baroness . " Bon jour , mon ami , et bon voyage ! " and she kiss a hand to her nephew . 
 " I may not   come back for some time , aunt , " he groan out . 
 " indeed ! we shall be inconsolable without you ! unless you have a spade , Mr. Sampson , the game be mine . good - bye , my child ! no more about your journey at present : tell we about it when you come back ! " and she gaily bid he farewell . he look for a moment piteously at she , and be go . 
 " something grave have happen , madam , " say the chaplain . 
 " oh ! the boy be always get into scrape ! I suppose he have be fall in love with one of those country girl what be their name , lambert ? with whom he be ever dawdle about . he have be do no good here for some time . I be disappoint in he , really quite grieve about he I will take two card , if you please again ? quite grieve . what do you think they say of his cousin the Miss Warrington who make eye at he when she think he be a prize they say the King have remark she , and the Yarmouth be creve with rage . he , be ! those methodistical warrington ! they be not a bit less worldly than their neighbour ; and , old as he be , if the Grand Seignior throw his pocket - handkerchief , they will jump to catch it ! " 
 " ah , madam ; how your ladyship know the world ! " sigh the chaplain . " I propose , if you please ! " 
 " I have live long enough in it , Mr. Sampson , to know something of it . ' tis sadly selfish , my dear sir , sadly selfish ; and everybody be struggle to pass his neighbour ! no , I can not   give you any more card . you have not   the king ? I play queen , knave , and a ten , a sadly selfish world , indeed . and here come my chocolate ! " 
 the more immediate interest of the card entirely absorb the old woman . the door shut out her nephew and his care . under his hat , he bear they into the street , and pace the dark town for a while . 
 " Good God ! " he think , " what a miserable fellow I be , and what a spendthrift of my life I have be ! I sit silent with George and his friend . I be not clever and witty as he be . I be only a burthen to he ; and , if I would help he ever so much , do not   know how . my dear Aunt Lambert 's kindness never tire , but I begin to be ashamed of try it . why , even Hetty can not   help turn on I ; and when she tell I I be idle and should be do something , ought I to be angry ? the rest have leave I . there be my cousin and uncle and my lady my aunt , they have show I the cold shoulder this long time . they do not   even ask I to Norfolk when they go down to the country , and offer I so much as a day 's partridge - shooting . I can not   go to Castlewood after what have happen ; I should break that scoundrel William 's bone ; and , faith , be well out of the place altogether . " 
 he laugh a fierce laugh as he recall his adventure since he have be in Europe . money , friend , pleasure , all have pass away , and he feel the past like a dream . he stroll into White 's Chocolate - House , where the waiter have scarce see he for a year . the parliament be up . gentleman be away ; there be not even any play go on : not that he would join it , if there be . 
 he have but a few piece in his pocket ; George 's drawer be open , and he may take what money he like thence ; but very , very sparingly will he avail himself of his brother 's repeat invitation . he sit and drink his glass in moody silence . two or three officer of the Guards enter from St. James 's . he know they in former day , and the young man , who have be already din and drink on guard , insist on more drink at the club . the other battalion of their regiment be at Winchester : it be go on this great expedition , no one know whither , which everybody be talk about . curse fate that they do not belong to the other battalion ; and must stay and do duty in London and at Kensington ! there be Webb , who be of their regiment : he do well to exchange his company in the Coldstreams for the lieutenant - colonelcy of the thirty - second . he will be of the expedition . why , everybody be go ; and the young gentleman mention a score of name of man of the first birth and fashion who have volunteer . " it be not   Hanoverians this time , command by the big Prince , " say one young gentleman   whose relative may have be Tories forty year ago   " it be Englishmen , with the Guards at the head of them , and a Marlborough for a leader ! will the Frenchmen ever stand against they ? no , by George , they be irresistible . " and a fresh bowl be call , and loud toast be drunk to the success of the expedition . 
 Mr. Warrington , who be a cup too low , the young Guardsmen say , walk away when they be not steady enough to be able to follow he , think over the matter on his way to his lodging , and lie think of it all through the night . 
 " what be it , my boy ? " ask George Warrington of his brother , when the latter enter his chamber very early on a blushing May morning . 
 " I want a little money out of the drawer , " say Harry , look at his brother . " I be sick and tired of London . " 
 " good heaven ! can anybody be tired of London ? " George ask , who have reason for think it the most delightful place in the world . 
 " I be for one . I be sick and ill , " say Harry . 
 " you and Hetty have be quarrel ? " 
 " she do not   care a penny - piece about I , nor I for she neither , " say Harry , nod his head . " but I be ill , and a little country air will do I good , " and he mention how he think of go to visit Mr. Webb in the Isle of Wight , and how a Portsmouth coach start from Holborn . 
 " there be the till , Harry , " say George , point from his bed . " put your hand in , and take what you will . what a lovely morning , and how fresh the Bedford House garden look ! " 
 " God bless you , brother ! " Harry say . 
 " have a good time , Harry ! " and down go George 's head on the pillow again , and he take his pencil and notebook from under his bolster , and fall to polish his verse , as Harry , with his cloak over his shoulder and a little valise in his hand , walk to the inn in Holborn whence the Portsmouth machine start . 




 CHAPTER LXIII . Melpomene 

 George Warrington by no mean allow his legal study to obstruct his comfort and pleasure , or interfere with his precious health . Madam Esmond have point out to he in her letter that though he wear a student 's gown , and sate down with a crowd of nameless people to hall - commons , he have himself a name , and a very ancient one , to support , and could take rank with the first person at home or in his own country ; and desire that he would study as a gentleman , not a mere professional drudge . with this injunction the young man comply obediently enough : so that he may be say not to have belong to the rank and file of the law , but may be consider to have be a volunteer in her service , like some young gentleman of whom we have just hear . though not so exact as she since have become though she allow her disciple much more leisure , much more pleasure , much more punch , much more frequenting of coffee - house and holiday - making , than she admit nowadays , when she scarce give her votary time for amusement , recreation , instruction , sleep , or dinner the law a hundred year ago be still a jealous mistress , and demand a pretty exclusive attention . Murray , we be tell , might have be an Ovid , but he prefer to be Lord Chief Justice , and to wear ermine instead of bay . perhaps Mr. Warrington might have rise to a peerage and the woolsack , have he study very long and assiduously , have he be a dexterous courtier , and a favourite of attorney : have he be other than he be , in a word . he behave to Themis with a very decent respect and attention ; but he love letter more than law always ; and the black - letter of Chaucer be infinitely more agreeable to he than the gothic page of Hale and Coke . 
 letter be love indeed in those quaint time , and author be actually authority . gentleman appeal to Virgil or Lucan in the Courts or the House of Commons . what say Statius , Juvenal let alone Tully or Tacitus on such and such a point ? their reign be over now , the good old Heathens : the worship of Jupiter and Juno be not more out of mode than the cultivation of Pagan poetry or ethic . the age of economist and calculator have succeed , and Tooke 's Pantheon be desert and ridiculous . now and then , perhaps , a Stanley kill a kid , a Gladstone bang up a wreath , a Lytton burn incense , in honour of the Olympians . but what do they care at Lambeth , Birmingham , the Tower Hamlets , for the ancient rite , divinity , worship ? who the plague be the Muses , and what be the use of all that greek and latin rubbish ? what be Elicon , and who care ? who be Thalia , pray , and what be the length of she I ? be Melpomene 's name in three syllable or four ? and do you know from whose design I steal that figure of Tragedy which adorn the initial g of this chapter ? 
 now , it have be say how Mr. George in his youth , and in the long leisure which he enjoy at home , and during his imprisonment in the french fort on the bank of Monongahela , have while away his idleness by pay court to Melpomene ; and the result of their union be a tragedy , which have be omit in Bell 's Theatre , though I dare say it be no bad than some of the piece print there . Most young man pay their respect to the Tragic Muse first , as they fall in love with woman who be a great deal old than themselves . let the candid reader own , if ever he have a literary turn , that his ambition be of the very high , and that however , in his riper age , he might come down in his pretension , and think that to translate an ode of Horace , or to turn a song of Waller or Prior into decent alcaic or sapphic , be about the utmost of his capability , tragedy and epic only do his green unknowe youth engage , and no prize but the high be fit for he . 
 George Warrington , then , on come to London , attend the theatrical performance at both house , frequent the theatrical coffee - house , and hear the opinion of the critic , and might be see at the Bedford between the play , or sup at the Cecil along with the wit and actor when the performance be over . here he gradually become acquainted with the player and such of the writer and poet as be know to the public . the tough old Macklin , the frolicsome Foote , the vivacious Hippisley , the sprightly Mr. Garrick himself , might occasionally be see at these house of entertainment ; and our gentleman , by his wit and modesty , as well , perhaps , as for the high character for wealth which he possess , come to be very much like in the coffee - house circle , and find that the actor would drink a bowl of punch with he , and the critic sup at his expense with great affability . to be on term of intimacy with an author or an actor have be an object of delight to many a young man ; actually to hob and nob with Bobadil or Henry the Fifth or Alexander the Great , to accept a pinch out of Aristarchus 's own box , to put Juliet into her coach , or hand Monimia to her chair , be privilege which would delight most young man of a poetic turn ; and no wonder George Warrington love the theatre . then he have the satisfaction of think that his mother only half approve of play and playhouse , and of feast on fruit forbid at home . he give more than one elegant entertainment to the player , and it be even say that one or two distinguished genius have condescend to borrow money of he . 
 and as he polish and add new beauty to his masterpiece , we may be sure that he take advice of certain friend of his , and that they give he applause and counsel . Mr. Spencer , his new acquaintance , of the Temple , give a breakfast at his chamber in Fig Tree Court , when Mr. Warrington read part of his play , and the gentleman present pronounce that it have uncommon merit . even the learn Mr. Johnson , who be invite , be good enough to say that the piece have show talent . it war against the unity , to be sure ; but these have be violate by other author , and Mr. Warrington might sacrifice they as well as another . there be in Mr. W. 's tragedy a something which remind he both of Coriolanus and Othello . " and two very good thing too , sir ! " the author plead . " well , well , there be no doubt on that point ; and ' tis certain your catastrophe be terrible , just , and be in part true , be not the less awful , " remark Mr. Spencer . 
 now the plot of Mr. Warrington 's tragedy be quite full indeed of battle and murder . a favourite book of his grandfather have be the life of old George Frundsberg of Mindelheim , a colonel of foot - folk in the imperial service at Pavia fight , and during the war of the Constable Bourbon : and one of Frundsberg 's military companion be a certain Carpzow , or Carpezan , whom our friend select as his tragedy hero . his first act , as it at present stand in Sir George Warrington 's manuscript , be suppose to take place before a convent on the Rhine , which the Lutherans , under Carpezan , be besiege . a godless gang these Lutherans be . they have pull the beard of roman friar , and tear the veil of hundred of religious woman . a score of these be tremble within the wall of the convent yonder , of which the garrison , unless the expect succour arrive before midday , have promise to surrender . meanwhile there be armistice , and the sentry within look on with hungry eye , as the soldier and camp people gamble on the grass before the gate . twelve o'clock , ding , ding , dong ! it sound upon the convent bell . no succour have arrive . open gate , warder ! and give admission to the famous protestant hero , the terror of Turks on the Danube , and Papists in the Lombard plain Colonel Carpezan ! see , here he come , clothe in complete steel , his hammer of battle over his shoulder , with which he have batter so many infidel sconce , his flag display , his trumpet blow . " no rudeness , my man , " say Carpezan ; " the wine be your , and the convent larder and cellar be good : the church plate shall be melt : any of the garrison who choose to take service with Gaspar Carpezan be welcome , and shall have good pay . no insult to the religious lady ! I have promise they a safe - conduct , and he who lay a finger on they , hang ! mind that Provost Marshal ! " the Provost Marshal , a huge fellow in a red doublet , nod his head . 
 " we shall see more of that Provost Marshal , or executioner , " Mr. Spencer explain to his guest . 
 " a very agreeable acquaintance , I be sure , shall be delighted to meet the gentleman again ! " say Mr. Johnson , wag his head over his tea . " this scene of the mercenary , the camp follower , and their wild sport , be novel and stirring , Mr. Warrington , and I make you my compliment on it . the Colonel have go into the convent , I think ? now let we hear what he be go to do there . " 
 the Abbess , and one or two of her old lady , make their appearance before the conqueror . conqueror as he be , they hear he in their sacred hall . they have hear of his violent behaviour in conventual establishment before . that hammer , which he always carry in action , have smash many sacred image in religious house . pound and pound of convent plate be he know to have melt , the sacrilegious plunderer ! no wonder the Abbess - Princess of St. Mary 's , a lady of violent prejudice , free language , and noble birth , have a dislike to the lowborn heretic who lord it in her convent , and tell Carpezan a bit of her mind , as the phrase be . this scene , in which the lady get somewhat well of the Colonel , be like not a little by Mr. Warrington 's audience at the Temple . terrible as he might be in war , Carpezan be shake at first by the Abbess 's brisk opening charge of word ; and , conqueror as he be , seem at first to be conquer by his actual prisoner . but such an old soldier be not to be beat ultimately by any woman . " pray , madam , " say he , " how many lady be there in your convent , for whom my people shall provide conveyance ? " the Abbess , with a look of much trouble and anger , say that , " besides herself , the noble sister of Saint Mary 's House be twenty twenty - three . " she be go to say twenty - four , and now say twenty - three ? " ha ! why this hesitation ? " ask Captain Ulric , one of Carpezan 's gay officer . 
 the dark chief pull a letter from his pocket . " I require from you , madam , " he say sternly to the Lady Abbess , " the body of the noble lady Sybilla of Hoya . her brother be my favourite captain , slay by my side , in the Milanese . by his death , she become heiress of his land . ' Tis say a greedy uncle bring her hither ; and fast immure the lady against her will . the damsel shall herself pronounce her fate to stay a cloister sister of Saint Mary 's , or to return to home and liberty , as Lady Sybil , Baroness of . " ha ! the Abbess be greatly disturb by this question . she say , haughtily : " there be no Lady Sybil in this house : of which every inmate be under your protection , and swear to go free . the Sister Agnes be a nun profess , and what be her land and wealth revert to this order . " 
 " give I straightway the body of the Lady Sybil of Hoya ! " roar Carpezan , in great wrath . " if not , I make a signal to my reiter , and give you and your convent up to war . " 
 " Faith , if I lead the storm , and have my right , ' tis not my Lady Abbess that I will choose , " say Captain Ulric , " but rather some plump , smile , red - lipped maid like like " here , as he , the sly fellow , be look under the veil of the two attendant nun , the stern abbess cry , " Silence , fellow , with thy ribald talk ! the lady , warrior , whom you ask of I be pass away from sin , temptation , vanity , and three day since our Sister Agnes die . " 
 at this announcement Carpezan be immensely agitated . the Abbess call upon the chaplain to confirm her statement . ghastly and pale , the old man have to own that three day since the wretched Sister Agnes be bury . 
 this be too much ! in the pocket of his coat of mail Carpezan have a letter from Sister Agnes herself , in which she announce that she be go to be bury indeed , but in an oubliette of the convent , where she may either be keep on water and bread , or die starve outright . he seize the unflinche Abbess by the arm , whilst Captain Ulric lay hold of the chaplain by the throat . the Colonel blow a blast upon his horn : in rush his furious Lanzknechts from without . Crash , bang ! they knock the convent wall about . and in the midst of flame , scream , and slaughter , who be presently bring in by Carpezan himself , and faint on his shoulder , but Sybilla herself ? a little sister nun   that gay one with the red lip   have point out to the Colonel and Ulric the way to Sister Agnes 's dungeon , and , indeed , have be the mean of make her situation know to the Lutheran chief . 
 " the convent be suppress with a vengeance , " say Mr. Warrington . " we end our first act with the burning of the place , the roar of triumph of the soldiery , and the outcry of the nun . they have well go change their dress immediately , for they will have to be court lady in the next act as you will see . " here the gentleman talk the matter over . if the piece be to be do at Drury Lane , Mrs. Pritchard would hardly like to be Lady Abbess , as she doth but appear in the first act . Miss Pritchard might make a pretty Sybilla , and Miss Gates the attendant nun . Mr. Garrick be scarce tall enough for Carpezan though , when he be excited , nobody ever think of he but as big as a grenadier . Mr. Johnson own Woodward will be a good Ulric , as he play the Mercutio part very gaily ; and so , by one and t'other , the audience fancy the play already on the board , and cast the character . 
 in act the second , Carpezan have marry Sybilla . he have enrich himself in the war , have be ennoble by the Emperor , and live at his castle on the Danube in state and splendour . 
 but , truth to say , though marry , rich , and ennoble , the Lord Carpezan be not happy . it may be that in his wild life , as leader of condottieri on both side , he have commit crime which agitate his mind with remorse . it may be that his rough soldier - manner consort ill with his imperious highborn bride . she lead he such a life I be narrate as it be the Warrington manuscript , which be too long to print in entire taunt he with his low birth , his vulgar companion , whom the old soldier love to see about he , and so forth that there be time when he rather wish that he have never rescue this lovely , quarrelsome , wayward vixen from the oubliette out of which he fish she . after the bustle of the first act this be a quiet one , and pass chiefly in quarrel between the Baron and Baroness Carpezan , until horn blow , and it be announce that the young king of Bohemia and Hungary be come bunt that way . 
 Act III . be pass at Prague , whither his Majesty have invite Lord Carpezan and his wife , with noble offer of preferment to the latter . from Baron he shall be promote to be Count , from Colonel he shall be general - in - chief . his wife be the most brilliant and fascinating of all the lady of the court and as for Carpzoff 
 " oh , stay I have it I know your story , sir , now , " say Mr. Johnson . " ' tis in ' Meteranus , ' in the Theatrum Universum . I read it in Oxford as a boy Carpezanus or Carpzoff " 
 " that be the fourth act , " say Mr. Warrington . in the fourth act the young King 's attention towards Sybilla grow more and more marked ; but her husband , battle against his jealousy , long refuse to yield to it , until his wife 's criminality be put beyond a doubt and here he read the act , which close with the terrible tragedy which actually happen . be convinced of his wife 's guilt , Carpezan cause the executioner who follow his regiment to slay she in her own palace . and the curtain of the act fall just after the dreadful deed be do , in a side - chamber illuminate by the moon shin through a great oriel window , under which the King come with his lute , and play the song which be to be the signal between he and his guilty victim . 
 this song   writ in the ancient style , and repeat in the piece , be sing in the third act previously at a great festival give by the King and Queen   be pronounce by Mr. Johnson to be a happy imitation of Mr. Waller 's manner , and its gay repetition at the moment of guilt , murder , and horror , very much deepen the tragic gloom of the scene . 
 " but whatever come afterwards ? " he ask . " I remember in the Theatrum , Carpezan be say to have be take into favour again by Count Mansfield , and doubtless to have murder other folk on the reform side . " 
 here our poet have depart from historic truth . in the fifth act of Carpezan King Louis of Hungary and Bohemia   sufficiently terror - stricken , no doubt , by the sanguinary termination of his intrigue   have receive word that the Emperor Solyman be invade his hungarian dominion . enter two nobleman who relate how , in the council which the King hold upon the news , the injure Carpezan rush infuriate into the royal presence , break his sword , and fling it at the King 's foot along with a glove which he dare he to wear , and which he swear he would one day claim . after that wild challenge the rebel flee from Prague , and have not since be hear of ; but it be report that he have join the turkish invader , assume the turban , and be now in the camp of the Sultan , whose white tent glance across the river yonder , and against whom the King be now on his march . then the King come to his tent with his general , prepare his order of battle ; and dismiss they to their post , keep by his side an aged and faithful knight , his master of the horse , to whom he express his repentance for his past crime , his esteem for his good and injured Queen , and his determination to meet the day 's battle like a man . 
 " what be this field call ? " 
 " Mohacz , my liege ! " say the old warrior , add the remark that " Ere set of sun , Mohacz will see a battle bravely win . " 
 trumpet and alarm now sound ; they be the cymbal and barbaric music of the Janissaries : we be in the turkish camp , and yonder , surround by turbane chief , walk the Sultan Solyman 's friend , the conqueror of Rhodes , the redoubte Grand Vizier . 
 who be that warrior in an eastern habit , but with a glove in his cap ? ' Tis Carpezan . even Solyman know his courage and ferocity as a soldier . he know ; the ordnance of the hungarian host ; in what arm King Louis be weak : how his cavalry , of which the shock be tremendous , should be receive , and inveigle into yonder morass , where certain death may await they he pray for a command in the front , and as near as possible to the place where the traitor King Louis will engage . " ' tis well , " say the grim Vizier , " our invincible Emperor survey the battle from yonder tower . at the end of the day , he will know how to reward your valour . " the signal - gun fire the trumpet blow the turkish captain retire , vow death to the infidel , and eternal fidelity to the Sultan . 
 and now the battle begin in earnest , and with those various incident which the lover of the theatre knoweth . christian knight and turkish warrior clash and skirmish over the stage . continue alarm be sound . troop on both side advance and retreat . Carpezan , with his glove in his cap , and his dreadful hammer smashing all before he , rage about the field , call for King Louis . the renegade be about to slay a warrior who face he , but recognise young Ulric , his ex - captain , he drop the uplifted hammer , and bid he fly , and think of Carpezan . he be soften at see his young friend , and thinking of former time when they fight and conquer together in the cause of Protestantism . ulric bid he to return , but of course that be now out of the question . they fight . Ulric will have it , and down he go under the hammer . the renegade melt in sight of his wound comrade , when who appear but King Louis , his plume tear , his sword hack , his shield dent with a thousand blow which he have receive and deliver during the day 's battle . ha ! who be this ? the guilty monarch would turn away   perhaps Macbeth may have do so before , but Carpezan be on he . all his softness be go . he rag like a fury . " an equal fight ! " he roar . " a traitor against a traitor ! Stand , King Louis ! false king , false knight , false friend by this glove in my helmet , I challenge you ! " and he tear the guilty token out of his cap , and fling it at the King . 
 of course they set to , and the monarch fall under the terrible arm of the man whom he have injure . he die , utter a few incoherent word of repentance , and Carpezan , lean upon his murderous mace , utter a heartbroken soliloquy over the royal corpse . the turkish warrior have gather meanwhile : the dreadful day be their own . yonder stand the dark Vizier , surround by his Janissaries , whose bow and sword be tired of drink death . he survey the renegade stand over the corpse of the King . 
 " christian renegade ! " he say , " Allah have give we a great victory . the arm of the Sublime Emperor be everywhere triumphant . the Christian King be slay by you . " 
 " peace to his soul ! he die like a good knight , " gasp Ulric , himself die on the field . 
 " in this day 's battle , " the grim Vizier continue , " no man hath comport himself more bravely than you . you be make Bassa of Transylvania ! Advance bowman Fire ! " 
 an arrow quiver in the breast of Carpezan . 
 " Bassa of Transylvania , you be a traitor to your king , who lie murder by your hand ! " continue grim Vizier . " you contribute more than any soldier to this day 's great victory . ' tis thus my sublime Emperor meetly reward you . sound trumpet ! we march for Vienna to - night ! " 
 and the curtain drop as Carpezan , crawl towards his die comrade , kiss his hand , and gasp 
 " forgive I , Ulric ! " 
 when Mr. Warrington have finish read his tragedy , he turn round to Mr. Johnson , modestly , and ask , 
 " what say you , sir ? be there any chance for I ? " 
 but the opinion of this most eminent critic be scarce to be give , for Mr. Johnson have be asleep for some time , and frankly own that he have lose the latter part of the play . 
 the little auditory begin to hum and stir as the noise of the speaker cease . George may have be very nervous when he first commence to read ; but everybody allow that he read the last two act uncommonly well , and make he a compliment upon his matter and manner . perhaps everybody be in good - humour because the piece have come to an end . Mr. Spencer 's servant hand about refreshing drink . the Templars speak out their various opinion whilst they sip the negus . they be a choice band of critic , familiar with the pit of the theatre , and they treat Mr. Warrington 's play with the gravity which such a subject demand . 
 Mr. Fountain suggest that the Vizier should not say " Fire ! " when he bid the archer kill Carpezan , as you certainly do not   fire with a bow and arrow . a note be take of the objection . 
 Mr. Figtree , who be of a sentimental turn , regret that Ulric could not be save , and marry to the comic heroine . 
 " Nay , sir , there be an utter annihilation of the hungarian army at Mohacz , " say Mr. Johnson , " and Ulric must take his knock on the head with the rest . he could only be save by flight , and you would not   have a hero run away ! pronounce sentence of death against Captain Ulric , but kill he with honour of war . " 
 Messrs. Essex and Tanfield wonder to one another who be this queer - look pert whom Spencer have invite , and who contradict everybody ; and suggest a boat up the river and a little fresh air after the fatigue of the tragedy . 
 the general opinion be decidedly favourable to Mr. Warrington 's performance ; and Mr. Johnson 's opinion , on which he set a special value , be the most favourable of all . perhaps Mr. Johnson be not sorry to compliment a young gentleman of fashion and figure like Mr. W. " up to the death of the heroine , " he say , " I be frankly with you , sir . and I may speak , as a playwright who have kill my own heroine , and have my share of the plausus in the atro . to hear your own line nobly deliver to an applauding house , be indeed a noble excitement . I like to see a young man of good name and lineage who condescend to think that the Tragic Muse be not below his advance . it be to a sordid roof that I invite she , and I ask she to rescue I from poverty and squalor . happy you , sir , who can meet she upon equal term , and can afford to marry she without a portion ! " 
 " I doubt whether the great genius be not debase who have to make a bargain with Poetry , " remark Mr. Spencer . 
 " Nay , sir , " Mr. Johnson answer , " I doubt if many a great genius would work at all without bribe and necessity ; and so a man have well marry a poor Muse for good and all , for well or bad , than dally with a rich one . I make you my compliment to your play , Mr. Warrington , and if you want an introduction to the stage , shall be very happy if I can induce my friend Mr. Garrick to present you . " 
 " Mr. Garrick shall be his sponsor , " cry the florid Mr. Figtree . " melpomene shall be his godmother , and he shall have the witch ' caldron in Macbeth for a christening font . " 
 " Sir , I neither say font nor godmother ! " remark the man of letter . " I would have no play contrary to moral or religion nor , as I conceive , be Mr. Warrington 's piece otherwise than friendly to they . Vice be chastise , as it should be , even in king , though perhaps we judge of their temptation too lightly . revenge be punish as not to be lightly exercise by our limited notion of justice . it may have be Carpezan 's wife who pervert the King , and not the King who lead the woman astray . at any rate , Louis be rightly humiliate for his crime , and the Renegade most justly execute for his . I wish you a good afternoon , gentleman ! " and with these remark , the great author take his leave of the company . 
 towards the close of the reading , General Lambert have make his appearance at Mr. Spencer 's chamber , and have listen to the latter part of the tragedy . the performance over , he and George take their way to the latter 's lodging in the first place , and subsequently to the General 's own house , where the young author be expect , in order to recount the reception which his play have meet from his Temple critic . 
 at Mr. Warrington 's apartment in Southampton Row , they find a letter await George , which the latter place in his pocket unread , so that he might proceed immediately with his companion to Soho . we may be sure the lady there be eager to know about the Carpezan 's fate in the morning 's small rehearsal . 
 Hetty say George be so shy , that perhaps it would be well for all party if some other person have read the play . Theo , on the contrary , cry out : 
 " read it , indeed ! who can read a poem well than the author who feel it in his heart ? and George have his whole heart in the piece ! " 
 Mr. Lambert very likely think that somebody else 's whole heart be in the piece too , but do not utter this opinion to Miss Theo . 
 " I think Harry would look very well in your figure of a Prince , " say the General . " that scene where he take leave of his wife before depart for the war remind I of your brother 's manner not a little . " 
 " oh , papa ! surely Mr. Warrington himself would act the Prince 's part good ! " cry Miss Theo . 
 " and be deservedly slain in battle at the end ? " ask the father of the house . 
 " I do not say that , only that Mr. George would make a very good Prince , papa ! " cry Miss Theo . 
 " in which case he would find a suitable Princess , I have no doubt . what news of your brother Harry ? " 
 George , who have be think about theatrical triumph ; about monumentum aere perennius ; about lilac ; about love whisper and tenderly accept , remember that he have a letter from Harry in his pocket , and gaily produce it . 
 " let we hear what Mr. Truant say for himself , Aunt Lambert ! " cry George , break the seal . 
 why be he so disturbed , as he read the content of his letter ? why do the woman look at he with alarmed eye ? and why , above all , be Hetty so pale ? 
 " here be the letter , " say George , and begin to read it : 
 " RYDE , June 1 , 1758 . 
 " I do not tell my dearest George what I hop and intend , when I leave home on Wednesday . ' twas to see Mr. Webb at Portsmouth or the Isle of Wight , wherever his regiment be , and if need be to go down on my knee to he to take I as volunteer on the Expedition . I take boat from Portsmouth , where I learn that he be with our regiment incampt at the village of Ryde . be receive by he most kindly , and my petition grant out of hand . that be why I say our regiment . we be eight gentleman volunteer with Mr. Webb , all man of birth , and good fortune except poor I , who do not   deserve one . we be to mess with the officer ; we take the right of the collumn , and have always the right to be in front , and in an hour we embark on board his Majesty 's Ship the Rochester of 60 gun , while our Commodore 's , Mr. Howe 's , be the Essex , 70 . his squadron be about 20 ship , and I should think 100 transport at least . though ' tis a secret expedition , we make no doubt France be our destination where I hope to see my friend the Monsieurs once more , and win my colour , a la point de mon epee , as we use to say in Canada . perhaps my service as interpreter may be useful ; I speak the language not so well as some one I know , but well than most here . 
 " I scarce venture to write to our mother to tell she of this step . will you , who have a coxing tongue will wheadle any one , write to she as soon as you have finisht the famous tradgedy ? will you give my affectionate respect to dear General Lambert and lady ? and if any accident should happen , I know you will take care of poor Gumbo as belong to my dearest good George 's most affectionate brother , HENRY E. WARRINGTON . 
 " P.S. Love to all at home when you write , include Dempster , Mountain , and Fanny M. and all the people , and duty to my honoured mother , wish I have please she well . and if I say anything unkind to dear Miss Hester Lambert , I know she will forgive I , and pray God bless all . H. E. W. " 
 " to G. Esmond Warrington , Esq . , at Mr. Scrace 's House in Southampton Row , Opposite Bedford House Gardens , London . " 
 he have not read the last word with a very steady voice . Mr. Lambert sit silent , though not a little move . theo and her mother look at one another ; but Hetty remain with a cold face and a stricken heart . she think , " he be go to danger , perhaps to death , and it be I send he ! " 




 CHAPTER LXIV . in which Harry live to fight another Day 

 the trusty Gumbo could not console himself for the departure of his beloved master : at least , to judge from his tear and howl on first hear the news of Mr. Harry 's enlistment , you would have think the negro 's heart must break at the separation . no wonder he go for sympathy to the maid - servant at Mr. Lambert 's lodging . wherever that dusky youth be , he seek comfort in the society of female . their fair and tender bosom know how to feel pity for the poor African , and the darkness of Gumbo 's complexion be no more repulsive to they than Othello 's to Desdemona . I believe Europe have never be so squeamish in regard to Africa , as a certain other respected Quarter . Nay , some Africans witness the Chevalier de St. Georges , for instance have be notorious favourite with the fair sex . 
 so , in his humbler walk , be Mr. Gumbo . the Lambert servant weep freely in his company ; the maid kindly consider he not only as Mr. Harry 's man , but their brother . Hetty could not help laugh when she find Gumbo roar because his master have go a volumteer , as he call it , and have not take he . he be ready to save Master Harry 's life any day , and would have do it and have himself cut in twenty thousand hundred piece for Master Harry , that he would ! meanwhile , Nature must be support , and he condescend to fortify she by large supply of beer and cold meat in the kitchen . that he be greedy , idle , and tell lie , be certain ; but yet Hetty give he half a crown , and be especially kind to he . her tongue , that be will not to wag so pertly , be so gentle now , that you might fancy it have never make a joke . she move about the house mum and meek . she be humble to mamma ; thankful to John and Betty when they wait at dinner ; patient to Polly when the latter pull her hair in comb it ; long - suffering when Charley from school trod on her toe , or derange her workbox ; silent in papa 's company , oh , such a transmogrify little Hetty ! if papa have order she to roast the leg of mutton , or walk to church arm - in - arm with Gumbo , she would have make a curtsey , and say , " yes , if you please , dear papa ! " Leg of mutton ! what sort of meal be some poor volunteer have , with the cannon - ball fly about their head ? church ! when it come to the prayer in time of war , oh , how her knee smite together as she kneel , and hide her head in the pew ! she hold down her head when the parson read out , " thou shalt do no murder , " from the communion - rail , and fancy he must be look at she . how she think of all traveller by land or by water ! how she sicken as she run to the paper to read if there be news of the Expedition ! how she watch papa when he come home from his Ordnance Office , and look in his face to see if there be good news or bad ! be he well ? be he make a General yet ? be he wound and make a prisoner ? ah I ! or , perhaps , be both his leg take off by one shot , like that pensioner they see in Chelsea Garden t'other day ? she would go on wooden leg all her life , if his can but bring he safe home ; at least , she ought never to get up off her knee until he be return . " have not   you hear of people , Theo , " say she , " whose hair have grow grey in a single night ? I should not   wonder if mine do , should not   wonder in the least . " and she look in the glass to ascertain that phenomenon . 
 " Hetty dear , you use not to be so nervous when papa be away in Minorca , " remark Theo . 
 " ah , Theo ! one may very well see that George be not with the army , but safe at home , " rejoin Hetty ; whereat the eld sister blush , and look very pensive . Au fait , if Mr. George have be in the army , that , you see , would have be another pair of boot . meanwhile , we do not   intend to harrow anybody 's kind feeling any long , but may as well state that Harry be , for the present , as safe as any officer of the Life Guards at Regent 's Park Barracks . 
 the first expedition in which our gallant volunteer be engage may be call successful , but certainly be not glorious . the British Lion , or any other lion , can not always have a worthy enemy to combat , or a battle - royal to deliver . suppose he go forth in quest of a tiger who will not   come , and lay his paw on a goose , and gobble he up ? lion , we know , must live like any other animal . but suppose , advance into the forest in search of the tiger aforesaid , and bellow his challenge of war , he espy not one but six tiger come towards he ? this manifestly be not his game at all . he put his tail between his royal leg , and retreat into his own snug den as quickly as he may . be he to attempt to go and fight six tiger , you might write that Lion down an Ass . 
 now , Harry Warrington 's first feat of war be in this wise . he and about 13,000 other fight man embark in various ship and transport on the 1st of June , from the Isle of Wight , and at daybreak on the 5th the fleet stand in to the Bay of Cancale in Brittany . for a while he and the gentleman volunteer have the pleasure of examine the french coast from their ship , whilst the Commander - in - Chief and the Commodore reconnoitre the bay in a cutter . Cattle be see , and some dragoon , who trot off into the distance ; and a little fort with a couple of gun have the audacity to fire at his Grace of Marlborough and the Commodore in the cutter . by two o'clock the whole british fleet be at anchor , and signal be make for all the grenadi company of eleven regiment to embark on board flat - bottom boat and assemble round the Commodore 's ship , the Essex . meanwhile , Mr. Howe , hoist his broad pennant on board the Success frigate , go in as near as possible to shore , follow by the other frigate , to protect the landing of the troop ; and , now , with Lord George Sackville and General Dury in command , the gentleman volunteer , the grenadi company , and three battalion of guard pull to shore . 
 the gentleman volunteer could not do any heroic deed upon this occasion , because the French , who should have stay to fight they , run away , and the frigate have silence the fire of the little fort which have disturb the reconnaissance of the Commander - in - Chief , the army presently assault it , take the whole garrison prisoner , and shoot he in the leg . indeed , he be but one old gentleman , who gallantly have fire his two gun , and who tell his conqueror , " if every Frenchman have act like I , you would not have land at Cancale at all . " 
 the advanced detachment of invader take possession of the village of Cancale , where they lie upon their arm all night ; and our volunteer be joke by his comrade about his eagerness to go out upon the war - path , and bring in two or three scalp of Frenchmen . none such , however , fall under his tomahawk ; the only person slay on the whole day be a french gentleman , who be rid with his servant , and be surprise by volunteer Lord Downe , march in the front with a company of Kingsley 's . my Lord Downe offer the gentleman quarter , which he foolishly refuse , whereupon he , his servant , and the two horse , be straightway shot . 
 next day the whole force be land , and advance from Cancale to St. Malo . all the village be empty through which the troop pass , and the road be so narrow in many place that the man have to march single file , and might have be shoot down from behind the tall leafy hedge have there be any enemy to disturb they . 
 at nightfall the army arrive before St. Malo , and be salute by a fire of artillery from that town , which do little damage in the darkness . under cover of this , the british set fire to the ship , wooden building , pitch and tar magazine in the harbour , and make a prodigious conflagration that last the whole night . 
 this feat be achieve without any attempt on the part of the French to molest the british force : but , as it be confidently assert that there be a considerable french force in the town of St. Malo , though they would not   come out , his grace the Duke of Marlborough and my Lord George Sackville determine not to disturb the garrison , march back to Cancale again , and and so get on board their ship . 
 if this be not a veracious history , do not   you see that it would have be easy to send our Virginian on a more glorious campaign ? exactly four week after his departure from England , Mr. Warrington find himself at Portsmouth again , and address a letter to his brother George , with which the latter run off to Dean Street so soon as ever he receive it . 
 " glorious news , lady ! " cry he , find the Lambert family all at breakfast . " our champion have come back . he have undergo all sort of danger , but have survive they all . he have see dragon upon my word , he say so . " 
 " dragon ! what do you mean , Mr. Warrington ? " 
 " but not kill any he say so , as you shall hear . he write : 
 " ' dearest BROTHER I think you will be glad to hear that I be return , without any commission as yet ; without any wound or glory ; but , at any rate , alive and harty . on board our ship , we be almost as crowded as poor Mr. Holwell and his friend in their Black Hole at Calicutta . we have rough weather , and some of the gentleman volunteer , who prefer smooth water , grumble not a little . my gentleman 's stomach be dainty ; and after Braund 's cookery and White 's kick - shaw , they do not   like plain sailor 's rum and bisket . but I , who have be at sea before , take my ration and can of flip very contentedly : be determined to put a good face on everything before our fine english macaronis , and show that a Virginia gentleman be as good as the good of them . I wish , for the honour of old Virginia , that I have more to brag about . but all I can say in truth be , that we have be to France and come back again . why , I do not   think even your tragick pen could make anything of such a campaign as ours have be . we land on the 6 at Cancalle Bay , we see a few dragon on a hill ... ' 
 " there ! do I not tell you there be dragon ? " ask George , laugh . 
 " Mercy ! what can he mean by dragon ? " cry Hetty . 
 " Immense , long - tail monster , with steel scale on their back , who vomit fire , and gobble up a virgin a day . have not   you read about they in the Seven Champions ? " say papa . " see St. George 's flag , I suppose , they slunk off . " 
 " I have read of them , " say the little boy from Chartreux , solemnly . " they like to eat woman . one be go to eat Andromeda , you know , papa ; and Jason kill another , who be guard the apple - tree . " 
 " ... a few dragon on a hill , " George resume , " who ride away from we without engage . we sleep under canvass . we march to St. Malo , and burn ever so many privateer there . and we go on board shipp again , without ever cross sword with an enemy or meeting any except a few poor devil whom the troop plunder . well luck next time ! this have not   be very much nor particular glorious : but I have like it for my part . I have smell powder , besides a good deal of rosn and pitch we burn . I have   see the enemy ; have sleppt under canvass , and be dredful crowdid and sick at sea . I like it . my good compliment to dear Aunt Lambert , and tell Miss Hetty I be not   very much fritene when I see the french horse . your most affectionate brother , H. E. WARRINGTON . " 
 we hope Miss Hetty 's qualm of conscience be allay by Harry 's announcement that his expedition be over , and that he have so far take no hurt . far otherwise . Mr. Lambert , in the course of his official duty , have occasion to visit the troop at Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight , and George Warrington bear he company . they find Harry vastly improve in spirit and health from the excitement produce by the little campaign , quite eager and pleased to learn his new military duty , active , cheerful , and healthy , and altogether a different person from the listless moping lad who have dawdle in London coffee - house and Mrs. Lambert 's drawing - room . the troop be under canvas ; the weather be glorious , and George find his brother a ready pupil in a fine brisk open - air school of war . not a little amuse , the eld brother , arm - in - arm with the young volunteer , pace the street of the warlike city , recall his own brief military experience of two year back , and see here a much great army than that ill - fat one of which he have share the disaster . the expedition , such as we have see it , be certainly not glorious , and yet the troop and the nation be in high spirit with it . we be say to have humiliate the proud Gaul . we should have vanquish as well as humble he have he dare to appear . what valour , after all , be like british valour ? I dare say some such expression have be hear in later time . not that I would hint that our people brag much more than any other , or more now than formerly . have not these eye beheld the battle - ground of Leipzig , Jena , Dresden , Waterloo , Blenheim , Bunker 's Hill , New Orleans ? what heroic nation have not fight , have not conquer , have not run away , have not brag in its turn ? well , the british nation be much excited by the glorious victory of St. Malo . capture treasure be send home and exhibit in London . the people be so excited , that more laurel and more victory be demand , and the enthusiastic army go forth to seek some . 
 with this new expedition go a volunteer so distinguished , that we must give he precedence of all other amateur soldier or sailor . this be our sailor Prince , H.R.H. Prince Edward , who be convey on board the Essex in the ship 's twelve - oare barge , the standard of England fly in the bow of the boat , the Admiral with his flag and boat follow the Prince 's , and all the captain follow in seniority . 
 Away sail the fleet , Harry , in high health and spirit , wave his hat to his friend as they cheer from the shore . he must and will have his commission before long . there can be no difficulty about that , George think . there be plenty of money in his little store to buy his brother 's ensigncy ; but if he can win it without purchase by gallantry and good conduct , that be good . the colonel of the regiment report highly of his recruit ; man and officer like he . it be easy to see that he be a young fellow of good promise and spirit . 
 Hip , hip , huzzay ! what famous news be these which arrive ten day after the expedition have sail ? on the 7th and 8th of August his Majesty 's troop have effect a landing in the Bay des Marais , two league westward of Cherbourg , in the face of a large body of the enemy . awe by the appearance of british valour , that large body of the enemy have disappear . Cherbourg have surrender at discretion ; and the english colour be hoist on the three outlying fort . seven - and - twenty ship have be burn in the harbour , and a prodigious number of fine brass cannon take . as for your common iron gun , we have destroy them , likewise the basin   about which the mounseer brag so , and the two pier at the entrance to the harbour . 
 there be no end of jubilation in London ; just as Mr. Howe 's gun arrive from Cherbourg , come Mr. Wolfe 's colour capture at Louisbourg . the colour be take from Kensington to St Paul 's , escort by fourscore life - guard and fourscore horse - grenadier with officer in proportion , their standard , kettle - drum , and trumpet . at St. Paul 's they be receive by the Dean and chapter at the West Gate , and at that minute bang , bong , bung the Tower and Park gun salute they ! next day be the turn of the Cherbourg cannon and mortar . these be the gun we take . look at they with their carving and flaunting emblem their lily , and crown , and motto ! here they be , the Teneraire , the Malfaisant , the Vainqueur   the Vainqueur , indeed ! a pretty vainqueur of Britons ! , and ever so many more . how the people shout as the piece be trail through the street in procession ! as for Hetty and Mrs. Lambert , I believe they be of opinion that Harry take every one of the gun himself , drag they out of the battery , and destroy the artilleryman . he have immensely rise in the general estimation in the last few day . Madame de Bernstein have ask about he . Lady Maria have beg her dear cousin George to see she , and , if possible , give her news of his brother . George , who be quite the head of the family a couple of month since , find himself depose , and of scarce any account , in Miss Hetty 's eye at least . your wit , and your learning , and your tragedy , may be all very well ; but what be these in comparison to victory and brass cannon ? George take his deposition very meekly . they be fifteen thousand briton . why should they not march and take Paris itself ? nothing more probable , think some of the lady . they embrace ; they congratulate each other ; they be in a high state of excitement . for once , they long that Sir Miles and Lady Warrington be in town , so that they might pay her ladyship a visit , and ask , " what do you say to your nephew now , pray ? have he not take twenty - one fine brass cannon ; fling a hundred and twenty iron gun into the water , seize twenty - seven ship in the harbour , and destroy the basin and the two pier at the entrance ? " as the whole town rejoice and illuminate , so these worthy folk display brilliant red hanging in their cheek , and light up candle of joy in their eye , in honour of their champion and conqueror . 
 but now , I grieve to say , come a cloudy day after the fair weather . the appetite of our commander , grow by what it feed on , lead they to think they have not feast enough on the plunder of St. Malo ; and thither , after stay a brief time at Portsmouth and the Wight , the conqueror of Cherbourg return . they be land in the Bay of St. Lunar , at a distance of a few mile from the place , and march towards it , intend to destroy it this time . meanwhile the harbour of St. Lunar be find insecure , and the fleet move up to St. Cas , keep up its communication with the invade army . 
 now the British Lion find that the town of St. Malo which he have propose to swallow at a single mouthful be guard by an army of French , which the Governor of Brittany have bring to the succour of his good town , and the meditate coup - de - main being thus impossible , our leader march for their ship again , which lie duly await our warrior in the Bay of St. Cas . 
 hide , blush glory , hide St. Cas 's day ! as our troop be march down to their ship they become aware of an army follow they , which the french governor of the province have send from Brest . two - third of the troop , and all the artillery , be already embark , when the Frenchmen come down upon the remainder . four company of the first regiment of guard and the grenadi company of the army , face about on the beach to await the enemy , whilst the remain troop be carry off in the boat . as the French descend from the height round the bay , these guard and grenadier march out to attack they , leave an excellent position which they have occupy a great dyke raise on the shore , and behind which they might have resist to advantage . and now , eleven hundred man be engage with six nay , ten time their number ; and , after a while , break and make for the boat with a sauve qui peut ! seven hundred out of the eleven be kill , drown , or take prisoner the General himself be kill and , ah ! where be the volunteer ? 
 a man of peace myself , and little intelligent of the practice or the detail of war , I own I think less of the engage troop than of the people they leave behind . Jack the Guardsman and La Tulipe of the Royal Bretagne be face to face , and strive to knock each other 's brain out . Bon ! it be their nature to like the bear and lion and we will not say Heaven , but some power or other have make they so to do . but the girl of Tower Hill , who hang on Jack 's neck before he depart ; and the lass at Quimper , who give the Frenchman his brule - gueule and tobacco - box before he depart on the noir trajet ? what have you do , poor little tender heart , that you should grieve so ? my business be not with the army , but with the people leave behind . what a fine state Miss Hetty Lambert must be in , when she hear of the disaster to the troop and the slaughter of the grenadi company ! what grief and doubt be in George Warrington 's breast ; what commiseration in Martin Lambert 's , as he look into his little girl 's face and read her piteous story there ! Howe , the brave Commodore , row in his barge under the enemy 's fire , have rescue with his boat score and score of our fly people . More be drown ; hundred be prisoner , or shoot on the beach . among these , where be our Virginian ? 




 CHAPTER LXV . soldier 's Return 

 Great Powers ! will the vainglory of man , especially of Frenchmen , never cease ? will it be believe , that after the action of St. Cas a mere affair of cut off a rearguard , as you be aware they be so unfeeling as to fire away I do not   know how much powder at the invalide at Paris , and brag and bluster over our misfortune ? be there any magnanimity in hallooing and huzzaying because five or six hundred brave fellow have be catch by ten thousand on a seashore , and that fate have overtake they which be say to befall the hindmost ? I have a mind to design an authentic picture of the rejoicing at London upon our glorious success at St. Malo . I fancy the polished gun drag in procession by our gallant tar ; the stout horse - grenadier prance by ; the mob wave hat , roar cheer , pick pocket , and our friend in a balcony in Fleet Street look on and bless this scene of british triumph . but now that the french Invalides have be so vulgar as to imitate the Tower , and set up their St. Cas against our St. Malo , I scorn to allude to the stale subject . I say Nolo , not Malo : content , for my part , if Harry have return from one expedition and t'other with a whole skin . and have I ever say he be so much as bruised ? have I not , for fear of excite my fair young reader , say that he be as well as ever he have be in his life ? the sea air have brown his cheek , and the ball whistle by his side - curl have spar it . the ocean have wet his gaiter and other garment , without swallow up his body . he have , it be true , show the lapel of his coat to the enemy ; but for as short a time as possible , withdraw out of their sight as quick as might be . and what , pray , be lapel but revers ? coat have they , as well as man ; and our duty be to wear they with courage and good - humour . 
 " I can tell you , " say Harry , " we all have to run for it ; and when our line break , it be he who could get to the boat who be most lucky . the french horse and foot pursue we down to the sea , and be mingle among we , cut our man down , and bayonet they on the ground . poor Armytage be shoot in advance of I , and fall ; and I take he up and stagger through the surf to a boat . it be lucky that the sailor in our boat be not   afraid ; for the shot be whistle about their ear , break the blade of their oar , and riddle their flag with shot ; but the officer in command be as cool as if he have be drink a bowl of punch at Portsmouth , which we have one on landing , I can promise you . poor Sir John be less lucky than I . he never live to reach the ship , and the service have lose a fine soldier , and Miss Howe a true gentleman to her husband . there must be these casualty , you see ; and his brother get the promotion the baronetcy . " 
 " it be of the poor lady I be think , " say Miss Hetty   to whom haply our volunteer be tell his story ; " and the king . why do the King encourage Sir John Armytage to go ? a gentleman could not refuse a command from such a quarter . and now the poor gentleman be dead ! oh , what a state his Majesty must be in ! " 
 " I have no doubt his Majesty will be in a deep state of grief , " say papa , wag his head . 
 " now you be laugh ! do you mean , sir , that when a gentleman die in his service , almost at his foot , the King of England will not   feel for he ? " Hetty ask . " if I think that , I vow I would be for the Pretender ! " 
 " the sauce - box would make a pretty little head for Temple Bar , " say the General , who could see Miss Hetty 's meaning behind her word , and be aware in what a tumult of remorse , of consternation , of gratitude that the danger be over , the little heart be beat . " no , " say he , " my dear . be king to weep for every soldier , what a life you would make for they ! I think well of his Majesty than to suppose he so weak ; and , if Miss Hester Lambert get her Pretender , I doubt whether she would be any the happy . that family be never famous for too much feeling . " 
 " but if the King send Harry I mean Sir John Armytage actually to the war in which he lose his life , ought not   his Majesty to repent very much ? " ask the young lady . 
 " if Harry have fall , no doubt the court would have go into mourning : as it be , gentleman and lady be in coloured clothe yesterday , " remark the General . 
 " why should we not make bonfire for a defeat , and put on sackcloth and ash after a victory ? " ask George . " I protest I do not   want to thank Heaven for help we to burn the ship at Cherbourg . " 
 " yes you do , George ! not that I have a right to speak , and you be not   ever so much cleverer . but when your country win you be glad I know I be . when I run away before Frenchmen I be ashamed I can not   help it , though I do it , " say Harry . " it do not   seem to I right somehow that Englishmen should have to do it , " he add , gravely . and George smile ; but do not choose to ask his brother what , on the other hand , be the Frenchman 's opinion . 
 " ' tis a bad business , " continue Harry , gravely ; " but ' tis lucky ' twa no bad . the story about the French be , that their Governor , the Duke of Aiguillon , be rather what you call a moistened chicken . our whole retreat might have be cut off , only , to be sure , we ourselves be in a mighty hurry to move . the french local militia behave famous , I be happy to say ; and there be ever so many gentleman volunteer with them , who show , as they ought to do , in the front . they say the Chevalier of Tour d'Auvergne engage in spite of the Duke of Aiguillon 's order . officer tell we , who come off with a list of our prisoner and wound to General Bligh and Lord Howe . he be a lord now , since the news come of his brother 's death to home , George . he be a brave fellow , whether lord or commoner . " 
 " and his sister , who be to have marry poor Sir John Armytage , think what her state must be ! " sigh Miss Hetty , who have grow of late so sentimental . 
 " and his mother ! " cry Mrs. Lambert . " have you see her ladyship 's address in the paper to the elector of Nottingham ? ' Lord Howe be now absent upon the publick service , and Lieutenant - Colonel Howe with his regiment at Louisbourg , it rest upon I to beg the favour of your vote and interest that Lieutenant - Colonel Howe may supply the place of his late brother as your representative in Parliament . ' be not   this a gallant woman ? " 
 " a laconic woman , " say George . 
 " how can son help be brave who have be nurse by such a mother as that ? " ask the General . 
 our two young man look at each other . 
 " if one of we be to fall in defence of his country , we have a mother in Sparta who would think and write so too , " say George . 
 " if Sparta be anywhere Virginia way , I reckon we have , " remark Mr. Harry . " and to think that we should both of we have meet the enemy , and both of we be whip by he , brother ! " he add pensively . 
 Hetty look at he , and think of he only as he be the other day , totter through the water towards the boat , his comrade bleed on his shoulder , the enemy in pursuit , the shot fly round . and it be she who drive he into the danger ! her word provoke he . he never rebuke she now he be return . except when ask , he scarcely speak about his adventure at all . he be very grave and courteous with Hetty ; with the rest of the family especially frank and tender . but those taunt of hers wound he . " little hand ! " his look and demeanour seem to say , " thou shouldst not have be lift against I ! it be ill to scorn any one , much more one who have be so devoted to you and all your . I may not be over quick of wit , but in as far as the heart go , I be the equal of the good , and the good of my heart your family have have . " 
 Harry 's wrong , and his magnanimous endurance of it , serve he to regain in Miss Hetty 's esteem that place which he have lose during the previous month ' inglorious idleness . the respect which the fair pay to the brave she give he . she be no long pert in her answer , or sarcastic in her observation regard his conduct . in a word , she be a humiliate , an altered , an improve Miss Hetty . 
 and all the world seem to change towards Harry , as he towards the world . he be no long sulky and indolent : he no more despond about himself , or defy his neighbour . the colonel of his regiment report his behaviour as exemplary , and recommend he for one of the commission vacate by the casualty during the expedition . Unlucky as its termination be , it at least be fortunate to he . his brother - volunteer , when they come back to St. James 's Street , report highly of his behaviour . these volunteer and their action be the theme of everybody 's praise . have he be a general commanding , and slay in the moment of victory , Sir John Armytage could scarce have have more sympathy than that which the nation show he . the paper teem with letter about he , and man of wit and sensibility vie with each other in compose epitaph in his honour . the fate of his affianced bride be bewail . she be , as we have say , the sister of the brave Commodore who have just return from this unfortunate expedition , and succeed to the title of his eld brother , an officer as gallant as himself , who have just fall in America . 
 my Lord Howe be hear to speak in special praise of Mr. Warrington , and so he have a handsome share of the fashion and favour which the town now bestow on the volunteer . doubtless there be thousand of man employ who be as good as they but the English ever love their gentleman , and love that they should distinguish themselves ; and these volunteer be vote Paladins and hero by common accord . as our young nobleman will , they accept their popularity very affably . White 's and Almack 's illuminate when they return , and St. James 's embrace its young knight . Harry be restore to full favour amongst they . their hand be hold out eagerly to he again . even his relation congratulate he ; and there come a letter from Castlewood , whither Aunt Bernstein have by this time betake herself , contain praise of his valour , and a pretty little bank - bill , as a token of his affectionate aunt 's approbation . this be under my Lord Castlewood 's frank , who send his regard to both his kinsman , and an offer of the hospitality of his country - house , if they be minded to come to he . and besides this , there come to he a private letter through the post not very well spelt , but in a handwriting which Harry smile to see again , in which his affeetionate cousin , Maria Esmond , tell he she always love to hear his praise   which be in everybody 's mouth now , and sympathise in his good or evil fortune ; and that , whatever occur to he , she beg to keep a little place in his heart . Parson Sampson , she write , have preach a beautiful sermon about the horror of war , and the noble action of man who volunteer to face battle and danger in the service of their country . indeed , the chaplain write himself , presently , a letter full of enthusiasm , in which he salute Mr. Harry as his friend , his benefactor , his glorious hero . even Sir Miles Warrington despatch a basket of game from Norfolk : and one bird   shoot sit , with love to my cousin , have a string and paper round the leg , and be send as the first victim of young Miles 's fowling - piece . 
 and presently , with joy beam in his countenance , Mr. Lambert come to visit his young friend at their lodging in Southampton Row , and announce to they that Mr. Henry Warrington be forthwith to be gazette as Ensign in the Second Battalion of Kingsley 's , the 20th Regiment , which have be engage in the campaign , and which now at this time be form into a separate regiment , the 67th . its colonel be not with his regiment during its expedition to Brittany . he be away at Cape Breton , and be engage in capture those gun at Louisbourg , of which the arrival in England have cause such exultation . 




 CHAPTER LXVI . in which we go a - court 

 some of my amiable reader no doubt be in the custom of visit that famous garden in the Regent 's Park , in which so many of our fin , feather , four - foot fellow - creature be accommodate with board and lodge , in return for which they exhibit themselves for our instruction and amusement : and there , as a man 's business and private thought follow he everywhere , and mix themselves with all life and nature round about he , I find myself , whilst look at some fish in the aquarium , still actually think of our friend the Virginians . 
 one of the most beautiful motion - master I ever beheld , sweep through his green bath in harmonious curve , now turn his black glistening back to I , now exhibit his fair white chest , in every movement active and graceful , turn out to be our old homely friend the flounder , whom we have all gobble up out of his bath of water souchy at Greenwich , without have the slight idea that he be a beauty . 
 as be the race of man , so be the race of flounder . if you can but see the latter in his right element , you may view he agile , healthy , and comely : put he out of his place , and behold his beauty be go , his motion be disgraceful : he flap the unfeele ground ridiculously with his tail , and will presently gasp his feeble life out . take he up tenderly , ere it be too late , and cast he into his native Thames again but stop : I believe there be a certain proverb about fish out of water , and that other profound naturalist have remark on they before I . now Harry Warrington have be flounder for ever so long a time past , and out of his proper element . as soon as he find it , health , strength , spirit , energy , return to he , and with the tap of the epaulet on his shoulder he spring up an altered being . he delight in his new profession ; he engage in all its detail , and master they with eager quickness . have I the skill of my friend Lorrequer , I would follow the other Harry into camp , and see he on the march , at the mess , on the parade - ground ; I would have many a carouse with he and his companion ; I would cheerfully live with he under the tent ; I would knowingly explain all the manoeuvre of war , and all the detail of the life military . as it be , the reader must please , out of his experience and imagination , to fill in the colour of the picture of which I can give but meagre hint and outline , and , above all , fancy Mr. Harry Warrington in his new red coat and yellow facing , very happy to bear the King 's colour , and please to learn and perform all the duty of his new profession . 
 as each young man delight in the excellence of the other , and cordially recognise his brother 's superior quality , George , we may be sure , be proud of Harry 's success , and rejoice in his return good fortune . he write an affectionate letter to his mother in Virginia , recount all the praise which he have hear of Harry , and which his brother 's modesty , George know , would never allow he to repeat . he describe how Harry have win his own first step in the army , and how he , George , would ask his mother leave to share with she the expense of purchase a high rank for he . 
 nothing , say George , would give he a great delight , than to be able to help his brother , and the more so , as , by his sudden return into life , as it be , he have deprive Harry of an inheritance which he have legitimately consider as his own . labour under that misconception , Harry have indulge in great expense than he ever would have think of incur as a young brother ; and George think it be but fair , and as it be , as a thank - offering for his own deliverance , that he should contribute liberally to any scheme for his brother 's advantage . 
 and now , have conclude his statement respect Harry 's affair , George take occasion to speak of his own , and address his honoured mother on a point which very deeply concerned himself . she be aware that the good friend he and his brother have find in England be the good Mr. and Mrs. Lambert , the latter Madam Esmond 's schoolfellow of early year . where their own blood relation have be worldly and unfeele , these true friend have ever be generous and kind . the General be respect by the whole army , and belove by all who know he . no mother 's affection could have be more touching than Mrs. Lambert 's for both Madam Esmond 's child ; and now , write Mr. George , he himself have form an attachment for the eld Miss Lambert , on which he think the happiness of his life depend , and which he besought his honoured mother to approve . he have make no precise offer to the young lady or her parent ; but he be bind to say that he have make little disguise of his sentiment , and that the young lady , as well as her parent , seem favourable to he . she have be so admirable and exemplary a daughter to her own mother , that he feel sure she would do her duty by his . in a word , Mr. Warrington describe the young lady as a model of perfection , and express his firm belief that the happiness or misery of his own future life depend upon possess or lose she . why do you not produce this letter ? haply ask some sentimental reader , of the present Editor , who have say how he have the whole Warrington correspondence in his hand . why not ? because ' tis cruel to babble the secret of a young man 's love ; to overhear his incoherent vow and wild rapture , and to note , in cold blood , the secret it may be , the folly of his passion . shall we play eavesdropper at twilight embrasure , count sigh and hand - shake , bottle hot tear : lay our stethoscope on delicate young breast , and feel their heart - throb ? I protest , for one , love be sacred . wherever I see it   as one sometimes may in this world   shoot suddenly out of two pair of eye ; or glance sadly even from one pair ; or look down from the mother to the baby in her lap ; or from papa at his girl 's happiness as she be whirl round the room with the captain ; or from John Anderson , as his old wife come into the room the bonne vieille , the ever peerless among woman ; wherever we see that signal , I say , let we salute it . it be not only wrong to kiss and tell , but to tell about kiss . everybody who have be admit to the mystery , hush about it . down with he qui Deae sacrum vulgarit arcanae . beware how you dine with he , he will print your private talk : as sure as you sail with he , he will throw you over . 
 Whilst Harry 's love of battle have lead he to smell powder to rush upon reluctante dracone , and to carry wounded comrade out of fire , George have be pursue an amusement much more peaceful and delightful to he ; pen sonnet to his mistress 's eyebrow , mayhap ; pace in the darkness under her window , and watch the little lamp which shine upon she in her chamber ; find all sort of pretext for send little note which do not   seem to require little answer , but get they ; cull bit out of his favourite poet , and flower out of Covent Garden for somebody 's special adornment and pleasure ; walk to St. James 's Church , sing very likely out of the same Prayer - book , and never hear one word of the sermon , so much do other thought engross he ; be prodigiously affectionate to all Miss Theo 's relation to her little brother and sister at school ; to the elder at college ; to Miss Hetty , with whom he engage in gay passage of wit ; and to mamma , who be half in love with he herself , Martin Lambert say ; for if father be sometimes sulky at the appearance of the destine son - in - law , be it not a fact that mother become sentimental and , as it be , love their own love over again ? 
 Gumbo and Sady be for ever on the trot between Southampton Row and Dean Street . in the summer month all sort of junketing and pleasure - party be devise ; and there be countless proposal to go to Ranelagh , to Hampstead , to Vauxhall , to Marylebone Gardens , and what not . George want the famous tragedy copy out fair for the stage , and who can write such a beautiful italian hand as Miss Theo ? as the sheet pass to and fro they be accompany by little note of thank , of interrogation , of admiration , always . see , here be the packet , mark in Warrington 's neat hand , " T 's letter , 1758 - 9 . " shall we open they and reveal their tender secret to the public gaze ? those virgin word be whisper for one ear alone . year after they be write , the husband read , no doubt , with sweet pang of remembrance , the fond line address to the lover . it be a sacrilege to show the pair to public eye : only let kind reader be pleased to take our word that the young lady 's letter be modest and pure , the gentleman 's most respectful and tender . in fine , you see , we have say very little about it ; but , in these few last month , Mr. George Warrington have make up his mind that he have find the woman of woman . she may not   be the most beautiful . why , there be Cousin Flora , there be Coelia , and Ardelia , and a hundred more , who be ever so much more handsome : but her sweet face please he well than any other in the world . she may not   be the most clever , but her voice be the dearest and pleasantest to hear ; and in her company he be so clever himself ; he have such fine thought ; he use such eloquent word ; he be so generous , noble , witty , that no wonder he delight in it . and , in regard to the young lady , as thank Heaven I never think so ill of woman as to suppose they to be just , we may be sure that there be no amount of wit , of wisdom , of beauty , of valour , of virtue with which she do not endow her young hero . 
 when George 's letter reach home , we may fancy that it create no small excitement in the little circle round Madam Esmond 's fireside . so he be in love , and wish to marry ! it be but natural , and would keep he out of harm 's way . if he propose to unite himself with a well - breed christian young woman , Madam see no harm . 
 " I know they would be set their cap at he , " say Mountain . " they fancy that his wealth be as great as his estate . he do not say whether the young lady have money . I fear otherwise . " 
 " People would set their cap at he here , I dare say , " say Madam Esmond , grimly look at her dependant , " and try and catch Mr. Esmond Warrington for their own daughter , who be no rich than Miss Lambert may be . " 
 " I suppose your ladyship mean I ! " say Mountain . " my Fanny be poor , as you say ; and ' tis kind of you to remind I of her poverty ! " 
 " I say people would set their cap at he . if the cap fit you , tant pis ! as my papa use to say . " 
 " you think , madam , I be scheme to keep George for my daughter ? I thank you , on my word ! a good opinion you seem to have of we after the year we have live together ! " 
 " my dear mountain , I know you much well than to suppose you could ever fancy your daughter would be a suitable match for a gentleman of Mr. Esmond 's rank and station , " say Madam , with much dignity . 
 " Fanny Parker be as good as Molly Benson at school , and Mr. Mountain 's daughter be as good as Mr. Lambert 's ! " Mrs. Mountain cry out . 
 " then you do think of marry she to my son ! I shall write to Mr. Esmond Warrington , and say how sorry I be that you should be disappoint ! " say the mistress of Castlewood . and we , for our part , may suppose that Mrs. Mountain be disappoint , and have some ambitious view respect her daughter else , why should she have be so angry at the notion of Mr. Warrington 's marriage ? 
 in reply to her son , Madam Esmond write back that she be pleased with the fraternal love George exhibit ; that it be indeed but right in some measure to compensate Harry , whose expectation have lead he to adopt a more costly mode of life than he would have enter on have he know he be only a young son . and with respect to purchase his promotion , she would gladly halve the expense with Harry 's eld brother , be thankful to think his own gallantry have win he his first step . this bestowal of George 's money , Madam Esmond add , be at least much more satisfactory than some other extravagance to which she would not advert . 
 the other extravagance to which Madam allude be the payment of the ransom to the french captain 's family , to which tax George 's mother never would choose to submit . she have a determined spirit of her own , which her son inherit . his persistence she call pride and obstinacy . what she think of her own pertinacity , her biographer , who live so far from her time , do not pretend to say . only I dare say people a hundred year ago pretty much resemble their grandchild of the present date , and love to have their own way , and to make other follow it . 
 now , after pay his own ransom , his brother 's debt , and half the price for his promotion , George calculate that no inconsiderable portion of his private patrimony would be swallow up : nevertheless he make the sacrifice with a perfect good heart . his good mother always enjoin he in her letter to remember who his grandfather be , and to support the dignity of his family accordingly . she give he various commission to purchase good in England , and though she as yet have send he very trifle remittance , she allude so constantly to the exalt rank of the Esmonds , to her desire that he should do nothing unworthy of that illustrious family ; she advise he so peremptorily and frequently to appear in the first society of the country , to frequent the court where his ancestor have be accustom to move , and to appear always in the world in a manner worthy of his name , that George make no doubt his mother 's money would be forthcoming when his own run short , and generously obey her injunction as to his style of life . I find in the Esmond paper of this period , bill for genteel entertainment , tailor ' bill for court suit supply , and livery for his honour 's negro servant and chairman , horse - dealer ' receipt , and so forth ; and be thus lead to believe that the elder of our Virginians be also after a while live at a considerable expense . 
 he be not wild or extravagant like his brother . there be no talk of gambling or racehorse against Mr. George ; his table be liberal , his equipage handsome , his purse always full , the estate to which he be heir be know to be immense . I mention these circumstance because they may probably have influence the conduct both of George and his friend in that very matter concern which , as I have say , he and his mother have be just corresponding . the young heir of Virginia be travel for his pleasure and improvement in foreign kingdom . the queen , his mother , be in daily correspondence with his Highness , and constantly enjoin he to act as become his lofty station . there could be no doubt from her letter that she desire he should live liberally and magnificently . he be perpetually make purchase at his parent 's order . she have not settle as yet ; on the contrary , she have write out by the last mail for twelve new set of waggon harness , and an organ that should play fourteen specify psalm - tune : which article George dutifully order . she have not pay as yet , and might not to - day or to - morrow , but eventually , of course , she would : and Mr. Warrington never think of trouble his friend about these calculation , or discuss with they his mother 's domestic affair . they , on their side , take for grant that he be in a state of competence and ease , and , without be mercenary folk , Mr. and Mrs. Lambert be no doubt pleased to see an attachment grow up between their daughter and a young gentleman of such good principle , talent , family , and expectation . there be honesty in all Mr. Esmond Warrington 's word and action , and in his behaviour to the world a certain grandeur and simplicity , which show he to be a true gentleman . somewhat cold and haughty in his demeanour to stranger , especially towards the great , he be not in the least supercilious : he be perfectly courteous towards woman , and with those people whom he love , especially kind , amiable , lively , and tender . 
 no wonder that one young woman we know of get to think he the good man in all the world alas ! not even except papa . a great love feel by a man towards a woman make he well , as regard she , than all other man . we have say that George use to wonder himself when he find how witty , how eloquent , how wise he be , when he talk with the fair young creature whose heart have become all his .... I say we will not again listen to their love whisper . those soft word do not bear be write down . if you please good sir , or madam , who be sentimentally inclined lie down the book and think over certain thing for yourself . you may be ever so old now ; but you remember . it may be all dead and bury ; but in a moment , up it spring out of its grave , and look , and smile , and whisper as of yore when it cling to your arm , and drop fresh tear on your heart . it be here , and alive , do I say ? o far , far away ! o lonely hearth and cold ash ! here be the vase , but the rose be go ; here be the shore , and yonder the ship be moor ; but the anchor be up , and it have sail away for ever . 
 Et cetera , et cetera , et cetera . this , however , be mere sentimentality ; and as regard George and Theo , be neither here nor there . what I mean to say be , that the young lady 's family be perfectly satisfied with the state of affair between she and Mr. Warrington ; and though he have not as yet ask the decisive question , everybody else know what the answer would be when it come . 
 Mamma perhaps think the question be a long time come . 
 " Psha ! my dear ! " say the General . " there be time enough in all conscience . Theo be not much more than seventeen ; George , if I mistake not , be under forty ; and , besides , he must have time to write to Virginia , and ask mamma . " 
 " but suppose she refuse ? " 
 " that will be a bad day for old and young , " say the General , " let we rather say , suppose she consent , my love ? I can not   fancy anybody in the world refuse Theo anything she have set her heart on , " add the father : " and I be sure ' tis bent upon this match . " 
 so they all wait with the utmost anxiety until an answer from Madam Esmond should arrive ; and tremble lest the french privateer should take the packet - ship by which the precious letter be convey . 




 CHAPTER LXVII . in which a Tragedy be act , and two more be begin 

 James Wolfe , Harry 's new Colonel , come back from America a few week after our Virginian have join his regiment . Wolfe have previously be Lieutenant - Colonel of Kingsley 's , and a second battalion of the regiment have be form and give to he in reward for his distinguished gallantry and service at Cape Breton . Harry go with quite unfeigned respect and cordiality to pay his duty to his new commander , on whom the eye of the world begin to be turn now , the common opinion be that he be likely to become a great general . in the late affair in France , several officer of great previous repute have be try and find lamentably want . the Duke of Marlborough have show himself no worthy descendant of his great ancestor . about my Lord George Sackville 's military genius there be doubt , even before his unhappy behaviour at Minden prevent a great victory . the nation be long for military glory , and the Minister be anxious to find a general who might gratify the eager desire of the people . Mr. Wolfe 's and Mr. Lambert 's business keep they both in London , the friendly intercourse between those officer be renew , no one be more delighted than Lambert at his young friend 's good fortune . 
 Harry , when he be away from his duty , be never tired of hear Mr. Wolfe 's detail of the military operation of the last year , about which Wolfe talk very freely and openly . whatever thought be in his mind , he appear to have speak it out generously . he have that heroic simplicity which distinguish Nelson afterwards : he talk frankly of his action . some of the fine gentleman at St. James 's might wonder and sneer at he ; but amongst our little circle of friend we may be sure he find admire listener . the young General have the romance of a boy on many matter . he delight in music and poetry . on the last day of his life he say he would rather have write Gray 's Elegy than have win a battle . we may be sure that with a gentleman of such literary taste our friend George would become familiar ; and as they be both in love , and both accept lover , and both eager for happiness , no doubt they must have have many sentimental conversation together which would be very interesting to report could we only have accurate account of they . in one of his later letter , Warrington write : 
 " I have the honour of know the famous General Wolfe , and see much of he during his last stay in London . we have a subject of conversation then which be of unfaile interest to both of we , and I could not but admire Mr. Wolfe 's simplicity , his frankness , and a sort of glorious bravery which characterise he . he be much in love , and he want heap and heap of laurel to take to his mistress . ' if it be a sin to covet honour , ' he use to say with Harry the Fifth   he be passionately fond of play and poetry , ' I be the most offending soul alive . ' surely on his last day he have a feast which be enough to satisfy the greedy appetite for glory . he hunger after it . he seem to I not merely like a soldier go resolutely to do his duty , but rather like a knight in quest of dragon and giant . my own country have furnish of late a chief of a very different order , and quite an opposite genius . I scarce know which to admire most . the Briton 's chivalrous ardour , or the more than roman constancy of our great Virginian . " 
 as Mr. Lambert 's official duty detain he in London , his family remain contentedly with he , and I suppose Mr. Warrington be so satisfied with the rural quiet of Southampton Row and the beautiful flower and tree of Bedford Gardens , that he do not care to quit London for any long period . he make his pilgrimage to Castlewood , and pass a few day there , occupy the chamber of which he have often hear his grandfather talk , and which Colonel Esmond have occupy as a boy and he be receive kindly enough by such member of the family as happen to be at home . but no doubt he love well to be in London by the side of a young person in whose society he find great pleasure than any which my Lord Castlewood 's circle could afford he , though all the lady be civil , and Lady Maria especially gracious , and enchant with the tragedy which George and Parson Sampson read out to the lady . the chaplain be enthusiastic in its praise , and indeed it be through his interest and not through Mr. Johnson 's after all , that Mr. Warrington 's piece ever come on the stage . Mr. Johnson , it be true , press the play on his friend Mr. Garrick for Drury Lane , but Garrick have just make an arrangement with the famous Mr. Home for a tragedy from the pen of the author of Douglas . accordingly , Carpezan be carry to Mr. Rich at Covent Garden , and accept by that manager . 
 on the night of the production of the piece , Mr. Warrington give an elegant entertainment to his friend at the Bedford Head , in Covent Garden , whence they adjourn in a body to the theatre ; leave only one or two with our young author , who remain at the coffee - house , where friend from time to time come to he with an account of the performance . the part of Carpezan be fill by Barry , Shuter be the old nobleman , Reddish , I need scarcely say , make an excellent ulric , and the King of Bohemia be by a young actor from Dublin , Mr. Geoghegan , or Hagan as he be call on the stage , and who look and perform the part to admiration . Mrs. Woffington look too old in the first act as the heroine , but her murder in the fourth act , about which great doubt be express , go off to the terror and delight of the audience . Miss Wayn sing the ballad which be suppose to be sing by the king 's page , just at the moment of the unhappy wife 's execution , and all agree that Barry be very terrible and pathetic as Carpezan , especially in the execution scene . the grace and elegance of the young actor , Hagan , win general applause . the piece be put very elegantly on the stage by Mr. Rich , though there be some doubt whether , in the march of Janissaries in the last , the manager be correct in introduce a favourite elephant , which have figure in various pantomime , and by which one of Mr. Warrington 's black servant march in a turkish habit . the other sate in the footman 's gallery , and uproariously weep and applaud at the proper interval . 
 the execution of Sybilla be the turning - point of the piece . her head off , George 's friend breathe freely , and one messenger after another come to he at the coffee - house , to announce the complete success of the tragedy . Mr. Barry , amidst general applause , announce the play for repetition , and that it be the work of a young gentleman of Virginia , his first attempt in the dramatic style . 
 we should like to have be in the box where all our friend be seat during the performance , to have watch Theo 's flutter and anxiety whilst the success of the play seem dubious , and have behold the blush and the sparkle in her eye , when the victory be assure . Harry , during the little trouble in the fourth act , be deadly pale whiter , Mrs. Lambert say , than Barry , with all his chalk . but if Briareus could have clap hand , he could scarcely have make more noise than Harry at the end of the piece . Mr. Wolfe and General Lambert huzzaye enthusiastically . Mrs. Lambert , of course , cry : and though Hetty say , " why do you cry , mamma ? I you do not   want any of they alive again ; you know it serve they all right " the girl be really as much delighted as any person present , include little Charley from the Chartreux , who have leave from Dr. Crusius for that evening , and Miss Lucy , who have be bring from boarding - school on purpose to be present on the great occasion . my Lord Castlewood and his sister , Lady Maria , be present ; and his lordship go from his box and compliment Mr. Barry and the other actor on the stage ; and Parson Sampson be invaluable in the pit , where he lead the applause , have , I believe , give previous instruction to Gumbo to keep an eye upon he from the gallery , and do as he do . 
 be sure there be a very jolly supper of Mr. Warrington 's friend that night much more jolly than Mr. Garrick 's , for example , who make but a very poor success with his Agis and its dreary chorus , and who must have again feel that he have miss a good chance , in prefer Mr. Home 's tragedy to our young author 's . a jolly supper , do we say ? many jolly supper . Mr. Gumbo give an entertainment to several gentleman of the shoulder - knot , who have concur in support his master 's masterpiece : Mr. Henry Warrington give a supper at the Star and Garter , in Pall Mall , to ten officer of his new regiment , who have come up for the express purpose of back Carpezan ; and finally , Mr. Warrington receive the three principal actor of the tragedy , our family party from the side box , Mr. Johnson and his ingenious friend , Mr. Reynolds the painter , my Lord Castlewood and his sister , and one or two more . my Lady Maria happen to sit next to the young actor who have perform the part of the King . Mr. Warrington somehow have Miss Theo for a neighbour , and no doubt pass a pleasant evening beside she . the great animation and cordiality prevail , and when toast be call , Lady Maria gaily give " the King of Hungary " for her . that gentleman , who have plenty of eloquence and fire , and excellent manner , on as well as off the stage , protest that he have already suffer death in the course of the evening , hop that he should die a hundred time more on the same field ; but , dead or living , vow he know whose humble servant he ever should be . ah , if he have but a real crown in place of his diadem of pasteboard and tinsel , with what joy would he lay it at her ladyship 's foot ! neither my lord nor Mr. Esmond be over well pleased with the gentleman 's exceed gallantry a part of which they attribute , no doubt justly , to the wine and punch , of which he have be partake very freely . theo and her sister , who be quite new to the world , be a little frightened by the exceed energy of Mr. Hagan 's manner but Lady Maria , much more experienced , take it in perfectly good part . at a late hour coach be call , to which the gentleman attend the lady , after whose departure some of they return to the supper - room , and the end be that Carpezan have to be carry away in a chair , and that the King of Hungary have a severe headache ; and that the Poet , though he remember make a great number of speech , be quite astounded when half a dozen of his guest appear at his house the next day , whom he have invite overnight to come and sup with he once more . 
 as he put Mrs. Lambert and her daughter into their coach on the night previous , all the lady be flurry , delighted , excited ; and you may be sure our gentleman be with they the next day , to talk of the play and the audience , and the actor , and the beauty of the piece , over and over again . Mrs. Lambert have hear that the lady of the theatre be dangerous company for young man . she hop George would have a care , and not frequent the greenroom too much . 
 George smile , and say he have a preventive against all greenroom temptation , of which he be not in the least afraid ; and as he speak he look in Theo 's face , as if in those eye lay the amulet which be to preserve he from all danger . 
 " why should he be afraid , mamma ? " ask the maiden simply . she have no idea of danger or of guile . 
 " no , my darling , I do not   think he need be afraid , " say the mother , kiss she . 
 " you do not   suppose Mr. George would fall in love with that paint old creature who perform the chief part ? " ask Miss Hetty , with a toss of her head . " she must be old enough to be his mother . " 
 " pray , do you suppose that at our age nobody can care for we , or that we have no heart leave ? " ask mamma , very tartly . " I believe , or I may say , I hope and trust , your father think otherwise . he be , I imagine , perfectly satisfied , miss . he do not sneer at age , whatever little girl out of the schoolroom may do . and they have much well be back there , and they have much well remember what the fifth commandment be that they have , Hetty ! " 
 " I do not   think I be break it by say that an actress be as old as George 's mother , " plead Hetty . 
 " George 's mother be as old as I be , miss ! at least she be when we be at school . and Fanny Parker Mrs. Mountain who now be be seven month old , and we be in the french class together ; and I have no idea that our age be to be make the subject of remark and ridicule by our child , and I will thank you to spare it , if you please ! do you consider your mother too old , George ? " 
 " I be glad my mother be of your age , Aunt Lambert , " say George , in the most sentimental manner . 
 strange infatuation of passion singular perversity of reason ! at some period before his marriage , it not unfrequently happen that a man actually be fond of his mother - in - law ! at this time our good General vow , and with some reason , that he be jealous . Mrs. Lambert make much more of George than of any other person in the family . she dress up Theo to the utmost advantage in order to meet he ; she be for ever caress she , and appeal to she when he speak . it be , " do not   you think he look well ? " " do not   you think he look pale , Theo , to - day ? " " do not   you think he have be sit up over his book too much at night ? " and so forth . if he have a cold , she would have like to make gruel for he and see his foot in hot water . she send he recipe of her own for his health . when he be away , she never cease talk about he to her daughter . I dare say Miss Theo like the subject well enough . when he come , she be sure to be want in some other part of the house , and would bid Theo take care of he till she return . why , before she return to the room , could you hear she talk outside the door to her young innocent child , to her servant in the upper region , and so forth ? when she reappear , be not Mr. George always stand or sit at a considerable distance from Miss Theo except , to be sure , on that one day when she have just happen to drop her scissor , and he have naturally stoop down to pick they up ? why be she blush ? be not youthful cheek make to blush , and rose to bloom in the spring ? not that mamma ever note the blush , but begin quite an artless conversation about this or that , as she sate down brimful of happiness to her worktable . 
 and at last there come a letter from Virginia in Madam Esmond 's neat , well - know hand , and over which George tremble and blush before he break the seal . it be in answer to the letter which he have send home , respect his brother 's commission and his own attachment to Miss Lambert . of his intention respect Harry , Madam Esmond fully approve . as for his marriage , she be not against early marriage . she would take his picture of Miss Lambert with the allowance that be to be make for lover ' portrait , and hope , for his sake , that the young lady be all he describe she to be . with money , as Madam Esmond gather from her son 's letter , she do not appear to be provide at all , which be a pity , as , though wealthy in land , their family have but little ready - money . however , by Heaven 's blessing , there be plenty at home for child and child 's child , and the wife of her son should share all she have . when she hear more at length from Mr. and Mrs. Lambert , she would reply for her part more fully . she do not pretend to say that she have not great hope for her son , as a gentleman of his name and prospect might pretend to the hand of the first lady of the land ; but as Heaven have will that her son 's choice should fall upon her old friend 's daughter , she acquiesce , and would welcome George 's wife as her own child . this letter be bring by Mr. Van den Bosch of Albany , who have lately buy a very large estate in Virginia , and who be bind for England to put his granddaughter to a boarding - school . she , Madam Esmond , be not mercenary , nor be it because this young lady be heiress of a very great fortune that she desire her son to pay Mr. Van d. B. every attention . their property lay close together , and could Harry find in the young lady those quality of person and mind suitable for a companion for life , at least she would have the satisfaction of see both her child near she in her decline year . Madam Esmond conclude by send her affectionate compliment to Mrs. Lambert , from whom she beg to hear far , and her blessing to the young lady who be to be her daughter - in - law . 
 the letter be not cordial , and the writer evidently but half satisfied ; but , such as it be , her consent be here formally announce . how eagerly George run away to Soho with the long - desire news in his pocket ! I suppose our worthy friend there must have read his news in his countenance else why should Mrs. Lambert take her daughter 's hand and kiss she with such uncommon warmth , when George announce that he have receive letter from home ? then , with a break in his voice , a pallid face , and a considerable tremor , turn to Mr. Lambert , he say : " Madam Esmond 's letter , sir , be in reply to one of mine , in which I acquaint she that I have form an attachment in England , for which I ask my mother 's approval . she give her consent , I be grateful to say , and I have to pray my dear friend to be equally kind to I . " 
 " God bless thee , my dear boy ! " say the good General , lay a hand on the young man 's head . " I be glad to have thee for a son , George . there , there , do not   go down on your knee , young folk ! George may , to be sure , and thank God for give he the good little wife in all England . yes , my dear , except when you be ill , you never cause I a heartache and happy be the man , I say , who win thee ! " 
 I have no doubt the young people knelt before their parent , as be the fashion in those day ; and be perfectly certain that Mrs. Lambert kiss both of they , and likewise bedew her pocket - handkerchief in the most plentiful manner . Hetty be not present at this sentimental scene , and when she hear of it , speak with considerable asperity , and a laugh that be by no means pleasant , say : " be this all the news you have to give I ? why , I have know it these month past . do you think I have no eye to see , and no ear to hear , indeed ? " but in private she be much more gentle . she fling herself on her sister 's neck , embrace she passionately , and vow that never , never would Theo find any one to love she like her sister . with Theo she become entirely mild and humble . she could not abstain from her joke and satire with George , but he be too happy to heed her much , and too generous not to see the cause of her jealousy . 
 when all party concern come to read Madam Esmond 's letter , that document , it be true , appear rather vague . it contain only a promise that she would receive the young people at her house , and no sort of proposal for a settlement . the General shake his head over the letter he do not think of examine it until some day after the engagement have be make between George and his daughter : but now he read Madam Esmond 's word , they give he but small encouragement . 
 " Bah ! " say George . " I shall have three hundred pound for my tragedy . I can easily write a play a year ; and if the bad come to the bad , we can live on that . " 
 " on that and your patrimony , " say Theo 's father . 
 George now have to explain , with some hesitation , that what with pay bill for his mother , and Harry 's commission and debt , and his own ransom George 's patrimony proper be well - nigh spend . 
 Mr. Lambert 's countenance look graver still at this announcement , but he see his girl 's eye turn towards he with an alarm so tender , that he take she in his arm and vow that , let the bad come to the bad , his darling should not be balk of her wish . 
 about the go back to Virginia , George frankly own that he little like the notion of return to be entirely dependent on his mother . he give General Lambert an idea of his life at home , and explain how little to his taste that slavery be . no . why should he not stay in England , write more tragedy , study for the bar , get a place , perhaps ? why , indeed ? he straightway begin to form a plan for another tragedy . he bring portion of his work , from time to time , to Miss Theo and her sister : Hetty yawn over the work , but Theo pronounce it to be still more beautiful and admirable than the last , which be perfect . 
 the engagement of our young friend be make known to the member of their respective family , and announce to Sir Miles Warrington , in a ceremonious letter from his nephew . for a while Sir Miles see no particular objection to the marriage ; though , to be sure , consider his name and prospect , Mr. Warrington might have look high . the truth be , that Sir Miles imagine that Madam Esmond have make some considerable settlement on her son , and that his circumstance be more than easy . but when he hear that George be entirely dependent on his mother , and that his own small patrimony be dissipate , as Harry 's have be before , Sir Miles 's indignation at his nephew 's imprudence know no bound ; he could not find word to express his horror and anger at the want of principle exhibit by both these unhappy young man : he think it his duty to speak his mind about they , and write his opinion to his sister Esmond in Virginia . as for General and Mrs. Lambert , who pass for respectable person , be it to be bear that such people should inveigle a penniless young man into a marriage with their penniless daughter ? regard they , and George 's behaviour , Sir Miles fully explain his view to Madam Esmond , give half a finger to George whenever his nephew call on he in town , and do not even invite he to partake of the famous family small - beer . towards Harry his uncle somewhat unbent ; Harry have do his duty in the campaign , and be mention with praise in high quarter . he have sow his wild oat , he at least be endeavour to amend ; but George be a young prodigal , fast career to ruin , and his name be only mention in the family with a groan . be there any poor fellow nowadays , I wonder , whose polite family fall on they and persecute they ; groan over they and stone they , and hand stone to their neighbour that they may do likewise ? all the patrimony spend ! gracious heaven ! Sir Miles turn pale when he see his nephew come . Lady Warrington pray for he as a dangerous reprobate ; and , in the meantime , George be walk the town , quite unconscious that he be occasion so much wrath and so much devotion . he take little Miley to the play and bring he back again . he send ticket to his aunt and cousin which they could not refuse , you know ; it would look too marked be they to break altogether . so they not only take the ticket , but whenever country constituent come to town they ask for more , take care to give the very bad motif to George 's intimacy with the theatre , and to suppose that he and the actress be on term of the most disgraceful intimacy . an august personage have be to the theatre , and express his approbation of Mr. Warrington 's drama to Sir Miles , when he attend his R - y - l h - ghn - ss 's levee at Saville House , Sir Miles , to be sure , modify his opinion regard the piece , and speak henceforth more respectfully of it . meanwhile , as we have say , George be pass his life entirely careless of the opinion of all the uncle , aunt , and cousin in the world . 
 Most of the Esmond cousin be at least more polite and cordial than George 's kinsfolk of the Warrington side . in spite of his behaviour over the card , Lord Castlewood , George always maintain , have a liking for our Virginians , and George be pleased enough to be in his company . he be a far abler man than many who succeed in life . he have a good name , and somehow only stain it ; a considerable wit , and nobody trust it ; and a very shrewd experience and knowledge of mankind , which make he mistrust they , and himself most of all , and which perhaps be the bar to his own advancement . my Lady Castlewood , a woman of the world , wear always a bland mask , and receive Mr. George with perfect civility , and welcome he to lose as many guineas as he like at her ladyship 's card - table . between Mr. William and the virginian brother there never be any love lose ; but , as for Lady Maria , though her love affair be over , she have no rancour ; she profess for her cousin a very great regard and affection , a part of which the young gentleman very gratefully return . she be charm to hear of Harry 's valour in the campaign ; she be delighted with George 's success at the theatre ; she be for ever go to the play , and have all the favourite passage of Carpezan by heart . one day , as Mr. George and Miss Theo be take a sentimental walk in Kensington Gardens , whom should they light upon but their cousin Maria in company with a gentleman in a smart suit and handsome laced hat , and who should the gentleman be but his Majesty King Louis of Hungary , Mr. Hagan ? he salute the party , and leave they presently . Lady Maria have only just happen to meet he . Mr. Hagan come sometimes , he say , for quiet , to study his part in Kensington Gardens , and George and the two lady walk together to Lord Castlewood 's door in Kensington Square , Lady Maria utter a thousand compliment to Theo upon her good look , upon her virtue , upon her future happiness , upon her papa and mamma , upon she destine husband , upon her paduasoy cloak and dear little foot and shoe - buckle . 
 Harry happen to come to London that evening , and sleep at his accustomed quarter . when George appear at breakfast , the Captain be already in the room   the custom of that day be to call all army gentleman captain , and look at the letter on the breakfast - table . 
 " why , George , " he cry , " there be a letter from Maria ! " 
 " little boy bring it from Common Garden last night Master George asleep , " say Gumbo . 
 " what can it be about ? " ask Harry , as George peruse his letter with a queer expression of face . 
 " about my play , to be sure , " George answer , tear up the paper , and still wear his queer look . 
 " what , she be not write love - letter to you , be she , georgy ? " 
 " no , certainly not to I , " reply the other . but he speak no word more about the letter ; and when at dinner in Dean Street Mrs. Lambert say , " so you meet somebody walk with the King of Hungary yesterday in Kensington Gardens ? " 
 " what little tell - tale tell you ? a mere casual rencontre the King go there to study his part , and Lady Maria happen to be cross the garden to visit some of the other King 's servant at Kensington Palace . " and so there be an end to that matter for the time be . 
 other event be at hand fraught with interest to our Virginians . one evening after Christmas , the two gentleman , with a few more friend , be meet round General Lambert 's supper - table ; and among the company be Harry 's new Colonel of the 67th , Major - General Wolfe . the young General be more than ordinarily grave . the conversation all relate to the war . event of great importance be pende . the great minister now in power be determined to carry on the war on a much more extended scale than have be attempt hitherto : an army be order to Germany to help Prince Ferdinand , another great expedition be prepare for America , and here , say Mr. Lambert , " I will give you the health of the Commander a glorious campaign , and a happy return to he ! " 
 " why do you not drink the toast , General James ! " ask the hostess of her guest . 
 " he must not drink his own toast , " say General Lambert ; " it be we must do that ! " 
 what ? be James appoint ? all the lady must drink such a toast as that , and they mingle their kind voice with the applause of the rest of the company . 
 why do he look so melancholy ? the lady ask of one another when they withdraw . in after day they remember his pale face . 
 " perhaps he have be part from his sweetheart , " suggest tender - hearted Mrs. Lambert . and at this sentimental notion , no doubt all the lady look sad . 
 the gentleman , meanwhile , continue their talk about the war and its chance . Mr. Wolfe do not contradict the speaker when they say that the expedition be to be direct against Canada . 
 " ah , sir , " say Harry , " I wish your regiment be go with you , and that I might pay another visit to my old friend at Quebec . " 
 what , have Harry be there ? yes . he describe his visit to the place five year before , and know the city , and the neighbourhood , well . he lay a number of bit of biscuit on the table before he , and make a couple of rivulet of punch on each side . " this fork be the Isle d'Orleans , " say he , " with the north and south branch of St. Lawrence on each side . here be the Low Town , with a battery how many gun be mount there in our time , brother ? but at long shot from the St. Joseph shore you might play the same game . here be what they call the little river , the St. Charles , and a bridge of boat with a tete du pont over to the place of arm . here be the citadel , and here 's convent ever so many convent and the cathedral ; and here , outside the line to the west and south , be what they call the Plains of Abraham where a certain little affair take place , do you remember , brother ? he and a young officer of the Rousillon regiment ca ca'd at each other for twenty minute , and George pink he , and then they jure'd each other an amitie eternelle . well it be for George : for his second save his life on that awful day of Braddock 's defeat . he be a fine little fellow , and I give his toast : Je bois a la sante du Chevalier de Florac ! " 
 " what , can you speak French , too , Harry ? " ask Mr. Wolfe . the young man look at the General with eager eye . 
 " yes , " say he , " I can speak , but not so well as George . " 
 " but he remember the city , and can place the battery , you see , and know the ground a thousand time well than I do ! " cry the eld brother . 
 the two eld officer exchange look with one another ; Mr. Lambert smile and nod , as if in reply to the mute query of his comrade : on which the other speak . " Mr. Harry , " he say , " if you have have enough of fine folk , and White 's , and horse - race " 
 " oh , sir ! " say the young man , turn very red . 
 " and if you have a mind to a sea voyage at a short notice , come and see I at my lodging to - morrow . " 
 what be that sudden uproar of cheer which the lady hear in their drawing - room ? it be the hurrah which Harry Warrington give when he leap up at hear the General 's invitation . 
 the woman see no more of the gentleman that night . General Lambert have to be away upon his business early next morning , before see any of his family ; nor have he mention a word of Harry 's outbreak on the previous evening . but when he rejoin his folk at dinner , a look at Miss Hetty 's face inform the worthy gentleman that she know what have pass on the night previous , and what be about to happen to the young Virginian . after dinner Mrs. Lambert sit demurely at her work , Miss Theo take her book of italian Poetry . neither of the General 's customary guest happen to be present that evening . 
 he take little Hetty 's hand in his , and begin to talk with she . he do not allude to the subject which he know be uppermost in her mind , except that by a more than ordinary gentleness and kindness he perhaps cause she to understand that her thought be know to he . 
 " I have breakfast , " say he , " with James Wolfe this morning , and our friend Harry be of the party . when he and the other guest be go , I remain and talk with James about the great expedition on which he be go to sail . would that his brave father have live a few month long to see he come back covered with honour from Louisbourg , and know that all England be look to he to achieve still great glory ! James be dreadfully ill in body so ill that I be frightened for he and not a little depressed in mind at have to part from the young lady whom he have love so long . a little rest , he think , might have set his shattered frame up ; and to call she his have be the object of his life . but , great as his love be   and he be as romantic as one of you young folk of seventeen , honour and duty be great , and he leave home , and wife , and ease , and health , at their bidding . every man of honour would do the like ; every woman who love he truly would buckle on his armour for he . James go to take leave of his mother to - night ; and though she love he devotedly , and be one of the tender woman in the world , I be sure she will show no sign of weakness at his go away . " 
 " when do he sail , papa ? " the girl ask . 
 " he will be on board in five day . " and Hetty know quite well who sail with he . 




 CHAPTER LXVIII . in which Harry go westward 

 our tender heart be averse to all idea and description of parting ; and I shall therefore say nothing of Harry Warrington 's feeling at take leave of his brother and friend . be not thousand of man in the same plight ? have not Mr. Wolfe his mother to kiss   his brave father have quit life during his son 's absence on the glorious Louisbourg campaign , and his sweetheart to clasp in a farewell embrace ? have not stout Admiral Holmes , before sail westward with his squadron , the Somerset , the terrible , the Northumberland , the Royal William , the Trident , the Diana , the Seahorse his own flag be hoist on board the Dublin to take leave of Mrs. and the Misses Holmes ? be Admiral Saunders , who sail the day after he , exempt from human feeling ? away go William and his crew of jovial sailor , plough through the tumble wave , and poor black - eyed Susan on shore watch the ship as it dwindle in the sunset . 
 it dwindle in the West . the night fall darkle over the ocean . they be go : but their heart be at home yet a while . in silence , with a heart inexpressibly soft and tender , how each man think of those he have leave ! what a chorus of pitiful prayer rise up to the Father , at sea and on shore , on that parting night at home by the vacant bedside , where the wife kneel in tear ; round the fire , where the mother and child together pour out their supplication : or on deck , where the seafarer look up to the star of heaven , as the ship cleave through the roar midnight water ! to - morrow the sun rise upon our common life again , and we commence our daily task of toil and duty . 
 George accompany his brother , and stay a while with he at Portsmouth whilst they be wait for a wind . he shake Mr. Wolfe 's hand , look at his pale face for the last time , and see the vessel depart amid the clangour of bell , and the thunder of cannon from the shore . next day he be back at his home , and at that business which be sure one of the most selfish and absorbing of the world 's occupation , to which almost every man who be thirty year old have serve ere this his apprenticeship . he have a pang of sadness , as he look in at the lodging to the little room which Harry use to occupy , and see his half - burn paper still in the grate . in a few minute he be on his way to Dean Street again , and whispering by the fitful firelight in the ear of the cling sweetheart . she be very happy oh , so happy ! at his return . she be ashamed of be so . be it not heartless to be so , when poor Hetty be so melancholy ? poor little Hetty ! indeed , it be selfish to be glad when she be in such a sad way . it make one quite wretched to see she . " do not , sir ! well , I ought to be wretche , and it be very , very wicked of I if I be not , " say Theo ; and one can understand her soft - hearted repentance . what she mean by " do not " who can tell ? I have say the room be dark , and the fire burn fitfully and " do not " be no doubt utter in one of the dark fit . enter servant with supper and light . the family arrive ; the conversation become general . the destination of the fleet be know everywhere now . the force on board be sufficient to beat all the French in Canada ; and , under such an officer as Wolfe , to repair the blunder and disaster of previous campaign . he look dreadfully ill , indeed . but he have a great soul in a feeble body . the minister , the country hope the utmost from he . after supper , accord to custom , Mr. Lambert assemble his modest household , of whom George Warrington may be say quite to form a part ; and as he pray for all traveller by land and water , Theo and her sister be kneel together . and so , as the ship speed far and far into the West , the fond thought pursue it ; and the night pass , and the sun rise . 
 a day or two more , and everybody be at his book or his usual work . as for George Warrington , that celebrate dramatist be busy about another composition . when the tragedy of Carpezan have run some thirty or twoscore night , other person of genius take possession of the theatre . 
 there may have be person who wonder how the town could be so fickle as ever to tire of such a masterpiece as the Tragedy who could not bear to see the actor dress in other habit , recite other man 's verse ; but George , of a sceptical turn of mind , take the fate of his Tragedy very philosophically , and pocket the proceed with much quiet satisfaction . from Mr. Dodsley , the bookseller , he have the usual complement of a hundred pound ; from the manager of the theatre two hundred or more ; and such praise from the critic and his friend , that he set to work to prepare another piece , with which he hop to achieve even great success than by his first performance . 
 over these study , and the other charming business which occupy he , month pass away . happy business ! happy time of youth and life , when love be first speak and return ; when the dear eye be daily shin welcome , and the fond lip never tire of whisper their sweet secret ; when the parting look that accompany " good night ! " give delightful warning of to - morrow ; when the heart be so overflow with love and happiness , that it have to spare for all the world ; when the day close with glad prayer , and open with joyful hope ; when doubt seem cowardice , misfortune impossible , poverty only a sweet trial of constancy ! Theo 's elder , thankfully remember their own prime , sit softly by and witness this pretty comedy perform by their young people . and in one of his later letter , dutifully write to his wife during a temporary absence from home , George Warrington record how he have be to look up at the window of the dear old house in Dean Street , and wonder who be sit in the chamber where he and Theo have be so happy . 
 meanwhile we can learn how the time pass , and our friend be engage , by some extract from George 's letter to his brother . 
 " from the old window opposite Bedford Gardens , this 20th August 1759 . 
 " why be you go back to rugged rock , bleak shore , burn summer , nipping winter , at home , when you might have be crop ever so many laurel in Germany ? Kingsley 's be come back as cover with them as Jack - a - green on May - day . our six regiment do wonder ; and our horse would have do if my Lord George Sackville only have let they . but when Prince Ferdinand say ' charge ! ' his lordship could not hear , or could not translate the german word for ' Forward ; ' and so we only beat the French , without utterly annihilate they , as we might , have Lord Granby or Mr. Warrington have the command . my lord be come back to town , and be shout for a Court - Martial . he hold his head high enough in prosperity : in misfortune he show such a constancy of arrogance that one almost admire he . he look as if he rather envy poor Mr. Byng , and the not shoot he be a manque d'egards towards he . 
 " the Duke have have notice to get himself in readiness for depart from this world of grandeur and victory , and downfall and disappointment . an attack of palsy have visit his Royal Highness ; and pallida mor have just peep in at his door , as it be , and say , ' I will call again . ' tyrant as he be , this prince have be noble in disgrace ; and no king have ever have a true servant than our have find in his son . why do I like the lose side always , and be I disposed to revolt against the winner ? your famous Mr. P , your chief 's patron and discoverer , I have be to hear in the House of Commons twice or thrice . I revolt against his magniloquence . I wish some little David would topple over that swell giant . his thought and his language be always attitudinising . I like Barry 's manner well , though the other be the more awful actor . 
 " Pocahontas get on apace . Barry like his part of Captain Smith ; and , though he will have he wear a red coat and blue facing and an epaulet , I have a fancy to dress he exactly like one of the picture of Queen Elizabeth 's gentleman at Hampton Court : with a ruff and a square beard and square shoe . ' and Pocahontas would you like she to be tattoo ? ' ask Uncle Lambert . Hagan 's part as the warrior who be in love with she , and , see her partiality for the captain , nobly rescue he from death , I trust will prove a hit . a strange fish be this Hagan : his mouth full of stage - play and rant , but good , honest , and brave , if I do not   err . he be angry at have be cast lately for Sir O'Brallaghan , in Mr. Macklin 's new farce of Love A - la - mode . he say that he do not keer to disgreece his tongue with imiteetion of that rascal brogue . as if there be any call for imiteetion , when he have such an admirable twang of his own ! 
 " shall I tell you ? shall I hide the circumstance ? shall I hurt your feeling ? shall I set you in a rage of jealousy , and cause you to ask for leave to return to Europe ? Know , then , that though Carpezan be long since dead , cousin Maria be for ever come to the playhouse . Tom Spencer have spy she out night after night in the gallery , and she come on the night when Hagan perform . quick , Burroughs , Mr. Warrington 's boot and portmanteau ! order a chaise and four for Portsmouth immediately ! the letter which I burn one morning when we be at breakfast   I may let the cat out of the bag , now puss have such a prodigious way to run   be from cousin M. , hint that she wish I to tell no tale about she : but I can not   help just whisper to you that Maria at this moment be busy console herself as fast as possible . shall I spoil sport ? shall I tell her brother ? be the affair any business of mine ? what have the Esmonds do for you and I but win our money at card ? yet I like our noble cousin . it seem to I that he would be good if he could or rather , he would have be once . he have be set on a wrong way of life , from which ' tis now probably too late to rescue he . o beati agricolae ! our Virginia be dull , but let we thank Heaven we be breed there . we be make little slave , but not slave to wickedness , gambling , bad male and female company . it be not until my poor Harry leave home that he fall among thief . I mean thief en grand , such as waylay he and strip he on english highroad . I consider you none the bad because you be the unlucky one , and have to deliver your purse up . and now you be go to retrieve , and make a good name for yourself ; and kill more ' french dragon , ' and become a great commander . and our mother will talk of her son the Captain , the Colonel , the General , and have his picture paint with all his star and epaulet , when poor I shall be but a dawdling poetaster , or , if we may hope for the good , a snug placeman , with a little box at Richmond or Kew , and a half - score of little picaninny , that will come and bob curtsey at the garden - gate when their uncle the General rid up on his great charger , with his aide - de - camp 's pocket fill with gingerbread for the nephew and niece . ' tis for you to brandish the sword of Mars . as for I , I look forward to a quiet life : a quiet little home , a quiet little library full of book , and a little some one dulce ridentem , dulce loquentem , on t'other side of the fire , as I scribble away at my paper . I be so pleased with this prospect , so utterly content and happy , that I feel afraid as I think of it , lest it should escape I ; and , even to my dear Hal , be shy of speak of my happiness . what be ambition to I , with this certainty ? what do I care for war , with this beatific peace smile near ? 
 " our mother 's friend , Mynheer Van den Bosch , have be away on a tour to discover his family in Holland , and , strange to say , have find one . Miss   who be intend by maternal solicitude to be a wife for your worship   have have six month at Kensington School , and be come out with a hundred pretty accomplishment , which be to complete she a perfect fine lady . her papa bring she to make a curtsey in Dean Street , and a mighty elegant curtsey she make . though she be scarce seventeen , no dowager of sixty can be more at her ease . she converse with Aunt Lambert on an equal footing ; she treat the girl as chit to Hetty 's wrath and Theo 's amusement . she talk politic with the General , and the last rout , dress , opera , fashion , scandal , with such perfect ease that , but for a blunder or two , you might have fancy Miss Lydia be bear in Mayfair . at the Court end of the town she will live , she say ; and have no patience with her father , who have a lodging in Monument Yard . for those who love a brown beauty , a pretty little mignonne creature can not be see . but my taste , you know , dear brother , and ... " 
 here follow a page of rapture and quotation of verse , which , out of a regard for the reader , and the writer 's memory , the editor of the present page decline to reprint . gentleman and lady of a certain age may remember the time when they indulge in these rapturous folly on their own account ; when the praise of the charmer be for ever warble from their lip or trickle from their pen ; when the flower of life be in full bloom , and all the bird of spring be sing . the twig be now bare , perhaps , and the leaf have fall ; but , for all that , shall we not , remember the vernal time ? as for you , young people , whose May   or April , be it ?   have not commence yet , you need not be detain over other folk ' love - rhapsody ; depend on it , when your spring - season arrive , kindly Nature will warm all your flower into bloom , and rouse your glad bosom to pour out their full song . 




 CHAPTER LXIX . a little Innocent 

 George Warrington have mention in the letter just quote , that in spite of my Lord Castlewood 's previous play transaction with Harry , my lord and George remain friend , and meet on term of good kinsmanship . do George want frank , or an introduction at court , or a place in the House of Lords to hear a debate , his cousin be always ready to serve he , be a pleasant and witty companion , and would do anything which might promote his relative 's interest , provide his own be not prejudiced . 
 now he even go so far as to promise that he would do his good with the people in power to provide a place for Mr. George Warrington , who daily show a great disinclination to return to his native country , and place himself once more under the maternal servitude . George have not merely a sentimental motive for remain in England : the pursuit and society of London please he infinitely well than any which he could have at home . a planter 's life of idleness might have suit he , could he have enjoy independence with it . but in Virginia he be only the first , and , as he think , the worst treat , of his mother 's subject . he dread to think of return with his young bride to his home , and of the life which she would be destine to lead there . well freedom and poverty in England , with congenial society , and a hope perchance of future distinction , than the wearisome routine of home life , the tedious subordination , the frequent bickering , the certain jealousy and difference of opinion , to which he must subject his wife so soon as they turn their face homeward . 
 so Lord Castlewood 's promise to provide for George be very eagerly accept by the Virginian . my lord have not provide very well for his own brother to be sure , and his own position , peer as he be , be anything but enviable ; but we believe what we wish to believe , and George Warrington choose to put great stress upon his kinsman 's offer of patronage . unlike the Warrington family , Lord Castlewood be quite gracious when he be make acquainted with George 's engagement to Miss Lambert ; come to wait upon her parent ; praise George to they and the young lady to George , and make himself so prodigiously agreeable in their company that these charitable folk forget his bad reputation , and think it must be a very wicked and scandalous world which malign he . he say , indeed , that he be improve in their society , as every man must be who come into it . among they he be witty , lively , good for the time be . he leave his wickedness and worldliness with his cloak in the hall , and only put they on again when he step into his chair . what worldle on life 's voyage do not know of some such harbour of rest and calm , some haven where he put in out of the storm ? very likely Lord Castlewood be actually well whilst he stay with those good people , and for the time be at least no hypocrite . 
 and , I dare say , the Lambert elder think no bad of his lordship for openly proclaim his admiration for Miss Theo . it be quite genuine , and he do not profess it be very deep . 
 " it do not   affect my sleep , and I be not go to break my heart because Miss Lambert prefer somebody else , " he remark . " only I wish when I be a young man , madam , I have have the good fortune to meet with somebody so innocent and good as your daughter . I might have be keep out of a deal of harm 's way : but innocent and good young woman do not fall into mine , or they would have make I well than I be . " 
 " sure , my lord , it be not too late ! " say Mrs. Lambert , very softly . 
 Castlewood start back , misunderstand she . 
 " not too late , madam ? " he inquire . 
 she blush . " it be too late to court my dear daughter , my lord , but not too late to repent . we read , ' tis never too late to do that . if other have be receive at the eleventh hour , be there any reason why you should give up hope ? " 
 " perhaps I know my own heart well than you , " he say in a plaintive tone . " I can speak french and German very well , and why ? because I be teach both in the nursery . a man who learn they late can never get the practice of they on his tongue . and so ' tis the case with goodness , I can not   learn it at my age . I can only see other practise it , and admire they . when I be on on the side opposite to Lazarus , will Miss Theo give I a drop of water ? do not   frown ! I know I shall be there , Mrs. Lambert . some folk be doom so ; and I think some of our family be amongst these . some people be vacillate , and one hardly know which way the scale will turn . whereas some be predestined angel , and fly heavenwards naturally , and do what they will . " 
 " oh , my lord , and why should you not be of the predestine ? whilst there be a day leave whilst there be an hour there be hope ! " say the fond matron . 
 " I know what be pass in your mind , my dear madam nay , I read your prayer in your look ; but how can they avail ? " Lord Castlewood ask sadly . " you do not   know all , my good lady . you do not   know what a life ours be of the world ; how early it begin ; how selfish Nature , and then necessity and education , have make we . it be Fate hold the rein of the chariot , and we can not   escape our doom . I know well : I see well people : I go my own way . my own ? no , not mine Fate 's : and it be not altogether without pity for we , since it allow we , from time to time , to see such people as you . " and he take her hand and look her full in the face , and bow with a melancholy grace . every word he say be true . no great error than to suppose that weak and bad man be stranger to good feeling , or deficient of sensibility . only the good feeling do not last nay , the tear be a kind of debauch of sentiment , as old libertine be say to find that the tear and grief of their victim add a z to their pleasure . but Mrs. Lambert know little of what be pass in this man 's mind   how should she ? , and so pray for he with the fond persistence of woman . he be much well yes , much well than he be suppose to be . he be a most interesting man . there be hope , why should there not be the most precious hope for he still ? 
 it remain to be see which of the two speaker form the correct estimate of my lord 's character . meanwhile , if the gentleman be right , the lady be mollify , and her kind wish and prayer for this experienced sinner 's repentance , if they be of no avail for his amendment , at least could do he no harm . kind - soule doctor   and what good woman be not of the faculty ?   look after a reprobate as physician after a perilous case . when the patient be convert to health their interest cease in he , and they drive to feel pulse and prescribe medicine elsewhere . 
 but , while the malady be under treatment , our kind lady could not see too much of her sick man . quite an intimacy spring up between my Lord Castlewood and the Lamberts . I be not sure that some worldly view might not suit even with good Mrs. Lambert 's spiritual plan   for who know into what pure Eden , though guard by flame - sworde angel , worldliness will not creep ? . her son be about to take order . my Lord Castlewood fear very much that his present chaplain 's , Mr. Sampson 's , careless life and heterodox conversation might lead he to give up his chaplaincy : in which case , my lord hint the little modest cure would be vacant , and at the service of some young divine of good principle and good manner , who would be content with a small stipend , and a small but friendly congregation . 
 thus an acquaintance be establish between the two family , and the lady of Castlewood , always on their good behaviour , come more than once to make their curtsey in Mrs. Lambert 's drawing - room . they be civil to the parent and the young lady . my Lady Castlewood 's card assembly be open to Mrs. Lambert and her family . there be play , certainly all the world play his Majesty , the Bishops , every peer and peeress in the land . but nobody need play who do not like ; and surely nobody need have scruple regard the practice , when such august and venerable personage be daily find to abet it . More than once Mrs. Lambert make her appearance at her ladyship 's rout , and be grateful for the welcome which she receive , and please with the admiration which her daughter excite . 
 Mention have be make , in a foregoing page and letter , of an american family of dutch extraction , who have come to England very strongly recommend by Madam Esmond , their virginian neighbour , to her son in Europe . the view express in Madam Esmond 's letter be so clear , that that arch match - maker , Mrs. Lambert , could not but understand they . as for George , he be engage already ; as for poor Hetty 's flame , Harry , he be go on service , for which circumstance Hetty 's mother be not very sorry perhaps . she laughingly tell George that he ought to obey his mamma 's injunction , break off his engagement with Theo , and make up to Miss Lydia , who be ten time ten time ! a hundred time as rich as her poor girl , and certainly much handsomer . " yes , indeed , " say George , " that I own : she be handsomer , and she be rich , and perhaps even cleverer . "   all which praise Mrs. Lambert but half like .   " but say she be all these ? so be Mr. Johnson much cleverer than I be : so be , whom shall we say ? so be Mr. Hagan the actor much tall and handsomer : so be Sir James Lowther much rich : yet pray , ma'am , do you suppose I be go to be jealous of any one of these three , or think my Theo would jilt I for their sake ? why should I not allow that Miss Lydia be handsomer , then ? and rich , and clever , too , and lively , and well breed , if you insist on it , and an angel if you will have it so ? Theo be not afraid : art thou , child ? " 
 " no , George , " say Theo , with such an honest look of the eye as would convince any scepticism , or shame any jealousy . and if , after this pair of speech , mamma take occasion to leave the room for a minute to fetch her scissor , or her thimble , or a bootjack and slipper , or the cross and ball on the top of St. Paul 's , or her pocket - handkerchief which she have forget in the parlour if , I say , Mrs. Lambert quit the room on any errand or pretext , natural or preposterous , I shall not be in the least surprised , if , at her return in a couple of minute , she find George in near proximity to Theo , who have a heighten colour , and whose hand George be just drop I shall not have the least idea of what they have be do . have you , madam ? have you any remembrance of what use to happen when Mr. Grundy come a - courting ? be you , who , after all , be not in the room with our young people , go to cry out fie and for shame ? then fie and for shame upon you , Mrs. Grundy ! 
 well , Harry be away , and Theo and George irrevocably engage , so that there be no possibility of bring Madam Esmond 's little plan to bear , why should not Mrs. Lambert have plan of her own ; and if a rich , handsome , beautiful little wife should fall in his way , why should not Jack Lambert from Oxford have she ? so think mamma , who be always think of marry and give in marriage , and so she prattle to General Lambert , who , as usual , call she a goose for her pain . at any rate , Mrs. Lambert say beauty and rich be no objection ; at any rate , Madam Esmond desire that this family should be hospitably entertain , and it be not her fault that Harry be go away to Canada . would the General wish he to come back ; leave the army and his reputation , perhaps ; yes , and come to England and marry this American , and break poor Hetty 's heart would her father wish that ? let we spare further argument , and not be so rude as to hint that Mr. Lambert be in the right in call a fond wife by the name of that absurd splay - foot bird , annually sacrifice at the Feast of St. Michael . 
 in those early day , there be vast distinction of rank draw between the court and city people : and Mr. Van den Bosch , when he first come to London , scarcely associate with any but the latter sort . he have a lodging near his agent 's in the city . when his pretty girl come from school for a holiday , he take she an airing to Islington or Highgate , or an occasional promenade in the Artillery Ground in Bunhill Fields . they go to that Baptist meeting - house in Finsbury Fields , and on the sly to see Mr. Garrick once or twice , or that funny rogue Mr. Foote , at the Little Theatre . to go to a Lord Mayor 's feast be a treat to the gentleman of the high order : and to dance with a young mercer at Hampstead Assembly give the utmost delight to the young lady . when George first go to wait upon his mother 's friend , he find our old acquaintance , Mr. Draper , of the Temple , sedulous in his attention to she ; and the lawyer , who be marry , tell Mr. Warrington to look out , as the young lady have a plumb to her fortune . Mr. Drabshaw , a young Quaker gentleman , and nephew of Mr. Trail , Madam Esmond 's Bristol agent , be also in constant attendance upon the young lady , and in dreadful alarm and suspicion when Mr. Warrington first make his appearance . wish to do honour to his mother 's neighbour , Mr. Warrington invite they to an entertainment at his own apartment ; and who should so naturally meet they as his friend from Soho ? not one of they but be force to own little Miss Lydia 's beauty . she have the foot of a fairy : the arm , neck , flash eye of a little brown huntress of Diana . she have bring a little plaintive accent from home with she of which I , moi qui vous parle , have hear a hundred gross Cockney imitation , and watch as many absurd disguise , and which I say   in moderation   be charming in the mouth of a charming woman . who set up to say no , forsooth ? you dear Miss Whittington , with whose h 's fate have deal so unkindly ? you lovely Miss Nicol Jarvie , with your northern burr ? you beautiful Miss Molony , with your Dame Street warble ? all accent be pretty from pretty lip , and who shall set the standard up ? shall it be a rose , or a thistle , or a shamrock , or a star and stripe ? as for Miss Lydia 's accent , I have no doubt it be not odious even from the first day when she set foot on these polite shore , otherwise Mr. Warrington , as a man of taste , have certainly disapprove of her manner of talking , and her schoolmistress at Kensington have not do her duty by her pupil . 
 after the six month be over , during which , accord to her father 's calculation , she be to learn all the accomplishment procurable at the Kensington Academy , Miss Lydia return nothing loth to her grandfather , and take her place in the world . a narrow world at first it be to she ; but she be a resolute little person , and resolve to enlarge her sphere in society ; and whither she choose to lead the way , the obedient grandfather follow she . he have be thwart himself in early life , he say , and little good come of the severity he underwent . he have thwart his own son , who have turn out but ill . as for little Lyddy , he be determined she should have as pleasant a life as be possible . do not Mr. George think he be right ? ' Twas say in Virginia he do not know with what reason that the young gentleman of Castlewood have be happy if Madam Esmond have allow they a little of their own way . George could not gainsay this public rumour , or think of induce the benevolent old gentleman to alter his plan respect his granddaughter . as for the Lambert family , how could they do otherwise than welcome the kind old man , the parent so tender and liberal , Madam Esmond 's good friend ? 
 when Miss come from school , grandpapa remove from Monument Yard to an elegant house in Bloomsbury ; whither they be follow at first by their city friend . there be merchant from Virginia Walk ; there be worthy tradesman , with whom the worthy old merchant have dealing ; there be their lady and daughter and son , who be all highly gracious to Miss Lyddy . it would be a long task to describe how these disappear one by one how there be no more junketing at Belsize , or trip to Highgate , or Saturday jaunt to Deputy Higgs ' villa , Highbury , or country - dance at honest Mr. Lutestring 's house at Hackney . even the Sunday practice be change ; and , oh , abomination of abomination ! Mr. Van den Bosch leave Bethesda Chapel in Bunhill Row , and actually take a pew in Queen Square Church ! 
 Queen Square Church , and Mr. George Warrington live hard by in Southampton Row ! ' twa easy to see at whom Miss Lyddy be set her cap , and Mr. Draper , who have be full of she and her grandfather 's praise before , now take occasion to warn Mr. George , and give he very different report regard Mr. Van den Bosch to those which have first be current . Mr. Van d. B. , for all he brag so of his dutch parentage , come from Albany , and be nobody 's son at all . he have make his money by land speculation , or by privateere   which be uncommonly like piracy , and by the Guinea trade . his son have marry if marriage it could be call , which be very doubtful an assign servant , and have be cut off by his father , and have take to bad course , and have die , luckily for himself , in his own bed . 
 " Mr. Draper have tell you bad tale about I , " say the placid old gentleman to George . " very likely we be all sinner , and some evil may be truly say of all of we , with a great deal more that be untrue . do he tell you that my son be unhappy with I ? I tell you so too . do he bring you wicked story about my family ? he like it so well that he want to marry my Lyddy to his brother . Heaven bless she ! I have have a many offer for she . and you be the young gentleman I should have choose for she , and I like you none the bad because you prefer somebody else ; though what you can see in your Miss , as compare to my Lyddy , beg your honour 's pardon , I be at a loss to understand . " 
 " there be no accounting for taste , my good sir , " say Mr. George , with his most superb air . 
 " no , sir ; ' tis a wonder of nature , and daily happen . when I keep store to Albany , there be one of your tiptop gentry there that might have marry my dear daughter that be alive then , and with a pretty piece of money , whereby for her father and I have quarrel Miss Lyddy would have be a pauper , you see : and in place of my beautiful Bella , my gentleman choose a little homely creature , no pretty than your Miss , and without a dollar to her fortune . the more fool he , save your presence , Mr. George . " 
 " pray do not   save my presence , my good sir , " say George , laugh . " I suppose the gentleman 's word be give to the other lady , and he have see she first , and hence be indifferent to your charming daughter . " 
 " I suppose when a young fellow give his word to perform a cursed piece of folly , he always stick to it , my dear sir , beg your pardon . but Lord , Lord , what be I speak of ? I be aspeake of twenty year ago . I be well - to - do then , but I may say Heaven have bless my store , and I be three time as well off now . ask my agent how much they will give for Joseph Van den Bosch 's bill at six month on New York or at sight may be for forty thousand pound ? I warrant they will discount the paper . " 
 " happy he who have the bill , sir ! " say George , with a bow , not a little amuse with the candour of the old gentleman . 
 " Lord , Lord , how mercenary you young man be ! " cry the elder , simply . " always think about money nowadays ! happy he who have the girl , I should say the money be not   the question , my dear sir , when it go along with such a lovely young thing as that though I humbly say it , who ought not , and who be her fond silly old grandfather . we be talk about you , Lyddy darling come , give I a kiss , my blessing ! we be talk about you , and Mr. George say he would not   take you with all the money your poor old grandfather can give you . " 
 " Nay , sir , " say George . 
 " well , you be right to say nay , for I do not   say all , that be the truth . my Blessing will have a deal more than that trifle I speak of , when it shall please Heaven to remove I out of this world to a well when poor old Gappy be go , Lyddy will be a rich little Lyddy , that she will . but she do not   wish I to go yet , do she ? " 
 " oh , you darle dear grandpapa ! " say Lyddy . 
 " this young gentleman will not   have you . "   Lyddy look an arch " thank you , sir , " from her brown eye .   " but at any rate he be honest , and that be more than we can say of some folk in this wicked London . oh , Lord , Lord , how mercenary they be ! do you know that yonder , in Monument Yard , they be all at my poor little blessing for her money ? there be Tom Lutestring ; there be Mr. Draper , your precious lawyer ; there be actually Mr. Tubbs , of Bethesda Chapel ; and they must all come buzz like fly round the honey - pot . that be why we come out of the quarter where my brother - tradesman live . " 
 " to avoid the fly , to be sure ! " say Miss Lydia , toss up her little head . 
 " where my brother - tradesman live , " continue the old gentleman . " else who be I to think of consort with your grandee and fine folk ? I do not   care for the fashion , Mr. George ; I do not   care for play and poetry , beg your honour 's pardon ; I never go to a play in my life , but to please this little minx . " 
 " oh , sir , ' twa lovely ! and I cry so , do not   I , grandpapa ? " say the child . 
 " at what , my dear ? " 
 " at at Mr. Warrington 's play , grandpapa . " 
 " do you , my dear ? I dare say ; I dare say ! it be mail day : and my letter have come in : and my ship the Lovely Lyddy have just come into Falmouth ; and Captain Joyce report how he have mercifully escape a french privateer ; and my head be so full of thank for that escape , which save I a deal of money , Mr. George for the rate at which ship be underwrite this war - time be so scandalous that I often prefer to venture than to insure that I confess I do not   listen much to the play , sir , and only go to please this little Lyddy . " 
 " and you do please I , dear Gappy ! " cry the young lady . 
 " bless you ! then it be all I want . what do a man want more here below than to please his child , Mr. George ? especially I , who know what be to be unhappy when I be young , and to repent of have treat this darling 's father too hard . " 
 " oh , grandpapa ! " cry the child , with more caress . 
 " yes , I be too hard with he , dear ; and that be why I spoil my little lydkin so ! " 
 more kiss ensue between Lyddy and Gappy . the little creature fling the pretty polished arm round the old man 's neck , press the dark red lip on his wither cheek , surround the venerable head with a halo of powder beat out of his wig by her caress ; and eye Mr. George the while , as much as to say , there , sir ! should you not like I to do as much for you ? 
 we confess ; but do we confess all ? George certainly tell the story of his interview with Lyddy and Gappy , and the old man 's news regard his granddaughter 's wealth ; but I do not   think he tell everything ; else Theo would scarce have be so much interested , or so entirely amused and good - humour with Lyddy when next the two young lady meet . 
 they meet now pretty frequently , especially after the old american gentleman take up his residence in Bloomsbury . Mr. Van den Bosch be in the city for the most part of the day , attend to his affair , and appear at his place upon ' Change . during his absence Lyddy have the command of the house , and receive her guest there like a lady , or ride abroad in a fine coach , which she order her grandpapa to keep for she , and into which he could very seldom be induce to set his foot . before long Miss Lyddy be as easy in the coach as if she have ride in one all her life . she order the domestic here and there ; she drive to the mercer 's and the jeweller 's , and she call upon her friend with the utmost stateliness , or ride abroad with they to take the air . Theo and Hetty be both greatly divert with she : but would the eld have be quite as well pleased have she know all Miss Lyddy 's doing ? not that Theo be of a jealous disposition , far otherwise ; but there be case when a lady have a right to a little jealousy , as I maintain , whatever my fair reader may say to the contrary . 
 it be because she know he be engage , very likely , that Miss Lyddy permit herself to speak so frankly in Mr. George 's praise . when they be alone and this bless chance occur pretty often at Mr. Van den Bosch 's house , for we have say he be constantly absent on one errand or the other it be wonderful how artlessly the little creature would show her enthusiasm , ask he all sort of simple question about himself , his genius , his way of life at home and in London , his project of marriage , and so forth . 
 " I be glad you be go to be marry , oh , so glad ! " she would say , heave the most piteous sigh the while ; " for I can talk to you frankly , quite frankly as a brother , and not be afraid of that odious politeness about which they be always scold I at boarding - school . I may speak to you frankly ; and if I like you , I may say so , may not   I , Mr. George ? " 
 " pray , say so , " say George , with a bow and a smile . " that be a kind of talk which most man delight to hear , especially from such pretty lip as Miss Lydia 's . " 
 " what do you know about my lip ? " say the girl , with a pout and an innocent look into his face . 
 " what , indeed ? " ask George . " perhaps I should like to know a great deal more . " 
 " they do not   tell nothing but truth , anyhow ! " say the girl ; " that be why some people do not   like they ! if I have anything on my mind , it must come out . I be a country - breed girl , I be with my heart in my mouth all honesty and simplicity ; not like your english girl , who have learn I do not   know what at their boarding - school , and from the man afterwards . " 
 " our girl be monstrous little hypocrite , indeed ! " cry George . 
 " you be think of Miss Lamberts ? and I might have think of they ; but I declare I do not then . they have be at boarding - school ; they have be in the world a great deal so much the great pity for they , for be certain they learn no good there . and now I have say so , of course you will go and tell Miss Theo , will not   you , sir ? " 
 " that she have learn no good in the world ? she have scarce speak to man at all , except her father , her brother , and I . which of we would teach she any wrong , think you ? " 
 " oh , not you ! though I can understand its be very dangerous to be with you ! " say the girl , with a sigh . 
 " indeed there be no danger , and I do not   bite ! " say George , laugh . 
 " I do not   say bite , " say the girl , softly . " there be other thing dangerous besides bite , I should think . be not   you very witty ? yes , and sarcastic , and clever , and always laugh at people ? have not   you a coax tongue ? if you be to look at I in that kind of way , I do not   know what would come to I . be your brother like you , as I be to have marry ? be he as clever and witty as you ? I have hear he be like you : but he have not   your coax tongue . Heigho ! ' tis well you be engage , Master George , that be all . do you think if you have see I first , you would have like Miss Theo well ? " 
 " they say marriage be make in Heaven , my dear , and let we trust that mine have be arrange there , " say George . 
 " I suppose there be no such thing never know , as a man have two sweetheart ? " ask the artless little maiden . " guess it be a pity . o I ! what nonsense I be a - talk ; there now ! I be like the little girl who cry for the moon ; and I can not   have it . ' tis too high for I too high and splendid and shin : can not   reach up to it nohow . well , what a foolish , wayward , little spoilt thing I be now ! but one thing you promise.-on your word and your honour , now , Mr. George ? " 
 " and what be that ? " 
 " that you will not   tell Miss Theo , else she will hate I . " 
 " why should she hate you ? " 
 " because I hate she , and wish she be dead ! " break out the young lady . and the eye that be look so gentle and lachrymose but now , flame with sudden wrath , and her cheek flush up . " for shame ! " she add , after a pause . " I be a little fool to speak ! but whatever be in my heart must come out . I be a girl of the wood , I be . I be breed where the sun be hot than in this foggy climate . and I be not like your cold english girl ; who , before they speak , or think , or feel , must wait for mamma to give leave . there , there ! I may be a little fool for say what I have . I know you will go and tell Miss Lambert . well , do ! " 
 but , as we have say , George do not   tell Miss Lambert . even from the beloved person there must be some thing keep secret ; even to himself , perhaps , he do not quite acknowledge what be the meaning of the little girl 's confession ; or , if he acknowledge it , do not act on it ; except in so far as this , perhaps , that my gentleman , in Miss Lydia 's presence , be particularly courteous and tender ; and in her absence think of she very kindly , and always with a certain pleasure . it be hard , indeed , if a man might not repay by a little kindness and gratitude the artless affection of such a warm young heart . 
 what be that story meanwhile which come round to our friend , of young Mr. Lutestring and young Mr. Drabshaw the Quaker have a boxing - match at a tavern in the city , and all about this young lady ? they fall out over their cup , and fight probably . why do Mr. Draper , who have praise she so at first , tell such story now against her grandfather ? " I suspect , " say Madame de Bernstein , " that he want the girl for some client or relation of his own ; and that he tell these tale in order to frighten all suitor from she . when she and her grandfather come to I , she behave perfectly well ; and I confess , sir , I think it be a great pity that you should prefer yonder red - cheeked countrifie little chit , without a halfpenny , to this pretty , wild , artless girl , with such a fortune as I hear she have . " 
 " oh , she have be with you , have she , aunt ? " ask George of his relative . 
 " of course she have be with I , " the other reply , curtly . " unless your brother have be so silly as to fall in love with that other little lambert girl " 
 " indeed , ma'am , I think I can say he have not , " George remark . 
 " why , then , when he come back with Mr. Wolfe , should he not take a fancy to this little person , as his mamma wish only , to do we justice , we esmond care very little for what our mamma wish and marry she , and set up beside you in Virginia ? she be to have a great fortune , which you will not   touch . pray , why should it go out of the family ? " 
 George now learn that Mr. Van den Bosch and his granddaughter have be often at Madame de Bernstein 's house . take his favourite walk with his favourite companion to Kensington Gardens , he see Mr. Van den Bosch 's chariot turn into Kensington Square . the Americans be go to visit Lady Castlewood , then ? he find , on some little inquiry , that they have be more than once with her ladyship . it be , perhaps , strange that they should have say nothing of their visit to George ; but , be little curious of other people 's affair , and have no intrigue or mystery of his own , George be quite slow to imagine they in other people . what matter to he how often Kensington entertain Bloomsbury , or Bloomsbury make its bow at Kensington ? 
 a number of thing be happen at both place , of which our Virginian have not the slight idea . indeed , do not thing happen under our eye , and we not see they ? be not comedy and tragedy daily perform before we of which we understand neither the fun nor the pathos ? very likely George go home thinking to himself , " I have make an impression on the heart of this young creature . she have almost confess as much . poor artless little maiden ! I wonder what there be in I that she should like I ? " can he be angry with she for this unlucky preference ? be ever a man angry at such a reason ? he would not have be so well pleased , perhaps , have he know all ; and that he be only one of the performer in the comedy , not the principal character by any mean ; Rosencrantz and Guildenstern in the Tragedy , the part of Hamlet by a gentleman unknown . how often be our little vanity shock in this way , and subject to wholesome humiliation ! have you not fancy that Lucinda 's eye beam on you with a special tenderness , and presently become aware that she ogle your neighbour with the very same killing glance ? have you not exchange exquisite whisper with lalage at the dinner - table   sweet murmur hear through the hum of the guest , and clatter of the banquet !   and then overheard her whisper the very same delicious phrase to old Surdus in the drawing - room ? the sun shin for everybody ; the flower smell sweet for all nose ; and the nightingale and Lalage warble for all ear not your long one only , good Brother ! 




 CHAPTER LXX . in which Cupid play a Considerable Part 

 we must now , however , and before we proceed with the history of Miss Lydia and her doing , perform the duty of explain that sentence in Mr. Warrington 's letter to his brother which refer to Lady Maria Esmond , and which , to some simple reader , may be still mysterious . for how , indeed , could well - regulate person divine such a secret ? how could innocent and respectable young people suppose that a woman of noble birth , of ancient family , of mature experience , a woman whom we have see exceedingly in love only a score of month ago , should so far forget herself as   oh , my very finger - tip blush as I write the sentence !   as not only to fall in love with a person of low origin , and very many year her junior , but actually to marry he in the face of the world ? that be , not exactly in the face , but behind the back of the world , so to speak ; for Parson Sampson privily tie the indissoluble knot for the pair at his chapel in Mayfair . 
 now stop before you condemn she utterly . because Lady Maria have have , and overcome , a foolish partiality for her young cousin , be that any reason why she should never fall in love with anybody else ? be man to have the sole privilege of change , and be woman to be rebuke for avail themselves now and again of their little chance of consolation ? no invective can be more rude , gross , and unphilosophical than , for instance , Hamlet 's to his mother about her second marriage . the truth , very likely , be , that that tender , parasitic creature want a something to cling to , and , Hamlet senior out of the way , twin herself round Claudius . Nay , we have know female so bent on attach themselves , that they can twine round two gentleman at once . why , forsooth , shall there not be marriage - table after funeral bake - meat ? if you say grace for your feast yesterday , be that any reason why you shall not be hungry to - day ? your natural fine appetite and relish for this evening 's feast , show that to - morrow evening at eight o'clock you will most probably be in want of your dinner . I , for my part , when Flirtilla or Jiltissa be partial to I   the kind reader will please to fancy that I be allude here to person of the most ravish beauty and lofty rank , always use to bear in mind that a time would come when they would be fond of somebody else . we be serve a la Russe , and gobble up a dish at a time , like the folk in Polyphemus 's cave . ' tis hodie mihi , cra tibi : there be some Anthropophagi who devour dozen of we , the old , the young , the tender , the tough , the plump , the lean , the ugly , the beautiful : there be no escape , and one after another , as our fate be , we disappear down their omnivorous maw . look at Lady Ogresham ! we all remember , last year , how she serve poor Tom Kydd : seize upon he , devour he , pick his bone , and fling they away . now it be Ned Suckling she have get into her den . he lie under her great eye , quivering and fascinated . look at the poor little trepid creature , pant and helpless under the great eye ! she trail towards he nearer and nearer ; he draw to she , close and close . presently there will be one or two feeble squeak for pity , and hobblegobble he will disappear ! ah I ! it be pity , too . I know , for instance , that Maria Esmond have lose her heart ever so many time before Harry Warrington find it ; but I like to fancy that he be go to keep it ; that , bewail mischance and time out of joint , she would yet have preserve her love , and fondle it in decorous celibacy . if , in some paroxysm of senile folly , I should fall in love to - morrow , I shall still try and think I have acquire the fee - simple of my charmer 's heart ; not that I be only a tenant , on a short lease , of an old battered furnished apartment , where the dingy old wine - glass have be cloud by score of pair of lip , and the tumbled old sofa be muddy with the last lodger 's boot . dear , dear nymph ! be beloved and beautiful ! suppose I have a little pass passion for Glycera   and her complexion really be as pure as splendent parian marble ; suppose you have a fancy for Telephus , and his low collar and absurd neck ; those folly be all over now , be not   they ? we love each other for good now , do not   we ? yes , for ever ; and Glycera may go to Bath , and Telephus take his cervicem roseam to Jack Ketch , n'est - ce pas ? 
 no . we never think of change , my dear . however wind blow , or time fly , or spoon stir , our potage , which be now so pip hot , will never get cold . pass fancy we may have allow ourselves in former day ; and really your infatuation for Telephus   do not   frown so , my darling creature ! and make the wrinkle in your forehead worse   I say , really it be the talk of the whole town ; and as for Glycera , she behave confoundedly ill to I . well , well , now that we understand each other , it be for ever that our heart be united , and we can look at Sir Cresswell Cresswell , and snap our finger at his wig . but this Maria of the last century be a woman of an ill - regulated mind . you , my love , who know the world , know that in the course of this lady 's career a great deal must have pass that would not bear the light , or edify in the telling . you know   not , my dear creature , that I mean you have any experience ; but you have hear people say you have hear your mother say   that an old flirt , when she have do play the fool with one passion , will play the fool with another ; that flirt be like drinking ; and the brandy be drunk up , you no , not you Glycera the brandy be drunk up , Glycera , who have take to drinking , will fall upon the gin . so , if Maria Esmond have find a successor for Harry Warrington , and set up a new sultan in the precious empire of her heart , what , after all , could you expect from she ? that territory be like the Low Countries , accustom to be conquer , and for ever open to invasion . 
 and Maria 's present enslaver be no other than Mr. Geoghegan or Hagan , the young actor who have perform in George 's tragedy . his tone be so thrilling , his eye so bright , his mien so noble , he look so beautiful in his gilt leather armour and large buckled periwig , give utterance to the poet 's glow verse , that the lady 's heart be yield up to he , even as Ariadne 's to Bacchus when her affair with Theseus be over . the young Irishman be not a little touch and elated by the highborn damsel 's partiality for he . he might have prefer a Lady Maria Hagan more tender in year , but one more tender in disposition it be difficult to discover . she cling to he closely , indeed . she retire to his humble lodging in Westminster with he , when it become necessary to disclose their marriage , and when her furious relative disown she . 
 General Lambert bring the news home from his office in Whitehall one day , and make merry over it with his family . in those homely time a joke be none the bad for be a little broad ; and a fine lady would laugh at a jolly page of Fielding , and weep over a letter of Clarissa , which would make your present ladyship 's eye start out of your head with horror . he utter all sort of waggery , do the merry General , upon the subject of this marriage ; upon George 's share in bring it about ; upon Barry 's jealousy when he should hear of it , he vow it be cruel that cousin Hagan have not select George as groomsman ; that the first child should be call Carpezan or Sybilla , after the tragedy , and so forth . they would not quite be able to keep a coach , but they might get a chariot and pasteboard dragon from Mr. Rich 's theatre . the baby might be christen in Macbeth 's caldron ; and Harry and harlequin ought certainly to be godfather . 
 " why should not   she marry he if she like he ? " ask little Hetty . " why should he not love she because she be a little old ? Mamma be a little old , and you love she none the bad . when you marry my mamma , sir , I have hear you say you be very poor ; and yet you be very happy , and nobody laugh at you ! " thus this impudent little person speak by reason of her tender age , not be aware of Lady Maria Esmond 's previous folly . 
 so her family have desert she ? George describe what wrath they be in ; how Lady Castlewood have go into mourning ; how Mr. will swore he would have the rascal 's ear ; how furious Madame de Bernstein be , the most angry of all . " it be an insult to the family , " say haughty little Miss Hett ; " and I can fancy how lady of that rank must be indignant at their relative 's marriage with a person of Mr. Hagan 's condition ; but to desert she be a very different matter . " 
 " indeed , my dear child , " cry mamma , " you be talk of what you do not   understand . after my Lady Maria 's conduct , no respectable person can go to see she . " 
 " what conduct , mamma ? " 
 " never mind , " cry mamma . " little girl can not   be expect to know , and ought not to be too curious to inquire , what Lady Maria 's conduct have be ! suffice it , miss , that I be shock her ladyship should ever have be here ; and I say again , no honest person should associate with she ! " 
 " then , Aunt Lambert , I must be whip and send to bed , " say George , with mock gravity . " I own to you   though I do not confess soon , see that the affair be not mine   that I have be to see my cousin the player , and her ladyship his wife . I find they in very dirty lodging in Westminster , where the wretch have the shabbiness to keep not only his wife , but his old mother , and a little brother , whom he put to school . I find Mr. Hagan , and come away with a liking , and almost a respect for he , although I own he have make a very improvident marriage . but how improvident some folk be about marriage , be not   they , Theo ? " 
 " Improvident , if they marry such spendthrift as you , " say the General . " Master George find his relation , and I will be bind to say he leave his purse behind he . " 
 " no , not the purse , sir , " say George , smile very tenderly . " Theo make that . but I be bind to own it come empty away . Mr. Rich be in great dudgeon . he say he hardly dare have Hagan on his stage , and be afraid of a riot , such as Mr. Garrick have about the foreign dancer . this be to be a fine gentleman 's riot . the macaroni be furious , and vow they will pelt Mr. Hagan , and have he cudgel afterwards . my cousin will , at Arthur 's , have take his oath he will have the actor 's ear . meanwhile , as the poor man do not play , they have cut off his salary ; and without his salary , this luckless pair of lover have no mean to buy bread and cheese . " 
 " and you take it to they , sir ? it be like you , George ! " say Theo , worship he with her eye . 
 " it be your purse take it , dear Theo ! " reply George . 
 " Mamma , I hope you will go and see they to - morrow ! " pray Theo . 
 " if she do not , I shall get a divorce , my dear ! " cry papa . " come and kiss I , you little wench that be , avec la bonne permission de monsieur mon beau - fil . " 
 " Monsieur mon beau fiddlestick , papa ! " say Miss Lambert , and I have no doubt complie with the paternal order . and this be the first time George Esmond Warrington , Esquire , be ever call a fiddlestick . 
 any man , even in our time , who make an imprudent marriage , know how he have to run the gauntlet of the family , and undergo the abuse , the scorn , the wrath , the pity of his relation . if your respectable family cry out because you marry the curate 's daughter , one in ten , let we say , of his charming child ; or because you engage yourself to the young barrister whose only present pecuniary resource come from the court which he report , and who will have to pay his Oxford bill out of your slender little fortune ; if your friend cry out for make such engagement as these , fancy the feeling of Lady Maria Hagan 's friend , and even those of Mr. Hagan 's , on the announcement of this marriage . 
 there be old Mrs. Hagan , in the first instance . her son have keep she dutifully and in tolerable comfort , ever since he leave Trinity College at his father 's death , and appear as Romeo at Crow Street Theatre . his salary have suffice of late year to keep the brother at school , to help the sister who have go out as companion , and to provide fire , clothing , tea , dinner , and comfort for the old clergyman 's widow . and now , forsooth , a fine lady , with all sort of extravagant habit , must come and take possession of the humble home , and share the scanty loaf and mutton ! be Hagan not a high - spirited fellow , and the old mother very much afraid of he , I doubt whether my lady 's life at the Westminster lodging would be very comfortable . it be very selfish perhaps to take a place at that small table , and in poor Hagan 's narrow bed . but love in some passionate and romantic disposition never regard consequence , or measure accommodation . who have not experience that frame of mind ; what thrifty wife have not see and lament her husband in that condition ; when , with rather a heighten colour and a deuce - may - care smile on his face , he come home and announce that he have ask twenty people to dinner next Saturday ? he do not   know whom exactly ; and he do know the dining - room will only hold sixteen . never mind ! two of the prettiest girl can sit upon young gentleman 's knee : other will not   come : there be sure to be plenty ! in the intoxication of love people venture upon this dangerous sort of housekeeping ; they do not   calculate the resource of their dining - table , or those inevitable butcher ' and fishmonger ' bill which will be bring to the ghastly housekeeper at the beginning of the month . 
 yes : it be rather selfish of my Lady Maria to seat herself at Hagan 's table and take the cream off the milk , and the wing of the chicken , and the good half of everything where there be only enough before ; and no wonder the poor old mamma - in - law be disposed to grumble . but what be her outcry compare to the clamour at Kensington among Lady Maria 's noble family ? think of the talk and scandal all over the town ! think of the titter and whisper of the lady in attendance at the Princess 's court , where Lady Fanny have a place ; of the joke of Mr. Will 's brother - officer at the usher 's table ; of the waggery in the daily print and magazine ; of the comment of outraged prude ; of the laughter of the club and the sneer of the ungodly ! at the receipt of the news Madame Bernstein have fit and run off to the solitude of her dear rock at Tunbridge Wells , where she do not see above forty people of a night at card . my lord refuse to see his sister ; and the Countess in mourning , as we have say , wait upon one of her patroness , a gracious Princess , who be pleased to condole with she upon the disgrace and calamity which have befall her house . for one , two , three whole day the town be excite and amuse by the scandal ; then there come other news a victory in Germany ; doubtful account from America ; a general officer come home to take his trial ; an exquisite new soprano singer from Italy ; and the public forget Lady Maria in her garret , eat the hard - earn meal of the actor 's family . 
 this be an extract from Mr. George Warrington 's letter to his brother , in which he describe other personal matter , as well as a visit he have pay to the newly marry pair : 
 " my dearest little Theo , " he write , " be eager to accompany her mamma upon this errand of charity ; but I think Aunt Lambert 's visit would be good under the circumstance , and without the attendance of her little spinster aide - de - camp . Cousin Hagan be out when we call ; we find her ladyship in a loose undress , and with her hair in not the neat paper , play at cribbage with a neighbour from the second floor , while good Mrs. Hagan sate on the other side of the fire with a glass of punch , and the Whole Duty of Man . 
 " Maria , your Maria once , cry a little when she see we ; and Aunt Lambert , you may be sure , be ready with her sympathy . while she bestow it on Lady Maria , I pay the good compliment I could invent to the old lady . when the conversation between Aunt L. and the bride begin to flag , I turn to the latter , and between we we do our good to make a dreary interview pleasant . our talk be about you , about Wolfe , about war ; you must be engage face to face with the Frenchmen by this time , and God send my dear brother safe and victorious out of the battle ! be sure we follow your step anxiously we fancy you at Cape Breton . we have plan of Quebec , and chart of the St. Lawrence . shall I ever forget your face of joy that day when you see I return safe and sound from the little combat with the little Frenchman ? so will my Harry , I know , return from his battle . I feel quite assured of it ; elated somehow with the prospect of your certain success and safety . and I have make all here share my cheerfulness . we talk of the campaign as over , and Captain Warrington 's promotion as secure . pray Heaven , all our hope may be fulfil one day ere long . 
 " how strange it be that you who be the mettlesome fellow   you know you be   should escape quarrel hitherto , and I , who be a peaceful youth , wish no harm to anybody , should have battle thrust upon I ! what do you think actually of my have have another affair upon my wicked hand , and with whom , think you ? with no less a personage than your old enemy , our kinsman , Mr. Will . 
 " what or who set he to quarrel with I , I can not think . Spencer   who act as second for I , for matter actually have go this length ; do not   be frighten ; it be all over , and nobody be a scratch the bad   think some one set Will on I , but who , I say ? his conduct have be most singular ; his behaviour quite unbearable . we have meet pretty frequently lately at the house of good Mr. Van den Bosch , whose pretty granddaughter be consign to both of we by our good mother . oh , dear mother ! do you know that the little thing be to be such a causa belli , and to cause sword to be draw , and precious life to be menace ? but so it have be . to show his own spirit , I suppose , or have some reasonable doubt about mine , whenever Will and I have meet at Mynheer 's house and he be for ever go there he have show such downright rudeness to I , that I have require more than ordinary patience to keep my temper . he have contradict I once , twice , thrice in the presence of the family , and out of sheer spite and rage , as it appear to I . be he pay his address to Miss Lydia , and her father 's ship , negro , and forty thousand pound ? I should guess so . the old gentleman be for ever talk about his money , and adore his granddaughter , and as she be a beautiful little creature , number of folk here be ready to adore she too . be will rascal enough to fancy that I would give up my Theo for a million of guineas , and negro , and Venus to boot ? could the thought of such baseness enter into the man 's mind ? I do not   know that he have accuse I of steal Van den Bosch 's spoon and tankard when we dine there , or of rob on the highway . but for one reason or the other he have choose to be jealous of I , and as I have parry his impertinence with little sarcastic speech   though perfectly civil before company , perhaps I have once or twice make he angry . our little Miss Lydia have unwittingly add fuel to the fire on more than one occasion , especially yesterday , when there be talk about your worship . 
 " ' ah ! ' say the heedless little thing , as we sit over our dessert , " tis lucky for you , Mr. Esmond , that Captain Harry be not here . ' 
 " ' why , miss ? ' ask he , with one of his usual conversational ornament . he must have offend some fairy in his youth , who have cause he to drop curse for ever out of his mouth , as she do the girl to spit out toad and serpent .   I know some one from whose gentle lip there only fall pure pearl and diamond .   ' why ? ' say will , with a cannonade of oath . 
 " ' o fie ! ' say she , put up the prettiest little finger to the prettiest little rosy ear in the world . ' o fie , sir ! to use such naughty word . ' tis lucky the Captain be not here , because he might quarrel with you ; and Mr. George be so peaceable and quiet , that he will not . have you hear from the Captain , Mr. George ? ' 
 " ' from Cape Breton , ' say I. ' he be very well , thank you ; that be ' I could not   finish the sentence , for I be in such a rage that I scarce could contain myself . 
 " ' from the Captain , as you call he , Miss Lyddy , ' say Will . ' he will distinguish himself as he do at Saint Cas ! Ho , ho ! ' 
 " ' so I apprehend he do , sir , ' say Will 's brother . 
 " ' do he ? ' say our dear cousin ; ' always think he run away ; take to his leg ; get a ducking , and run away as if a bailiff be after he . ' 
 " ' La ! ' say Miss , ' do the Captain ever have a bailiff after he ? ' 
 " ' do not   he ? Ho , ho ! ' laugh Mr. Will . 
 " I suppose I must have look very savage , for Spencer , who be din with we , trod on my foot under the table . ' do not   laugh so loud , cousin , ' I say , very gently ; ' you may wake good old Mr. Van den Bosch . ' the good old gentleman be asleep in his arm - chair , to which he commonly retire for a nap after dinner . 
 " ' oh , indeed , cousin , ' say will , and he turn and wink at a friend of his , Captain Deuceace , whose own and whose wife 's reputation I dare say you hear of when you frequent the club , and whom will have introduce into this simple family as a man of the high fashion . ' do not   be afraid , miss , ' say Mr. Will , ' nor my cousin need not   be . ' 
 " ' oh , what a comfort ! ' cry Miss Lyddy . ' keep quite quiet , gentleman , and do not   quarrel , and come up to I when I send to say the tea be ready . ' and with this she make a sweet little curtsey , and disappear . 
 " ' hang it , Jack , pass the bottle , and do not   wake the old gentleman ! ' continue Mr. Will . ' will not   you help yourself , cousin ? ' he continue ; be particularly facetious in the tone of that word cousin . 
 " ' I be go to help myself , ' I say ; ' but I be not go to drink the glass ; and I will tell you what I be go to do with it , if you will be quite quiet , cousin . '   desperate kick from Spencer all this time . 
 " ' and what the deuce do I care what you be go to do with it ? ' ask Will , look rather white . 
 " ' I be go to fle it into your face , cousin , ' say I , very rapidly perform that feat . 
 " ' by Jove , and no mistake ! ' cry Mr. Deuceace ; and as he and William roar out an oath together , good old Van den Bosch wake up , and , take the pocket - handkerchief off his face , ask what be the matter . 
 " I remark it be only a glass of wine go the wrong way and the old man say ; ' well , well , there be more where that come from ! let the butler bring you what you please , young gentleman ! ' and he sink back in his great chair , and begin to sleep again . 
 " ' from the back of Montagu House Gardens there be a beautiful view of Hampstead at six o'clock in the morning ; and the statue of the King on St. George 's Church be reckon elegant , cousin ! ' say I , resume the conversation . 
 " ' d the statue ! ' begin will ; but I say , ' do not , cousin ! or you will wake up the old gentleman . have we not well go upstairs to Miss Lyddy 's tea - table ? ' 
 " we arrange a little meeting for the next morning ; and a coroner might have be sit upon one or other , or both , of our body this afternoon ; but , would you believe it ? just as our engagement be about to take place , we be interrupt by three of Sir John Fielding 's man , and carry to Bow Street , and ignominiously bind over to keep the peace . 
 " who give the information ? not I , or Spencer , I can vow . though I own I be pleased when the constable come run to we ; bludgeon in hand : for I have no wish to take Will 's blood , or sacrifice my own to such a rascal . now , sir , have you such a battle as this to describe to I ? a battle of powder and no shot ? a battle of sword as bloody as any on the stage ? I have fill my paper , without finish the story of Maria and her Hagan . you must have it by the next ship . you see , the quarrel with will take place yesterday , very soon after I have write the first sentence or two of my letter . I have be dawdle till dinner - time   I look at the paper last night , when I be grimly make certain little account up , and wonder shall I ever finish this letter ? , and now the quarrel have be so much more interesting to I than poor Molly 's love - adventure , that behold my paper be full to the brim ! wherever my dear Harry read it , I know that there will be a heart full of love for his love brother , 
 " G. E. W. " 




 CHAPTER LXXI . White Favours 

 the little quarrel between George and his cousin cause the former to discontinue his visit to Bloomsbury in a great measure ; for Mr. Will be more than ever assiduous in his attention ; and , now that both be bind over to peace , so outrageous in his behaviour , that George find the great difficulty in keep his hand from his cousin . the artless little Lydia have certainly a queer way of receive her friend . but six week before madly jealous of George 's preference for another , she now take occasion repeatedly to compliment Theo in her conversation . Miss Theo be such a quiet , gentle creature , Lyddy be sure George be just the husband for she . how fortunate that horrible quarrel have be prevent ! the constable have come up just in time ; and it be quite ridiculous to hear Mr. Esmond curse and swearing , and the rage he be in at be disappoint of his duel ! " but the arrival of the constable save your valuable life , dear Mr. George , and I be sure Miss Theo ought to bless they forever , " say Lyddy , with a soft smile . " you will not   stop and meet Mr. Esmond at dinner to - day ? you do not   like be in his company ? he can not   do you any harm ; and I be sure you will do he none . " kind speech like these address by a little girl to a gentleman , and speak by a strange inadvertency in company , and when other gentleman and lady be present , be not likely to render Mr. Warrington very eager for the society of the young american lady . 
 George 's meeting with Mr. Will be not know for some day in Dean Street , for he do not wish to disturb those kind folk with his quarrel ; but when the lady be make aware of it , you may be sure there be a great flurry and to - do . " you be actually go to take a fellow - creature 's life , and you come to see we , and say not a word ! oh , George , it be shocking ! " say Theo . 
 " my dear , he have insult I and my brother , " plead George . " could I let he call we both coward , and sit by and say , thank you ? " 
 the General sate by and look very grave . 
 " you know you think , papa , it be a wicked and un - christian practice ; and have often say you wish gentleman would have the courage to refuse ! " 
 " to refuse ? yes , " say Mr. Lambert , still very glum . 
 " it must require a prodigious strength of mind to refuse , " say Jack Lambert , look as gloomy as his father ; " and I think if any man be to call I a coward , I should be apt to forget my order . " 
 " you see brother Jack be with I ! " cry George . 
 " I must not be against you , Mr. Warrington , " say Jack Lambert . 
 " Mr. Warrington ! " cry George , turn very red . 
 " would you , a clergyman , have George break the Commandments , and commit murder , John ? " ask Theo , aghast . 
 " I be a soldier 's son , sister , " say the young divine , drily . " besides , Mr. Warrington have commit no murder at all . we must soon be hear from Canada , father . the great question of the supremacy of the two race must be try there ere long ! " he turn his back on George as he speak , and the latter eye he with wonder . 
 Hetty , look rather pale at this original remark of brother Jack , be call out of the room by some artful pretext of her sister . George start up and follow the retreat girl to the door . 
 " great power , gentleman ! " say he , come back , " I believe , on my honour , you be give I the credit of shirk this affair with Mr. Esmond ! " the clergyman and his father look at one another . 
 " a man 's near and dearest be always the first to insult he , " say George , flash out . 
 " you mean to say , ' not guilty ? ' God bless thee , my boy ! " cry the General . " I tell thee so , Jack . " and he rub his hand across his eye , and blush , and wring George 's hand with all his might . 
 " not guilty of what , in heaven 's name ? " ask Mr. Warrington . 
 " Nay , " say the General , " Mr. Jack , here , bring the story . let he tell it . I believe ' tis a lie , with all my heart . " and utter this wicked expression , the General fairly walk out of the room . 
 the Rev. J. Lambert look uncommonly foolish . 
 " and what be this this d d lie , sir , that somebody have be tell of I ? " ask George , grin at the young clergyman . 
 " to question the courage of any man be always an offence to he , " say Mr. Lambert , " and I rejoice that yours have be belie . " 
 " who tell the falsehood , sir , which you repeat ? " bawl out Mr. Warrington . " I insist on the man 's name ! " 
 " you forget you be bind over to keep the peace , " say Jack . 
 " curse the peace , sir ! we can go and fight in Holland . tell I the man 's name , I say ! " 
 " fair and softly , Mr. Warrington ! " cry the young parson ; " my hearing be perfectly good . it be not a man who tell I the story which , I confess , I impart to my father . " 
 " what ? " ask George , the truth suddenly occur . " be it that artful , wicked little vixen in Bloomsbury Square ? " 
 " Vixen be not the word to apply to any young lady , George Warrington ! " exclaim Lambert , " much less to the charming Miss Lydia . she artful the most innocent of Heaven 's creature ! she wicke that angel ! with unfeigned delight that the quarrel should be over with devout gratitude to think that blood consanguineous should not be shed she speak in term of the high praise of you for decline this quarrel , and of the deep sympathy with you for take the painful but only method of avert it . " 
 " what method ? " demand George , stamp his foot . 
 " why , of lay an information , to be sure ! " say Mr. Jack ; on which George burst forth into language much too violent for we to repeat here , and highly uncomplimentary to Miss Lydia . 
 " do not   utter such word , sir ! " cry the parson , who , as it seem , now take his turn to be angry . " do not insult , in my hearing , the most charming , the most innocent of her sex ! if she have be mistake in her information regard you , and doubt your willingness to commit what , after all , be a crime for a crime homicide be , and of the most awful description you , sir , have no right to blacken that angel 's character with foul word : and , innocent yourself , should respect the most innocent as she be the most lovely of woman ! oh , George , be you to be my brother ? " 
 " I hope to have that honour , " answer George , smile . he begin to perceive the other 's drift . 
 " what , then , what though ' tis too much bliss to be hop for by sinful man what , if she should one day be your sister ? who could see her charm without be subjugate by they ? I own that I be a slave . I own that those Latin Sapphics in the September number of the Gentleman 's magazine , begin Lydicae quondam cecinit venustae   with an english version by my friend Hickson of Corpus , be mine . I have tell my mother what hath pass between we , and Mrs. Lambert also think that the most lovely of her sex have deign to look favourably on I . I have compose a letter she another . she propose to wait on Miss Lydia 's grandpapa this very day , and to bring I the answer , which shall make I the happy or the most wretched of man ! it be in the unrestrained intercourse of family conversation that I chance to impart to my father the sentiment which my dear girl have utter . perhaps I speak slightingly of your courage , which I do not   doubt by Heaven , I do not   doubt : it may be , she have err , too , regard you . it may be that the fiend jealousy have be gnaw at my bosom , and horrible suspicion ! that I think my sister 's lover find too much favour with she I would have all my own . ah , dear George , who know his fault ? I be as one distract with passion . confound it , sir ! what right have you to laugh at I ? I would have you to know that risu inepto . " 
 " what , have you two boy make it up ? " cry the General , enter at this moment , in the midst of a roar of laughter from George . 
 " I be give my opinion to Mr. Warrington upon laughter , and upon his laughter in particular , " say Jack Lambert , in a fume . 
 " George be bind over to keep the peace , Jack ! thou canst not fight he for two year ; and between now and then , let we trust you will have make up your quarrel . here be dinner , boy ! we will drink absent friend , and an end to the war , and no fighting out of the profession ! " 
 George plead an engagement , as a reason for run away early from his dinner ; and Jack must have speedily follow he , for when the former , after transact some brief business at his own lodging , come to Mr. Van den Bosch 's door , in Bloomsbury Square , he find the young parson already in parley with a servant there . " his master and mistress have leave town yesterday , " the servant say . 
 " poor Jack ! and you have the decisive letter in your pocket ? " George ask of his future brother - in - law . 
 " well , yes , " Jack own he have the document " and my mother have order a chair , and be come to wait on Miss Lyddy , " he whisper piteously , as the young man linger on the step . 
 George have a note , too , in his pocket for the young lady , which he have not care to mention to Jack . in truth , his business at home have be to write a smart note to Miss Lyddy , with a message for the gentleman who have bring she that funny story of his give information regard the duel ! the family be absent , George , too , do not choose to leave his note . " if cousin will have be the slander - bearer , I will go and make he recant , " think George . " will the family soon be back ? " he blandly ask . 
 " they be go to visit the quality , " the servant reply . " here be the address on this paper ; " and George read , in Miss Lydia 's hand , " the box from Madam Hocquet 's to be send by the Farnham Flying Coach ; address to Miss Van den Bosch , at the Right Honourable the Earl of Castlewood 's , Castlewood , hant . " 
 " where ? " cry poor Jack , aghast . 
 " his lordship and their ladyship have be here often , " the servant say , with much importance . " the family be quite intimate . " 
 this be very strange ; for , in the course of their conversation , Lyddy have own but to one single visit from Lady Castlewood . 
 " and they must be a - go to stay there some time , for Miss have take a power of box and gown with she ! " the man add . and the young man walk away , each crumple his letter in his pocket . 
 " what be that remark you make ? " ask George of Jack , at some exclamation of the latter . " I think you say " 
 " Distraction ! I be beside myself , George ! I I scarce know what I be say , " groan the clergyman . " she be go to Hampshire , and Mr. Esmond be go with she ! " 
 " Othello could not have speak well ! and she have a pretty scoundrel in her company ! " say Mr. George . " ha ! here be your mother 's chair ! " indeed , at this moment poor Aunt Lambert come swing down Great Russell Street , precede by her footman . " ' tis no use go far , Aunt Lambert ! " cry George . " our little bird have fly . " 
 " what little bird ? " 
 " the bird Jack wish to pair with : the Lyddy bird , aunt . why , Jack , I protest you be swear again ! this morning ' twa the Sixth Commandment you want to break ; and now " 
 " confound it ! leave I alone , Mr. Warrington , do you hear ? " growl Jack , look very savage ; and away he stride far out of the reach of his mother 's bearer . 
 " what be the matter , George ? " ask the lady . 
 George , who have not be very well pleased with brother Jack 's behaviour all day , say : " Brother Jack have not a fine temper , Aunt Lambert . he inform you all that I be a coward , and remonstrate with I for be angry . he find his mistress go to the country , and he bawl , and stamp , and swear . o fie ! oh , Aunt Lambert , beware of jealousy ! do the General ever make you jealous ? " 
 " you will make I very angry if you speak to I in this way , " say poor Aunt Lambert from her chair . 
 " I be respectfully dumb . I make my bow . I withdraw , " say George , with a low bow , and turn towards Holborn . his soul be wrath within he . he be bent on quarrel with somebody . have he meet cousin will that night , it have go ill with his surety . 
 he seek Will at all his haunt , at Arthur 's , at his own house . there Lady Castlewood 's servant inform he that they believe Mr. Esmond have go to join the family in hant . he write a letter to his cousin : 
 " my dear , kind cousin William , " he say , " you know I be bind over , and would not quarrel with any one , much less with a dear , truth - telling , affectionate kinsman , whom my brother insult by can . but if you can find any one who say that I prevent a meeting the other day by give information , will you tell your informant that I think it be not I but somebody else be the coward ? and I write to Mr. Van den Bosch by the same post , to inform he and Miss Lyddy that I find some rascal have be tell they lie to my discredit , and to beg they to have a care of such person . " and , these neat letter be despatch , Mr. Warrington dress himself , show himself at the play , and take supper cheerfully at the Bedford . 
 in a few day George find a letter on his breakfast - table frank " Castlewood , " and , indeed , write by that nobleman . 
 " Dear Cousin , " my lord write , " there have be so much annoyance in our family of late , that I be sure ' tis time our quarrel should cease . two day since my brother William bring I a very angry letter , sign G. Warrington , and at the same time , to my great grief and pain , acquaint I with a quarrel that have take place between you , in which , to say the least , your conduct be violent . ' tis an ill use to put good wine to that to which you apply good Mr. Van den Bosch 's . sure , before an old man , young one should be more respectful . I do not deny that Wm . 's language and behaviour be often irritate . I know he have often try my temper , and that within the 24 hour . 
 " ah ! why should we not all live happily together ? you know , cousin , I have ever profess a sincere regard for you that I be a sincere admirer of the admirable young lady to whom you be engage , and to whom I offer my most cordial compliment and remembrance . I would live in harmony with all my family where ' tis possible the more because I hope to introduce to it a Countess of Castlewood . 
 " at my mature age , ' tis not uncommon for a man to choose a young wife . my Lydia   you will divine that I be happy in be able to call mine the elegant Miss Van den Bosch   will naturally survive I . after soothe my decline year , I shall not be jealous if at their close she should select some happy man to succeed I ; though I shall envy he the possession of so much perfection and beauty . though of a noble dutch family , her rank , the dear girl declare , be not equal to mine , which she confess that she be pleased to share . I , on the other hand , shall not be sorry to see descendant to my house , and to have it , through my Lady Castlewood 's mean , restore to something of the splendour which it know before two or three improvident predecessor impair it . my Lydia , who be by my side , send you and the charming Lambert family her warm remembrance . 
 " the marriage will take place very speedily here . may I hope to see you at church ? my brother will not be present to quarrel with you . when I and dear Lydia announce the match to he yesterday , he take the intelligence in bad part , utter language that I know he will one day regret , and be at present on a visit to some neighbour . the Dowager Lady Castlewood retain the house at Kensington ; we have our own establishment , where you will ever be welcome , dear cousin , by your affectionate humble servant , CASTLEWOOD . " 
 from the London Magazine of November 1759 : 
 " Saturday , October 13th , marry , at his seat , Castlewood , Hants , the Right Honourable Eugene , Earl of Castlewood , to the beautiful Miss Van den Bosch , of Virginia . 70,000 pound . " 




 CHAPTER LXXII .   from the Warrington MS .   in which my Lady be on the Top 

 of the Ladder 
 look across the fire , towards her accustomed chair , who have be the beloved partner of my hearth during the last half of my life , I often ask   for middle aged gentleman have the privilege of repeat their joke , their question , their story   whether two young people ever be more foolish and imprudent than we be when we marry , as we do , in the year of the old King 's death ? my son , who have take some prodigious leap in the heat of his fox - hunting , say he survey the gap and river which he cross so safely over with terror afterwards , and astonishment at his own foolhardiness in make such desperate venture ; and yet there be no more eager sportsman in the two county than Miles . he love his amusement so much that he care for no other . he have break his collar - bone , and have a hundred tumble   to his mother 's terror ; but so have his father   thinking , perhaps , of a copy of verse , or his speech at Quarter Sessions   be throw over his old mare 's head , who have slip on a stone as they be both dream along a park road at four mile an hour ; and Miles 's reckless sport have be the delight of his life , as my marriage have be the blessing of mine ; and I never think of it but to thank Heaven . mind , I do not   set up my worship as an example . I do not   say to all young folk , " go and marry upon twopence a year ; " or people would look very black at I at our vestry - meeting ; but my wife be know to be a desperate match - maker ; and when Hodge and Susan appear in my justice - room with a talk of allowance , we urge they to spend their half - crown a week at home , add a little contribution of our own , and send for the vicar . 
 now , when I ask a question of my dear oracle , I know what the answer will be ; and hence , no doubt , the reason why I so often consult she . I have but to wear a particular expression of face and my Diana take her reflection from it . suppose I say , " my dear , do not   you think the moon be make of cream cheese to - night ? " she will say , " well , papa , it do look very like cream cheese , indeed there be nobody like you for droll simile . " or , suppose I say , " my love , Mr. Pitt 's speech be very fine , but I do not   think he be equal to what I remember his father . " " nobody be equal to my Lord Chatham , " say my wife . and then one of the girl cry , " why , I have often hear our papa say Lord Chatham be a charlatan ! " on which mamma say , " how like she be to her Aunt Hetty ! " 
 as for Miles , Tros Tyriusve be all one to he . he only read the sporting announcement in the Norwich paper . so long as there be good scent , he do not care about the state of the country . I believe the rascal have never read my poem , much more my tragedy   for I mention Pocahontas to he the other day , and the dunce think she be a river in Virginia ; and with respect to my Latin verse , how can he understand they when I know he can not   construe Corderius ? why , this notebook lie publicly on the little table at my corner of the fireside , and any one may read in it who will take the trouble of lift my spectacle off the cover : but Miles never hath . I insert in the loose page caricature of Miles : joke against he : but he never know nor heed they . only once , in place of a neat drawing of mine , in China - ink , represent Miles asleep after dinner , and which my friend Bunbury would not disown , I find a rude picture of myself go over my mare Sultana 's head , and entitle " the squire on Horseback , or fish out of Water . " and the fellow to roar with laughter , and all the girl to titter , when I come upon the page ! my wife say she never be in such a fright as when I go to my book : but I can bear a joke against myself , and have hear many , though   strange to say , for one who have live among some of the chief wit of the age   I never hear a good one in my life . never mind , Miles , though thou art not a wit , I love thee none the bad   there never be any love lose between two wit in a family ; though thou hast no great beauty , thy mother think thee as handsome as Apollo , or his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales , who be bear in the very same year with thee . indeed , she always think Coates 's picture of the Prince be very like her eld boy , and have the print in her dressing - room to this very day . 
  note , in a female hand : " my son be not a spendthrift , nor a breaker of woman 's heart , as some gentleman be ; but that he be exceed like H.R.H. when they be both baby , be most certain , the Duchess of Aneaster have herself remark he in St. James 's Park , where Gumbo and my poor molly use often to take he for an airing . Th . W. " 
 in that same year , with what different prospect ! my Lord Esmond , Lord Castlewood 's son , likewise appear to adorn the world . my Lord C. and his humble servant have already come to a coolness at that time , and , heaven know ! my honest Miles 's godmother , at his entrance into life , bring no gold pap - boat to his christening ! matter have mend since , laus Deo laus Deo , indeed ! for I suspect neither Miles nor his father would ever have be able to do much for themselves , and by their own wit . 
 Castlewood House have quite a different face now from that venerable one which it wear in the day of my youth , when it be cover with the wrinkle of time , the scar of old war , the crack and blemish which year have mark on its hoary feature . I love good to remember it in its old shape , as I see it when young Mr. George Warrington go down at the owner 's invitation , to be present at his lordship 's marriage with Miss Lydia Van den Bosch " an american lady of noble family of Holland , " as the county paper announce her ladyship to be . then the tower stand as Warrington 's grandfather the Colonel   the Marquis , as Madam Esmond would like to call her father   have see they . the wood   thin not a little to be sure   stand , nay , some of the self - same rook may have caw over they , which the Colonel have see threescore year back . his picture hang in the hall which might have be his , have he not prefer love and gratitude to wealth and worldly honour ; and Mr. George Esmond Warrington   that be , Egomet Ipse who write this page down , as he walk the old place , pace the long corridor , the smooth dew - spangled terrace and cool darkle avenue , feel a while as if he be one of Mr. Walpole 's cavalier with ruff , rapier , buff - coat , and gorget , and as if an Old Pretender , or a Jesuit emissary in disguise , might appear from behind any tall tree - trunk round about the mansion , or antique carve cupboard within it . I have the strange , saddest , pleasantest , old - world fancy as I walk the place ; I imagine tragedy , intrigue , serenade , escaladoe , Oliver 's roundhead batter the tower , or bluff Hal 's Beefeaters prick over the plain before the castle . I be then court a certain young lady   madam , your ladyship 's eye have no need of spectacle then , and on the brow above they there be never a wrinkle or a silver hair , and I remember I write a ream of romantic description , under my Lord Castlewood 's frank , to the lady who never tired of read my letter then . she say I only send she three line now , when I be away in London or elsewhere . ' tis that I may not fatigue your old eye , my dear ! 
 Mr. Warrington think himself authorise to order a genteel new suit of clothe for my lord 's marriage , and with mon . gumbo in attendance , make his appearance at Castlewood a few day before the ceremony . I may mention that it have be find expedient to send my faithful Sady home on board a Virginia ship . a great inflammation attack the throat and lung , and prove fatal in very many case , in that year of Wolfe 's expedition , have seize and well - nigh kill my poor lad , for whom his native air be pronounce to be the good cure . we part with an abundance of tear , and Gumbo shed as many when his master go to Quebec : but he have attraction in this country and none for the military life , so he remain attached to my service . we find Castlewood House full of friend , relation , and visitor . Lady Fanny be there upon compulsion , a sulky bridesmaid . some of the virgin of the neighbourhood also attend the young Countess . a bishop 's widow herself , the Baroness Beatrix bring a holy brother - in - law of the bench from London to tie the holy knot of matrimony between Eugene Earl of Castlewood and Lydia Van den Bosch , spinster ; and for some time before and after the nuptial the old house in Hampshire wear an appearance of gaiety to which it have long be unaccustomed . the country family come gladly to pay their compliment to the newly married couple . the lady 's wealth be the subject of everybody 's talk , and no doubt do not decrease in the telling . those naughty story which be rife in town , and spread by her disappointed suitor there , take some little time to travel into Hampshire ; and when they reach the country find it disposed to treat Lord Castlewood 's wife with civility , and not inclined to be too curious about her behaviour in town . suppose she have jilt this man , and laugh at the other ? it be her money they be anxious about , and she be no more mercenary than they . the Hampshire folk be determined that it be a great benefit to the country to have Castlewood House once more open , with beer in the cellar , horse in the stable , and spit turn before the kitchen fire . the new lady take her place with great dignity , and ' twa certain she have uncommon accomplishment and wit . be it not write , in the marriage advertisement , that her ladyship bring her noble husband seventy thousand pound ? on a beaucoup d'esprit with seventy thousand pound . the Hampshire people say this be only a small portion of her wealth . when the grandfather should fall , ever so many plum would be find on that old tree . 
 that quiet old man , and keen reckoner , begin quickly to put the dilapidated Castlewood account in order , of which long neglect , poverty , and improvidence have hasten the ruin . the business of the old gentleman 's life now , and for some time henceforth , be to advance , improve , mend my lord 's finance ; to screw the rent up where practicable , to pare the expense of the establishment down . he could , somehow , look to every yard of worsted lace on the footman 's coat , and every pound of beef that go to their dinner . a watchful old eye note every flagon of beer which be fetch from the buttery , and mark that no waste occur in the larder . the people be few , but more regularly pay ; the livery be not so ragged , and yet the tailor have no need to dun for his money ; the gardener and groom grumble , though their wage be no long overdue : but the horse fatten on less corn , and the fruit and vegetable be ever so much more plentiful so keenly do my lady 's old grandfather keep a watch over the household affair , from his lonely little chamber in the turret . 
 these improvement , though here tell in a paragraph or two , be the affair of month and year at Castlewood ; where , with thrift , order , and judicious outlay of money   however , upon some press occasion , my lord might say he have none , the estate and household increase in prosperity . that it be a flourishing and economical household no one could deny : not even the dowager lady and her two child , who now seldom enter within Castlewood gate , my lady consider they in the light of enemy for who , indeed , would like a stepmother - in - law ? the little reign Countess give the dowager battle , and rout she utterly and speedily . though educate in the colony , and ignorant of polite life during her early year , the Countess Lydia have a power of language and a strength of will that all have to acknowledge who quarrel with she . the dowager and my Lady Fanny be no match for the young American : they flee from before she to their jointure house in Kensington , and no wonder their absence be not regret by my lord , who be in the habit of regret no one whose back be turn . could cousin Warrington , whose hand his lordship press so affectionately on come and parting , with whom cousin Eugene be so gay and frank and pleasant when they be together , expect or hope that his lordship would grieve at his departure , at his death , at any misfortune which could happen to he , or any soul alive ? Cousin Warrington know well . always of a sceptical turn , Mr. W. take a grim delight in watch the peculiarity of his neighbour , and could like this one even though he have no courage and no heart . courage ? heart ? what be these to you and I in the world ? a man may have private virtue as he may have half a million in the fund . what we du monde expect be , that he should be lively , agreeable , keep a decent figure , and pay his way . Colonel Esmond Warrington 's grandfather   in whose history and dwelling - place Mr. W. take an extraordinary interest , might once have be owner of this house of Castlewood , and of the title which belong to its possessor . the gentleman often look at the Colonel 's grave picture as it still hang in the saloon , a copy or replica of which piece Mr. Warrington fondly remember in Virginia . 
 " he must have be a little touch here , " my lord say , tap his own tall , placid forehead . 
 there be certain action , simple and common with some man , which other can not understand , and deny as utter lie , or deride as act of madness . 
 " I do you the justice to think , cousin , " say Mr. Warrington to his lordship , " that you would not give up any advantage for any friend in the world . " 
 " eh ! I be selfish : but be I more selfish than the rest of the world ? " ask my lord , with a french shrug of his shoulder , and a pinch out of his box . once , in their walk in the field , his lordship happen to wear a fine scarlet coat , a cow run towards he ; and the ordinarily languid nobleman spring over a stile with the agility of a schoolboy . he do not conceal his tremor , or his natural want of courage . " I dare say you respect I no more than I respect myself , George , " he would say , in his candid way , and begin a very pleasant sardonical discourse upon the fall of man , and his fault , and shortcoming ; and wonder why Heaven have not make we all brave and tall , and handsome and rich ? as for Mr. Warrington , who very likely love to be king of his company   as some people do , he could not help like this kinsman of his , so witty , graceful , polished , high - place in the world so utterly his inferior . like the animal in Mr. Sterne 's famous book , " do not beat I , " his lordship 's look seem to say , " but , if you will , you may . " no man , save a bully and coward himself , deal hardly with a creature so spiritless . 




 CHAPTER LXXIII . we keep Christmas at Castlewood . 1759 

 we know , my dear child , from our favourite fairy story - book , how at all christening and marriage some one be invariably disappoint , and vow vengeance ; and so need not wonder that good cousin will should curse and rage energetically at the news of his brother 's engagement with the colonial heiress . at first , will flee the house , in his wrath , swear he would never return . but nobody , include the swearer , believe much in Master Will 's oath ; and this unrepentant prodigal , after a day or two , come back to the paternal house . the fume of the marriage - feast allure he : he could not afford to resign his knife and fork at Castlewood table . he return , and drank and eat there in token of revenge . he pledge the young bride in a bumper , and drank perdition to she under his breath . he make response of smothered malediction as her father give she away in the chapel , and my lord vow to love , honour and cherish she . he be not the only grumbler respect that marriage , as Mr. Warrington know : he hear , then and afterwards , no end of abuse of my lady and her grandfather . the old gentleman 's City friend , his legal adviser , the dissent clergyman at whose chapel they attend on their first arrival in England , and poor Jack Lambert , the orthodox young divine , whose eloquence he have fondly hop have be exert over she in private , be bitter against the little lady 's treachery , and each have a story to tell of his have be enslave , encouraged , jilt , by the young American . the lawyer , who have have such an accurate list of all her property , estate , money , slave , ship , expectation , be ready to vow and swear that he believe the whole account be false ; that there be no such place as New York or Virginia ; or at any rate , that Mr. Van den Bosch have no land there ; that there be no such thing as a Guinea trade , and that the negro be so many black falsehood invent by the wily old planter . the dissent pastor moan over his stray lambling if such a little , wily , mischievous monster could be call a lamb at all . poor Jack Lambert ruefully acknowledge to his mamma the possession of a lock of black hair , which he bedew with tear and apostrophise in quite unclerical language : and , as for Mr. William Esmond , he , with the shriek and curse in which he always freely indulge , even at Castlewood , under his sister - in - law 's own pretty little nose , when under any strong emotion , call Acheron to witness , that out of that region there do not exist such an artful young devil as Miss Lydia . he swear that she be an infernal female Cerberus , and call down all the wrath of this world and the next upon his swindle rascal of a brother , who have cajole he with fair word , and filch his prize from he . 
 " why , " say Mr. Warrington   when will expatiate on these matter with he , " if the girl be such a she - devil as you describe she , you be all the well for lose she . if she intend to deceive her husband , and to give he a dose of poison , as you say , how lucky for you , you be not the man ! you ought to thank the god , will , instead of curse they , for rob you of such a fury , and can not   be well revenge on Castlewood than by allow he her sole possession . " 
 " all this be very well , " will Esmond say ; but not unjustly , perhaps , remark that his brother be not the less a scoundrel for have cheat he out of the fortune which he expect to get , and which he have risk his life to win , too . 
 George Warrington be at a loss to know how his cousin have be make so to risk his precious existence   for which , perhaps , a rope 's end have be a fitting termination , on which will Esmond , with the utmost candour , tell his kinsman how the little Cerbera have actually cause the meeting between they , which be interrupt somehow by Sir John Fielding 's man ; how she be always say that George Warrington be a coward for ever sneer at Mr. Will , and the latter doubly a poltroon for not take notice of his kinsman 's taunt ; how George have run away and nearly die of fright in Braddock 's expedition ; and " deuce take I , " say will , " I never be more surprised , cousin , than when you stand to your ground so coolly in Tottenham Court Fields yonder , for I and my second offer to wager that you would never come ! " 
 Mr. Warrington laugh , and thank Mr. Will for this opinion of he . 
 " though , " say he , " cousin , ' twa lucky for I the constable come up , or you would have whip your sword through my body in another minute . do not   you see how clumsy I be as I stand before you ? and you actually turn white and shake with anger ! " 
 " yes , curse I , " say Mr. Will   who turn very red this time , " that be my way of show my rage ; and I be confoundedly angry with you , cousin ! but now ' tis my brother I hate , and that little devil of a Countess a countess ! a pretty countess , indeed ! " and with another rumble cannonade of oath , will salute the reign member of his family . 
 " well , cousin , " say George , look he queerly in the face , " you let I off easily , and I dare say I owe my life to you , or at any rate a whole waistcoat , and I admire your forbearance and spirit . what a pity that a courage like yours should be waste as a mere court usher ! you be a loss to his Majesty 's army . you positively be ! " 
 " I never know whether you be joke or serious , Mr. Warrington , " growl Will . 
 " I should think very few gentleman would dare to joke with you , cousin , if they have a regard for their own life or ear ! cry Mr. Warrington , who love this grave way of deal with his noble kinsman , and use to watch , with a droll interest , the other choke his curse , grind his tooth because afraid to bite , and smother his cowardly anger . 
 " and you should moderate your expression , cousin , regard the dear Countess and my lord your brother , " Mr. Warrington resume . " of you they always speak most tenderly . her ladyship have tell I everything . " 
 " what everything ? " cry will , aghast . 
 " as much as woman ever do tell , cousin . she own that she think you have be a little epris with she . what woman can help like a man who have admire she ? " 
 " why , she hat you , and say you be wild about she , Mr. Warrington ! " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " Spretae injuria formae , cousin ! " 
 " for I what be for I ? " ask the other . 
 " I never do care for she , and hence , perhaps , she do not love I . do not   you remember that case of the wife of the Captain of the Guard ? " 
 " which guard ? " ask Will . 
 " my Lord Potiphar , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " Lord who ? my Lord Falmouth be Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard , and my Lord Berkeley of the Pensioners . my Lord Hobart have them before . suppose you have not   be long enough in England to know who be who , cousin ! " remark Mr. William . 
 but Mr. Warrington explain that he be speak of a Captain of the Guard of the King of Egypt , whose wife have persecute one Joseph for not return her affection for he . on which will say that , as for Egypt , he believe it be a confounded long way off ; and that if Lord What - d'ye - call 's wife tell lie about he , it be like her sex , who he suppose be the same everywhere . 
 now the truth be , that when he pay his marriage - visit to Castlewood , Mr. Warrington have hear from the little Countess her version of the story of difference between Will Esmond and herself . and this tale differ , in some respect , though he be far from say it be more authentic than the ingenuous narrative of Mr. Will . the lady be grieve to think how she have be deceive in her brother - in - law . she fear that his life about the court and town have injure those high principle which all the Esmonds be know to be bear with ; that Mr. Will 's word be not altogether to be trust ; that a loose life and pecuniary difficulty have make he mercenary , blunt his honour , perhaps even impair the high chivalrous courage " which we Esmonds , cousin , " the little lady say , toss her head , " which we esmond must always possess leastway , you and I , and my lord , and my cousin Harry have it , I know ! " say the Countess . " oh , cousin George ! and must I confess that I be lead to doubt of your , without which a man of ancient and noble family like ours be not   worthy to be call a man ! I shall try , George , as a christian lady , and the head of one of the first family in this kingdom and the whole world , to forgive my brother William for have speak ill of a member of our family , though a young branch and by the female side , and make I for a moment doubt of you . he do so . perhaps he tell I ever so many bad thing you have say of I . " 
 " I , my dear lady ! " cry Mr. Warrington . 
 " which he say you say of I , cousin , and I hope you do not , and heartily pray you do not ; and I can afford to despise them . and he pay I his court , that be a fact ; and so have other , and that I be use to ; and he might have prosper well than he do perhaps   for I do not know my dear lord , nor come to vally his great and eminent quality , as I do out of the fulness of this grateful heart now ! , but , oh ! I find William be deficient in courage , and no man as want that can ever have the esteem of Lydia , Countess of Castlewood , no more he can ! he say ' twa you that want for spirit , cousin , and anger I by tell I that you be always abuse of I . but I forgive you , George , that I do ! and when I tell you that it be he be afraid the mean skunk ! and actually send for they constable to prevent the match between you and he , you will not   wonder I would not   vally a feller like that no , not that much ! " and her ladyship snap her little finger . " I say , noblesse oblige , and a man of our family who have not   get courage , I do not   care not this pinch of snuff for he there , now , I do not ! look at our ancestor , George , round these wall ! have not   the esmond always fight for their country and king ? be there one of we that , when the moment arrive , be not   ready to show that he be an Esmond and a nobleman ? if my eld son be to show the white feather , ' my Lord Esmond ! ' I would say to he   for that be the second title in our family , ' I disown your lordship ! ' " and so say , the intrepid little woman look round at her ancestor , whose effigy , depict by Lely and Kneller , figure round the wall of her drawing - room at Castlewood . 
 over that apartment , and the whole house , domain , and village , the new Countess speedily begin to rule with an unlimited sway . it be surprising how quickly she learn the way of command ; and , if she do not adopt those method of precedence usual in England among great lady , invent regulation for herself , and promulgate they , and make other submit . have be breed a Dissenter , and not be over - familiar with the Established Church service , Mr. Warrington remark that she make a blunder or two during the office   not know , for example , when she be to turn her face towards the east , a custom not adopt , I believe , in other reform church besides the English ; but between Warrington 's first bridal visit to Castlewood and his second , my lady have get to be quite perfect in that part of her duty , and sail into chapel on her cousin 's arm , her two footman bear her ladyship 's great prayer - book behind she , as demurely as that delightful old devotee with her lackey , in Mr. Hogarth 's famous picture of " Morning , " and as if my Lady Lydia have be accustom to have a chaplain all her life . she seem to patronise not only the new chaplain , but the service and the church itself , as if she have never in her own country hear a Ranter in a barn . she make the old established family in the country grave baronet and their wife worthy squire of twenty descent , who ride over to Castlewood to pay the bride and bridegroom honour know their distance , as the phrase be , and give she the pas . she get an old heraldry book ; and a surprising old maiden lady from Winton , learn in politeness and genealogy , from whom she learn the court etiquette   as the old Winton lady have know it in Queen Anne 's time ; and ere long she jabber gule and sable , bend and saltire , not with correctness always , but with a wonderful volubility and perseverance . she make little progress to the neighbouring town in her gilt coach - and - six , or to the village in her chair , and assert a quasi - regal right of homage from her tenant and other clodpole . she lecture the parson on his divinity ; the bailiff on his farming ; instruct the astonished housekeeper how to preserve and pickle ; would have teach the great London footman to jump behind the carriage , only it be too high for her little ladyship to mount ; give the village gossip instruction how to nurse and take care of their child long before she have one herself ; and as for physic , Madam Esmond in Virginia be not more resolute about her pill and draught than Miss Lydia , the earl 's new bride . do you remember the story of the Fisherman and the Genie , in the Arabian Nights ? so one wonder with regard to this lady , how such a prodigious genius could have be cork down into such a little bottle as her body . when Mr. Warrington return to London after his first nuptial visit , she bring he a little present for her young friend in Dean Street , as she call they   theo be old , and Hetty scarce young than herself , and send a trinket to one and a book to the other G. Warrington always vow that Theo 's present be a doll , while Hetty 's share be a nursery - book with word of one syllable . as for Mr. Will , her young brother - in - law , she treat he with a maternal gravity and tenderness , and be in the habit of speak of and to he with a protect air , which be infinitely divert to Warrington , although Will be usual curse and blasphemy be sorely increase by her behaviour . 
 as for old age , my Lady Lydia have little respect for that accident in the life of some gentleman and gentlewoman ; and , once the settlement be make in her behalf , treat the ancient Van den Bosch and his large periwig with no more ceremony than Dinah her black attendant , whose great ear she would pinch , and whose woolly pate she would pull without scruple , upon offence give so at least Dinah tell Gumbo , who tell his master . all the household tremble before my lady the Countess : the housekeeper , of whom even my lord and the dowager have be in awe ; the pamper London footman , who use to quarrel if they be disturb at their card , and grumble as they swill the endless beer , now step nimbly about their business when they hear her ladyship 's call ; even old Lockwood , who have be gate - porter for half a century or more , try to rally his poor old wandering wit when she come into his lodge to open his window , inspect his wood - closet , and turn his old dog out of door . Lockwood bar his old bald head before his new mistress , turn an appealing look towards his niece , and vaguely tremble before her little ladyship 's authority . Gumbo , dress his master for dinner , talk about Elisha   of whom he have hear the chaplain read in the morning , " and his bald head and de boy who call um name , and de bar eat em up , and serve um right , " say Gumbo . but as for my lady , when discourse with her cousin about the old porter , " Pooh , pooh ! stupid old man ! " say she ; " past his work , he and his dirty old dog ! they be as old and ugly as those old fish in the pond ! "   here she point to two old monster of carp that have be in a pond in Castlewood garden for century , accord to tradition , and have their back all cover with a hideous grey mould .   " Lockwood must pack off ; the workhouse be the place for he ; and I shall have a smart , good - look , tall fellow in the lodge that will do credit to our livery . " 
 " he be my grandfather 's man , and serve he in the war of Queen Anne , " interpose Mr. Warrington . on which my lady cry , petulantly , " o Lord ! Queen Anne 's dead , I suppose , and we be not   a - go into mourning for she . " 
 this matter of Lockwood be discuss at the family dinner , when her ladyship announce her intention of get rid of the old man . 
 " I be tell , " demurely remark Mr. Van den Bosch , " that , by the law , poor servant and poor folk of all kind be admirably provide in their old age here in England . I be sure I wish we have such an asylum for our folk at home , and that we be ease of the expense of keep our old hand . " 
 " if a man can not   work he ought to go ! " cry her ladyship . 
 " yes , indeed , and that be a fact ! " say grandpapa . 
 " what ! an old servant ? " ask my lord . 
 " Mr. Van den Bosch possibly be independent of servant when he be young , " remark Mr. Warrington . 
 " grease my own boot , open my own shutter , sand and water my own " 
 " Sugar , sir ? " say my lord . 
 " no ; floor , son - in - law ! " say the old man , with a laugh ; " though there be such trick , in grocery store , save your ladyship 's presence . " 
 " La , pa ! what should I know about store and grocery ? " cry her ladyship . 
 " he ! remember steal the sugar , and what come on it , my dear ladyship ? " say grandpapa . 
 " at any rate , a handsome , well - grow man in our livery will look well than that shrivel old porter creature ! " cry my lady . 
 " no livery be so become as old age , madam , and no lace as handsome as silver hair , " say Mr. Warrington . " what will the county say if you banish old Lockwood ? " 
 " oh ! if you plead for he , sir , I suppose he must stay . had not   I well order a couch for he out of my drawing - room , and send he some of the good wine from the cellar ? " 
 " indeed your ladyship could not   do well , " Mr. Warrington remark , very gravely . 
 and my lord say , yawn , " Cousin George be perfectly right , my dear . to turn away such an old servant as Lockwood would have an ill look . " 
 " you see those mouldy old carp be , after all , a curiosity , and attract visitor , " continue Mr. Warrington , gravely . " your ladyship must allow this old wretch to remain . it will not   be for long . and you may then engage the tall porter . it be very hard on we , Mr. Van den Bosch , that we be oblige to keep our old negro when they be past work . I shall sell that rascal Gumbo in eight or ten year . " 
 " do not   tink you will , master ! " say Gumbo , grin . 
 " hold your tongue , sir ! he do not   know english way , you see , and perhaps think an old servant have a claim on his master 's kindness , " say Mr. Warrington . 
 the next day , to Warrington 's surprise , my lady absolutely do send a basket of good wine to Lockwood , and a cushion for his armchair . 
 " I think of what you say , yesterday , at night when I go to bed ; and guess you know the world well than I do , cousin ; and that it be good to keep the old man , as you say . " 
 and so this affair of the porter 's lodge end , Mr. Warrington wonder within himself at this strange little character out of the West , with her naivete and simplicity , and a heartlessness would have do credit to the most battered old dowager who ever turn trump in St. James 's . 
 " you tell I to respect old people . why ? I do not   see nothing to respect in the old people , I know , " she say to Warrington . " they be not   so funny , and I be sure they be not   so handsome . look at grandfather ; look at Aunt Bernstein . they say she be a beauty once ! that picture paint from she ! I do not   believe it , nohow . no one shall tell I that I shall ever be as bad as that ! when they come to that , people ought not   to live . no , that they ought not . " 
 now , at Christmas , Aunt Bernstein come to pay her nephew and niece a visit , in company with Mr. Warrington . they travel at their leisure in the Baroness 's own landau ; the old lady be in particular good health and spirit , the weather delightfully fresh and not too cold ; and , as they approach her paternal home , Aunt Beatrice tell her companion a hundred story regard it and old day . though often lethargic , and not seldom , it must be confess , out of temper , the old lady would light up at time , when her conversation become wonderfully lively , her wit and malice be brilliant , and her memory supply she with a hundred anecdote of a bygone age and society . sure , ' tis hard with respect to Beauty , that its possessor should not have even a life - enjoyment of it , but be compel to resign it after , at the most , some forty year ' lease . as the old woman prattle of her former lover and admirer   her auditor have much more information regard her past career than her ladyship know of , I would look in her face , and , out of the ruin , try to build up in my fancy a notion of her beauty in its prime . what a homily I read there ! how the court be grow with grass , the tower break , the door ajar , the fine gilt saloon tarnish , and the tapestry cobwebbe and tear ! yonder dilapidated palace be all alive once with splendour and music , and those dim window be dazzle and blaze with light ! what ball and feast be once here , what splendour and laughter ! I could see lover in waiting , crowd in admiration , rival furious . I could imagine twilight assignation , and detect intrigue , though the curtain be close and draw . I be often minded to say to the old woman as she talk , " Madam , I know the story be not as you tell it , but so and so "   I have read at home the history of her life , as my dear old grandfather have write it : and my fancy wander about in she , amused and solitary , as I have walk about our father 's house at Castlewood , meditate on departed glory , and imagine ancient time . 
 when Aunt Bernstein come to Castlewood , her relative there , more , I think , on account of her own force of character , imperiousness , and sarcastic wit , than from their desire to possess her money , be accustom to pay she a great deal of respect and deference , which she accept as her due . she expect the same treatment from the new Countess , whom she be prepared to greet with special good - humour . the match have be of her making . " as you , you silly creature , would not have the heiress , " she say , " I be determined she should not go out of the family , " and she laughingly tell of many little scheme for bring the marriage about . she have give the girl a coronet and her nephew a hundred thousand pound . of course she should be welcome to both of they . she be delighted with the little Countess 's courage and spirit in rout the Dowager and Lady Fanny . almost always pleased with pretty people on her first introduction to they , Madame Bernstein raffle of her niece Lydia 's bright eye and lovely little figure . the marriage be altogether desirable . the old man be an obstacle , to be sure , and his talk and appearance somewhat too homely . but he will be get rid of . he be old and in delicate health . " he will want to go to America , or perhaps far , " say the Baroness , with a shrug . " as for the child , she have great fire and liveliness , and a Cherokee manner which be not without its charm , " say the pleased old Baroness . " your brother have it so have you , Master George ! nous la formeron , cette petite . Eugene want character and vigour , but he be a finished gentleman , and between we we shall make the little savage perfectly presentable . " in this way we discourse on the second afternoon as we journey towards Castlewood . we lie at the King 's arm at Bagshot the first night , where the Baroness be always receive with profound respect , and thence drive post to Hexton , where she have write to have my lord 's horse in wait for she ; but these be not forthcoming at the inn , and after a couple of hour we be oblige to proceed with our Bagshot horse to Castlewood . 
 during this last stage of the journey , I be bind to say the old aunt 's testy humour return , and she scarce speak a single word for three hour . as for her companion ; be prodigiously in love at the time , no doubt he do not press his aunt for conversation , but think unceasingly about his Dulcinea , until the coach actually reach Castlewood Common , and roll over the bridge before the house . 
 the housekeeper be ready to conduct her ladyship to her apartment . my lord and lady be both absent . she do not know what have keep they , the housekeeper say , head the way . 
 " not that door , my lady ! " cry the woman , as Madame de Bernstein put her hand upon the door of the room which she have always occupy . " that be her ladyship 's room now . this way , " and our aunt follow , by no mean in increase good - humour . I do not envy her maid when their mistress be displeased . but she have clear her brow before she join the family , and appear in the drawing - room before supper - time with a countenance of tolerable serenity . 
 " how d'ye do , aunt ? " be the Countess 's salutation . " I declare now , I be take a nap when your ladyship arrive ! hope you find your room fix to your liking ! " 
 have address three brief sentence to the astonished old lady , the Countess now turn to her other guest , and direct her conversation to they . Mr. Warrington be not a little divert by her behaviour , and by the appearance of surprise and wrath which begin to gather over Madame Bernstein 's face . " La petite , " whom the Baroness propose to " form , " be rather a rebellious subject , apparently , and propose to take a form of her own . look once or twice rather anxiously towards his wife , my lord try to atone for her pertness towards his aunt by profuse civility on his own part ; indeed , when he so wish , no man could be more courteous or pleasing . he find a score of agreeable thing to say to Madame Bernstein . he warmly congratulate Mr. Warrington on the glorious news which have come from America , and on his brother 's safety . he drink a toast at supper to Captain Warrington . " our family be distinguish itself , cousin , " he say ; and add , look with fond significance towards his Countess , " I hope the happy day be in store for we all . " 
 " yes , George ! " say the little lady . " you will write and tell Harry that we be all very much pleased with he . this action at Quebec be a most glorious action ; and now we have turn the french king out of the country , should not   be at all surprised if we set up for ourselves in America . " 
 " my love , you be talk treason ! " cry Lord Castlewood . 
 " I be talk reason , anyhow , my lord . I have   no notion of folk be keep down , and treat as child for ever ! " 
 George ! Harry ! I protest I be almost as much astonish as amuse . " when my brother hear that your ladyship be satisfied with his conduct , his happiness will be complete , " I say gravely . 
 next day , when talk beside her sofa , where she choose to lie in state , the little Countess no long call her cousin " George , " but " Mr. George , " as before ; on which Mr. George laughingly say she have change her language since the previous day . 
 " guess I do it to tease old Madam Buzwig , " say her ladyship . " she want to treat I as a child , and do the grandmother over I . I do not   want no grandmother , I do not . I be the head of this house , and I intend to let she know it . and I have   bring she all the way from London in order to tell it she , too ! La ! how she do look when I call you George ! I might have call you George only you have see that little Theo first , and like she good , I suppose . " 
 " yes , I suppose I like she good , " say Mr. George . 
 " well , I like you because you tell the truth . because you be the only one of them in London who do not   seem to care for my money , though I be downright mad and angry with you once , and with myself too , and with that little sweetheart of your , who be not   to be compare to I , I know she be not . " 
 " do not   let we make the comparison , then ! " I say , laugh . 
 " I suppose people must lie on their bed as they make them , " say she , with a little sigh . " dare say Miss Theo be very good , and you will marry she and go to Virginia , and be as dull as we be here . we be talk of Miss Lambert , my lord , and I be wish my cousin joy . how be old Goody to - day ? what a supper she do eat last night , and drink ! drink like a dragoon ! no wonder she have get a headache , and keep her room . guess it take she ever so long to dress herself . " 
 " you , too , may be feeble when you be old , and require rest and wine to warm you ! " say Mr. Warrington . 
 " Hope I shall not   be like she when I be old , anyhow ! " say the lady . " can not   see why I be to respect an old woman , because she hobble on a stick , and have shaky hand , and false tooth ! " and the little heathen sink back on her couch , and show twenty - four pearl of her own . 
 " Law ! " she add , after gaze at both her hearer through the curl lash of her brilliant dark eye . " how frighten you both look ! my lord have already give I ever so many sermon about old Goody . you be both afraid of she : and I be not , that be all . do not   look so scared at one another ! I be not   a - go to bite her head off . we shall have a battle , and I intend to win . how do I serve the Dowager , if you please , and my Lady Fanny , with their high and mighty air , when they try to put down the Countess of Castlewood in her own house , and laugh at the poor american girl ? we have a fight , and which get the good of it , pray ? I and Goody will have another , and when it be over , you will see that we shall both be perfect friend ! " 
 when at this point of our conversation the door open , and Madame Beatrix , elaborately dress accord to she will not , actually make her appearance , I , for my part , be not ashamed to own that I feel as great a panic as ever coward experienced . my lord , with his profound bow and blandest courtesy , greet his aunt and lead she to the fire , by which my lady   who be already hop for an heir to Castlewood   lie recline on her sofa . she do not attempt to rise , but smile a greeting to her venerable guest . and then , after a brief talk , in which she show a perfect self - possession , while the two gentleman blunder and hesitate with the most dastardly tremor , my lord say : 
 " if we be to look for those pheasant , cousin , we have well go now . " 
 " and I and aunt will have a cosy afternoon . and you will tell I about Castlewood in the old time , will not   you , Baroness ? " say the new mistress of the mansion . 
 o les lache que les homme ! I be so frightened , that I scarce see anything , but vaguely feel that Lady Castlewood 's dark eye be follow I . my lord grip my arm in the corridor , we quicken our pace till our retreat become a disgraceful run . we do not breathe freely till we be in the open air in the courtyard , where the keeper and the dog be wait . 
 and what happen ? I protest , child , I do not   know . but this be certain : if your mother have be a woman of the least spirit , or have know how to scold for five minute during as many consecutive day of her early married life , there would have be no more humble , henpecke wretch in Christendom than your father . when Parson Blake come to dinner , do not   you see how at a glance from his little wife he put his glass down and say , " no , thank you , Mr. Gumbo , " when old Gum bring he wine ? Blake wear a red coat before he take to black , and walk up Breeds Hill with a thousand bullet whistle round his ear , before ever he see our Bunker Hill in Suffolk . and the fire - eater of the 43rd now dare not face a glass of old port wine ! ' tis his wife have subdue his courage . the woman can master we , and do they know their own strength , be invincible . 
 well , then , what happen I know not on that disgraceful day of panic when your father flee the field , nor dare to see the heroine engage ; but when we return from our shooting , the battle be over . America have revolt , and conquer the mother country . 




 CHAPTER LXXIV . news from Canada 

 our Castlewood relative keep we with they till the commencement of the new year , and after a fortnight 's absence   which seem like an age to the absurd and infatuated young man   he return to the side of his charmer . Madame de Bernstein be not sorry to leave the home of her father . she begin to talk more freely as we get away from the place . what pass during that interview in which the battle - royal between she and her niece occur , she never reveal . but the old lady talk no more of form cette petite , and , indeed , when she allude to she , speak in a nervous , laugh way , but without any hostility towards the young Countess . her nephew eugene , she say , be doom to be henpecke for the rest of his day that she see clearly . a little order bring into the house would do it all the good possible . the little old vulgar american gentleman seem to be a shrewd person , and would act advantageously as a steward . the Countess 's mother be a convict , she have hear , send out from England , where no doubt she have beat hemp in most of the gaol ; but this news need not be carry to the town - crier ; and , after all , in respect to certain kind of people , what matter what their birth be ? the young woman would be honest for her own sake now : be shrewd enough , and would learn English presently ; and the name to which she have a right be great enough to get she into any society . a grocer , a smuggler , a slave - dealer , what matter Mr. Van den Bosch 's pursuit or previous profession ? the Countess of Castlewood could afford to be anybody 's daughter , and as soon as my nephew produce she , say the old lady , it be our duty to stand by she . 
 the tie of relationship bind Madame de Bernstein strongly to her nephew , Mr. Warrington hop that she would be dispose to be equally affectionate to her niece ; and speak of his visit to Mr. Hagan and his wife , for whom he entreat her aunt 's favour . but the old lady be obdurate regard Lady Maria ; beg that her name might never be mention , and immediately go on for two hour talk about no one else . she relate a series of anecdote regard her niece , which , as this book lie open virginibus puerisque , to all the young people of the family , I shall not choose to record . but this I will say of the kind creature , that if she sin , she be not the only sinner of the family , and if she repent , that other will do well to follow her example . Hagan , ' tis know , after he leave the stage , lead an exemplary life , and be remarkable for elegance and eloquence in the pulpit . his lady adopt extreme view , but be greatly respect in the sect which she join ; and when I see she last , talk to I of possess a peculiar spiritual illumination , which I strongly suspect at the time to be occasion by the too free use of liquor : but I remember when she and her husband be good to I and mine , at a period when sympathy be needful , and many a Pharisee turn away . 
 I have tell how easy it be to rise and fall in my fickle aunt 's favour , and how each of us brother , by turn , be embrace and neglect . my turn of glory have be after the success of my play . I be introduce to the town - wit ; hold my place in their company tolerably well ; be pronounce to be pretty well breed by the macaroni and people of fashion , and might have run a career amongst they have my purse be long enough ; have I choose to follow that life ; have I not love at that time a pair of kind eye well than the bright orb of the Gunnings or Chudleighs , or all the paint beauty of the Ranelagh ring . because I be fond of your mother , will it be believe , child , that my taste be say to be low , and deplore by my genteel family ? so it be , and I know that my godly Lady Warrington and my worldly Madame Bernstein both lay their elderly head together and lament my way of life . " why , with his name , he might marry anybody , " say meek Religion , who have ever one eye on Heaven and one on the main chance . " I meddle with no man 's affair , and admire genius , " say uncle , " but it be a pity you consort with those poet and author , and that sort of people , and that , when you might have have a lovely creature , with a hundred thousand pound , you let she slip and make up to a country girl without a penny - piece . " 
 " but if I have promise she , uncle ? " say I. 
 " promise , promise ! these thing be matter of arrangement and prudence , and demand a careful look - out . when you first commit yourself with little Miss Lambert , you have not see the lovely american lady whom your mother wish you to marry , as a good mother naturally would . and your duty to your mother , nephew , your duty to the Fifth Commandment , would have warrant your breaking with Miss L. , and fulfil your excellent mother 's intention regard Miss what be the Countess 's dutch name ? never mind . a name be nothing ; but a plumb , Master George , be something to look at ! why , I have my dear little Miley at a dancing - school with Miss Barwell , Nabob Barwell 's daughter , and I do not   disguise my wish that the child may contract an attachment which may endure through their life ! I tell the Nabob so . we go from the House of Commons one dancing - day and see they . ' twa beautiful to see the young thing walk a minuet together ! it bring tear into my eye , for I have a feeling heart , George , and I love my boy ! " 
 " but if I prefer Miss Lambert , uncle , with twopence to her fortune , to the Countess , with her hundred thousand pound ? " 
 " why then , sir , you have a singular taste , that be all , " say the old gentleman , turn on his heel and leave I . and I could perfectly understand his vexation at my not be able to see the world as he view it . 
 nor do my Aunt Bernstein much like the engagement which I have make , or the family with which I pass so much of my time . their simple way weary , and perhaps annoy , the old woman of the world , and she no more relish their company than a certain person   who be not so black as he be paint   like holy water . the old lady chafe at my for ever dangle at my sweetheart 's lap . have rise mightily in her favour , I begin to fall again : and once more Harry be the favourite , and his brother , Heaven know , not jealous . 
 he be now our family hero . he write we brief letter from the seat of war where he be engage ; Madame Bernstein care little at first about the letter or the writer , for they be simple , and the fact he narrate not over interesting . we have early learn in London the news of the action on the glorious first of August at Minden , where Wolfe 's old regiment be one of the british six which help to achieve the victory on that famous day . at the same hour , the young General lie in his bed , in sight of Quebec , stricken down by fever , and perhaps rage and disappointment at the check which his troop have just receive . 
 arrive in the St. Lawrence in June , the fleet which bring Wolfe and his army have land they on the last day of the month on the Island of Orleans , opposite which rise the great cliff of Quebec . after the great action in which his General fall , the dear brother who accompany the chief , write home to I one of his simple letter , describe his modest share in that glorious day , but add nothing to the many description already write of the action of the 13th of September , save only I remember he write , from the testimony of a brother aide - de - camp who be by his side , that the General never speak at all after receive his death - wound , so that the phrase which have be put into the mouth of the die hero may be consider as no more authentic than an oration of Livy or Thucydides . 
 from his position on the island , which lie in the great channel of the river to the north of the town , the General be ever hungrily on the look - out for a chance to meet and attack his enemy . above the city and below it he land , now here and now there ; he be bent upon attack wherever he see an opening . ' twas surely a prodigious fault on the part of the Marquis of Montcalm , to accept a battle from Wolfe on equal term , for the British General have no artillery , and when we have make our famous scalade of the height , and be on the Plains of Abraham , we be a little nearer the city , certainly , but as far off as ever from be within it . 
 the game that be play between the brave chief of those two gallant little army , and which last from July until Mr. Wolfe win the crown hazard in September , must have be as interesting a match as ever eager player engage in . on the very first night after the landing   as my brother have narrate it   the sport begin . at midnight the French send a flame squadron of fireship down upon the british ship which be discharge their store at Orleans . our seaman think it be good sport to tow the fireship clear of the fleet , and grind they on the shore , where they burn out . 
 as soon as the french commander hear that our ship have enter the river , he march to Beauport in advance of the city and there take up a strong position . when our store and hospital be establish , our General cross over from his island to the left shore , and draw near to his enemy . he have the ship in the river behind he , but the whole country in face of he be in arm . the Indians in the forest seize our advanced party as they strove to clear it , and murder they with horrible torture . the French be as savage as their indian friend . the Montmorenci River rush between Wolfe and the enemy . he could neither attack these nor the city behind they . 
 bent on see whether there be no other point at which his foe might be assailable , the General pass round the town of Quebec and skirt the left shore beyond . everywhere it be guard , as well as in his immediate front , and have run the gauntlet of the battery up and down the river , he return to his post at Montmorenci . on the right of the french position , across the Montmorenci River , which be fordable at low tide , be a redoubt of the enemy . he would have that . perhaps , to defend it the french chief would be force out from his line , and a battle be bring on . Wolfe determine to play these odd . he would fetch over the body of his army from the Island of Orleans , and attack from the St. Lawrence . he would time his attack , so that , at shallow water , his lieutenant , Murray and Townsend , might cross the Montmorenci , and , at the last day of July , he play this desperate game . 
 he first , and General Monckton , his second in command   set out from Point Levi , which he occupy , cross over the St. Lawrence from their respective station , be receive with a storm of shot and artillery as they row to the shore . no soon be the troop land than they rush at the french redoubt without order , be shoot down before it in great number , and be oblige to fall back . at the preconcerted signal the troop on the other side of the Montmorenci avance across the river in perfect order . the enemy even evacuate the redoubt and fall back to their line ; but from these the assailant be receive with so severe a fire that an impression on they be hopeless , and the General have to retreat . 
 the battle of Montmorenci   which my brother Harry and I have fight again many a time over our wine   form the dismal burthen of the first despatch from Mr. Wolfe which reach England and plunge we all in gloom . what more might one expect of a commander so rash ? what disaster might one not foretell ? be ever scheme so wild as to bring three great body of man , across broad river , in the face of murderous battery , merely on the chance of induce an enemy , strongly entrench and guard , to leave his position and come out and engage we ? ' twas the talk of the town . no wonder grave people shake their head , and prophesy fresh disaster . the General , who take to his bed after this failure , shudder with fever , be to live barely six week long , and die immortal ! how be it , and by what , and whom , that Greatness be achieve ? be Merit be Madness the patron ? be it Frolic or Fortune ? be it fate that award success and defeat ? be it the just Cause that ever win ? how do the french gain Canada from the savage , and we from the French , and after which of the conquest be the right time to sing Te deum ? we be always for implicate Heaven in our quarrel , and cause the god to intervene whatever the nodus may be . do Broughton , after pummel and beat Slack , lift up a black eye to Jove and thank he for the victory ? and if ten thousand boxer be to be so heard , why not one ? and if Broughton be to be grateful , what be Slack to be ? 
 " by the list of disabled officer   many of whom be of rank   you may perceive , sir , that the army be much weaken . by the nature of this river the most formidable part of the armament be deprive of the power of acting , yet we have almost the whole force of Canada to oppose . in this situation there be such a choice of difficulty , that I own myself at a loss how to determine . the affair of Great Britain , I know , require the most vigorous measure ; but then the courage of a handful of brave man should be exert only where there be some hope of a favourable event . the admiral and I have examine the town with a view to a general assault : and he would readily join in this or any other measure for the public service ; but I can not propose to he an undertaking of so dangerous a nature , and promise so little success .... I find myself so ill , and be still so weak , that I beg the general officer to consult together for the public utility . they be of opinion that they should try by convey up a corps of 4000 or 5000 man   which be nearly the whole strength of the army , after the point of Levi and Orleans be put in a proper state of defence   to draw the enemy from their present position , and bring they to an action . I have acquiesce in their proposal , and we be prepare to put it into execution . " 
 so write the General   of whose noble letter it be clear our dear scribe be not the author or secretary   from his headquarters at Montmorenci Falls on 2nd day of September ; and on the 14th of October following , the Rodney cutter arrive with the sad news in England . the attack have fail , the chief be sick , the army dwindle , the menace city so strong that assault be almost impossible ; " the only chance be to fight the Marquis of Montcalm upon term of less disadvantage than attack his entrenchment , and , if possible , to draw he from his present position . " would the french chief , whose great military genius be know in Europe , fall into such a snare ? no wonder there be pale look in the City at the news , and doubt and gloom wheresoever it be know . 
 three day after this first melancholy intelligence , come the famous letter announce that wonderful consummation of fortune with which Mr. Wolfe 's wonderful career end . if no man be to be style happy till his death , what shall we say of this one ? his end be so glorious , that I protest not even his mother nor his mistress ought to have deplore it , or at any rate have wish he alive again . I know it be a hero we speak of ; and yet I vow I scarce know whether in the last act of his life I admire the result of genius , invention , and daring , or the boldness of a gambler win surprising odd . suppose his ascent discover a half - hour soon , and his people , as they would have be assuredly , beat back ? suppose the Marquis of Montcalm not to quit his entrenched line to accept that strange challenge ? suppose these point and none of they depend upon Mr. Wolfe at all and what become of the glory of the young hero , of the great minister who discover he , of the intoxicated nation which rise up frantic with self - gratulation at the victory ? I say , what fate be it that shape our end , or those of nation ? in the many hazardous game which my Lord Chatham play , he win this prodigious one . and as the greedy british hand seize the Canadas , it let fall the United States out of its grasp . 
 to be sure this wisdom d'apres coup be easy . we wonder at this man 's rashness now the deed be do , and marvel at the other 's fault . what general some of we be upon paper ! what repartee come to our mind when the talk be finish ! and , the game over , how well we see how it should have be play ! writing of an event at a distance of thirty year , ' tis not difficult now to criticise and find fault . but at the time when we first hear of Wolfe 's glorious deed upon the Plains of Abraham of that army marshal in darkness and carry silently up the midnight river of those rock scale by the intrepid leader and his troop of that miraculous security of the enemy , of his present acceptance of our challenge to battle , and of his defeat on the open plain by the sheer valour of his conqueror we be all intoxicate in England by the news . the whole nation rise up and feel itself the strong for Wolfe 's victory . not merely all man engage in the battle , but those at home who have condemn its rashness , feel themselves hero . our spirit rise as that of our enemy falter . friend embrace each other when they meet . coffee - house and public place be throng with people eager to talk the news . courtier rush to the King and the great Minister by whose wisdom the campaign have be decree . when he show himself , the people follow he with shout and blessing . People do not deplore the dead warrior , but admire his euthanasia . should James Wolfe 's friend weep and wear mourning , because a chariot have come from the sky to fetch he away ? let they watch with wonder , and see he depart , radiant ; rise above we superior . to have a friend who have be near or about he be to be distinguish . every soldier who fight with he be a hero . in our fond little circle I know ' twas a distinction to be Harry 's brother . we should not in the least wonder but that he , from his previous knowledge of the place , have find the way up the height which the british army take , and point it out to his general . his promotion would follow as a matter of course . why , even our Uncle Warrington write letter to bless Heaven and congratulate I and himself upon the share Harry have have in the glorious achievement . our Aunt Beatrix open her house and receive company upon the strength of the victory . I become a hero from my likeness to my brother . as for Parson Sampson , he preach such a sermon that his auditor   some of whom have be warn by his reverence of the come discourse   be with difficulty restrain from huzzae the orator , and be mob as they leave the chapel . " do not   talk to I , madam , about grief , " say General Lambert to his wife , who , dear soul , be for allow herself some small indulgence of her favourite sorrow on the day when Wolfe 's remain be gloriously bury at Greenwich . " if our boy could come by such death as James 's , you know you would not   prevent they from be shoot , but would scale the Abraham height to see the thing do ! wouldst thou mind die in the arm of victory , Charley ? " he ask of the little hero from the Chartreux . " that I would not , " say the little man ; " and the doctor give we a holiday , too . " 
 our Harry 's promotion be insure after his share in the famous battle , and our aunt announce her intention of purchase a company for he . 




 CHAPTER LXXV . the course of True Love 

 have your father , young folk , possess the commonest share of prudence , not only would this chapter of his history never have be write , but you yourselves would never have appear in the world to plague he in a hundred way to shout and laugh in the passage when he want to be quiet at his book ; to wake he when he be doze after dinner , as a healthy country gentleman should : to mislay his spectacle for he , and steal away his newspaper when he want to read it ; to ruin he with tailor ' bill , mantua - maker ' bill , tutor ' bill , as you all of you do : to break his rest of night when you have the impudence to fall ill , and when he would sleep undisturbed but that your silly mother will never be quiet for half an hour ; and when Joan can not   sleep , what use , pray , be there in Darby put on his nightcap ? every trifling ailment that any one of you have have , have scar she so that I protest I have never be tranquil ; and , be I not the most long - suffer creature in the world , would have like to be rid of the whole pack of you . and now , forsooth , that you have grow out of childhood , long petticoat , chicken - pox , small - pox , whooping - cough , scarlet fever , and the other delectable accident of puerile life , what must that unconscionable woman propose but to arrange the south room as a nursery for possible grandchild , and set up the Captain with a wife , and make he marry early because we do ! he be too fond , she say , of Brookes 's and Goosetree 's when he be in London . she have the perversity to hint that , though an entree to Carlton House may be very pleasant , ' tis very dangerous for a young gentleman : and she would have Miles live away from temptation , and sow his wild oat , and marry , as we do . Marry ! my dear creature , we have no business to marry at all ! by the law of common prudence and duty , I ought to have back out of my little engagement with Miss Theo   who would have marry somebody else , and take a rich wife . your Uncle John be a parson and could not   fight , poor Charley be a boy at school , and your grandfather be too old a man to call I to account with sword and pistol . I repeat there never be a more foolish match in the world than ours , and our relation be perfectly right in be angry with we . what be relation make for , indeed , but to be angry and find fault ? when Hester marrie , do you mind , Master George , to quarrel with she if she do not take a husband of your selecting . when George have get his living , after be senior wrangler and fellow of his college , Miss Hester , do you toss up your little nose at the young lady he shall fancy . as for you , my little Theo , I can not   part with your . you must not quit your old father ; for he like you to play Haydn to he , and peel his walnut after dinner . 
  on the blank leaf opposite this paragraph be write , in a large , girlish hand : 
 " I never intend to go . THEODOSIA . " 
 " nor i. HESTER . " 
 they both marry , as I see by the note in the family Bible Miss Theodosia Warrington to Joseph Clinton , son of the Rev. Joseph Blake , and himself subsequently Master of Rodwell Regis Grammar School ; and Miss Hester Mary , in 1804 , to Captain F. Handyman , R.N. ED . 
 whilst they have the blessing   forsooth !   of meeting , and billing and coo every day , the two young people , your parent , go on in a fool 's paradise , little heed the world round about they , and all its tattling and meddling . Rinaldo be as brave a warrior as ever slew Turk , but you know he love dangle in Armida 's garden . Pray , my Lady Armida , what do you mean by fling your spell over I in youth , so that not glory , not fashion , not gaming - table , not the society of man of wit in whose way I fall , could keep I long from your apron - string , or out of reach of your dear simple prattle ? pray , my dear , what use we to say to each other during those endless hour of meeting ? I never go to sleep after dinner then . which of we be so witty ? be it I or you ? and how come it our conversation be so delightful ? I remember that year I do not even care to go and see my Lord Ferrers try and hung , when all the world be run after his lordship . the King of Prussia 's capital be take ; have the Austrians and Russians be encamp round the Tower there could scarce have be more stir in London : yet Miss Theo and her young gentleman feel no inordinate emotion of pity or indignation . what to we be the fate of Leipzig or Berlin ? the truth be , that dear old house in Dean Street be an enchanted garden of delight . I have be as idle since , but never as happy . shall we order the postchaise , my dear , leave the child to keep house ; and drive up to London and see if the old lodging be still to be let ? and you shall sit at your old place in the window , and wave a little handkerchief as I walk up the street . say what we do be imprudent . would we not do it over again ? my good folk , if Venus have walk into the room and challenge the apple , I be so infatuated , I would have give it your mother . and have she have the choice , she would have prefer her humble servant in a threadbare coat to my Lord Clive with all his diamond . 
 once , to be sure , and for a brief time in that year , I have a notion of go on the highway in order to be catch and hang as my Lord Ferrers : or of join the King of Prussia , and request some of his Majesty 's enemy to knock my brain out ; or of enlist for the India service , and perform some desperate exploit which should end in my bodily destruction . ah I ! that be indeed a dreadful time ! your mother scarce dare speak of it now , save in a whisper of terror ; or think of it it be such cruel pain . she be unhappy year after on the anniversary of the day , until one of you be bear on it . suppose we have be part : what have come to we ? what have my lot be without she ? as I think of that possibility , the whole world be a blank . I do not say be we part now . it have please God to give we thirty year of union . we have reach the autumn season . our successor be appoint and ready ; and that one of we who be first call away , know the survivor will follow ere long . but we be actually part in our youth ; and I tremble to think what might have be , have not a dear friend bring we together . 
 unknown to myself , and very likely mean only my advantage , my relative in England have choose to write to Madam Esmond in Virginia , and represent what they be pleased to call the folly of the engagement I have contract . every one of they sing the same song : and I see the letter , and burn the whole cursed pack of they year afterwards when my mother show they to I at home in Virginia . Aunt Bernstein be forward with her advice . a young person , with no wonderful good look , of no family , with no money ; be ever such an imprudent connexion , and ought it not for dear George 's sake to be break off ? she have several eligible match in view for I . with my name and prospect , ' twas a shame I should throw myself away on this young lady ; her sister ought to interpose and so forth . 
 my Lady Warrington must write , too , and in her peculiar manner . her ladyship 's letter be garnish with scripture text . 
 she dress her worldliness out in phylactery . she point out how I be live in an unworthy society of player - folk , and the like people , who she could not say be absolutely without religion   Heaven forbid ! , but who be deplorably worldly . she would not say an artful woman have inveigle I for her daughter , have in vain try to captivate my young brother . she be far from say any harm of the young woman I have select ; but at least this be certain , Miss L. have no fortune or expectation , and her parent might naturally be anxious to compromise I . she have take counsel , etc . etc . she have seek for guidance where it be , etc . feel what her duty be , she have determine to speak . Sir Miles , a man of excellent judgment in the affair of this world   though he know and seek a well , fully agree with she in opinion , nay , desire she to write , and entreat her sister to interfere , that the ill - advise match should not take place . 
 and who besides must put a little finger into the pie but the new Countess of Castlewood ? she write a majestic letter to Madam Esmond , and state , that have be place by Providence at the head of the Esmond family , it be her duty to communicate with her kinswoman and warn she to break off this marriage . I believe the three woman lay their head together previously ; and , packet after packet , send off their warning to the Virginian lady . 
 one raw April morning , as Corydon go to pay his usual duty to Phillis , he find , not his charmer with her dear smile as usual ready to welcome he , but Mrs. Lambert , with very red eye , and the General as pale as death . " read this , George Warrington ! " say he , as his wife 's head drop between her hand ; and he put a letter before I , of which I recognise the handwriting . I can hear now the sob of the good Aunt Lambert , and to this day the noise of fire - iron stir a fire in a room overhead give I a tremor . I hear such a noise that day in the girl ' room where the sister be together . poor , gentle child ! Poor Theo ! 
 " what can I do after this , George , my poor boy ? " ask the General , pace the room with desperation in his face . 
 I do not quite read the whole of Madam Esmond 's letter , for a kind of sickness and faintness come over I ; but I fear I could say some of it now by heart . its style be good , and its actual word temperate enough , though they only imply that Mr. and Mrs. Lambert have inveigle I into the marriage ; that they know such an union be unworthy of I ; that   as Madam E. understand   they have desire a similar union for her young son , which project , not unluckily for he , perhaps , be give up when it be find that Mr. Henry Warrington be not the inheritor of the virginian property . if Mr. Lambert be a man of spirit and honour , as he be represent to be , Madam Esmond scarcely suppose that , after her representation , he would persist in desire this match . she would not lay command upon her son , whose temper she know ; but for the sake of Miss Lambert 's own reputation and comfort , she urge that the dissolution of the engagement should come from her family , and not from the just unwillingness of Rachel Esmond Warrington of Virginia . 
 " God help we , George ! " the General say , " and give we all strength to bear this grief , and these charge which it have please your mother to bring ! they be hard , but they do not   matter now . what be of most importance , be to spare as much sorrow as we can to my poor girl . I know you love she so well , that you will help I and her mother to make the blow as tolerable as we may to that poor gentle heart . since she be bear she have never give pain to a soul alive , and ' tis cruel that she should be make to suffer . " and as he speak he pass his hand across his dry eye . 
 " it be my fault , Martin ! it be my fault ! " weep the poor mother . 
 " your mother speak we fair , and give her promise , " say the father . 
 " and do you think I will withdraw mine ? " cry I ; and protest , with a thousand frantic vow , what they know full well , that I be bind to Theo before Heaven , and that nothing should part I from she . 
 " she herself will demand the parting . she be a good girl , God help I ! and a dutiful . she will not have her father and mother call schemer , and treat with scorn . your mother know not , very likely , what she be do , but ' tis do . you may see the child , and she will tell you as much . be Theo dress , molly ? I bring the letter home from my office last evening after you be go . the woman have have a bad night . she know at once by my face that there be bad news from America . she read the letter quite firmly . she say she would like to see you and say good - bye . of course , George , you will give I your word of honour not to try and see she afterwards . as soon as my business will let I we will get away from this , but mother and I think we be good all together . ' tis you , perhaps , have good go . but give I your word , at any rate , that you will not try and see she . we must spare her pain , sir ! we must spare her pain ! " and the good man sate down in such deep anguish himself that I , who be not yet under the full pressure of my own grief , actually feel his , and pity it . it could not be that the dear lip I have kiss yesterday be to speak to I only once more . we be all here together ; love each other , sit in the room where we meet every day ; my drawing on the table by her little workbox ; she be in the chamber upstairs ; she must come down presently . 
 who be this open the door ? I see her sweet face . it be like our little Mary 's when we think she would die of the fever . there be even a smile upon her lip . she come up and kiss I . " good - bye , dear George ! " she say . Great Heaven ! an old man sit in this room , with my wife 's workbox opposite , and she but five minute away , my eye grow so dim and full that I can not   see the book before I . I be three - and - twenty year old again . I go through every stage of that agony . I once have it sit in my own postchaise , with my wife actually by my side . who dare to sully her sweet love with suspicion ? who have a right to stab such a soft bosom ? do not   you see my lady get their knife ready , and the poor child bar it ? my wife come in . she have be serve out tea or tobacco to some of her pensioner . " what be it make you look so angry , papa ? " she say . " my love ! " I say , " it be the thirteenth of April . " a pang of pain shoot across her face , follow by a tender smile . she have undergo the martyrdom , and in the midst of the pang come a halo of forgiveness . I can not   forgive ; not until my day of dotage come , and I cease remember anything . " Hal will be home for Easter ; he will bring two or three of his friend with he from Cambridge , " she say . and straightway she fall to devise scheme for amuse the boy . when be she ever occupy , but with plan for make other happy ? 
 a gentleman sit in spectacle before an old ledger , and write down pitiful remembrance of his own condition , be a quaint and ridiculous object . my corn hurt I , I know , but I suspect my neighbour 's shoe pinch he too . I be not go to howl much over my own grief , or enlarge at any great length on this one . many another man , I dare say , have have the light of his day suddenly put out , the joy of his life extinguish , and have be leave to darkness and vague torture . I have a book I try to read at this time of grief Howel 's Letters and when I come to the part about Prince Charles in Spain , up start the whole tragedy alive again . I go to Brighthelmstone , and there , at the inn , have a room face the east , and see the sun get up ever so many morning , after blank night of wakefulness , and smoke my pipe of Virginia in his face . when I be in that place by chance , and see the sun rise now , I shake my fist at he , thinking , o orient Phoebus , what horrible grief and savage wrath have you not see I suffer ! though my wife be mine ever so long , I say I be angry just the same . who dare , I want to know , to make we suffer so ? I be forbid to see she . I keep my promise , and remain away from the house : that be , after that horrible meeting and parting . but at night I would go and look at her window , and watch the lamp burn there ; I would go to the Chartreux   where I know another boy , and call for her brother , and gorge he with cake and half - crown . I would meanly have her eld brother to dine , and almost kiss he when he go away . I use to breakfast at a coffee - house in Whitehall , in order to see Lambert go to his office ; and we would salute each other sadly , and pass on without speak . why do not the woman come out ? they never do . they be practise on she , and persuade she to try and forget I . oh , the weary , weary day ! oh , the madden time ! at last a doctor 's chariot use to draw up before the General 's house every day . be she ill ? I fear I be rather glad she be ill . my own suffering be so infernal , that I greedily want she to share my pain . and would she not ? what grief of mine have it not feel , that gentle and most compassionate of heart ? what pain would it not suffer to spare mine a pang ? 
 I seek that doctor out . I have an interview with he . I tell my story , and lay bare my heart to he , with an outburst of passionate sincerity , which win his sympathy . my confession enable he to understand his young patient 's malady ; for which his drug have no remedy or anodyne . I have promise not to see she , or to go to she : I have keep my promise . I have promise to leave London : I have go away . twice , thrice I go back and tell my suffering to he . he would take my fee now and again , and always receive I kindly , and let I speak . ah , how I cling to he ! I suspect he must have be unhappy once in his own life , he know so well and gently how to succour the miserable . 
 he do not tell I how dangerously , though he do not disguise from I how gravely and seriously , my dear girl have be ill . I tell he everything that I would marry she and brave every chance and danger ; that , without she , I be a man utterly wreck and ruin , and care not what become of I . my mother have once consent , and have now choose to withdraw her consent , when the tie between we have be , as I hold , draw so closely together , as to be paramount to all filial duty . 
 " I think , sir , if your mother hear you , and see Miss Lambert , she would relent , " say the doctor . who be my mother to hold I in bondage ; to claim a right of misery over I ; and to take this angel out of my arm ? 
 " he could not , " he say , " be a message - carrier between young lady who be pin and young lover on whom the sweetheart ' gate be shut : but so much he would venture to say , that he have see I , and be prescribe for I , too . " yes , he must have be unhappy once , himself . I see he , you may be sure , on the very day when he have keep his promise to I . he say she seem to be comfort by hear news of I . 
 " she bear her suffering with an angelical sweetness . I prescribe Jesuit 's bark , which she take ; but I be not sure the hearing of you have not do more good than the medicine . " the woman own afterwards that they have never tell the General of the doctor 's new patient . 
 I know not what wild expression of gratitude I pour out to the good doctor for the comfort he bring I . his treatment be cure two unhappy sick person . ' Twas but a drop of water , to be sure ; but then a drop of water to a man rag in torment . I love the ground he trod upon , bless the hand that take mine , and have feel her pulse . I have a ring with a pretty cameo head of a Hercules on it . ' twas too small for his finger , nor do the good old man wear such ornament . I make he hang it to his watch - chain , in hope that she might see it , and recognise that the token come from I . how I fasten upon Spencer at this time   my friend of the Temple who also have an unfortunate love - match , and walk with he from my apartment to the Temple , and he back with I to Bedford Gardens , and our talk be for ever about our woman ! I dare say I tell everybody my grief . my good landlady and Betty the housemaid pity I . my son Miles , who , for a wonder , have be read in my MS . , say , " by Jove , sir , I do not   know you and my mother be take in this kind of way . the year I join , I be hit very bad myself . an infernal little jilt that throw I over for Sir Craven Oaks of our regiment . I think I should have go crazy . " and he give a melancholy whistle , and walk away . 
 the General have to leave London presently on one of his military inspection , as the doctor casually tell I ; but , have give my word that I would not seek to present myself at his house , I keep it , avail myself , however , as you may be sure , of the good physician 's leave to visit he , and have news of his dear patient . his account of she be , far from encourage . " she do not rally , " he say . " we must get she back to Kent again , or to the sea . " I do not know then that the poor child have beg and pray so piteously not to be move , that her parent , divine , perhaps , the reason of her desire to linger in London , and feel that it might be dangerous not to humour she , have yield to her entreaty , and consent to remain in town . 
 at last one morning I come , pretty much as usual , and take my place in my doctor 's front parlour , whence his patient be call in their turn to his consulting - room . here I remain , look heedlessly over the book on the table and take no notice of any person in the room , which speedily empty itself of all , save I and one lady who sate with her veil down . I use to stay till the last , for Osborn , the doctor 's man , know my business , and that it be not my own illness I come for . 
 when the room be empty of all save I and the lady , she put out two little hand , cry in a voice which make I start " do not   you know I , George ? " and the next minute I have my arm round she , and kiss she as heartily as ever I kiss in my life , and give way to a passionate outgush of emotion the most refreshing , for my parched soul have be in rage and torture for six week past , and this be a glimpse of Heaven . 
 who be it , child ? you think it be your mother whom the doctor have bring to I ? no . it be Hetty . 




 CHAPTER LXXVI . inform we how Mr. Warrington jump into a Landau 

 the emotion at the first surprise and greet over , the little maiden begin at once . 
 " so you be come at last to ask after Theo , and you feel sorry that your neglect have make she so ill ? for six week she have be unwell , and you have never ask a word about she ! very kind of you , Mr. George , I be sure ! " 
 " Kind ! " gasp out Mr. Warrington . 
 " I suppose you call it kind to be with she every day and all day for a year , and then to leave she without a word ? " 
 " my dear , you know my promise to your father ? " I reply . 
 " promise ! " say Miss Hetty , shrug her shoulder . " a very fine promise , indeed , to make my darling ill , and then suddenly , one fine day , to say , ' good - bye , Theo , ' and walk away for ever . I suppose gentleman make these promise , because they wish to keep them . I would not   trifle with a poor child 's heart , and leave she afterwards , if I be a man . what have she ever do to you , but be a fool and too fond of you ? pray , sir , by what right do you take she away from all of we , and then desert she , because an old woman in America do not   approve of she ? she be happy with we before you come . she love her sister there never be such a sister until she see you . and now , because your mamma think her young gentleman might do well , you must leave her forsooth ! " 
 " great power , child ! " I cry , exasperate at this wrongheadedness . " be it I that draw back ? be it not I that be forbid your house ? and do not your father require , on my honour , that I should not see she ? " 
 " Honour ! and you be the man who pretend to be our superior ; and it be we who be to respect you and admire you ! I declare , George Warrington , you ought to go back to your schoolroom in Virginia again ; have your black nurse to tuck you up in bed , and ask leave from your mamma when you might walk out . oh , George ! I little think that my sister be give her heart away to a man who have not   the spirit to stand by she ; but , at the first difficulty , leave she ! when Doctor Heberden say he be attend you , I determine to come and see you , and you do look very ill , that I be glad to see ; and I suppose it be your mother you be frightened of . but I shall not   tell Theo that you be unwell . she have not   leave off care for you . she can not   walk out of a room , break her solemn engagement , and go into the world the next day as if nothing have happen ! that be leave for man , our superior in courage and wisdom ; and to desert an angel yes , an angel ten thousand time too good for you ; an angel who use to love I till she see you , and who be the blessing of life and of all of we be what you call honour ? do not   tell I , sir ! I despise you all ! you be our better , be you ? we be to worship and wait on you , I suppose ? I do not   care about your wit , and your tragedy , and your verse ; and I think they be often very stupid . I will not   set up of night copy your manuscript , nor watch hour after hour at a window waste my time and neglect everybody because I want to see your worship walk down the street with your hat cock ! if you be go away , and welcome , give I back my sister , I say ! give I back my darling of old day , who love every one of we , till she see you . and you leave she because your mamma think she can find somebody rich for you ! oh , you brave gentleman ! go and marry the person your mother choose , and let my dear die here desert ! " 
 " great heaven , Hetty ! " I cry , amazed at the logic of the little woman . " be it I who wish to leave your sister ? do I not offer to keep my promise , and be it not your father who refuse I , and make I promise never to try and see she again ? what have I but my word , and my honour ? " 
 " Honour , indeed ! you keep your word to he , and you break it to she ! pretty honour ! if I be a man , I would soon let you know what I think of your honour ! only I forget you be bind to keep the peace and must not ... oh , George , George ! do not   you see the grief I be in ? I be distract , and scarce know what I say . you must not leave my darling . they do not   know it at home . they do not   think so but I know she good of all , and she will die if you leave she . say you will not ! have pity upon I , Mr. Warrington , and give I my dearest back ! " thus the warm - hearted , distract creature run from anger to entreaty , from scorn to tear . be my little doctor right in thus speak of the case of her dear patient ? be there no other remedy than that which Hetty cry for ? have not other feel the same cruel pain of amputation , undergo the same exhaustion and fever afterwards , lain hopeless of anything save death , and yet recover after all , and limp through life subsequently ? why , but that love be selfish , and do not heed other people 's grief and passion , or that our be so intense and special that we deem no other lover could suffer like ourselves ; here in the passionate young pleader for her sister , we might have show an instance that a fond heart could be stricken with the love malady and silently suffer it , live under it , recover from it . what have happen in Hetty 's own case ? her sister and I , in our easy triumph and fond confidential prattle , have many a time talk over that matter , and , egotist as we be , perhaps draw a secret zest and security out of she less fortunate attachment . ' twa like sit by the fireside and hear the winter howl without ; ' twa like walk by the maxi magno , and see the ship toss at sea . we cling to each other only the more closely , and , wrap in our own happiness , view other ' misfortune with complacent pity . be the truth as it may . grant that we might have be sunder , and after a while survive the separation , so much my sceptical old age may be dispose to admit . yet , at that time , I be eager enough to share my ardent little Hetty 's terror and apprehension , and willingly choose to believe that the life dear to I in the world would be sacrifice if separate from mine . be I wrong ? I would not say as much now . I may doubt about myself   or not doubt , I know , but of she , never ; and Hetty find in her quite a willing sharer in her alarm and terror . I be for impart some of these to our doctor ; but the good gentleman shut my mouth . " hush , " say he , with a comical look of fright . " I must hear none of this . if two people who happen to know each other chance to meet and talk in my patient ' room , I can not help myself ; but as for match - making and love - making , I be your humble servant ! what will the General do when he come back to town ? he will have I behind Montagu House as sure as I be a live doctor , and alive I wish to remain , my good sir ! " and he skip into his carriage , and leave I there meditate . " and you and Miss Hetty must have no meeting here again , mind you that , " he have say previously . 
 oh no ! of course we would have none ! we be gentleman of honour , and so forth , and our word be our word . besides , to have see Hetty , be not that an inestimable boon , and would we not be for ever grateful ? I be so refresh with that drop of water I have have , that I think I can hold out for ever so long a time now . I walk away with Hetty to Soho , and never once think of arrange a new meeting with she . but the little emissary be more thoughtful , and she ask I whether I go to the Museum now to read ? and I say , " oh yes , sometimes , my dear ; but I be too wretched for read now ; I can not see what be on the paper . I do not care about my book . even Pocahontas be wearisome to I . I ... " I might have continue ever so much far , when , " Nonsense ! " she say , stamp her little foot . " why , I declare , George , you be more stupid than Harry ! " 
 " how do you mean , my dear child ? " I ask . 
 " when do you go ? you go away at three o'clock . you strike across on the road to Tottenham Court . you walk through the village , and return by the Green Lane that lead back towards the new hospital . you know you do ! if you walk for a week there , it can not   do you any harm . good morning , sir ! you will please not follow I any far . " and she drop I a curtsey , and walk away with a veil over her face . 
 that Green Lane , which lie to the north of the new hospital , be build all over with house now . in my time , when good old George II . be yet king , ' twa a shabby rural outlet of London ; so dangerous , that the City folk who go to their villa and junket house at Hampstead and the outlying village , would return in party of night , and escort by waiter with lanthorn , to defend they from the footpad who prowl about the town outskirt . Hampstead and highgate church , each crown its hill , fill up the background of the view which you see as you turn your back to London ; and one , two , three day Mr. George Warrington have the pleasure of look upon this landscape , and walk back in the direction of the new hospital . 
 along the lane be sundry small house of entertainment ; and I remember at one place , where they sell cake and beer , at the sign of the Protestant Hero , a decent woman smile at I on the third or fourth day , and curtsey in her clean apron , as she say , " it appear the lady do not   come , sir ! your honour have good step in , and take a can of my cool beer . " 
 at length , as I be come back through Tottenham Road , on the 25th of May o day to be mark with the white stone ! a little way beyond Mr. Whitefield 's Tabernacle , I see a landau before I , and on the box - seat by the driver be my young friend Charley , who wave his hat to I and call out , " George ! George ! " I run up to the carriage , my knee knock together so that I think I should fall by the wheel ; and inside I see Hetty , and by she my dear Theo , prop with a pillow . how thin the little hand have become since last it be lay in mine ! the cheek be flush and waste , the eye strangely bright , and the thrill of the voice when she speak a word or two , smote I with a pang , I know not of grief or joy be it , so intimately be they blend . 
 " I be take she an airing to Hampstead , " say Hetty , demurely . " the doctor say the air will do she good . " 
 " I have be ill , but I be well now , George , " say Theo . there come a great burst of music from the people in the chapel hard by , as she be speak . I hold her hand in mine . her eye be look into mine once more . it seem as if we have never be part . 
 I can never forget the tune of that psalm . I have hear it all through my life . my wife have touch it on her harpsichord , and her little one have warble it . now , do you understand , young people , why I love it so ? because ' twa the music play at our amoris redintegratio . because it sing hope to I , at the period of my existence the most miserable . yes , the most miserable : for that dreary confinement of Duquesne have its tenderness and kindly association connect with it ; and many a time in after day I have think with fondness of the poor Biche and my tipsy jailor , and the reveille of the forest bird and the military music of my prison . 
 Master Charley look down from his box - seat upon his sister and I engage in beatific contemplation , and Hetty listen too , to the music . " I think I should like to go and hear it . and that famous Mr. Whitfield , perhaps he be go to preach this very day ! come in with I , Charley and George can drive for half an hour with dear Theo towards Hampstead and back . " 
 Charley do not seem to have any very strong desire for witness the devotional exercise of good Mr. Whitfield and his congregation , and propose that George Warrington should take Hetty in ; but Het be not to be deny . " I will never help you in another exercise as long as you live , sir , " cry Miss Hetty , " if you do not   come on , " while the youth clamber down from his box - seat , and they enter the temple together . 
 can any moralist , bear my previous promise in mind , excuse I for jump into the carriage and sit down once more by my dear Theo ? suppose I do break them ? will he blame I much ? reverend sir , you be welcome . I break my promise ; and if you would not do as much , good friend , you be welcome to your virtue . not that I for a moment suspect my own child will ever be so bold as to think of have heart of their own , and bestow they accord to their liking . no , my young people , you will let papa choose for you ; be hungry when he tell you ; be thirsty when he order ; and settle your child 's marriage afterwards . 
 and now of course you be anxious to hear what take place when papa jump into the landau by the side of poor little mamma , prop up by her pillow . " I be come to your part of the story , my dear , " say I , look over to my wife as she be ply her needle . 
 " to what , pray ? " say my lady . " you should skip all that part , and come to the grand battle , and your heroic defence of " 
 " of Fort Fiddlededee in the year 1778 , when I pull off Mr. Washington 's epaulet , gouge General Gates 's eye , cut off Charles Lee 's head , and paste it on again ! " 
 " let we hear all about the fighting , " say the boy . even the Captain condescend to own he will listen to any military detail , though only from a militia officer . 
 " fair and softly , young people ! everything in its turn . I be not yet arrive at the war . I be only a young gentleman , just step into a landau , by the side of a young lady whom I promise to avoid . I be take her hand , which , after a little ado , she leave in mine . do you remember how hot it be , the little thing , how it tremble , and how it throb and jump a hundred and twenty in a minute ? and as we trot on towards Hampstead , I address Miss Lambert in the following term " 
 " ah , ah , ah ! " say the girl in a chorus with mademoiselle , their french governess , who cry , " nous ecouton maintenant . La parole est a vous , Monsieur le Chevalier ! " 
 here we have they all in a circle : mamma be at her side of the fire , papa at his ; Mademoiselle Eleonore , at whom the Captain look rather sweetly   eye off , Captain ! ; the two girl , listen like like nymphas discente to Apollo , let we say ; and John and Tummas   with obtuse ear , who be bring in the tea - tray and urn . 
 " very good , " say the Squire , pull out the MS . , and wave it before he . " we be go to tell your mother 's secret and mine . " 
 " I be sure you may , papa , " cry the house matron . " there be nothing to be ashamed of . " and a blush rise over her kind face . 
 " but before I begin , young folk , permit I two or three question . " 
 " allon , toujour des question ! " say mademoiselle , with a shrug of her pretty shoulder .   Florac have recommend she to we , and I suspect the little Chevalier have himself an eye upon this pretty Mademoiselle de Blois . 
 to the question , then . 




 CHAPTER LXXVII . and how everybody get out again 

 " you , Captain Miles Warrington , have the honour of win the good grace of a lady of ever so many lady of the Duchess of Devonshire , let we say , of Mrs. Crew , of Mrs. Fitzherbert , of the Queen of Prussia , of the Goddess Venus , of Mademoiselle Hillisberg of the Opera never mind of whom , in fine . if you win a lady 's good grace , do you always go to the mess and tell what happen ? " 
 " not such a fool , Squire ! " say the Captain , survey his side curl in the glass . 
 " have you , Miss Theo , tell your mother every word you say to Mr. Joe Blake , junior , in the shrubbery this morning ? " 
 " Joe Blake , indeed ! " cry Theo junior . 
 " and you , mademoiselle ? that scented billet which come to you under Sir Thomas 's frank , have you tell we all the letter contain ? look how she blush ! as red as the curtain , on my word ! no , mademoiselle , we all have our secret "   say the Squire , here make his good french bow . " no , Theo , there be nothing in the shrubbery only nut , my child ! no , Miles , my son , we do not   tell all , even to the most indulgent of father and if I tell what happen in a landau on the Hampstead Road , on the 25th of May , 1760 , may the Chevalier Ruspini pull out every tooth in my head ! " 
 " pray tell , papa ! " cry mamma : " or , as Jobson , who drive we , be in your service now , perhaps you will have he in from the stable ! I insist upon your telling ! " 
 " what be , then , this mystery ? " ask mademoiselle , in her pretty french accent , of my wife . 
 " eh , ma fille ! " whisper the lady . " Thou wouldst ask I what I say ? I say ' yes ! ' behold all I say . " and so ' tis my wife have peach , and not I ; and this be the sum of our conversation , as the carriage , all too swiftly as I think , gallop towards Hampstead , and fly back again . Theo have not agree to fly in the face of her honoured parent no such thing . but we would marry no other person ; no , not if we live to be as old as Methuselah ; no , not the Prince of Wales himself would she take . her heart she have give away with her papa 's consent nay , order it be not her to resume . so kind a father must relent one of these day ; and , if George would keep his promise be it now , or be it in twenty year , or be it in another world , she know she should never break her . 
 Hetty 's face beam with delight when , my little interview over , she see Theo 's countenance wear a sweet tranquillity . all the doctor 's medicine have not do she so much good , the fond sister say . the girl go home after their act of disobedience . I give up the place which I have hold during a brief period of happiness by my dear invalid 's side . Hetty skip back into her seat , and Charley on to his box . he tell I in after day , that it be a very dull , stupid sermon he have hear . the little chap be too orthodox to love dissent preacher ' sermon . 
 Hetty be not the only one of the family who remark her sister 's altered countenance and improved spirit . I be tell that on the girl ' return home their mother embrace both of they , especially the invalid , with more than common ardour of affection . " there be nothing like a country ride , " Aunt Lambert say , " for do her dear Theo good . she have be on the road to Hampstead , have she ? she must have another ride to - morrow . Heaven be bless , my Lord Wrotham 's horse be at their order three or four time a week , and the sweet child might have the advantage of they ! " as for the idea that Mr. Warrington might have happen to meet the child on their drive , Aunt Lambert never once entertain it , at least speak of it . I leave anybody who be interested in the matter to guess whether Mrs. Lambert could by any possibility have suppose that her daughter and her sweetheart could ever have come together again . do woman help each other in love perplexity ? do woman scheme , intrigue , make little plan , tell little fib , provide little amorous opportunity , hang up the rope - ladder , coax , wheedle , mystify the guardian or Abigail , and turn their attention away while Strephon and Chloe be bill and coo in the twilight , or whisk off in the postchaise to Gretna Green ? my dear young folk , some people there be of this nature ; and some kind soul who have love tenderly and truly in their own time , continue ever after to be kindly and tenderly disposed towards their young successor , when they begin to play the same pretty game . 
 Miss Prim do not . if she hear of two young person attach to each other , it be to snarl at they for fool , or to imagine of they all conceivable evil . because she have a hump - back herself , she be for bite everybody else 's . I believe if she see a pair of turtle coo in a wood , she would turn her eye down , or fle a stone to frighten they ; but I be speak , you see , young lady , of your grandmother , Aunt Lambert , who be one great syllabub of human kindness ; and , besides , about the affair at present under discussion , how be I ever to tell whether she know anything regard it or not ? 
 so , all she say to Theo on her return home be , " my child , the country air have do you all the good in the world , and I hope you will take another drive to - morrow , and another , and another , and so on . " 
 " do not   you think , papa , the ride have do the child most wonderful good , and must not she be make to go out in the air ? " Aunt Lambert ask of the General , when he come in for supper . 
 " yes , sure , if a coach - and - six will do his little Theo good , she shall have it , " Lambert say , " or he will drag the landau up Hampstead Hill himself , if there be no horse ; " and so the good man would have spend , freely , his guineas , or his breath , or his blood , to give his child pleasure . he be charm at his girl 's altered countenance ; she pick a bit of chicken with appetite : she drink a little negus , which he make for she : indeed it do seem to be well than the kind doctor 's good medicine , which hitherto , God wot , have be of little benefit . Mamma be gracious and happy . Hetty be radiant and rident . it be quite like an evening at home at Oakhurst . never for month past , never since that fatal , cruel day , that no one speak of , have they spend an evening so delightful . 
 but , if the other woman choose to coax and cajole the good , simple father , Theo herself be too honest to continue for long even that sweet and fond delusion . when , for the third or fourth time , he come back to the delightful theme of his daughter 's improved health , and ask , " what have do it ? be it the country air ? be it the Jesuit 's bark ? be it the new medicine ? " 
 " can not   you think , dear , what it be ? " she say , lay a hand upon her father 's , with a tremor in her voice , perhaps , but eye that be quite open and bright . 
 " and what be it , my child ? " ask the General . 
 " it be because I have see he again , papa ! " she say . 
 the other two woman turn pale , and Theo 's heart too begin to palpitate , and her cheek to whiten , as she continue to look in her father 's scared face . 
 " it be not wrong to see he , " she continue , more quickly ; " it would have be wrong not to tell you . " 
 " Great God ! " groan the father , draw his hand back , and with such a dreadful grief in his countenance , that Hetty run to she almost swoon sister , clasp she to her heart , and cry out , rapidly , " Theo know nothing of it , sir ! it be my do it be all my doing ! " 
 theo lie on her sister 's neck , and kiss it twenty , fifty time . 
 " woman , woman ! be you play with my honour ? " cry the father , burst out with a fierce exclamation . 
 Aunt Lambert sob , wildly , " Martin ! Martin ! do not   say a word to she ! " again call out Hetty , and fall back herself staggering towards the wall , for Theo have faint on her shoulder . 
 I be take my breakfast next morning , with what appetite I might , when my door open , and my faithful black announce , " General Lambert . " at once I see , by the General 's face , that the yesterday 's transaction be know to he . " your accomplice do not confess , " the General say , as soon as my servant have leave we , " but side with you against their father a proof how desirable clandestine meeting be . it be from Theo herself I hear that she have see you . " 
 " accomplice , sir ! " I say   perhaps not unwilling to turn the conversation from the real point at issue . " you know how fondly and dutifully your young people regard their father . if they side against you in this instance , it must be because justice be against you . a man like you be not go to set up sic volo sic jubeo as the sole law in his family ! " 
 " Psha , George ! " cry the General . " for though we be part , God forbid I should desire that we should cease to love each other . I have your promise that you would not seek to see she . " 
 " nor do I go to she , sir , " I say , turn red , no doubt ; for though this be truth , I own it be untrue . 
 " you mean she be bring to you ? " say Theo 's father , in great agitation . " be it behind Hester 's petticoat that you will shelter yourself ? what a fine defence for a gentleman ! " 
 " well , I will not   screen myself behind the poor child , " I reply . " to speak as I do be to make an attempt at evasion , and I be ill - accustomed to dissemble . I do not infringe the letter of my agreement , but I act against the spirit of it . from this moment I annul it altogether . " 
 " you break your word give to I ! " cry Mr. Lambert . 
 " I recall a hasty promise make on a sudden at a moment of extreme excitement and perturbation . no man can be for ever bind by word utter at such a time ; and , what be more , no man of honour or humanity , Mr. Lambert , would try to bind he . " 
 " Dishonour to I ! sir , " exclaim the General . 
 " yes , if the phrase be to be shuttlecock between we ! " I answer , hotly . " there can be no question about love , or mutual regard , or difference of age , when that word be use : and be you my own father and I love you well than a father , Uncle Lambert , I would not bear it ! what have I do ? I have see the woman whom I consider my wife before God and man , and if she call I I will see she again . if she come to I , here be my home for she , and the half of the little I have . ' tis you , who have no right , have make I the gift , to resume it . because my mother taunt you unjustly , be you to visit Mrs. Esmond 's wrong upon this tender , innocent creature ? you profess to love your daughter , and you can not   bear a little wound pride for her sake . well she should perish away in misery , than an old woman in Virginia should say that Mr. Lambert have scheme to marry one of his daughter . say that to satisfy what you call honour and I call selfishness , we part , we break our heart well nigh , we rally , we try to forget each other , we marry elsewhere ? can any man be to my dear as I have be ? God forbid ! can any woman be to I what she be ? you shall marry she to the Prince of Wales to - morrow , and it be a cowardice and treason . how can we , how can you , undo the promise we have make to each other before Heaven ? you may part we : and she will die as surely as if she be Jephthah 's daughter . have you make any vow to Heaven to compass her murder ? kill she if you conceive your promise so bind you : but this I swear , that I be glad you have come , so that I may here formally recall a hasty pledge which I give , and that , call I when she will , I will come to she ! " 
 no doubt this speech be make with the flurry and agitation belong to Mr. Warrington 's youth , and with the firm conviction that death would infallibly carry off one or both of the party , in case their worldly separation be inevitably decreed . who do not believe his first passion eternal ? have watch the world since , and see the rise , progress , and alas , that I must say it ! decay of other amour , I may smile now as I think of my own youthful error and ardour ; but , if it be a superstition , I have rather hold it ; I have rather think that neither of we could have live with any other mate , and that , of all its innumerable creature , Heaven decree these special two should be join together . 
 " we must come , then , to what I have fain have spar myself , " say the General , in reply to my outbreak ; " to an unfriendly separation . when I meet you , Mr. Warrington , I must know you no more . I must order and they will not do other than obey I my family and child not to recognise you when they see you , since you will not recognise in your intercourse with I the respect due to my age , the courtesy of gentleman . I have hop so far from your sense of honour , and the idea I have form of you , that , in my present great grief and perplexity , I should have find you willing to soothe and help I as far as you might for , God know , I have need of everybody 's sympathy . but , instead of help , you fle obstacle in my way . instead of a friend a gracious Heaven pardon I ! I find in you an enemy ! an enemy to the peace of my home and the honour of my child , sir ! and as such I shall treat you , and know how to deal with you , when you molest I ! " 
 and , wave his hand to I , and put on his hat , Mr. Lambert hastily quit my apartment . 
 I be confound , and believe , indeed , there be war between we . the brief happiness of yesterday be cloud over and go , and I think that never since the day of the first separation have I feel so exquisitely unhappy as now , when the bitterness of quarrel be add to the pang of parting , and I stand not only alone but friendless . in the course of one year 's constant intimacy I have come to regard Lambert with a reverence and affection which I have never before feel for any mortal man except my dear Harry . that his face should be turn from I in anger be as if the sun have go out of my sphere , and all be dark around I . and yet I feel sure that in withdraw the hasty promise I have make not to see Theo , I be act rightly that my fidelity to she , as hers now to I , be paramount to all other tie of duty or obedience , and that , ceremony or none , I be her , first and before all . promise be pass between we , from which no parent could absolve either ; and all the priest in Christendom could no more than attest and confirm the sacred contract which have tacitly be ratify between we . 
 I see Jack Lambert by chance that day , as I go mechanically to my not unusual haunt , the library of the new Museum ; and with the impetuousness of youth , and eager to impart my sorrow to some one , I take he out of the room and lead he about the garden , and pour out my grief to he . I do not much care for Jack   who in truth be somewhat of a prig , and not a little pompous and wearisome with his latin quotation   except in the time of my own sorrow , when I would fasten upon he or any one ; and have suffer himself in his affair with the little american , be haud ignarus mali   as I know he would say , I find the college gentleman ready to compassionate another 's misery . I tell he , what have here be represent at great length , of my yesterday 's meeting with his sister ; of my interview with his father in the morning ; of my determination at all hazard never to part with Theo . when I find from the various quotation from the greek and latin author which he utter that he lean to my side in the dispute , I think he a man of great sense , clung eagerly to his elbow , and bestow upon he much more affection than he be accustom at other time to have from I . I walk with he up to his father 's lodging in Dean Street ; see he enter at the dear door ; survey the house from without with a sickening desire to know from its exterior appearance how my beloved fare within ; and call for a bottle at the coffee - house where I wait Jack 's return . I call he Brother when I send he away . I fondle he as the condemn wretch at Newgate hang about the jailor or the parson , or any one who be kind to he in his misery . I drink a whole bottle of wine at the coffee - house by the way , Jack 's Coffee - House be its name call another . I think Jack would never come back . 
 he appear at length with rather a scared face ; and , come to my box , pour out for himself two or three bumper from my second bottle , and then fall to his story , which , to I at least , be not a little interesting . my poor Theo be keep her room , it appear , be much agitated by the occurrence of yesterday ; and Jack have come home in time to find dinner on table ; after which his good father hold forth upon the occurrence of the morning , be anxious and able to speak more freely , he say , because his eld son be present and Theodosia be not in the room . the General state what have happen at my lodging between I and he . he bid hester be silent , who indeed be as dumb as a mouse , poor thing ! he tell Aunt Lambert   who be indulge in that madefaction of pocket - handkerchief which I have before describe , and with something like an imprecation , that the woman be all against he , and pimp   he call they   for one another ; and frantically turn round to Jack , ask what be his view in the matter ? 
 to his father 's surprise and his mother 's and sister 's delight , Jack make a speech on my side . he rule with I   cite what ancient authority I do not   know , that the matter have go out of the hand of the parent on either side ; that have give their consent , some month previously , the elder have put themselves out of court . though he do not hold with a great , a respectable , he might say a host of divine , those sacramental view of the marriage - ceremony for which there be a great deal to be say yet he hold it , if possible , even more sacredly than they ; conceive that though marriage be make before the civil magistrate , and without the priest , yet they be , before Heaven , bind and indissoluble . 
 " it be not merely , sir , " say Jack , turn to his father , " those whom I , John Lambert , Priest , have join , let no man put asunder ; it be those whom God have join let no man separate . "   here he take off his hat , as he tell the story to I .   " my view be clear upon the point , and surely these young people be join , or permit to plight themselves to each other by the consent of you , the priest of your own family . my view , I say , be clear , and I will lay they down at length in a series of two or three discourse which , no doubt , will satisfy you . upon which , " say Jack , " my father say , ' I be satisfied already , my dear boy , ' and my lively little Het   who have much archness   whisper to I , ' Jack , mother and I will make you a dozen shirt , as sure as egg be egg . ' " 
 " whilst we be talk , " Mr. Lambert resume , " my sister Theodosia make her appearance , I must say very much agitated and pale , kiss our father , and sate down at his side , and take a sippet of toast   my dear George , this port be excellent , and I drink your health   and take a sippet of toast and dip it in his negus . 
 " ' you should have be here to hear Jack 's sermon ! ' say Hester . ' he have be preach most beautifully . ' 
 " ' has he ? ' ask Theodosia , who be too languid and weak , poor thing , much to care for the exercise of eloquence , or the display of authority , such as I must own , " say Jack , " it be give to I this afternoon to bring forward . 
 " ' he have talk for three quarter of an hour by Shrewsbury clock , ' say my father , though I certainly have not talk so long or half so long by my own watch . ' and his discourse have be you , my dear , ' say papa , play with Theodosia 's hand . 
 " ' I , papa ? ' 
 " ' you and and Mr. Warrington and and George , my love , ' say papa . upon which "   say Mr. Jack . " my sister come close to the General , and lay her head upon he , and weep upon his shoulder . 
 " ' this be different , sir , ' say I , ' to a passage I remember in Pausanias . ' 
 " ' in Pausanias ? indeed ! ' say the General . ' and pray who be he ? ' 
 " I smile at my father 's simplicity in expose his ignorance before his child . ' when Ulysses be take away Penelope from her father , the king hasten after his daughter and bridegroom , and besought his darling to return . Whereupon , it be relate , Ulysses offer she her choice , whether she would return , or go on with he ? upon which the daughter of Icarius cover her face with her veil . for want of a veil my sister have take refuge in your waistcoat , sir , ' I say , and we all laugh ; though my mother vow that if such a proposal have be make to she , or Penelope have be a girl of spirit , she would have go home with her father that instant . 
 " ' but I be not a girl of any spirit , dear mother ! ' say Theodosia , still in gremio patris . I do not remember that this habit of caressing be frequent in my own youth , " continue Jack . " but after some more discourse , Brother Warrington ! bethink I of you , and leave my parent insist upon Theodosia return to bed . the late transaction have , it appear , weaken and agitate she much . I myself have experience , in my own case , how full of solliciti timoris be a certain passion ; how it rack the spirit ; and I make no doubt , if carry far enough , or indulge to the extent to which woman who have little philosophy will permit it to go I make no doubt , I say , be ultimately injurious to the health . my service to you , brother ! " 
 from grief to hope , how rapid the change be ! what a flood of happiness pour into my soul , and glow in my whole being ! Landlord , more port ! would honest Jack have drink a binful I would have treat he ; and , to say truth , Jack 's sympathy be large in this case , and it have be generous all day . I decline to score the bottle of port : and place to the fabulous computation of interested waiter , the amount score against I in the reckoning . Jack be my dearest , good of brother . my friendship for he I swear should be eternal . if I could do he any service , be it a bishopric , by George ! he should have it . he say I be interrupt by the watchman rhapsodise verse beneath the love one 's window . I know not . I know I awake joyfully and rapturously , in spite of a rack headache the next morning . 
 nor do I know the extent of my happiness quite , or the entire conversion of my dear noble enemy of the previous morning . it must have be gall to the pride of an eld man to have to yield to representation and objection couch in language so little dutiful as that I have use towards Mr. Lambert . but the true christian gentleman , retire from his talk with I , mortify and wound by my asperity of remonstrance , as well as by the pain which he see his beloved daughter suffer , go thoughtfully and sadly to his business , as he subsequently tell I , and in the afternoon   as his custom not unfrequently be   into a church which be open for prayer . and it be here , on his knee , submit his case in the quarter whither he frequently , though privately , come for guidance and comfort , that it seem to he that his child be right in her persistent fidelity to I , and himself wrong in demand her utter submission . hence Jack 's cause be win almost before he begin to plead it ; and the brave , gentle heart , which could bear no rancour , which bleed at inflict pain on those it love , which even shrink from assert authority or demand submission , be only too glad to return to its natural pulse of love and affection . 




 CHAPTER LXXVIII . Pyramus and Thisbe 

 in examine the old paper at home , year afterwards , I find , docket and label with my mother 's well - know neat handwriting , " from London , April , 1760 . my son 's dreadful letter . " when it come to be mine I burn the document , not choose that that story of domestic grief and disunion should remain amongst our family annal for future Warringtons to gaze on , mayhap , and disobedient son to hold up as example of foregone domestic rebellion . for similar reason , I have destroy the paper which my mother despatch to I at this time of tyranny , revolt , annoyance , and irritation . 
 madden by the pang of separation from my mistress , and not unrightly consider that Mrs. Esmond be the prime cause of the great grief and misery which have ever befall I in the world , I write home to Virginia a letter , which might have be more temperate , it be true , but in which I endeavour to maintain the extreme respect and reticence . I say I do not know by what motif she have be influence , but that I hold her answerable for the misery of my future life , which she have choose wilfully to mar and render wretche . she have occasion a separation between I and a virtuous and innocent young creature , whose own hope , health , and happiness be cast down for ever by Mrs. Esmond 's interference . the deed be do , as I fear , and I would offer no comment upon the conduct of the perpetrator , who be answerable to God alone ; but I do not disguise from my mother that the injury which she have do I be so dreadful and mortal , that her life or mine could never repair it ; that the tie of my allegiance be break towards she , and that I never could be , as heretofore , her dutiful and respectful son . 
 Madam Esmond reply to I in a letter of very great dignity   her style and correspondence be extraordinarily elegant and fine . she utter not a single reproach or hard word , but coldly give I to understand that it be before that awful tribunal of God she have refer the case between we , and ask for counsel ; that , in respect of her own conduct , as a mother , she be ready , in all humility , to face it . might I , as a son , be equally able to answer for myself , and to show , when the Great Judge demand the question of I , whether I have do my own duty , and honour my father and mother ! o popoi ! my grandfather have quote in his memoir a line of Homer , show how in our trouble and grief the god be always call in question . when our pride , our avarice , our interest , our desire to domineer , be work upon , be we not for ever pester Heaven to decide in their favour ? in our great american quarrel , do we not on both side appeal to the sky as to the justice of our cause , sing Te Deum for victory , and boldly express our confidence that the right should prevail ? be America right because she be victorious ? then I suppose Poland be wrong because she be defeat ? how be I wander into this digression about Poland , America , and what not , and all the while thinking of a little woman now no more , who appeal to Heaven and confront it with a thousand text out of its own book , because her son want to make a marriage not of her like ? we appeal , we imprecate , we go down on our knee , we demand blessing , we shriek out for sentence accord to law ; the great course of the great world move on ; we pant , and strive , and struggle ; we hate ; we rage ; we weep passionate tear ; we reconcile ; we race and win ; we race and lose ; we pass away , and other little struggler succeed ; our day be spend ; our night come , and another morning rise , which shin on we no more . 
 my letter to Madam Esmond , announce my revolt and disobedience   perhaps I myself be a little proud of the composition of that document , I show in duplicate to Mr. Lambert , because I wish he to understand what my relation to my mother be , and how I be determine , whatever of threat or quarrel the future might bring , never for my own part to consider my separation from Theo as other than a force one . whenever I could see she again I would . my word give to she be in secula seculorum , or bind at least as long as my life should endure . I imply that the girl be similarly bind to I , and her poor father know indeed as much . he might separate we ; as he might give she a dose of poison , and the gentle , obedient creature would take it and die ; but the death or separation would be his do : let he answer they . now he be tender about his child to weakness , and could not have the heart to submit any one of they this one especially to torture . we have try to part : we could not . he have endeavour to separate we : it be more than be in his power . the bar be up , but the young couple the maid within and the knight without be love each other all the same . the wall be build , but Pyramus and Thisbe be whisper on either side . in the midst of all his grief and perplexity , Uncle Lambert have plenty of humour , and could not but see that his role be rather a sorry one . light be begin to show through that lime and rough plaster of the wall : the lover be get their hand through , then their head through indeed , it be wall 's good business to retire . 
 I forget what happen stage by stage and day by day ; nor , for the instruction of future age , do it much matter . when my descendant have love scrape of their own , they will find their own mean of get out of they . I believe I do not go back to Dean Street , but that practice of drive in the open air be consider most healthful for Miss Lambert . I get a fine horse , and ride by the side of her carriage . the old woman at Tottenham Court come to know both of we quite well , and nod and wink in the most friendly manner when we pass by . I fancy the old goody be not unaccustomed to interest herself in young couple , and have dispense the hospitality of her roadside cottage to more than one pair . 
 the doctor and the country air effect a prodigious cure upon Miss Lambert . Hetty always attend as duenna , and sometimes of his holiday , Master Charley ride my horse when I get into the carriage . what a deal of love - make Miss Hetty hear ! with what exemplary patience she listen to it ! I do not say she go to hear the Methodist sermon any more , but ' tis certain that when we have a closed carriage she would very kindly and considerately look out of the window . then , what heap of letter there be ! what run to and fro ! Gumbo 's bandy leg be for ever on the trot from my quarter to Dean Street ; and , on my account or her own , Mrs. Molly , the girl 's maid , be for ever bring back answer to Bloomsbury . by the time when the autumn leaf begin to turn pale , Miss Theo 's rose be in full bloom again , and my good Doctor Heberden 's cure be pronounce to be complete . what else happen during this blessed period ? Mr. Warrington complete his great tragedy of Pocahontas , which be not only accept by Mr. Garrick this time   his friend Dr. Johnson have speak not unfavourably of the work , but my friend and cousin , Hagan , be engage by the manager to perform the part of the hero , Captain Smith . Hagan 's engagement be not make before it be want . I have help he and his family with mean disproportione , perhaps , to my power , especially consider my feud with Madam Esmond , whose answer to my angry missive of April come to I towards autumn , and who write back from Virginia with war for war , controlment for controlment . these menace , however , frighten I little : my poor mother 's thunder could not reach I ; and my conscience , or casuistry , supply I with other interpretation for her text of scripture , so that her oracle have not the least weight with I in frighten I from my purpose . how my new love speed I neither inform she , nor any other member of my maternal or paternal family , who , on both side , have be bitter against my marriage . of what use wrangle with they ? it be well to carpere diem and its sweet love and pleasure , and to leave the railer to grumble , or the senior to advise , at their ease . 
 besides Madam Esmond I have , it must be own , in the frantic rage of my temporary separation , address note of wondrous sarcasm to my Uncle Warrington , to my Aunt Madame de Bernstein , and to my Lord or Lady of Castlewood   I forget to which individually , thank they for the trouble which they have take in prevent the dear happiness of my life , and promise they a corresponding gratitude from their oblige relative . business bring the jovial Baronet and his family to London somewhat early than usual , and Madame de Bernstein be never sorry to get back to Clarges Street and her card . I see they . they find I perfectly well . they conclude the match be break off , and I do not choose to undeceive they . the Baroness take heart at see how cheerful I be , and make many sly joke about my philosophy , and my prudent behaviour as a man of the world . she be , as ever , bent upon find a rich match for I : and I fear I pay many compliment at her house to a rich young soap - boiler 's daughter from Mile End , whom the worthy Baroness wish to place in my arm . 
 " you court she with infinite wit and esprit , my dear , " say my pleased kinswoman , " but she do not understand half you say , and the other half , I think , frighten she . this ton de persiflage be very well in our society , but you must be spar of it , my dear nephew , amongst these roturier . " 
 Miss Badge marry a young gentleman of royal dignity , though shatter fortune , from a neighbouring island ; and I trust Mrs. Mackshane have ere this pardon my levity . there be another person besides Miss at my aunt 's house , who do not understand my persiflage much well than Miss herself ; and that be a lady who have see James the Second 's reign , and who be alive and as worldly as ever in King George 's . I love to be with she : but that my little folk have access to this volume , I could put down a hundred story of the great old folk whom she have know in the great old day of George the First and his lady , of St. John and Marlborough , of his reign Majesty and the late Prince of Wales , and the cause of the quarrel between they but my modest muse pipe for boy and virgin . Son Miles do not care about court story , or if he doth , have a fresh budget from Carlton House , quite as bad as the bad of our old Baroness . no , my dear wife , thou hast no need to shake thy powdered lock at I ! papa be not go to scandalise his nursery with old - world gossip , nor bring a blush over our chaste bread - and - butter . 
 but this piece of scandal I can not help . my aunt use to tell it with infinite gusto ; for , to do her justice , she hat your would - be good people , and snigger over the fault of the self - style righteous with uncommon satisfaction . in her later day she have no hypocrisy , at least ; and in so far be well than some whitewash ... well , to the story . my Lady Warrington , one of the tall and the most virtuous of her sex , who have goodness for ever on her lip and " Heaven in her eye , " like the woman in Mr. Addison 's tedious tragedy   which have keep the stage , from which some other , which shall be nameless , have disappear , have the world in her other eye , and an exceedingly shrewd desire of push herself in it . what do she do , when my marriage with your ladyship yonder be suppose to be break off , but attempt to play off on I those art which she have try on my poor Harry with such signal ill success , and which fail with I likewise ! it be not the Beauty Miss Flora be for my master   and what a master ! I protest I take off my hat at the idea of such an illustrious connexion !   it be Dora , the Muse , be set upon I to languish at I and to pity I , and to read even my godless tragedy , and applaud I and console I . meanwhile , how be the Beauty occupy ? will it be believe that my severe aunt give a great entertainment to my Lady Yarmouth , present her boy to she , and place poor little mile under her ladyship 's august protection ? that , so far , be certain ; but can it be that she send her daughter to stay at my lady 's house , which our gracious lord and master daily visit , and with the view which old Aunt Bernstein attribute to she ? " but for that fit of apoplexy , my dear , " Bernstein say , " that aunt of yours intend there should have be a Countess in her own right in the Warrington family ! "   Compare Walpole 's letter in Mr. Cunningham 's excellent new edition . see the story of the supper at N. House , to show what great nobleman would do for a king 's mistress , and the pleasant account of the waiting for the Prince of Wales before Holland House.-EDITOR .   my neighbour and kinswoman , my Lady Claypole , be dead and bury . grow white , ye daisy , upon Flora 's tomb ! I can see my pretty Miles , in a gay little uniform of the Norfolk Militia , lead up by his parent to the lady whom the King delight to honour , and the good - natured old Jezebel lay her hand upon the boy 's curly pate . I be accuse of be but a lukewarm royalist ; but sure I can contrast those time with ours , and acknowledge the difference between the late sovereign and the present , who , bear a Briton , have give to every family in the empire an example of decorum and virtuous life .   the Warrington MS . be date 1793.-ED . 
 thus my life speed in the pleasantest of all occupation ; and , be so happy myself , I could afford to be reconcile to those who , after all , have do I no injury , but rather add to the zest of my happiness by the brief obstacle which they have place in my way . no specific plan be form , but Theo and I know that a day would come when we need say farewell no more . should the day befall a year hence ten year hence we be ready to wait . day after day we discuss our little plan , with Hetty for our confidante . on our drive we spy out pretty cottage that we think might suit young people of small mean ; we devise all sort of delightful scheme and childish economy . we be Strephon and Chloe to be sure . a cot and a brown loaf should content we ! Gumbo and Molly should wait upon we   as indeed they have do from that day until this . at twenty , who be afraid of be poor ? our trial would only confirm our attachment . the ' sweet sorrow " of every day 's parting but make the morrow 's meeting more delightful ; and when we separate we run home and write each other those precious letter which we and other young gentleman and lady write under such circumstance ; but though my wife have they all in a great tin sugar - box in the closet in her bedroom , and , I own , I myself have look at they once , and even think some of they pretty , I hereby desire my heir and executor to burn they all , unread , at our demise ; specially desire my son the Captain   to whom I know the perusal of MSS . be not pleasant   to perform this duty . those secret whisper to the penny - post , or deliver between Molly and Gumbo , be intend for we alone , and no ear of our descendant shall overhear they . 
 we hear in successive brief letter how our dear Harry continue with the army , as Mr. General Amherst 's aide - de - camp , after the death of his own glorious general . by the middle of October there come news of the Capitulation of Montreal and the whole of Canada , and a brief postscript in which Hal say he would ask for leave now , and must go and see the old lady at home , who write as sulky as a bare , Captain Warrington remark . I could guess why , though the claw could not reach I . I have write pretty fully to my brother how affair be stand with I in England . 
 then , on the 25th October , come the news that his Majesty have fall down dead at Kensington , and that George III . reign over we . I fear we grieve but little . what do those care for the Atridae whose heart be string only to erota mounon ? a modest , handsome , brave new Prince , we gladly accept the common report that he be endow with every virtue ; and we cry huzzay with the loyal crowd that hail his accession : it could make little difference to we , as we think , simple young sweetheart , whisper our little love - story in our corner . 
 but who can say how great event affect he ? do not our little Charley , at the Chartreux , wish impiously for a new king immediately , because on his gracious Majesty 's accession Doctor Crusius give his boy a holiday ? he and I , and Hetty , and Theo   Miss Theo be strong enough to walk many a delightful mile now , hear the Heralds proclaim his new Majesty before Savile House in Leicester Fields , and a pickpocket get the watch and chain of a gentleman hard by we , and be catch and carry to Bridewell , all on account of his Majesty 's accession . have the king not die , the gentleman would not have be in the crowd ; the chain would not have be seize ; the thief would not have be catch and soundly whip : in this way many of we , more or less remotely , be implicate in the great change which ensue , and even we humble folk be affect by it presently . 
 as thus . my Lord Wrotham be a great friend of the august family of Savile House , who know and esteem his many virtue . now , of all live man , my Lord Wrotham know and love good his neighbour and old fellow - soldier , Martin Lambert , declare that the world contain few well gentleman . and my Lord Bute , be all potent , at first , with his Majesty , and a nobleman , as I believe , very eager at the commencement of his brief and luckless tenure of power , to patronise merit wherever he could find it , be strongly prejudiced in Mr. Lambert 's favour by the latter 's old and constant friend . 
 my   and Harry 's   old friend Parson Sampson , who have be in and out of gaol I do not   know how many time of late year , and retain an ever - endure hatred for the Esmonds of Castlewood , and as last a regard for I and my brother , be occupy poor Hal 's vacant bed at my lodging at this time   be , in truth , hunt out of his own by the bailiff . I like to have Sampson near I , for a more amusing Jack - friar never walk in cassock ; and , besides , he enter into all my rhapsody about Miss Theo ; be never tired   so he vow   of hear I talk of she ; admire Pocahontas and Carpezan with , I do believe , an honest enthusiasm ; and could repeat whole passage of those tragedy with an emphasis and effect that Barry or cousin Hagan himself could not surpass . Sampson be the go - between between Lady Maria and such of her relation as have not disown she ; and , always in debt himself , be never more happy than in drink a pot , or mingle his tear with his friend in similar poverty . his acquaintance with pawnbroker ' shop be prodigious . he could procure more money , he boast , on an article than any gentleman of his cloth . he never pay his own debt , to be sure , but he be ready to forgive his debtor . poor as he be , he always find mean to love and help his needy little sister , and a more prodigal , kindly , amiable rogue never probably grin behind bar . they say that I love to have parasite about I . I own to have have a great liking for Sampson , and to have esteem he much well than probably much well man . 
 when he hear how my Lord Bute be admit into the cabinet , Sampson vow and declare that his lordship a great lover of the drama , who have be to see Carpezan , who have admire it , and who would act the part of the king very finely in it he vow , by George ! that my lord must give I a place worthy of my birth and merit . he insist upon it that I should attend his lordship 's levee . I would not ? the Esmonds be all as proud as Lucifer ; and , to be sure , my birth be as good as that of any man in Europe . Demmy ! where be my lord himself when the Esmonds be lord of great county , warrior , and Crusaders ? where be they ? beggarly Scotchmen , without a rag to their back by George ! tear raw fish in their island . but now the time be change . the Scotchmen be in luck . Mum 's the word ! " I do not   envy he , " say Sampson , " but he shall provide for you and my dearest , noblest , heroic captain ! he shall , by George ! " would my worthy parson roar out . and when , in the month after his accession , his Majesty order the play of Richard III . at Drury Lane , my chaplain curse , vow , swore , but he would have he to Covent Garden to see Carpezan too . and now , one morning , he burst into my apartment , where I happen to lie rather late , wave the newspaper in his hand , and sing " Huzza ! " with all his might . 
 " what be it , Sampson ? " say I. " have my brother get his promotion ? " 
 " no , in truth : but some one else have . Huzzay ! huzzay ! his Majesty have appoint Major - General Martin Lambert to be Governor and Commander - in - chief of the Island of Jamaica . " 
 I start up . here be news , indeed ! Mr. Lambert would go to his government : and who would go with he ? I have be sup with some genteel young fellow at the Cocoa - Tree . the rascal Gumbo have a note for I from my dear mistress on the night previous , convey the same news to I , and have delay to deliver it . Theo beg I to see she at the old place at midday the next day without fail .   in the Warrington MS . there be not a word to say what the " old place " be . perhaps some oblige reader of Notes and Queries will be able to inform I , and who Mrs. Goodison was.-ED . 
 there be no little trepidation in our little council when we reach our place of meeting . Papa have announce his acceptance of the appointment , and his speedy departure . he would have a frigate give he , and take his family with he . merciful power ! and be we to be part ? my Theo 's old deathly paleness return to she . Aunt Lambert think she would have swoon ; one of Mrs. Goodison 's girl have a bottle of salt , and run up with it from the workroom . " go away ? go away in a frigate , Aunt Lambert ? go to tear she away from I ? great God ! Aunt Lambert , I shall die ! " she be well when mamma come up from the workroom with the young lady 's bottle of salt . you see the woman use to meet I : know dear Theo 's delicate state , how could they refrain from compassionate she ! but the General be so busy with his levee and his wait on Ministers , and his outfit , and the settlement of his affair at home , that they never happen to tell he about our little walk and meeting ; and even when order for the outfit of the lady be give , Mrs. Goodison , who have know and work for Miss Molly Benson as a schoolgirl   she remember Miss Esmond of Virginia perfectly , the worthy lady tell I , and a dress she make for the young lady to be present at her Majesty 's Ball   " even when the outfit be order for the three lady , " say Mrs. Goodison , demurely , " why , I think I could do no harm in complete the order . " 
 now I need not say in what perturbation of mind Mr. Warrington go home in the evening to his lodging , after the discussion with the lady of the above news . no , or at least a very few , more walk ; no more ride to dear , dear Hampstead or beloved Islington ; no more fetching and carrying of letter for Gumbo and Molly ! the former blubber so , that Mr. Warrington be quite touch by his fidelity , and give he a crown - piece to go to supper with the poor girl , who turn out to be his sweetheart . what , you too unhappy , Gumbo , and tear from the maid you love ? I be ready to mingle with he tear for tear . 
 what a solemn conference I have with Sampson that evening ! he know my affair , my expectation , my mother 's anger . Psha ! that be far off , and he know some excellent liberal people   of the order of Melchizedek   who would discount the other . the General would not give his consent ? Sampson shrug his broad shoulder and swear a great roaring oath . my mother would not relent ? what then ? a man be a man , and to make his own way in the world ? he suppose . he be only a churl who will not   play for such a stake as that , and lose or win , by George ! shout the chaplain , over a bottle of Burgundy at the Bedford Head , where he din . I need not put down our conversation . we be two of we , and I think there be only one mind between we . our talk be of a Saturday night .... 
 I do not tell Theo , nor any relative of her , what be be do . but when the dear child falter and talk , tremble , of the come departure , I bid her bear up , and vow all would be well , so confidently , that she , who ever have take her alarm and joy from my face   I wish , my dear , it be sometimes not so gloomy , could not but feel confidence ; and place   with many fond word that need not here be repeat   her entire trust in I murmur those sweet word of Ruth that must have comfort myriad of tender heart in my dearest maiden 's plight ; that whither I would go she would go , and that my people should be her . at last , one day , the General 's preparation be make , the trunk encumber the passage of the dear old Dean Street lodging , which I shall love as long as I shall remember at all one day , almost the last of his stay , when the good man   his Excellency we call he now   come home to his dinner a comfortless meal enough it be in the present condition of the family he look round the table at the place where I have use to sit in happy old day , and sigh out : " I wish , Molly , George be here . " 
 " do you , Martin ? " say Aunt Lambert , fling into his arm . 
 " yes , I do ; but I do not   wish you to choke I , Molly , " he say . " I love he dearly . I may go away and never see he again , and take his foolish little sweetheart along with I . I suppose you will write to each other , child ? I can not   prevent that , you know ; and until he change his mind , I suppose Miss Theo will not   obey papa 's order , and get he out of her foolish little head . Wilt thou , Theo ? " 
 " no , dearest , dearest , good papa ! " 
 " what ! more embrace and kiss ! what do all this mean ? " 
 " it mean that that George be in the drawing - room , " say mamma . 
 " be he ! my dear boy ! " cry the General . " come to I come in ! " and when I enter he hold I to his heart , and kiss I . 
 I confess at this I be so overcome that I fall down on my knee before the dear , good man , and sob on his own . 
 " God bless you , my dear boy ! " he mutter hurriedly . " always love you as a son have not   I , molly ? break my heart nearly when I quarrel with you about this little what ! odd marrowbone ! all down on your knee ! Mrs. Lambert , pray what be the meaning of all this ? " 
 " Dearest , dearest papa ! I will go with you all the same ! " whimper one of the kneeling party . " and I will wait oh ! as long as ever my dear father want I ! " 
 " in Heaven 's name ! " roar the General , " tell I what have happen ? " 
 what have happen be , that George Esmond Warrington and Theodosia Lambert have be marry in Southwark that morning , their bann have be duly call in the church of a certain friend of the Reverend Mr. Sampson . 




 CHAPTER LXXIX . contain both Comedy and Tragedy 

 we , who have be active in the guilty scene of the morning , feel trebly guilty when we see the effect which our conduct have produce upon he , who , of all other , we love and respect . the shock to the good man be strange , and pitiful to we to witness who have administer it . the child of his heart have deceive and disobey he I declare I think , my dear , now , we would not or could not do it over again ; his whole family have enter into a league against he . dear , kind friend and father ! we know thou hast pardon our wrong in the Heaven where thou dwellest amongst purify spirit who learn on earth how to love and pardon ! to love and forgive be easy duty with that man . Beneficence be natural to he , and a sweet , smile humility ; and to wound either be to be savage and brutal , as to torture a child , or strike blow at a nursing woman . the deed do , all we guilty one grovel in the earth , before the man we have injure . I pass over the scene of forgiveness , of reconciliation , of common worship together , of final separation when the good man depart to his government , and the ship sail away before we , leave I and Theo on the shore . we stand there hand in hand , horribly abash , silent , and guilty . my wife do not come to I till her father go : in the interval between the ceremony of our marriage and his departure , she have remain at home , occupy her old place by her father , and bed by her sister 's side : he as kind as ever , but the woman almost speechless among themselves ; Aunt Lambert , for once , unkind and fretful in her temper ; and little Hetty feverish and strange , and say , " I wish we be go . I wish we be go . " Though admit to the house , and forgive , I slunk away during those last day , and only see my wife for a minute or two in the street , or with her family . she be not mine till they be go . we go to Winchester and Hampton for what may be call our wedding . it be but a dismal business . for a while we feel utterly lonely : and of our dear father as if we have bury he , or drive he to the grave by our undutifulness . 
 I make Sampson announce our marriage in the paper .   my wife use to hang down her head before the poor fellow afterwards .   I take Mrs. Warrington back to my old lodging in Bloomsbury , where there be plenty of room for we , and our modest married life begin . I write home a letter to my mother in Virginia , inform she of no particular , but only that Mr. Lambert be about to depart for his government , I consider myself bind in honour to fulfil my promise towards his dear daughter ; and state that I intend to carry out my intention of complete my study for the Bar , and qualify myself for employment at home , or in our own or any other colony . my good Mrs. Mountain answer this letter , by desire of Madam Esmond , she say , who think that for the sake of peace my communication have well be conduct that way . I find my relative in a fury which be perfectly amusing to witness . the butler 's face , as he say , " not at home , " at my uncle 's house in Hill Street , be a blank tragedy that might have be study by Garrick when he see Banque . my poor little wife be on my arm , and we be trip away , laugh at the fellow 's accueil , when we come upon my lady in a street stoppage in her chair . I take off my hat and make she the low possible bow . I affectionately ask after my dear cousin . " I I wonder you dare look I in the face ! " Lady Warrington gasp out . " Nay , do not   deprive I of that precious privilege ! " say I. " move on , Peter , " she scream to her chairman . " your ladyship would not impale your own husband 's flesh and blood ! " say I. she rattle up the glass of her chair in a fury . I kiss my hand , take off my hat , and perform another of my very fine bow . 
 walk shortly afterwards in Hyde Park with my dear companion , I meet my little cousin exercise on horseback with a groom behind he . as soon as he see we , he gallop up to we , the groom powdering afterwards and bawl out , " stop , Master Miles , stop ! " 
 " I be not to speak to my cousin , " say Miles , " but tell you to send my love to Harry be not speak to you , be it ? be that my new cousin ? I be not tell not to speak to she . I be Miles , cousin , Sir Miles Warrington Baronet 's son , and you be very pretty ! " " now , duee now , Master Miles , " say the groom , touch his hat to we ; and the boy trot away laugh and look at we over his shoulder . " you see how my relation have determine to treat I , " I say to my partner . " as if I marry you for your relation ! " say Theo , her eye beam joy and love into mine . ah , how happy we be ! how brisk and pleasant the winter ! how snug the kettle by the fire   where the abashed Sampson sometimes come and make the punch ; how delightful the night at the theatre , for which our friend bring we ticket of admission , and where we daily expect our new play of Pocahontas would rival the success of all former tragedy . 
 the fickle old aunt of Clarges Street , who receive I , on my first come to London with my wife , with a burst of scorn , mollify presently , and as soon as she come to know Theo   who she have pronounce to be an insignificant little country - face chit , fall utterly in love with she , and would have she to tea and supper every day when there be no other company . " as for company , my dear , " she would say , " I do not   ask you . you be no long du monde . your marriage have put that entirely out of the question . " so she would have have we come to amuse she , and go in and out by the back - stair . my wife be fine lady enough to feel only amuse at this reception ; and , I must do the Baroness 's domestic the justice to say that , have we be duke and duchess , we could not have be receive with more respect . Madame de Bernstein be very much tickle and amuse with my story of Lady Warrington and the chair . I act it for she , and give her anecdote of the pious Baronet 's lady and her daughter , which please the mischievous , lively old woman . 
 the Dowager Countess of Castlewood , now establish in her house at Kensington , give we that kind of welcome which genteel lady extend to their poor relative . we go once or twice to her ladyship 's drum at Kensington ; but , lose more money at card , and spend more money in coach - hire than I like to afford , we speedily give up those entertainment , and , I dare say , be no more miss or regret than other people in the fashionable world , who be carry by death , debt , or other accident out of the polite sphere . my Theo do not in the least regret this exclusion . she have make her appearance at one of these drum , attire in some little ornament which her mother leave behind she , and by which the good lady set some store ; but I think her own white neck be a great deal pretty than these poor twinkle stone ; and there be dowager , whose wrinkle old bone blaze with ruby and diamond , which , I be sure , they would gladly have exchange for her modest parure of beauty and freshness . not a soul speak to she except , to be sure , Beau Lothair , a friend of Mr. Will 's , who prowl about Bloomsbury afterwards , and even send my wife a billet . I meet he in Covent Garden shortly after , and promise to break his ugly face if ever I see it in the neighbourhood of my lodging , and Madam Theo be molest no far . 
 the only one of our relative who come to see we   Madame de Bernstein never come ; she send her coach for we sometimes , or make inquiry regard we by her woman or her major - domo   be our poor Maria , who , with her husband , Mr. Hagan , often take a share of our homely dinner . then we have friend Spencer from the Temple , who admire our arcadian felicity , and gently ask our sympathy for his less fortunate love ; and twice or thrice the famous Doctor Johnson come in for a dish of Theo 's tea . a dish ? a pailful ! " and a pail the good thing to feed he , sar ! " say Mr. Gumbo , indignantly : for the Doctor 's appearance be not pleasant , nor his linen particularly white . he snort , he grow red , and sputter in feeding ; he fling his meat about , and bawl out in contradict people : and annoy my Theo , whom he profess to admire greatly , by say , every time he see she , " Madam , you do not love I ; I see by your manner you do not love I ; though I admire you , and come here for your sake . here be my friend Mr. Reynolds that shall paint you : he have no ceruse in his paint - box that be as brilliant as your complexion . " and so Mr. Reynolds , a most perfect and agreeable gentleman , would have paint my wife ; but I know what his price be , and do not choose to incur that expense . I wish I have now , for the sake of the child , that they might see what yonder face be like some five - and - thirty year ago . to I , madam , ' tis the same now as ever ; and your ladyship be always young ! 
 what annoy Mrs. Warrington with Dr. Johnson more than his contradiction , his sputtering , and his dirty nail , be , I think , an unfavourable opinion which he form of my new tragedy . Hagan once propose that he should read some scene from it after tea . 
 " Nay , sir , conversation be well , " say the Doctor . " I can read for myself , or hear you at the theatre . I have rather hear Mrs. Warrington 's artless prattle than your declamation of Mr. Warrington 's decasyllable . tell we about your household affair , madam , and whether his Excellency your father be well , and whether you make the pudden and the butter sauce . the butter sauce be delicious ! "   he love it so well that he have keep a large quantity in the bosom of a very dingy shirt .   " you make it as though you love I . you help I as though you love I , though you do not . " 
 " Faith , sir , you be take some of the present away with you in your waistcoat , " say Hagan , with much spirit . 
 " Sir , you be rude ! " bawl the Doctor . " you be unacquainted with the first principle of politeness , which be courtesy before lady . have receive an university education , I be surprised that you have not learn the rudiment of politeness . I respect Mrs. Warrington . I should never think of make personal remark about her guest before she ! " 
 " then , sir , " say Hagan , fiercely , " why do you speak of my theatre ? " 
 " Sir , you be saucy ! " roar the Doctor . 
 " de te fabula , " say the actor . " I think it be your waistcoat that be saucy . Madam , shall I make some punch in the way we make it in Ireland ? " 
 the Doctor , puffing , and purple in the face , be wipe the dingy shirt with a still more dubious pocket - handkerchief , which he then apply to his forehead . after this exercise , he blow a hyperborean whistle , as if to blow his wrath away . " it be de I , sir though , as a young man , perhaps you need not have tell I so . " 
 " I drop my point , sir ! if you have be wrong , I be sure I be bind to ask your pardon for set you so ! " say Mr. Hagan , with a fine bow . 
 " do not   he look like a god ? " say Maria , clutch my wife 's hand : and indeed Mr. Hagan do look like a handsome young gentleman . his colour have rise ; he have put his hand to his breast with a noble air : Chamont or Castalio could not present himself well . 
 " let I make you some lemonade , sir ; my papa have send we a box of fresh lime . may we send you some to the Temple ? " 
 " Madam , if they stay in your house , they will lose their quality and turn sweet , " say the Doctor . " Mr. Hagan , you be a young sauce - box , that be what you be ! Ho ! ho ! it be I have be wrong . " 
 " oh , my lord , my Polidore ! " bleat Lady Maria , when she be alone in my wife 's drawing - room : 
  " ' oh , I could hear thee talk for ever thus , 
  eternally admiring , fix and gaze 
  on those dear eye , for every glance they send 
  dart through my soul , and fill my heart with rapture ! ' 
 " Thou know not , my Theo , what a pearl and paragon of a man my castalio be ; my Chamont , my oh , dear I , child , what a pity it be that in your husband 's tragedy he should have to take the horrid name of Captain Smith ! " 
 upon this tragedy not only my literary hope , but much of my financial prospect be found . my brother 's debt discharge , my mother 's draft from home duly honour , my own expense pay , which , though moderate , be not inconsiderable , pretty nearly the whole of my patrimony have be spend , and this auspicious moment I must choose for my marriage ! I could raise money on my inheritance : that be not impossible , though certainly costly . my mother could not leave her eld son without a maintenance , whatever our quarrel might be . I have health , strength , good wit , some friend , and reputation above all , my famous tragedy , which the manager have promise to perform , and upon the proceed of this I count for my present support . what become of the arithmetic of youth ? how do we then calculate that a hundred pound be a maintenance , and a thousand a fortune ? how do I dare play against Fortune with such odd ? I succeed , I remember , in convince my dear General , and he leave home convince that his son - in - law have for the present necessity at least a score of hundred pound at his command . he and his dear Molly have begin life with less , and the raven have somehow always feed they . as for the woman , the question of poverty be one of pleasure to those sentimental soul , and Aunt Lambert , for her part , declare it would be wicked and irreligious to doubt of a provision be make for her child . be the righteous ever forsake ? do the just man ever have to beg his bread ? she know well than that ! " no , no , my dear ! I be not go to be afraid on that account , I warrant you ! look at I and my General ! " 
 Theo believe all I say and wish to believe myself . so we actually begin life upon a capital of five act , and about three hundred pound of ready money in hand ! 
 well , the time of the appearance of the famous tragedy draw near , and my friend canvass the town to get a body of supporter for the opening night . I be ill at ask favour from the great ; but when my Lord Wrotham come to London , I go , with Theo in my hand , to wait on his lordship , who receive we kindly , out of regard for his old friend , her father though he good - naturedly shake a finger at I   at which my little wife hang down her head , for have steal a march on the good General . however , he would do his good for her father 's daughter ; hop for a success ; say he have hear great thing of the piece ; and engage a number of place for himself and his friend . but this patron secure , I have no other . " Mon cher , at my age , " say the Baroness , " I should bore myself to death at a tragedy : but I will do my good ; and I will certainly send my people to the box . yes ! case in his good black look like a nobleman ; and Brett in one of my gown have a faux air de moi which be quite distinguish . put down my name for two in the front box . good - bye , my dear . Bonne chance ! " the Dowager Countess present compliment   on the back of the nine of club , have a card - party that night , and be quite sorry she and Fanny could not go to my tragedy . as for my uncle and Lady Warrington , they be out of the question . after the affair of the sedan - chair I might as well have ask Queen Elizabeth to go to Drury Lane . these be all my friend that host of aristocratic connexion about whom poor Sampson have brag ; and on the strength of whom , the manager , as he say , have give Mr. Hagan his engagement ! " where be my Lord Bute ? have I not promise his lordship should come ? " he ask , snappishly , take snuff   how different from the brisk , and engaging , and obsequious little manager of six month ago !   " I promise Lord Bute should come ? " 
 " yes , " say Mr. Garrick , " and her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales , and his Majesty too . " 
 Poor Sampson own that he , buoy up by vain hope , have promise the appearance of these august personage . 
 the next day , at rehearsal , matter be bad still , and the manager in a fury . 
 " great heaven , sir ! " say he , " into what a pretty guet - a - pen have you lead I ! look at that letter , sir ! read that letter ! " and he hand I one : 
 " MY DEAR SIR "   say the letter   " I have see his lordship , and convey to he Mr. Warrington 's request that he would honour the tragedy of Pocahontas by his presence . his lordship be a patron of the drama , and a magnificent friend of all the liberal art ; but he desire I to say that he can not think of attend himself , much less of ask his Gracious Master to witness the performance of a play , a principal part in which be give to an actor who have make a clandestine marriage with a daughter of one of his Majesty 's nobility . your well - wisher , saunder MCDUFF . " 
 " Mr. D. Garrick , at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane . " 
 my poor Theo have a nice dinner wait for I after the rehearsal . I plead fatigue as the reason for look so pale : I do not dare to convey to she this dreadful news . 




 CHAPTER LXXX . Pocahontas 

 the english public not be so well acquainted with the history of Pocahontas as we of Virginia , who still love the memory of that simple and kindly creature , Mr. Warrington , at the suggestion of his friend , make a little ballad about this indian princess , which be print in the magazine a few day before the appearance of the tragedy . this proceed Sampson and I consider to be very artful and ingenious . " it be like ground - bait , sir , " say the enthusiastic parson , " and you will see the fish rise in multitude , on the great day ! " he and Spencer declare that the poem be discuss and admire at several coffee - house in their hearing , and that it have be attribute to Mr. Mason , Mr. Cowper of the Temple , and even to the famous Mr. Gray . I believe poor Sam have himself set abroad these report ; and , if Shakspeare have be name as the author of the tragedy , would have declare Pocahontas to be one of the poet 's good performance . I make acquaintance with brave Captain Smith , as a boy in my grandfather 's library at home , where I remember how I would sit at the good old man 's knee , with my favourite volume on my own , spell out the exploit of our virginian hero . I love to read of Smith 's travel , suffering , captivity , escape , not only in America but Europe . I become a child again almost as I take from the shelf before I in England the familiar volume , and all sort of recollection of my early home come crowd over my mind . the old grandfather would make picture for I of Smith do battle with the Turks on the Danube , or lead out by our indian savage to death . ah , what a terrific fight be that in which he be engage with the three turkish champion , and how I use to delight over the story of his combat with Bonny Molgro , the last and most dreadful of the three ! what a name Bonny Molgro be , and with what a prodigious turban , scimitar , and whisker we represent he ! have slay and take off the head of his first two enemy , Smith and Bonny Molgro meet , fall to   say my favourite old book   " with their battle - axis , whose pierce bill make sometimes the one , sometimes the other , to have scarce sense to keep their saddle : especially the Christian receive such a wound that he lose his battle - axe , whereat the suppose conquer Turke have a great shout from the rampire . yet , by the readinesse of his horse , and his great judgment and dexteritie , he not only avoid the Turke 's blow , but , have draw his falchion , so pierce the Turke under the cutlet , through back and body , that though hee alight from his horse , he stand not long ere hee lose his head as the rest have do . in reward for which deed , Duke Segismundus give he 3 Turke 's head in a shield for arme and 300 duckat yeerely for a pension . " disdain time and place   with that daring which be the privilege of poet   in my tragedy , Smith be make to perform similar exploit on the bank of our Potomac and James 's river . our " ground - bait " verse , run thus : 
  " POCAHONTAS 

  " wearied arm and broken sword 
  wage in vain the desperate fight 
  Round he press the countless horde , 
  he be but a single knight . 
  Hark ! a cry of triumph shrill 
  through the wilderness resound , 
  as , with twenty bleed wound , 
  sink the warrior , fight still . 

  " now they heap the fatal pyre , 
  and the torch of death they light 
  ah ! ' tis hard to die of fire ! 
  who will shield the captive knight ? 
  round the stake with fiendish cry 
  Wheel and dance the savage crowd , 
  cold the victim 's mien and proud , 
  and his breast be bared to die . 

  " who will shield the fearless heart ? 
  who avert the murderous blade ? 
  from the throng , with sudden start , 
  see , there spring an Indian maid . 
  Quick she stand before the knight , 
  ' loose the chain , unbind the ring , 
  I be daughter of the king , 
  and I claim the indian right ! ' 

  " dauntlessly aside she fling 
  lift axe and thirsty knife ; 
  fondly to his heart she cling , 
  and her bosom guard his life ! 
  in the wood of Powhattan , 
  still ' tis tell , by indian fire , 
  how a daughter of their sire 
  save the captive Englishman . " 
 I need not describe at length the plot of my tragedy , as my child can take it down from the shelf any day and peruse it for themselves . nor shall I , let I add , be in a hurry to offer to read it again to my young folk , since Captain Miles and the parson both choose to fall asleep last Christmas , when , at mamma 's request , I read aloud a couple of act . but any person have a moderate acquaintance with play and novel can soon , out of the above sketch , fill out a picture to his liking . an indian king ; a love princess , and her attendant , in love with the british captain 's servant ; a traitor in the English fort ; a brave indian warrior , himself entertain an unhappy passion for Pocahontas ; a medicine - man and priest of the Indians   very well play by Palmer , capable of every treason , stratagem , and crime , and bend upon the torture and death of the English prisoner ; these , with the accident of the wilderness , the war - dance and cry   which Gumbo have learn to mimic very accurately from the red people at home , and the arrival of the english fleet , with allusion to the late glorious victory in Canada , and the determination of Britons ever to rule and conquer in America , some of we not unnaturally think might contribute to the success of our tragedy . 
 but I have mention the ill omen which precede the day : the difficulty which a peevish , and jealous , and timid management throw in the way of the piece , and the violent prejudice which be feel against it in certain high quarter . what wonder then , I ask , that Pocahontas should have turn out not to be a victory ? I laugh to scorn the malignity of the critic who find fault with the performance . pretty critic , forsooth , who say that Carpezan be a masterpiece , whilst a far superior and more elaborate work receive only their sneer ! I insist on it that Hagan act his part so admirably that a certain actor and manager of the theatre might well be jealous of he ; and that , but for the cabal make outside , the piece would have succeed . the order have be give that the play should not succeed ; so at least Sampson declare to I . " the house swarm with Macs , by George , and they should have the gallery wash with brimstone , " the honest fellow swore , and always vow that Mr. Garrick himself would not have have the piece succeed for the world ; and be never in such a rage as during that grand scene in the second act , where Smith   poor Hagan   be bind to the stake , Pocahontas come and save he , and when the whole house be thrill with applause and sympathy . 
 anybody who have curiosity sufficient , may refer to the publish tragedy   in the octavo form , or in the subsequent splendid quarto edition of my Collected Works , and Poems Original and Translated , and say whether the scene be without merit , whether the verse be not elegant , the language rich and noble ? one of the cause of the failure be my actual fidelity to history . I have copy myself at the Museum , and tint neatly , a figure of Sir Walter Raleigh in a frill and beard ; and   my dear Theo give some of her mother 's good lace for the ruff   we dress Hagan accurately after this drawing , and no man could look well . Miss Pritchard as Pocahontas , I dress too as a Red Indian , have see enough of that costume in my own experience at home . will it be believe the house titter when she first appear ? they get use to she , however , but just at the moment when she rush into the prisoner 's arm , and a number of people be actually in tear , a fellow in the pit bawl out , " Bedad ! here be the Belle Savage kiss the saracen 's head ; " on which an impertinent roar of laughter spring up in the pit , break out with fitful explosion during the remainder of the performance . as the wag in Mr. Sheridan 's amusing Critic admirably say about the morning gun , the playwright be not content with one of they , but must fire two or three ; so with this wretched pothouse joke of the Belle Savage   the ignorant people not know that Pocahontas herself be the very Belle Sauvage from whom the tavern take its name ! . my friend of the pit repeat it ad nauseam during the performance , and as each new character appear , salute he by the name of some tavern for instance , the english governor   with a long beard   he call the Goat and Boots ; his lieutenant   Barker , whose face certainly be broad , the Bull and Mouth , and so on ! and the curtain descend amidst a shrill storm of whistle and hiss , which especially assail poor Hagan every time he open his lip . Sampson see Master Will in the green box , with some pretty acquaintance of his , and have no doubt that the treacherous scoundrel be one of the ringleader in the conspiracy . " I would have fling he over into the pit , " the faithful fellow say   and Sampson be man enough to execute his threat , " but I see a couple of Mr. Nadab 's follower prowl about the lobby , and be oblige to sheer off . " and so the egg we have count on sell at market be break , and our poor hope lie shatter before we ! 
 I look in at the house from the stage before the curtain be lift , and see it pretty well fill , especially remark Mr. Johnson in the front box , in a laced waistcoat , have his friend Mr. Reynolds by his side ; the latter could not hear , and the former could not see , and so they come good - naturedly a deux to form an opinion of my poor tragedy . I could see Lady Maria   I know the hood she wear   in the low gallery , where she once more have the opportunity of sit and look at her beloved actor perform a principal character in a piece . as for Theo , she fairly own that , unless I order she , she have rather not be present , nor have I any such command to give , for , if thing go wrong , I know that to see her suffer would be intolerable pain to myself , and so acquiesced in her desire to keep away . 
 be of a pretty equanimous disposition , and , as I flatter myself , able to bear good or evil fortune without disturbance , I myself , after take a light dinner at the Bedford , go to the theatre a short while before the commencement of the play , and propose to remain there , until the defeat or victory be decide . I own now , I could not help see which way the fate of the day be likely to turn . there be something gloomy and disastrous in the general aspect of all thing around . Miss Pritchard have the headache : the barber who bring home Hagan 's wig have powder it like a wretch : amongst the gentleman and lady in the greenroom , I see none but doubtful face : and the manager   a very flippant , not to say impertinent gentleman , in my opinion , and who himself on that night look as dismal as a mute at a funeral   have the insolence to say to I , " for Heaven 's sake , Mr. Warrington , go and get a glass of punch at the Bedford , and do not   frighten we all here by your dismal countenance ! " 
 " Sir , " say I , " I have a right , for five shilling , to comment upon your face , but I never give you any authority to make remark upon mine . " " Sir , " say he in a pet , " I most heartily wish I have never see your face at all ! " " your , sir ! " say I , " have often amuse I greatly ; and when paint for Abel Drugger be exceedingly comic " and indeed I have always do Mr. G. the justice to think that in low comedy he be unrivalle . I make he a bow , and walk off to the coffee - house , and for five year after never speak a word to the gentleman , when he apologise to I , at a nobleman 's house where we chance to meet . I say I have utterly forget the circumstance to which he allude , and that , on the first night of a play , no doubt author and manager be flurry alike . and add , " after all , there be no shame in not be make for the theatre . Mr. Garrick you be . " a compliment with which he appear to be as well pleased as I intend he should . 
 Fidus Achates run over to I at the end of the first act to say that all thing be go pretty well ; though he confess to the titter in the house upon Miss Pritchard 's first appearance , dress exactly like an indian princess . 
 " I can not help it , Sampson , " say I   fill he a bumper of good punch , " if Indians be dress so . " 
 " why , " say he , " would you have have Caractacus paint blue like an ancient Briton , or Bonduca with nothing but a cow - skin ? " and indeed it may be that the fidelity to history be the cause of the ridicule cast on my tragedy , in which case I , for one , be not ashamed of its defeat . 
 after the second act , my aide - de - camp come from the field with dismal news indeed . I do not   know how it be that , nervous before action , in disaster I become pretty cool and cheerful .   the writer seem to contradict himself here , have just boast of possess a pretty equanimous disposition . he be probably mistake in his own estimate of himself , as other folk have be besides.-ED .   " be thing go ill ? " say I. I call for my reckoning , put on my hat , and march to the theatre as calmly as if I be go to dine at the Temple ; fidus achate walk by my side , press my elbow , kick the link - boy out of the way , and cry , " by George , Mr. Warrington , you be a man of spirit a Trojan , sir ! " so , there be man of spirit in Troy ; but alas ! fate be too strong for they . 
 at any rate , no man can say that I do not bear my misfortune with calmness : I could no more help the clamour and noise of the audience than a captain can help the howling and hiss of the storm in which his ship go down . but I be determined that the rush wave and broken mast should impavidum ferient , and flatter myself that I bear my calamity without flinch . " not Regulus , my dear madam , could step into his barrel more coolly , " Sampson say to my wife . ' tis unjust to say of man of the parasitic nature that they be unfaithful in misfortune . whether I be prosperous or poor , the wild parson be equally true and friendly , and share our crust as eagerly as ever he have partake of our well fortune . 
 I take my place on the stage , whence I could see the actor of my poor piece , and a portion of the audience who condemn I . I suppose the performer give I a wide berth out of pity for I . I must say that I think I be as little move as any spectator ; and that no one would have judge from my mien that I be the unlucky hero of the night . 
 but my dear Theo , when I go home , look so pale and white , that I see from the dear creature 's countenance that the knowledge of my disaster have precede my return . Spencer , Sampson , cousin Hagan , and Lady Maria be to come after the play , and congratulate the author , God wot !   Poor Miss Pritchard be engage to we likewise , but send word that I must understand that she be a great deal too unwell to sup that night .   my friend the gardener of Bedford House have give my wife his good flower to decorate her little table . there they be ; the poor little paint standard and the battle lose ! I have bear the defeat well enough , but as I look at the sweet pale face of the wife across the table , and those artless trophy of welcome which she have set up for her hero , I confess my courage give way , and my heart feel a pang almost as keen as any that ever have smite it . 
 our meal , it may be imagine , be dismal enough , nor be it render much gayer by the talk we strove to carry on . Old Mrs. Hagan be , luckily , very ill at this time ; and her disease , and the incident connect with it , a great blessing to we . then we have his Majesty 's approach marriage , about which there be a talk .   how well I remember the most futile incident of the day down to a tune which a carpenter be whistle by my side at the playhouse , just before the dreary curtain fall !   then we talk about the death of good Mr. Richardson , the author of Pamela and Clarissa , whose work we all admire exceedingly . and as we talk about Clarissa , my wife take on herself to wipe her eye once or twice , and say , faintly , " you know , my love , mamma and I could never help cry over that dear book . oh , my dearest , dear mother "   she add , " how I wish she could be with I now ! " this be an occasion for more open tear , for of course a young lady may naturally weep for her absent mother . and then we mix a gloomy bowl with Jamaica lime , and drink to the health of his Excellency the Governor : and then , for a second toast , I fill a bumper , and , with a smile face , drink to " our well fortune ! " 
 this be too much . the two woman fling themselves into each other 's arm , and irrigate each other 's neck - handkerchief with tear . " oh , Maria ! be not be not my George good and kind ? " sob Theo . " look at my Hagan how great , how godlike he be in his part ! " gasp Maria . " it be a beastly cabal which throw he over and I could plunge this knife into Mr. Garrick 's black heart the odious little wretch ! " and she grasp a weapon at her side . but throw it presently down , the enthusiastic creature rush up to her lord and master , fling her arm round he , and embrace he in the presence of the little company . 
 I be not sure whether some one else do not do likewise . we be all in a state of extreme excitement and enthusiasm . in the midst of grief , Love the consoler appear amongst we , and soothe we with such fond blandishment and tender caress , that one scarce wish the calamity away . two or three day afterwards , on our birthday , a letter be bring I in my study , which contain the follow line : 
  " from POCAHONTAS 

  " return from the cruel fight 
  how pale and faint appear my knight ! 
  he see I anxious at his side ; 
  ' why seek , my love , your wound to hide ? 
  or deem your english girl afraid 
  to emulate the Indian maid ? ' 

  " be mine my husband 's grief to cheer , 
  in peril to be ever near ; 
  Whate'er of ill or woe betide , 
  to bear it cling at his side ; 
  the poisoned stroke of fate to ward , 
  his bosom with my own to guard ; 
  ah ! could it spare a pang to his , 
  it could not know a purer bliss ! 
  ' twould gladden as it feel the smart , 
  and thank the hand that fling the dart ! " 
 I do not say the verse be very good , but that I like they as well as if they be and that the face of the writer   whose sweet young voice I fancy I can hear as I hum the line , when I go into her drawing - room after get the letter , and when I see her blushing and blessing I seem to I more beautiful than any I can fancy out of Heaven . 




 CHAPTER LXXXI . Res Angusta Domi 

 I have already describe my present feeling as an elderly gentleman , regard that rash jump into matrimony , which I persuade my dear partner to take with I when we be both scarce out of our teen . as a man and a father with a due sense of the necessity of mutton chop , and the importance of pay the baker with a pack of rash child round about we who might be run off to Scotland to - morrow , and plead papa 's and mamma 's example for their impertinence , I know that I ought to be very cautious in narrate this early part of the married life of George Warrington , Esquire , and Theodosia his wife to call out mea culpa , and put on a demure air , and , sit in my comfortable easy - chair here , profess to be in a white sheet and on the stool of repentance , offer myself up as a warning to imprudent and hot - head youth . 
 but , truth to say , that married life , regard which my dear relative prophesy so gloomily , have disappoint all those prudent and respectable people . it have have its trial ; but I can remember they without bitterness its passionate grief , of which time , by God 's kind ordinance , have be the benign consoler its day of poverty , which we bore , who endure it , to the wonder of our sympathise relative look on its precious reward and blessing , so great that I scarce dare to whisper they to this page ; to speak of they , save with awful respect and to one ear , to which be offer up the prayer and thank of all man . to marry without a competence be wrong and dangerous , no doubt , and a crime against our social code ; but do not score of thousand of our fellow - being commit the crime every year with no other trust but in , Heaven , health , and their labour ? be young people enter into the married life not to take hope into account , nor dare to begin their housekeeping until the cottage be completely furnish , the cellar and larder stock , the cupboard full of plate , and the strong - box of money ? the increase and multiplication of the world would stop , be the law which regulate the genteel part of it to be make universal . our gentlefolk tremble at the brink in their silk stocking and pump , and wait for whole year , until they find a bridge or a gilt barge to carry they across ; our poor do not fear to wet their bare foot , plant they in the brook , and trust to fate and strength to bear they over . who would like to consign his daughter to poverty ? who would counsel his son to undergo the countless risk of poor married life , to remove the beloved girl from comfort and competence , and subject she to debt , misery , privation , friendlessness , sickness , and the hundred gloomy consequence of the res angusta domi ? I look at my own wife and ask her pardon for have impose a task so fraught with pain and danger upon one so gentle . I think of the trial she endure , and be thankful for they and for that unfailing love and constancy with which God bless she and strengthen she to bear they all . on this question of marriage , I be not a fair judge : my own be so imprudent and have be so happy , that I must not dare to give young people counsel . I have endure poverty , but scarcely ever find it otherwise than tolerable : have I not undergone it , I never could have know the kindness of friend , the delight of gratitude , the surprising joy and consolation which sometimes accompany the scanty meal and narrow fire , and cheer the long day 's labour . this at least be certain , in respect of the lot of the decent poor , that a great deal of superfluous pity be often throw away upon it . good - natured fine folk , who sometimes step out of the sunshine of their rich into a narrow obscurity , be blind as it be , whilst we could see quite cheerfully and clearly : they stumble over obstacle which be none to we : they be surprised at the resignation with which we drink small beer , and that we could heartily say grace over such very cold mutton . 
 the good General , my father - in - law , have marry his Molly , when he be a subaltern of a foot regiment , and have a purse scarce well fill than my own . they have have their up and down of fortune . I think   though my wife will never confess to this point   they have marry , as people could do in their young time , without previously ask papa 's and mamma 's leave .   the Editor have look through Burn 's Registers of Fleet Marriages without find the name of Martin Lambert and Mary Benson .   at all event , they be so well pleased with their own good luck in matrimony , that they do not grudge their child 's , and be by no mean frighten at the idea of any little hardship which we in the course of our married life might be call upon to undergo . and I suppose when I make my own pecuniary statement to Mr. Lambert , I be anxious to deceive both of we . believe I to be master of a couple of thousand pound , he go to Jamaica quite easy in his mind as to his darling daughter 's comfort and maintenance , at least for some year to come . after pay the expense of his family 's outfit , the worthy man go away not much rich than his son - in - law ; and a few trinket , and some lace of Aunt Lambert 's , with twenty new guineas in a purse which her mother and sister make for she , be my Theo 's marriage portion . but in value my stock , I choose to count as a good debt a sum which my honoured mother never could be get to acknowledge up to the day when the resolute old lady be call to pay the last debt of all . the sum I have disburse for she , she argue , be spend for the improvement and maintenance of the estate which be to be mine at her decease . what money she could spare be to be for my poor brother , who have nothing , who would never have spend his own mean have he not imagine himself to be sole heir of the virginian property , as he would have be the good lady take care to emphasise this point in many of her letter but for a half - hour 's accident of birth . he be now distinguish himself in the service of his king and country . to purchase his promotion be his mother 's , she should suppose his brother 's duty ! when I have finish my bar - study and my dramatic amusement , Madam Esmond inform I that I be welcome to return home and take that place in our colony to which my birth entitle I . this statement she communicate to I more than once through Mountain , and before the news of my marriage have reach she . 
 there be no need to recall her expression of maternal indignation when she be inform of the step I have take . on the pacification of Canada , my dear Harry ask for leave of absence , and dutifully pay a visit to Virginia . he write , describe his reception at home , and the splendid entertainment which my mother make in honour of her son . Castlewood , which she have not inhabit since our departure for Europe , be throw open again to our friend of the colony ; and the friend of Wolfe , and the soldier of Quebec , be receive by all our acquaintance with every become honour . some dismal quarrel , to be sure , ensue , because my brother persist in maintain his friendship with Colonel Washington , of Mount Vernon , whose praise Harry never be tired of singing . indeed I allow the gentleman every virtue ; and in the struggle which terminate so fatally for England a few year since , I can admire as well as his warm friend , General Washington 's glorious constancy and success . 
 if these battle between Harry and our mother be frequent , as , in his letter , he describe they to be , I wonder , for my part , why he should continue at home ? one reason naturally suggest itself to my mind , which I scarcely like to communicate to Mrs. Warrington ; for we have both talk over our dear little Hetty 's romantic attachment for my brother , and wonder that he have never discover it . I need not say , I suppose , that my gentleman have find some young lady at home more to his taste than our dear hester , and hence account for his prolonged stay in Virginia . 
 presently there come , in a letter from he , not a full confession but an admission of this interesting fact . a person be describe , not name a be all beauty and perfection , like other young lady under similar circumstance . my wife ask to see the letter : I could not help show it , and hand it to she , with a very sad face . to my surprise she read it , without exhibit any corresponding sorrow of her own . 
 " I have think of this before , my love , " I say . " I feel with you for your disappointment regard poor Hetty . " 
 " ah ! poor Hetty , " say Theo , look down at the carpet . 
 " it would never have do , " say I. 
 " no they would not have be happy , " sigh Theo . 
 " how strange he never should have find out her secret ! " I continue . 
 she look I full in the face with an odd expression . " pray , what do that look mean ? " I ask . 
 " nothing , my dear nothing ! only I be not surprised ! " say Theo , blush . 
 " what , " I ask , " can there be another ? " 
 " I be sure I never say so , George , " say the lady , hurriedly . " but if Hetty have overcome her childish folly , ought we not all to be glad ? do you gentleman suppose that you only be to fall in love and grow tired , indeed ? " 
 " what ! " I say , with a strange commotion of my mind . " do you mean to tell I , Theo , that you ever care for any one but I ? " 
 " oh , George , " she whimper , " when I be at school , there be there be one of the boy of Doctor Backhouse 's school , who sate in the loft next to we ; and I think he have lovely eye , and I be so shocked when I recognise he behind the counter at Mr. Grigg 's the mercer 's , when I go to buy a cloak for baby , and I want to tell you , my dear , and I do not   know how ! " 
 I go to see this creature with the lovely eye , have make my wife describe the fellow 's dress to I , and I see a little bandy - legged wretch in a blue camlet coat , with his red hair tie with a dirty ribbon , about whom I forbear generously even to reproach my wife ; nor will she ever know that I have look at the fellow , until she read the confession in this page . if our wife see we as we be , I think , would they love we as they do ? be we as much mistaken in they , as they in we ? I look into one candid face at least , and think it never have deceive I . 
 lest I should encourage my young people to an imitation of my own imprudence , I will not tell they with how small a capital Mrs. Theo and I commence life . the unfortunate tragedy bring we nothing ; though the reviewer , since its publication of late , have speak not unfavourably as to its merit , and Mr. Kemble himself have do I the honour to commend it . our kind friend Lord Wrotham be for have the piece publish by subscription , and send I a bank - note , with a request that I would let he have a hundred copy for his friend ; but I be always averse to that method of levy money , and , prefer my poverty sine dote , lock up my manuscript , with my poor girl 's verse insert at the first page . I know not why the piece should have give such offence at court , except for the fact that an actor who have run off with an earl 's daughter , perform a principal part in the play ; but I be tell that sentiment which I have put into the mouth of some of the indian character   who be make to declaim against ambition , the british desire of rule , and so forth , be pronounce dangerous and unconstitutional ; so that the little hope of royal favour , which I might have have , be quite take away from I . 
 what be to be do ? a few month after the failure of the tragedy , as I count up the remain of my fortune   the calculation be not long or difficult , I come to the conclusion that I must beat a retreat out of my pretty apartment in Bloomsbury , and so give warning to our good landlady , inform she that my wife 's health require that we should have lodging in the country . but we go no far than Lambeth , our faithful Gumbo and molly follow we ; and here , though as poor as might be , we be wait on by a maid and a lackey in livery , like any folk of condition . you may be sure kind relative cry out against our extravagance ; indeed , be they not the people who find our fault out for we , and proclaim they to the rest of the world ? 
 return home from London one day , whither I have be on a visit to some bookseller , I recognise the family arm and livery on a grand gilt chariot which stand before a public - house near to our lodging . a few loitering inhabitant be gather round the splendid vehicle , and look with awe at the footman , resplendent in the sun , and quaff blaze pot of beer . I find my Lady Castlewood seat opposite to my wife in our little apartment   whence we have a very bright , pleasant prospect of the river , cover with barge and wherry , and the ancient tower and tree of the Archbishop 's palace and garden , and Mrs. Theo , who have a very droll way of describe person and scene , narrate to I all the particular of her ladyship 's conversation , when she take she leave . 
 " I have be here this ever - so - long , " say the Countess , " gossip with cousin Theo , while you have be away at the coffee - house , I dare say , make merry with your friend , and drink your punch and coffee . guess she must find it rather lonely here , with nothing to do but work they little cap and hem they frock . never mind , dear ; reckon you will soon have a companion who will amuse you when cousin George be away at his coffee - house ! what a nice lodging you have get here , I do declare ! our new house which we have take be twenty time as big , and cover with gold from top to bottom ; but I like this quite as well . bless you be rich be no well than be poor . when we live to Albany , and I do most all the work myself , scour the room , bile the kettle , help the wash , and all , I be just as happy as I be now . we only have one old negro to keep the store . why do not   you sell Gumbo , cousin George ? he be not   no use here idle and dawdle about , and make love to the servant - girl . Fogh ! guess they be not   particular , these english people ! " so she talk , rattle on with perfect good - humour , until her hour for departure come ; when she produce a fine repeat watch , and say it be time for she to pay a call upon her Majesty at Buckingham House . " and mind you come to we , George , " say her ladyship , wave a little parting hand out of the gilt coach . " Theo and I have settle all about it . " 
 " here , at least , " say I , when the laced footman have clamber up behind the carriage , and our magnificent little patroness have leave we ; " here be one who be not afraid of our poverty , nor ashamed to remember she own . " 
 " Ashamed ! " say Theo , resume her lilliputian needlework . " to do her justice , she would make herself at home in any kitchen or palace in the world . she have give I and molly twenty lesson in housekeeping . she say , when she be at home to Albany , she roast , bake , sweep the house , and milk the cow . "   Madam Theo pronounce the word cow archly in our american way , and imitate her ladyship 's accent very divertingly . 
 " and she have no pride , " I add . " it be good - natured of she to ask we to dine with she and my lord . when will Uncle Warrington ever think of offer we a crust again , or a glass of his famous beer ? " 
 " yes , it be not ill - natured to invite we , " say Theo , slily . " but , my dear , you do not   know all the condition ! " and then my wife , still imitate the Countess 's manner , laughingly inform I what these condition be . " she take out her pocket - book , and tell I , " say Theo , " what day she be engage abroad and at home . on Monday she receive a Duke and a Duchess , with several other member of my lord 's house , and their lady . on Tuesday come more earl , two bishop , and an ambassador . ' of course you will not   come on they day ? ' say the Countess . ' now you be so poor , you know , that fine company be not   no good for you . Lord bless you ! father never dine on our company day ! he do not   like it ; he take a bit of cold meat anyways . ' on which , " say Theo , laugh , " I tell she that Mr. Warrington do not care for any but the good of company , and propose that she should ask we on some day when the Archbishop of Canterbury din with she , and his grace must give we a lift home in his coach to Lambeth . and she be an economical little person , too , " continue Theo . " ' I think of bring with I some of my baby 's cap and thing , which his lordship have outgrow them , but they may be want again , you know , my dear . ' and so we lose that addition to our wardrobe , " say Theo , smile , " and Molly and I must do our good without her ladyship 's charity . ' when people be poor , they be poor , ' the Countess say , with her usual outspokenness , ' and must get on the good they can . what we shall do for that poor Maria , goodness only know ! we can not   ask she to see we as we can you , though you be so poor : but an earl 's daughter to marry a play - actor ! La , my dear , it be dreadful : his Majesty and the Princess have both speak of it ! every other noble family in this kingdom as have ever hear of it pity we ; though I have a plan for help those poor unhappy people , and have send down simon , my groom of the chamber , to tell they on it . ' this plan be , that Hagan , who have keep almost all his term at Dublin College , should return thither and take his degree , and enter into holy order , ' when we will provide he with a chaplaincy at home , you know , ' Lady Castlewood add . " and I may mention here , that this benevolent plan be execute a score of month later ; when I be enable myself to be of service to Mr. Hagan , who be one of the kind and good of our friend during our own time of want and distress . Castlewood then execute his promise loyally enough , get order and a colonial appointment for Hagan , who distinguish himself both as soldier and preacher , as we shall presently hear ; but not a guinea do his lordship spare to aid either his sister or his kinsman in their trouble . I never ask he , thank Heaven , to assist I in my own ; though , to do he justice , no man could express himself more amiably , and with a joy which I believe be quite genuine , when my day of poverty be end . 
 as for my Uncle Warrington , and his virtuous wife and daughter , let I do they justice likewise , and declare that throughout my period of trial , their sorrow at my poverty be consistent and unvarying . I still have a few acquaintance who see they , and of course   as friend will   bring I a report of their opinion and conversation ; and I never could hear that my relative have utter one single good word about I or my wife . they speak even of my tragedy as a crime I be accustomed to hear that sufficiently malign of the author as a miserable reprobate , for ever reel about Grub Street , in rag and squalor . they hold I out no hand of help . my poor wife might cry in her pain , but they have no twopence to bestow upon she . they go to church a half - dozen time in the week . they subscribe to many public charity . their tribe be know eighteen hundred year ago , and will flourish as long as man endure . they will still thank Heaven that they be not as other folk be ; and leave the wounded and miserable to other succour . 
 I do not   care to recall the dreadful doubt and anxiety which begin to beset I ; the plan after plan which I try , and in which I fail , for procure work and add to our dwindle stock of money . I bethink I of my friend Mr. Johnson , and when I think of the eager kindness with which he receive I , be ashamed of some pert speech which I own to have make regard his manner and behaviour . I tell my story and difficulty to he , the circumstance of my marriage , and the prospect before I . he would not for a moment admit they be gloomy , or , si male nunc , that they would continue to be so . I have before I the chance , certainly very slender , of a place in England ; the inheritance which must be mine in the course of nature , or at any rate would fall to the heir I be expect . I have a small stock of money for present actual necessity a possibility , " though , to be free with you , sir "   say he , " after the performance of your tragedy , I doubt whether nature have endow you with those peculiar quality which be necessary for achieve a remarkable literary success " and finally a submission to the maternal rule , and a return to Virginia , where plenty and a home be always ready for I . " why , sir ! " he cry , ' such a sum as you mention would have be a fortune to I when I begin the world , and my friend Mr. Goldsmith would set up a coach - and - six on it . with youth , hope , to - day , and a couple of hundred pound in cash no young fellow need despair . think , sir , you have a year at least before you , and who know what may chance between now and then . why , sir , your relative here may provide for you , or you may succeed to your virginian property , or you may come into a fortune ! " I do not in the course of that year , but he do . my Lord Bute give Mr. Johnson a pension , which set all Grub Street in a fury against the recipient , who , to be sure , have publish his own not very flattering opinion upon pension and pensioner . 
 nevertheless , he do not altogether discourage my literary project , promise to procure I work from the bookseller , and faithfully perform that kind promise . " but , " say he , ' sir , you must not appear amongst they in forma pauperis . have you never a friend 's coach , in which we can ride to see they ? you must put on your well laced hat and waistcoat ; and we must appear , sir , as if we be do they a favour . " this stratagem answer , and procure I respect enough at the first visit or two ; but when the bookseller know that I want to be pay for my work , their back refuse to bend any more , and they treat I with a familiarity which I could ill stomach . I overhear one of they , who have be a footman , say , " oh , it be Pocahontas , be it ? let he wait . " and he tell his boy to say as much to I . " wait , sir ? " say I , fume with rage and put my head into his parlour , " I be not accustomed to waiting , but I have hear you be . " and I stride out of the shop into Pall Mall in a mighty fluster . 
 and yet Mr. D. be in the right . I come to he , if not to ask a favour , at any rate to propose a bargain , and surely it be my business to wait his time and convenience . in more fortunate day I ask the gentleman 's pardon , and the kind author of the Muse in Livery be instantly appease . 
 I be more prudent , or Mr. Johnson more fortunate , in an application elsewhere , and Mr. Johnson procure I a little work from the bookseller in translate from foreign language , of which I happen to know two or three . by a hard day 's labour I could earn a few shilling ; so few that a week 's work would hardly bring I a guinea : and that be fling to I with insolent patronage by the low huckster who employ I . I can put my finger upon two or three magazine article write at this period , and pay for with a few wretched shilling , which paper as I read they awaken in I the keen pang of bitter remembrance .   Mr. George Warrington , of the Upper Temple , say he remember a book , contain his grandfather 's book - plate , in which be paste various extract from review and newspaper in an old type , and letter outside Les Chains de l'Esclavage . these be no doubt the contribution above mention ; but the volume have not be find , either in the town - house or in the library at Warrington Manor . the Editor , by the way , be not answerable for a certain inconsistency , which may be remark in the narrative . the writer say early , that he speak without bitterness of past time , and presently fall into a fury with they . the same manner of forgive our enemy be not uncommon in the present century .   I recall the doubt and fear which agitate I , see the dear wife nurse her infant and look up into my face with hypocritical smile that vainly try to mask her alarm : the struggle of pride be fight over again : the wound under which I smart re - open . there be some act of injustice commit against I which I do not   know how to forgive ; and which , whenever I think of they , awaken in I the same feeling of revolt and indignation . the gloom and darkness gather over I till they be relieve by a reminiscence of that love and tenderness which through all gloom and darkness have be my light and consolation . 




 CHAPTER LXXXII . Miles 's Moidore 

 Little Miles make his appearance in this world within a few day of the gracious Prince who command his regiment . illumination and cannonading salute the Royal George 's birth , multitude be admit to see he as he lie behind a gilt rail at the Palace with noble nurse watch over he . few nurse guard the cradle of our little Prince ; no courtier , no faithful retainer salute it , except our trusty Gumbo and kind Molly , who to be sure love and admire the little heir of my poverty as loyally as our heart could desire . why be our boy not name George like the other paragon just mention , and like his father ? I give he the name of a little scapegrace of my family , a name which many generation of Warringtons have bear likewise ; but my poor little Miles 's love and kindness touch I at a time when kindness and love be rare from those of my own blood , and Theo and I agree that our child should be call after that single little friend of my paternal race . 
 we write to acquaint our royal parent with the auspicious event , and bravely insert the child 's birth in the Daily Advertiser , and the place , Church Street , Lambeth , where he be bear . " my dear , " say Aunt Bernstein , write to I in reply to my announcement , " how could you point out to all the world that you live in such a trou as that in which you have bury yourself ? I kiss the little mamma , and send a remembrance for the child . " this remembrance be a fine silk coverlid , with a lace edge fit for a prince . it be not very useful : the price of the lace would have serve we much well , but Theo and Molly be delighted with the present , and my eld son 's cradle have a cover as fine as any nobleman 's . 
 Good Dr. Heberden come over several time to visit my wife , and see that all thing go well . he know and recommend to we a surgeon in the vicinage , who take charge of she ; luckily , my dear patient need little care , beyond that which our landlady and her own trusty attendant could readily afford she . again our humble precinct be adorn with the gild apparition of Lady Castlewood 's chariot wheel ; she bring a pot of jelly , which she think Theo might like , and which , no doubt , have be serve at one of her ladyship 's banquet on a previous day . and she tell we of all the ceremony at court , and of the splendour and festivity attend the birth of the august heir to the crown ; our good Mr. Johnson happen to pay I a visit on one of those day when my lady countess 's carriage flame up to our little gate . he be not a little strike by her magnificence , and make she some bow , which be more respectful than graceful . she call I cousin very affably , and help to transfer the present of jelly from her silver dish into our crockery pan with much benignity . the Doctor taste the sweetmeat , and pronounce it to be excellent . " the great , sir , " say he , " be fortunate in every way . they can engage the most skilful practitioner of the culinary art , as they can assemble the most amiable wit round their table . if , as you think , sir , and , from the appearance of the dish , your suggestion at least be plausible , this sweetmeat may have appear already at his lordship 's table , it have be there in good company . it have quiver under the eye of celebrated beauty , it have be taste by ruby lip , it have divide the attention of the distinguished company , with fruit , tart , and cream , which I make no doubt be like itself delicious . " and so say , the good Doctor absorb a considerable portion of Lady Castlewood 's benefaction ; though as regard the epithet delicious I be bind to say , that my poor wife , after taste the jelly , put it away from she as not to she liking ; and Molly , fling up her head , declare it be mouldy . 
 my boy enjoy at least the privilege of have an earl 's daughter for his godmother ; for this office be perform by his cousin , our poor Lady Maria , whose kindness and attention to the mother and the infant be beyond all praise ; and who , have lose her own solitary chance for maternal happiness , yearn over our child in a manner not a little touching to behold . Captain Miles be a mighty fine gentleman , and his uniform of the Prince 's Hussars as splendid as any that ever bedizen a soldier of fashion ; but he hath too good a heart , and be too true a gentleman , let we trust , not to be thankful when he remember that his own infant limb be dress in some of the little garment which have be prepare for the poor player 's child . Sampson christen he in that very chapel in Southwark , where our marriage ceremony have be perform . never be the word of the Prayer - book more beautifully and impressively read than by the celebrant of the service ; except at its end , when his voice fail he , and he and the rest of the little congregation be fain to wipe their eye . " Mr. Garrick himself , sir , " say Hagan , " could not have read those word so nobly . I be sure little innocent never enter the world accompany by wish and benediction more tender and sincere . " 
 and now I have not tell how it chance that the Captain come by his name of Miles . a couple of day before his christening , when as yet I believe it be intend that our firstborn should bear his father 's name , a little patter of horse 's hoof come gallop up to our gate ; and who should pull at the bell but young Miles , our cousin ? I fear he have disobey his parent when he gallop away on that undutiful journey . 
 " you know , " say he , " cousin Harry give I my little horse ; and I can not   help like you , because you be so like Harry , and because they be always say thing of you at home , and it be a shame ; and I have bring my whistle and coral that my godmamma Lady Suckling give I , for your little boy ; and if you be so poor , cousin George , here be my gold moidore , and it be worth ever so much , and it be no use to I , because I may not   spend it , you know . " 
 we take the boy up to Theo in her room   he mount the stair in his little tramping boot , of which he be very proud ; and Theo kiss he , and thank he ; and his moidore have be in her purse from that day . 
 my mother , write through her ambassador as usual , inform I of her royal surprise and displeasure on learn that my son have be christen Miles a name not know , at least in the Esmond family . I do not care to tell the reason at the time ; but when , in after year , I tell Madam Esmond how my boy come by his name , I see a tear roll down her wrinkle cheek , and I hear afterwards that she have ask Gumbo many question about the boy who give his name to our Miles our Miles Gloriosus of Pall Mall , Valenciennes , Almack 's , Brighton . 




 CHAPTER LXXXIII . trouble and Consolations 

 in our early day at home , when Harry and I use to be so undutiful to our tutor , who would have think that Mr. Esmond Warrington of Virginia would turn Bearleader himself ? my mother   when we come together again   never could be get to speak directly of this period of my life ; but would allude to it as " that terrible time , my love , which I can not   bear to think of , " " those dreadful year when there be difference between we , " and so forth ; and though my pupil , a worthy and grateful man , send I out to Jamestown several barrel of that liquor by which his great fortune be make , Madam Esmond speak of he as " your friend in England , " " your wealthy Lambeth friend , " etc . , but never by his name ; nor do she ever taste a drop of his beer . we brew our own too at Warrington Manor , but our good Mr. Foker never fail to ship to Ipswich every year a couple of butt of his entire . his son be a young sprig of fashion , and have marry an earl 's daughter ; the father be a very worthy and kind gentleman , and it be to the luck of make his acquaintance that I owe the receipt of some of the most welcome guineas that ever I receive in my life . 
 it be not so much the sum , as the occupation and hope give I by the office of Governor , which I take on myself , which be then so precious to I . Mr. F. 's Brewery   the site have since be change   then stand near to Pedlar 's acre in Lambeth and the surgeon who attend my wife in her confinement , likewise take care of the wealthy brewer 's family . he be a Bavarian , originally name Voelker . Mr. Lance , the surgeon , I suppose , make he acquainted with my name and history . the worthy doctor would smoke many a pipe of Virginia in my garden , and have conceive an attachment for I and my family . he bring his patron to my house ; and when Mr. F. find that I have a smattering of his language , and could sing " Prinz Eugen the noble Ritter "   a song that my grandfather have bring home from the Marlborough war , the german conceive a great friendship for I : his lady put her chair and her chariot at Mrs. Warrington 's service : his little daughter take a prodigious fancy to our baby   and to do he justice , the Captain , who be as ugly a fellow now as ever wear a queue , be beautiful as an infant    the very image of the Squire at 30 , everybody say so . M. W.   Note in the MS .   : and his son and heir , Master Foker , be much maltreat at Westminster School because of his father 's profession of brewer , the parent ask if I would take charge of he ; and pay I a not insufficient sum for superintend his education . 
 Mr. F. be a shrewd man of business , and as he and his family really interest themselves in I and mine , I lay all my pecuniary affair pretty unreservedly before he ; and my statement , he be pleased to say , augment the respect and regard which he feel for I . he laugh at our story of the aid which my noble relative have give I my aunt 's coverlid , my Lady Castlewood 's mouldy jelly , Lady Warrington 's contemptuous treatment of we . but he weep many tear over the story of little Miles 's moidore ; and as for Sampson and Hagan , " I wow , " say he , " dey shall have so much beer al ever dey can drink . " he send his wife to call upon Lady Maria , and treat she with the utmost respect and obsequiousness , whenever she come to visit he . it be with Mr. Foker that Lady Maria stay when Hagan go to Dublin to complete his college term ; and the good brewer 's purse also minister to our friend 's want and supply his outfit . 
 when Mr. Foker come fully to know my own affair and position , he be pleased to speak of I with term of enthusiasm , and as if my conduct show some extraordinary virtue . I have say how my mother save money for Harry , and how the two be in my debt . but when Harry spend money , he spend it fancy it to be his ; Madam Esmond never could be make to understand she be deal hardly with I the money be pay and go , and there be an end of it . now , at the end of ' 62 , I remember Harry send over a considerable remittance for the purchase of his promotion , beg I at the same time to remember that he be in my debt , and to draw on his agent if I have any need . he do not know how great the need be , or how my little capital have be swallow . 
 well , to take my brother 's money would delay his promotion , and I naturally do not draw on he , though I own I be tempt ; nor , know my dear General Lambert 's small mean , do I care to impoverish he by ask for supply . these simple act of forbearance my worthy brewer must choose to consider as instance of exalt virtue . and what do my gentleman do but write privately to my brother in America , laud I and my wife as the most admirable of human being , and call upon Madame de Bernstein , who never tell I of his visit indeed , but who , I perceive , about this time treat we with singular respect and gentleness , that surprise I in one whom I could not but consider as selfish and worldly . in after day I remember ask he how he have gain admission to the Baroness ? he laugh : " De Baroness ! " say he . " I know de Baron when he be a walet at Munich , and I be a brewer - apprentice . " I think our family have good not be too curious about our uncle the Baron . 
 thus , the part of my life which ought to have be most melancholy be in truth make pleasant by many friend , happy circumstance , and stroke of lucky fortune . the bear I lead be a docile little cub , and dance to my piping very readily . well to lead he about , than to hang round bookseller ' door , or wait the pleasure or caprice of manager ! my wife and I , during our exile , as we may call it , spend very many pleasant evening with these kind friend and benefactor . nor be we without intellectual enjoyment ; Mrs. Foker and Mrs. Warrington sing finely together ; and sometimes when I be in the mood , I read my own play of Pocahontas , to this friendly audience , in a manner well than Hagan 's own , Mr. Foker be pleased to say . 
 after that little escapade of Miles Warrington , junior , I see nothing of he , and hear of my paternal relative but rarely . Sir Miles be assiduous at court   as I believe he would have be at Nero 's , and I laugh one day when Mr. Foker tell I that he have hear on ' change " that they be go to make my uncle a Beer . " " a beer ? " say I in wonder . " can not   you understand de vort , ven I say it ? " say the testy old gentleman . " Vell , veil , a Lort ! " Sir , Miles indeed be the obedient humble servant of the Minister , whoever he might be . I be surprised he do not speak English with a Scotch accent during the first favourite 's brief reign . I see he and his wife come from court , when Mrs. Claypool be present to her Majesty on her marriage . I have my little boy on my shoulder . my uncle and aunt star resolutely at I from their gilt coach window . the footman look blank over their nosegay . have I wear the Fairy 's cap and be invisible , my father 's brother could not have pass I with less notice . 
 we do not avail ourselves much , or often , of that queer invitation of Lady Castlewood , to go and drink tea and sup with her ladyship when there be no other company . Old Van den Bosch , however shrewd his intellect , and great his skill in make a fortune , be not amusing in conversation , except to his daughter , who talk household and City matter , bull and bear , raise and sell farming - stock , and so forth , quite as keenly and shrewdly as her father . nor be my Lord Castlewood often at home , or much miss by his wife when absent , or very much at ease in the old father 's company . the Countess tell all this to my wife in her simple way . " guess , " say she , " my lord and father do not   pull well together nohow . guess my lord be always want money , and father keep the key of the box and quite right , too . if he could have the fingering of all our money , my lord would soon make away with it , and then what be to become of our noble family ? we pay everything , my dear   except play - debt , and they we will not   have nohow . we pay cook , horse , wine - merchant , tailor , and everybody and lucky for they too reckon my lord would not   pay them ! and we always take care that he have a guinea in his pocket , and go out like a real nobleman . what that man do owe to we : what he do before we come gracious goodness only know ! I and father do our good to make he respectable : but it be no easy job , my dear . law ! he would melt the plate , only father keep the key of the strong - room ; and when we go to Castlewood , my father travel with I , and papa be arm too , as well as the people . " 
 " gracious heaven ! " cry my wife , " your ladyship do not mean to say you suspect your own husband of a desire to " 
 " to what ? oh no , nothing , of course ! and I would trust our brother will with untold money , would not   I ? as much as I would trust the cat with the cream - pan ! I tell you , my dear , it be not all pleasure be a woman of rank and fashion : and if I have buy a countess 's coronet , I have pay a good price for it that I have ! " 
 and so have my Lord Castlewood pay a large price for have his estate free from incumbrance , his house and stable furnish , and his debt discharge . he be the slave of the little wife and her father . no wonder the old man 's society be not pleasant to the poor victim , and that he gladly slunk away from his own fine house , to feast at the club when he have money , or at least to any society save that which he find at home . to lead a bear , as I do , be no very pleasant business , to be sure : to wait in a bookseller 's anteroom until it should please his honour to finish his dinner and give I audience , be sometimes a hard task for a man of my name and with my pride ; but would I have exchange my poverty against Castlewood 's ignominy , or prefer his miserable dependence to my own ? at least I earn my wage , such as it be ; and no man can say that I ever flatter my patron , or be servile to they ; or indeed , in my dealing with they , be otherwise than sulky , overbearing , and , in a word , intolerable . 
 now there be a certain person with whom Fate have throw I into a life - partnership , who bear her poverty with such a smile sweetness and easy grace , that niggard Fortune relent before she , and , like some savage Ogre in the fairy tale , melt at the constant goodness and cheerfulness of that uncomplaining , artless , innocent creature . however poor she be , all who know she see that here be a fine lady ; and the little tradesman and humble folk round about we treat she with as much respect as the rich of our neighbour . " I think , my dear , " say good - natured Mrs. Foker , when they ride out in the latter 's chariot , " you look like the mistress of the carriage , and I only as your maid . " our landlady adore she ; the tradesfolk execute her little order as eagerly as if a duchess give they , or they be to make a fortune by wait on she . I have think often of the lady in Comus , and how , through all the rout and rabble , she move , entirely serene and pure . 
 several time , as often as we choose indeed , the good - natured parent of my young bear lend we their chariot to drive abroad or to call on the few friend we have . if I must tell the truth , we drive once to the Protestant Hero and have a syllabub in the garden there : and the hostess would insist upon call my wife her ladyship during the whole afternoon . we also visit Mr. Johnson , and take tea with he   the ingenious Mr. Goldsmith be of the company ; the doctor wait upon my wife to her coach . but our most frequent visit be to Aunt Bernstein , and I promise you I be not at all jealous because my aunt presently profess to have a wonderful liking for Theo . 
 this liking grow so that she would have she most day in the week , or to stay altogether with she , and think that Theo 's child and husband be only plague to be sure , and hat we in the most amusing way for keep she favourite from she . not that my wife be unworthy of anybody 's favour ; but her many forced absence , and the constant difficulty of intercourse with she , raise my aunt 's liking for a while to a sort of passion . she pour in note like love - letter ; and her people be ever about our kitchen . if my wife do not go to she , she write heartrende appeal , and scold I severely when I see she ; and , the child be ill once   it hath pleased Fate to spare our Captain to be a prodigious trouble to we , and a wholesome trial for our temper , Madame Bernstein come three day run to Lambeth ; vow there be nothing the matter with the baby ; nothing at all ; and that we only pretend his illness , in order to vex she . 
 the reign Countess of Castlewood be just as easy and affable with her old aunt , as with other folk great and small . " what air you all about , scrap and bow to that old woman , I can not   tell , noway ! " her ladyship would say . " she a fine lady ! nonsense ! she be not   no more fine than any other lady : and I guess I be as good as any of them with their high heel and their grand air ! she a beauty once ! take away her wig , and her rouge , and her tooth ; and what become of your beauty , I would like to know ? guess you would put it all in a bandbox , and there would be nothing leave but a shrivelled old woman ! " and indeed the little homilist only speak too truly . all beauty must at last come to this complexion ; and decay , either underground or on the tree . here be old age , I fear , without reverence . here be grey hair , that be hide or paint . the world be still here , and she totter on it , and cling to it with her crutch . for fourscore year she have move on it , and eat of the tree , forbid and permit . she have have beauty , pleasure , flattery : but what secret rage , disappointment , defeat , humiliation ! what thorn under the rose ! what sting bee in the fruit ! " you be not a beauty , my dear , " she would say to my wife : " and may thank your star that you be not . "   if she contradict herself in her talk , I suppose the rest of we occasionally do the like .   " do not   tell I that your husband be pleased with your face , and you want no one else 's admiration ! we all do . every woman would rather be beautiful than be anything else in the world ever so rich , or ever so good , or have all the gift of the fairy ! look at that picture , though I know ' tis but a bad one , and that stupid vapouring Kneller could not paint my eye , nor my hair , nor my complexion . what a shape I have then and look at I now , and this wrinkle old neck ! why have we such a short time of our beauty ? I remember Mademoiselle de l'Enclos at a much great age than mine , quite fresh and well - conserved . we can not   hide our age . they be write in Mr. Collins 's book for we . I be bear in the last year of King James 's reign . I be not old yet . I be but seventy - six . but what a wreck , my dear : and be not   it cruel that our time should be so short ? " 
 here my wife have to state the incontrovertible proposition , that the time of all of we be short here below . 
 " ha ! " cry the Baroness . " do not Adam live near a thousand year , and be not Eve beautiful all the time ? I use to perplex Mr. Tusher with that poor creature ! what have we do since , that our life be so much lessen , I say ? " 
 " have your life be so happy that you would prolong it ever so much more ? " ask the Baroness 's auditor . " have you , who love wit , never read Dean Swift 's famous description of the deathless people in Gulliver ? my papa and my husband say ' tis one of the fine and most awful sermon ever write . it be well not to live at all , than to live without love ; and I be sure , " say my wife , put her handkerchief to her eye , ' should anything happen to my dear George , I would wish to go to Heaven that moment . " 
 " who love I in Heaven ? I be quite alone , child that be why I have rather stay here , " say the Baroness , in a frightened and rather piteous tone . " you be kind to I , God bless your sweet face ! though I scold , and have a frightful temper , my servant will do anything to make I comfortable , and get up at any hour of the night , and never say a cross word in answer . I like my card still . indeed , life would be a blank without them . almost everything be go except that . I can not   eat my dinner now , since I lose those last two tooth . everything go away from we in old age . but I still have my card thank Heaven , I still have my card ! " and here she would begin to doze : wake up , however , if my wife stir or rise , and imagine that Theo be about to leave she . " do not   go away , I can not   bear to be alone . I do not   want you to talk . but I like to see your face , my dear ! it be much pleasanter than that horrid old Brett 's , that I have have scowl about my bedroom these ever so long year . " 
 " well , Baroness ! still at your cribbage ? "   we may fancy a noble Countess interrupt a game at card between Theo and Aunt Bernstein .   " I and my Lord Esmond have come to see you ! go and shake hand with grandaunt , Esmond ! and tell her ladyship that your lordship be a good boy ! " 
 " my lordship be a good boy , " say the child .   Madam Theo use to act these scene for I in a very lively way . 
 " and if he be , I guess he do not   take after his father , " shriek out Lady Castlewood . she choose to fancy that Aunt Bernstein be deaf , and always bawl at the old lady . 
 " your ladyship choose my nephew for well or for bad , " say Aunt Bernstein , who be now always very much flurry in the presence of the young Countess . 
 " but he be a precious deal bad than ever I think he be . I be speak of your Pa , Ezzy . if it be not   for your mother , my son , Lord know what would become of you ! we be a - go to see his little Royal Highness . sorry to see your ladyship not look quite so well to - day . we can not   always remain young and law ! how we do change as we grow old ! go up and kiss that lady , Ezzy . she have get a little boy , too . why , bless we ! have you get the child downstairs ? " indeed , Master Miles be down below , for special reason accompany his mother on her visit to Aunt Bernstein sometimes ; and our aunt desire the mother 's company so much , that she be actually fain to put up with the child . " so you have get the child here ? oh , you slyboot ! " say the Countess . " guess you come after the old lady 's money ! Law bless you ! do not   look so frightened . she can not   hear a single word I say . come , Ezzy . good - bye , aunt ! " and my lady Countess rustle out of the room . 
 do Aunt Bernstein hear she or not ? where be the wit for which the old lady have be long famous ? and be that fire put out , as well as the brilliancy of her eye ? with other people she be still ready enough , and unsparing of her sarcasm . when the Dowager of Castlewood and Lady Fanny visit she   these exalt lady treat my wife with perfect indifference and charming good breeding , the Baroness , in their society , be stately , easy , and even command . she would mischievously caress Mrs. Warrington before they ; in her absence , vaunt my wife 's good breeding ; say that her nephew have make a foolish match , perhaps , but that I certainly have take a charming wife . " in a word , I praise you so to they , my dear , " say she , " that I think they would like to tear your eye out . " but , before the little american , ' tis certain that she be uneasy and tremble . she be so afraid , that she actually do not dare to deny her door ; and , the Countess 's back turn , do not even abuse she . however much they might dislike she , my lady do not tear out Theo 's eye . once they drive to our cottage at Lambeth , where my wife happen to be sit at the open window , hold her child on her knee , and in full view of her visitor . a gigantic footman strut through our little garden , and deliver their ladyship ' visit ticket at our door . their hatred hurt we no more than their visit please we . when next we have the loan of our friend the Brewer 's carriage Mrs. Warrington drive to Kensington , and Gumbo hand over to the giant our card in return for those which his noble mistress have bestow on we . 
 the Baroness have a coach , but seldom thought of give it to we : and would let Theo and her maid and baby start from Clarges Street in the rain , with a faint excuse that she be afraid to ask her coachman to take his horse out . but , twice on her return home , my wife be frighten by rude fellow on the other side of Westminster Bridge ; and I fairly tell my aunt that I should forbid Mrs. Warrington to go to she , unless she could be bring home in safety ; so grumble Jehu have to drive his horse through the darkness . he grumble at my shilling : he do not know how few I have . our poverty wear a pretty decent face . my relative never think of relieve it , nor I of complain before they . I do not   know how Sampson get a windfall of guineas ; but , I remember , he bring I six once ; and they be more welcome than any money I ever have in my life . he have be look into Mr. Miles 's crib , as the child lie asleep ; and , when the parson go away , I find the money in the baby 's little rosy hand . yes , Love be good of all . I have many such benefaction register in my heart precious welcome fountain spring up in desert place , kind , friendly light cheer our despondency and gloom . 
 this worthy divine be willing enough to give as much of his company as she choose to Madame de Bernstein , whether for card or theology . have know her ladyship for many year now , Sampson could see , and aver to we , that she be break fast ; and as he speak of she evidently increase infirmity , and of the probability of their fatal termination , Mr. S. would discourse to we in a very feeling manner of the necessity for prepare for a future world ; of the vanity of this , and of the hope that in another there might be happiness for all repentant sinner . 
 " I have be a sinner for one , " say the chaplain , bow his head . " God knoweth , and I pray he to pardon I . I fear , sir , your aunt , the Lady Baroness , be not in such a state of mind as will fit she very well for the change which be imminent . I be but a poor weak wretch , and no prisoner in Newgate could confess that more humbly and heartily . once or twice of late , I have seek to speak on this matter with her ladyship , but she have receive I very roughly . ' parson , ' say she , ' if you come for card , ' tis mighty well , but I will thank you to spare I your sermon . ' what can I do , sir ? I have call more than once of late , and Mr. Case hath tell I his lady be unable to see I . " in fact Madame Bernstein tell my wife , whom she never refuse , as I say , that the poor chaplain 's ton be unendurable , and as for his theology , " have not   I be a Bishop 's wife ? " say she , " and do I want this creature to teach I ? " 
 the old lady be as impatient of doctor as of divine ; pretend that my wife be ail , and that it be more convenient for our good Doctor Heberden to visit she in Clarges Street than to travel all the way to our Lambeth lodging , we get Dr. H. to see Theo at our aunt 's house , and pray he if possible to offer his advice to the baroness : we make Mrs. Brett , her woman , describe her ailment , and the doctor confirm our opinion that they be most serious , and might speedily end . she would rally briskly enough of some evening , and entertain a little company ; but of late she scarcely go abroad at all . a somnolence , which we have remark in she , be attributable in part to opiate which she be in the habit of taking ; and she use these narcotic to smother habitual pain . one night , as we two sit with her   Mr. Miles be wean by this time , and his mother could leave he to the charge of our faithful Molly , she fall asleep over her card . we hush the servant who come to lay out the supper - table   she would always have this luxurious , nor could any injunction of our or the Doctor 's teach her abstinence , and we sit a while as we have often do before , wait in silence till she should arouse from her doze . 
 when she awake , she look fixedly at I for a while , fumble with the card , and dropt they again in her lap , and say , " Henry , have I be long asleep ? " I think at first that it be for my brother she mistake I ; but she go on quickly , and with eye fix as upon some very far distant object , and say , " my dear , ' tis of no use , I be not good enough for you . I love card , and play , and court ; and oh , Harry , you do not   know all ! " here her voice change , and she fling her head up . " his father marry Anne Hyde , and sure the Esmond blood be as good as any that be not royal . Mamma , you must please to treat I with more respect . vos sermon I fatiguent ; entendez - vous ? faite place a mon Altesse royale : mesdames , I connaissez - vous ? je suis la " here she break out into frightful hysterical shriek and laughter , and as we run up to she , alarmed , " Oui , Henri , " she say , " il a jure de m'epouser et les prince tiennent parole n'est - ce pas ? o oui ! il tiennent parole ; si non , tu le tueras , cousin ; tu le ah ! que je suis folle ! " and the pitiful shriek and laughter recommence . Ere her frightened people have come up to her summon , the poor thing have pass out of this mood into another ; but always labour under the same delusion that I be the Henry of past time , who have love she and have be forsake by she , whose bone be lie far away by the bank of the Potomac . 
 my wife and the woman put the poor lady to bed as I run myself for medical aid . she ramble , still talk wildly , through the night , with her nurse and the surgeon sit by she . then she fall into a sleep , bring on by more opiate . when she awake , her mind do not actually wander ; but her speech be change , and one arm and side be paralyse . 
 ' tis needless to relate the progress and termination of her malady , or watch that expire flame of life as it gasp and flicker . her sens would remain with she for a while   and then she be never satisfied unless Theo be by her bedside , or again her mind would wander , and the poor decrepit creature , lie upon her bed , would imagine herself young again , and speak incoherently of the scene and incident of her early day . then she would address I as Henry again , and call upon I to revenge some insult or slight , of which   whatever my suspicion might be   the only record lie in her insane memory . " they have always be so , " she would murmur : " they never love man or woman but they forsook they . Je I vengerai , o oui , je I vengerai ! I know they all : I know they all : and I will go to my Lord Stair with the list . do not   tell I ! his religion can not   be the right one . I will go back to my mother 's though she do not love I . she never do . why do not   you , mother ? be it because I be too wicked ? ah ! Pitie , pitie . o mon pere ! I will make my confession " and here the unhappy paralysed lady make as if she would move in her bed . 
 let we draw the curtain round it . I think with awe still , of those rapid word , utter in the shadow of the canopy , as my pallid wife sit by she , her Prayer - book on her knee ; as the attendant move to and fro noiselessly ; as the clock tick without , and strike the fleeting hour ; as the sun fall upon the Kneller picture of beatrix in her beauty , with the blushing cheek , the smile lip , the wave auburn tress , and the eye which seem to look towards the dim figure moan in the bed . I could not for a while understand why our aunt 's attendant be so anxious that we should quit it . but towards evening , a servant steal in , and whisper her woman ; and then Brett , look rather disturbed , beg we to go downstairs , as the as the Doctor be come to visit the Baroness . I do not tell my wife , at the time , who " the Doctor " be ; but as the gentleman slide by we , and pass upstairs , I see at once that he be a catholic ecclesiastic . when Theo next see our poor lady , she be speechless ; she never recognise any one about she , and so pass unconsciously out of life . during her illness her relative have call assiduously enough , though she would see none of they save we . but when she be go , and we descend to the low room after all be over , we find Castlewood with his white face , and my lady from Kensington , and Mr. will already assemble in the parlour . they look greedily at we as we appear . they be hungry for the prey . 
 when our aunt 's will be open , we find it date five year back , and everything she have be leave to her dear nephew , Henry Esmond Warrington , of Castlewood , in Virginia , " in affectionate love and remembrance of the name which he bore . " the property be not great . her revenue have be derive from pension from the Crown as it appear   for what service I can not say , but the pension of course die with she , and there be only a few hundred pound , besides jewel , trinket , and the furniture of the house in Clarges Street , of which all London come to the sale . Mr. Walpole bid for her portrait , but I make free with Harry 's money so far as to buy the picture in : and it now hang over the mantelpiece of the chamber in which I write . what with jewel , lace , trinket , and old china which she have gather Harry become possessed of more than four thousand pound by his aunt 's legacy . I make so free as to lay my hand upon a hundred , which come , just as my stock be reduce to twenty pound ; and I procure bill for the remainder , which I forward to Captain Henry Esmond in Virginia . nor should I have scruple to take more   for my brother be indebted to I in a much great sum , but he write I there be another wonderful opportunity for buy an estate and negro in our neighbourhood at home ; and Theo and I be only too glad to forgo our little claim , so as to establish our brother 's fortune . as to mine , poor Harry at this time do not know the state of it . my mother have never inform he that she have cease remit to I . she help he with a considerable sum , the result of her saving , for the purchase of his new estate ; and Theo and I be most heartily thankful at his prosperity . 
 and how strange our be ! by what curious good fortune , as our purse be empty , be it fill again ! I have actually come to the end of our stock , when poor Sampson bring I his six piece and with these I be enable to carry on , until my half - year 's salary , as young Mr. Foker 's Governor , be due : then Harry 's hundred , on which I lay main basse , help we over three month   we be behindhand with our rent , or the money would have last six good week long : and when this be pretty near expended , what should arrive but a bill of exchange for a couple of hundred pound from Jamaica , with ten thousand blessing , from the dear friend there , and fond scolding from the General that we have not soon tell he of our necessity of which he have only hear through our friend , Mr. Foker , who speak in such term of Theo and myself as to make our parent more than ever proud of their child . be my quarrel with my mother irreparable ? let I go to Jamaica . there be plenty there for all , and employment which his Excellency as Governor would immediately procure for I . " come to we ! " write Hetty . " come to we ! " write Aunt Lambert . " have my child be suffer poverty , and we roll in our Excellency 's coach , with guard to turn out whenever we pass ? have Charley be home to you for ever so many holiday , from the Chartreux , and have ever so many of my poor George 's half - crown in his pocket , I dare say ? "   this be indeed the truth , for where be he to go for holiday but to his sister ? and be there any use in tell the child how scarce half - crown be with we ? . " and you always treat he with such goodness , as his letter tell I , which be brimful of love for George and little Miles ! oh , how we long to see Miles ! " write Hetty and her mother ; " and as for his godfather "   write Het , " who have be good to my dearest and her child , I promise he a kiss whenever I see he ! " 
 our young benefactor be never to hear of our family 's love and gratitude to he . that glimpse of his bright face over the railing before our house at Lambeth , as he ride away on his little horse , be the last we ever be to have of he . at Christmas a basket come to we , contain a great turkey , and three brace of partridge , with a card , and ' shoot by M. W. " write on one of they . and on receipt of this present , we write to thank the child and give he our sister 's message . 
 to this letter , there come a reply from Lady Warrington , who say she be bind to inform I , that in visit I her child have be guilty of disobedience , and that she learn his visit to I now for the first time . know my view regard duty to my parent   which I have exemplify in my marriage , she could not wish her son to adopt they . and fervently hop that I might be bring to see the error of my present course , she take leave of this most unpleasant subject , subscribe herself , etc . etc . and we get this pretty missive as sauce for poor Miles 's turkey , which be our family feast for New Year 's day . my Lady Warrington 's letter choke our meal , though Sampson and Charley rejoice over it . 
 ah I ! Ere the month be over , our little friend be go from amongst we . go out shooting , and drag his gun through a hedge after he , the trigger catch in a bush , and the poor little man be bring home to his father 's house , only to live a few day and expire in pain and torture . under the yew - tree yonder , I can see the vault which cover he , and where my bone one day no doubt will be lay . and over our pew at church , my child have often wistfully spelt the touching epitaph in which Miles 's heartbroken father have inscribe his grief and love for his only son . 




 CHAPTER LXXXIV . in which Harry submit to the Common Lot 

 hard time be now over with I , and I have to battle with poverty no more . my little kinsman 's death make a vast difference in my worldly prospect . I become next heir to a good estate . my uncle and his wife be not likely to have more child . " the woman be capable of commit any crime to disappoint you , " Sampson vow ; but , in truth , my Lady Warrington be guilty of no such treachery . cruelly smite by the stroke which fall upon they , Lady Warrington be teach by her religious adviser to consider it as a chastisement of Heaven , and submit to the Divine Will . " whilst your son live , your heart be turn away from the well world "   her clergyman tell she , " and your ladyship think too much of this . for your son 's advantage you desire rank and title . you ask and might have obtain an earthly coronet . of what avail be it now , to one who have but a few year to pass upon earth of what importance compare to the heavenly crown , for which you be an assured candidate ? " the accident cause no little sensation . in the chapel of that enthusiastic sect , towards which , after her son 's death , she now more than ever inclined , many sermon be preach bear reference to the event . far be it from I to question the course which the bereaved mother pursue , or to regard with other than respect and sympathy any unhappy soul seek that refuge whither sin and grief and disappointment fly for consolation . Lady Warrington even try a reconciliation with myself . a year after her loss , be in London , she signify that she would see I , and I wait on she ; and she give I , in her usual didactic way , a homily upon my position and her own . she marvel at the decree of Heaven , which have permit , and how dreadfully punish ! her poor child 's disobedience to she a disobedience by which I be to profit .   it appear my poor little man have disobey order , and go out with his gun , unknown to his mother .   she hop that , should I ever succeed to the property , though the Warringtons be , thank Heaven , a long - live family , except in my own father 's case , whose life have be curtail by the excess of a very ill - regulate youth , but should I ever succeed to the family estate and honour , she hop , she pray , that my present course of life might be alter ; that I should part from my unworthy associate ; that I should discontinue all connexion with the horrid theatre and its licentious frequenter ; that I should turn to that quarter where only peace be to be have ; and to those sacred duty which she fear she very much fear that I have neglect . she fill her exhortation with scripture language , which I do not care to imitate . when I take my leave she give I a packet of sermon for Mrs. Warrington , and a little book of hymn by Miss Dora , who have be eminent in that society of which she and her mother become avow professor subsequently , and who , after the dowager 's death , at Bath , three year since , marry young Mr. Juffles , a celebrated preacher . the poor lady forgave I then , but she could not bear the sight of our boy . we lose our second child , and then my aunt and her daughter come eagerly enough to the poor suffering mother , and even invite we hither . but my uncle be now almost every day in our house . he would sit for hour look at our boy . he bring he endless toy and sweetmeat . he beg that the child might call he Godpapa . when we feel our own grief   which at time still , and after the lapse of five - and - twenty year , strike I as keenly as on the day when we first lose our little one   when I feel my own grief , I know how to commiserate his . but my wife could pity he before she know what it be to lose a child of her own . the mother 's anxious heart have already divine the pang which be feel by the sorrow - stricken father ; mine , more selfish , have only learn pity from experience , and I be reconcile to my uncle by my little baby 's coffin . 
 the poor man send his coach to follow the humble funeral , and afterwards take out little Miles , who prattle to he unceasingly , and forget any grief he might have feel in the delight of his new black clothe , and the pleasure of the airing . how the innocent talk of the child stab the mother 's heart ! would we ever wish that it should heal of that wound ? I know her face so well that , to this day , I can tell when , sometimes , she be think of the loss of that little one . it be not a grief for a parting so long ago ; it be a communion with a soul we love in Heaven . 
 we come back to our bright lodging in Bloomsbury soon afterwards , and my young bear , whom I could no long lead , and who have take a prodigious friendship for Charley , go to the Chartreux School , where his friend take care that he have no more beat than be good for he , and where   in consequence of the excellence of his private tutor , no doubt   he take and keep a good place . and he like the school so much , that he say , if ever he have a son , he shall be send to that seminary . 
 now , I could no long lead my bear , for this reason , that I have other business to follow . be fully reconcile to we , I do believe , for Mr. Miles 's sake , my uncle   who be such an obsequious supporter of Government , that I wonder the Minister ever give he anything , be perfectly sure of his vote   use his influence in behalf of his nephew and heir ; and I have the honour to be gazette as one of his Majesty 's Commissioners for license hackney - coach , a post I fill , I trust , with credit , until a quarrel with the Minister   to be mention in its proper place   deprive I of that one . I take my degree also at the Temple , and appear in Westminster Hall in my gown and wig . and , this year , my good friend , Mr. Foker , have business at Paris , I have the pleasure of accompany he thither , where I be receive a bras ouvert by my dear american preserver , Monsieur de Florac , who introduce I to his noble family , and to even more of the polite society of the capital than I have leisure to frequent ; for I have too much spirit to desert my kind patron Foker , whose acquaintance lie chiefly amongst the bourgeoisie , especially with Monsieur Santerre , a great brewer of Paris , a scoundrel who hath since distinguish himself in blood and not beer . Mr. F. have need of my service as interpreter , and I be too glad that he should command they , and to be able to pay back some of the kindness which he have render to I . our lady , meanwhile , be reside at Mr. Foker 's new villa at Wimbledon , and be pleased to say that they be amuse with the " parisian letter " which I send to they , through my distinguished friend Mr. Hume , then of the Embassy , and which subsequently have be publish in a neat volume . 
 whilst I be tranquilly discharge my small official duty in London , those trouble be commence which be to end in the great separation between our colony and the mother country . when Mr. Grenville propose his stamp - duty , I say to my wife that the bill would create a mighty discontent at home , for we be ever anxious to get as much as we could from England , and pay back as little ; but assuredly I never anticipate the prodigious anger which the scheme create . it be with we as with family or individual . a pretext be give for a quarrel : the real cause lie in long bickering and previous animosity . many foolish exaction and petty tyranny , the habitual insolence of Englishmen towards all foreigner , all colonist , all folk who dare to think their river as good as our Abana and Pharpar , the natural spirit of man outrage by our imperious domineering spirit , set Britain and her colony to quarrel ; and the astonishing blunder of the system adopt in England bring the quarrel to an issue , which I , for one , be not go to deplore . have I be in Virginia instead of London , ' tis very possible I should have take the provincial side , if out of mere opposition to that resolute mistress of Castlewood , who might have drive I into revolt , as England do the colony . be the Stamp Act the cause of the revolution ? a tax no great than that cheerfully pay in England . ten year early , when the French be within our territory , and we be implore succour from home , would the colony have rebel at the payment of this tax ? do not most people consider the tax - gatherer the natural enemy ? against the British in America there be array thousand and thousand of the high - spirited and brave , but there be thousand more who find their profit in the quarrel , or have their private reason for engage in it . I protest I do not   know now whether mine be selfish or patriotic , or which side be in the right , or whether both be not . I be sure we in England have nothing to do but to fight the battle out ; and , have lose the game , I do vow and believe that , after the first natural soreness , the loser feel no rancour . 
 what make brother Hal write home from Virginia , which he seem exceedingly loth to quit , such flame patriotic letter ? my kind , good brother be always lead by somebody ; by I when we be together   he have such an idea of my wit and wisdom , that if I say the day be fine , he would ponder over the observation as though it be one of the saying of the Seven Sages , by some other wiseacre when I be away . who inspire these flaming letter , this boisterous patriotism , which he send to we in London ? " he be rebel against Madam Esmond , " say i. " he be lead by some colonial person by that lady , perhaps , " hint my wife . who " that lady " be Hal never have tell we ; and , indeed , besought I never to allude to the delicate subject in my letter to he ; " for Madam wish to see them all , and I wish to say nothing about you know what until the proper moment , " he write . no affection could be great than that which his letter show . when he hear   from the informant whom I have mention   that in the midst of my own extreme strait I have retain no more than a hundred pound out of his aunt 's legacy , he be for mortgage the estate which he have just buy ; and have more than one quarrel with his mother in my behalf , and speak his mind with a great deal more frankness than I should ever have venture to show . until her angry recrimination   when she charge he with ingratitude , after have toil and save so much and so long for he , the poor fellow do not know that our mother have cut off my supply to advance his interest ; and by the time this news come to he his bargain be make , and I be fortunately quite out of want . 
 every scrap of paper which we ever write , our thrifty parent at Castlewood tap and docket and put away . we boy be more careless about our letter to one another : I especially , who perhaps choose rather to look down upon my young brother 's literary performance ; but my wife be not so supercilious , and hath keep no small number of Harry 's letter , as well as those of the angelic be whom we be presently to call sister . 
 " to think whom he have choose , and whom he might have have ! oh , ' tis cruel ! " cry my wife , when we get that notable letter in which Harry first make we acquaint with the name of his charmer . 
 " she be a very pretty little maid when I leave home , she may be a perfect beauty now , " I remark , as I read over the long letter Harry ever write on private affair . 
 " but be she to compare to my Hetty ? " say Mrs. Warrington . 
 " we agree that Hetty and Harry be not to be happy together , my love , " say I. 
 Theo give her husband a kiss . " my dear , I wish they have try , " she say with a sigh . " I be afraid lest lest Hetty should have lead he , you see ; and I think she hath the well head . but , from read this , it appear that the new lady have take command of poor Harry , " and she hand I the letter : 
 " my dearest George hath be prepare by previous letter to understand how a certain lady have make a conquest of my heart , which I have give away in exchange for something infinitely more valuable , namely , her own . she be at my side as I write this letter , and if there be no bad spelling , such as you often use to laugh at , ' tis because I have my pretty dictionary at hand , which make no fault in the long word , nor in anything else I know of : being of opinion that she be perfection . 
 " as Madam Esmond see all your letter , I writ you not to give any hint of a certain delicate matter but now ' tis no secret , and be know to all the country . Mr. George be not the only one of our family who have make a secret marriage , and be scold by his mother . as a dutiful young brother I have follow his example ; and now I may tell you how this mighty event come about . 
 " I have not be at home long before I see my fate be accomplisht . I will not tell you how beautiful Miss Fanny Mountain have grow since I have be away in Europe . she saith , ' you never will think so , ' and I be glad , as she be the only thing in life I would grudge to my dear brother . 
 " that neither Madam Esmond nor my other mother   as Mountain be now   should have see our mutual attachment , be a wonder only to be account for by suppose that love make other folk blind . mine for my Fanny be increase by see what the treatment be she have from Madam Esmond , who indeed be very rough and haughty with she , which my love bear with a sweetness perfectly angelic   this I will say , though she will order I not to write any such nonsense . she be scarce well treat than a servant of the house indeed our negro can talk much more free before Madam Esmond than ever my Fanny could . 
 " and yet my Fanny say she doth not regret Madam 's unkindness , as without it I possibly never should have be what I be to she . oh , dear brother ! when I remember how great your goodness hath be , how , in my own want , you pay my debt , and rescue I out of prison ; how you have be live in poverty which never need have occur but for my fault ; how you might have pay yourself back my just debt to you and would not , prefer my advantage to your own comfort , indeed I be lose at the thought of such goodness ; and ought I not to be thankful to Heaven that hath give I such a wife and such a brother ? 
 " when I writ to you request you to send I my aunt 's legacy money , for which indeed I have the most profitable and urgent occasion , I have no idea that you be yourself suffer poverty . that you , the head of our family , should condescend to be governor to a brewer 's son ! that you should have to write for bookseller   except in so far as your own genius might prompt you , never once enter my mind , until Mr. Foker 's letter come to we , and this would never have be show for Madam keep it secret have it not be for the difference which spring up between we . 
 " Poor Tom Diggle 's estate and negro be for sale , owe to Tom 's loss and extravagance at play , and his father 's debt before he Madam Esmond see here be a great opportunity of make a provision for I , and that with six thousand pound for the farm and stock , I should be put in possession of as pretty a property as fall to most young son in this country . it lie handy enough to Richmond , between Kent and Hanover Court House the mansion nothing for elegance compare to our at Castlewood , but the land excellent and the people extraordinary healthy . 
 " here be a second opportunity , Madam Esmond say , such as never might again befall . by the sale of my commission and her own saving I might pay more than half of the price of the property , and get the rest of the money on mortgage ; though here , where money be scarce to procure , it would have be difficult and dear . at this juncture , with our new relative , Mr. Van den Bosch , bid against we   his agent be wild that we should have buy the property over he , my aunt 's legacy most opportunely fall in . and now I be owner of a good house and negro in my native country , shall be call , no doubt , to our House of Burgesses , and hope to see my dear brother and family under my own roof - tree . to sit at my own fireside , to ride my own horse to my own hound , be well than go a - soldiering , now war be over , and there be no french to fight . indeed , Madam Esmond make a condition that I should leave the army , and live at home , when she bring I her 1750 pound of saving . she have lose one son , she say , who choose to write play - book , and live in England let the other stay with she at home . 
 " but , after the purchase of the estate be make , and my paper for sell out be send home , my mother would have have I marry a person of her choosing , but by no mean of mine . you remember Miss Betsy Pitts at Williamsburgh ? she be in no wise improve by have have her face dreadfully scar with small - pock , and though Madam Esmond saith the young lady hath every virtue , I own her virtue do not suit I . her eye do not look straight ; she hath one leg short than another ; and oh , brother ! didst thou never remark Fanny 's ankle when we be boy ? Neater I never see at the Opera . 
 " now , when ' twa agree that I should leave the army , a certain dear girl   canst thou guess her name ?   one day , when we be private , burst into tear of such happiness , that I could not but feel immensely touch by her sympathy . 
 " ' ah ! ' say she , ' do you think , sir , that the idea of the son of my revered benefactress go to battle doth not inspire I with terror ? ah , Mr. Henry ! do you imagine I have no heart ? when Mr. George be with Braddock , do you fancy we do not pray for he ? and when you be with Mr. Wolfe oh ! ' 
 " here the dear creature hide her eye in her handkerchief , and have hard work to prevent her mama , who come in , from see that she be cry . but my dear Mountain declare that , though she might have fancy , might have pray in secret for such a thing   she own to that now , she never imagine it for one moment . nor , indeed , do my good mother , who suppose that Sam Lintot , the apothecary 's lad at Richmond , be Fanny 's flame an absurd fellow that I near kick into James River . 
 " but when the commission be sell , and the estate buy , what do fanny do but fall into a deep melancholy ? I find she cry one day , in her mother 's room , where the two lady have be at work trim hat for my negro . 
 " ' what ! cry , miss ? ' say I. ' has my mother be scold you ? ' 
 " ' no , ' say the dear creature . ' Madam Esmond have be kind to - day . ' 
 " and her tear drop down on a cockade which she be sew on to a hat for Sady , who be to be head - groom . 
 " ' then , why , miss , be those dear eye so red ? ' say I. 
 " ' because I have the toothache , ' she say , ' or because because I be a fool . ' here she fairly burst out . ' oh , Mr. Harry ! oh , Mr. Warrington ! you be go to leave we , and ' tis as well . you will take your place in your country , as become you . you will leave we poor woman in our solitude and dependence . you will come to visit we from time to time . and when you be happy and honour , and among your gay companion , you will remember your ' 
 " here she could say no more , and hide her face with one hand as I , I confess , seize the other . 
 " ' Dearest , sweetest Miss Mountain ! ' say I. ' oh , could I think that the parting from I have bring tear to those lovely eye ! indeed , I fear , I should be almost happy ! let they look upon your ' 
 " ' oh , sir ! ' cry my charmer . ' oh , Mr. Warrington ! consider who I be , sir , and who you be ! remember the difference between we ! release my hand , sir ! what would Madam Esmond say if if ' 
 " if what , I do not   know , for here our mother be in the room . 
 " ' what would Madam Esmond say ? ' she cry out . ' she would say that you be an ungrateful , artful , false , little ' 
 " ' Madam ! ' say I. 
 " ' yes , an ungrateful , artful , false , little wretch ! ' cry out my mother . ' for shame , miss ! what would Mr. Lintot say if he see you make eye at the Captain ? and for you , Harry , I will have you bring none of your garrison manner hither . this be a christian family , sir , and you will please to know that my house be not intend for captain and their miss ! ' 
 " ' Misses , mother ! ' say I. ' gracious power , do you ever venture for to call Miss Mountain by such a name ? Miss Mountain , the purest of her sex ! ' 
 " ' the purest of her sex ! can I trust my own ear ? ' ask Madam , turn very pale . 
 " ' I mean that if a man would question her honour , I would fling he out of window , ' say I. 
 " ' you mean that you your mother 's son be actually pay honourable attention to this young person ? ' 
 " ' he would never dare to offer any other , ' cry my fanny ; ' nor any woman but you , madam , to think so ! ' 
 " ' oh , I do not   know , miss ! ' say mother , drop she a fine curtsey , ' I do not   know the honour you be do our family ! you propose to marry with we , do you ? do I understand Captain Warrington aright , that he intend to offer I Miss Mountain as a daughter - in - law ? ' 
 " " tis to be see , madam , that I have no protector , or you would not insult I so ! ' cry my poor victim . 
 " ' I should think the apothecary protection sufficient ! ' say our mother . 
 " ' I do not , mother ! ' I bawl out , for I be very angry ; ' and if Lintot offer she any liberty , I will brain he with his own pestle ! ' 
 " ' oh ! if Lintot have withdraw , sir , I suppose I must be silent . but I do not know of the circumstance . he come hither , as I suppose , to pay court to Miss : and we all think the match equal , and I encourage it . ' 
 " ' he come because I have the toothache ! ' cry my darling   and indeed she have a dreadful bad tooth . and he take it out for she , and there be no end to the suspicion and calumny of woman . 
 " ' what more natural than that he should marry my housekeeper 's daughter ' twas a very suitable match ! ' continue Madam , take snuff . ' but I confess , ' she add , go on , ' I be not aware that you intend to jilt the apothecary for my son ! ' 
 " ' peace , for Heaven 's sake , peace , Mr. Warrington ! ' cry my angel . 
 " ' pray , sir , before you fully make up your mind , have you not well look round the rest of my family ? ' say Madam . ' Dinah be a fine tall girl , and not very black ; Cleopatra be promise to ajax the blacksmith , to be sure ; but then we could break the marriage , you know . if with an apothecary , why not with a blacksmith ? Martha 's husband have run away , and ' 
 " here , dear brother , I own I break out a - swearing . I can not   help it ; but at time , when a man be angry , it do relieve he immensely . I be blest , but I should have go wild , if it have not   be for they oath . 
 " ' Curses , blasphemy , ingratitude , disobedience , ' say mother , lean now on her tortoiseshell stick , and then wave it something like a queen in a play . ' these be my reward ! ' say she . ' o Heaven , what have I do , that I should merit this awful punishment ? and do it please you to visit the sin of my father upon I ? where do my child inherit their pride ? when I be young , have I any ? when my papa bid I marry , do I refuse ? do I ever think of disobey ? no , sir . my fault hath be , and I own it , that my love be centre upon you , perhaps to the neglect of your eld brother . '   indeed , brother , there be some truth in what Madam say .   ' I turn from Esau , and I clung to Jacob . and now I have my reward , I have my reward ! I fix my vain thought on this world , and its distinction . to see my son advanced in worldly rank be my ambition . I toil , and spar , that I might bring he worldly wealth . I take unjustly from my eld son 's portion , that my young might profit . and oh ! that I should see he seduce the daughter of my own housekeeper under my own roof , and reply to my just anger with oath and blasphemy ! ' 
 " ' I try to seduce no one , madam , ' I cry out . ' if I utter oath and blasphemy , I beg your pardon ; but you be enough to provoke a saint to speak them . I will not   have this young lady 's character assail no , not by own mother nor any mortal alive . no , dear Miss Mountain ! if Madam Esmond choose to say that my design on you be dishonourable , let this undeceive she ! ' and , as I speak , I go down on my knee , seize my adorable Fanny 's hand . ' and if you will accept this heart and hand , miss , ' say I , ' they be yours for ever . ' 
 " ' you , at least , I know , sir , ' say Fanny , with a noble curtsey , ' never say a word that be disrespectful to I , or entertain any doubt of my honour . and I trust it be only Madam Esmond , in the world , who can have such an opinion of I . after what your ladyship hath say of I , of course I can stay no long in your house . ' 
 " ' of course , madam , I never intend you should ; and the soon you leave it the well , ' cry our mother . 
 " ' if you be drive from my mother 's house , mine , miss , be at your service , ' say I , make she a low bow . ' it be nearly ready now . if you will take it and stay in it for ever , it be yours ! and as Madam Esmond insult your honour , at least let I do all in my power to make a reparation ! ' I do not   know what more I exactly say , for you may fancy I be not a little flustered and excite by the scene . but here Mountain come in , and my dear Fanny , fling herself into her mother 's arm , weep upon her shoulder ; whilst Madam Esmond , sit down in her chair , look at we as pale as a stone . whilst I be tell my story to Mountain   who , poor thing , have not the least idea , not she , that Miss Fanny and I have the slight inclination for one another , I could hear our mother once or twice still say , ' I be punish for my crime ! ' 
 " now , what our mother mean by her crime I do not know at first , or indeed take much heed of what she say ; for you know her way , and how , when she be angry , she always talk sermon . but Mountain tell I afterwards , when we have some talk together , as we do at the tavern , whither the lady presently remove with their bag and baggage for not only would they not stay at Madam 's house after the language she use , but my mother determine to go away likewise . she call her servant together , and announce her intention of go home instantly to Castlewood ; and I own to you ' twa with a horrible pain I see the family coach roll by , with six horse , and ever so many of the servant on mule and on horseback , as I and Fanny look through the blind of the Tavern . 
 " after the word Madam use to my spotless fanny , ' twa impossible that the poor child or her mother should remain in our house : and indeed M. say that she would go back to her relation in England : and a ship bind homeward lie in James River , she go and bargain with the captain about a passage , so bent be she upon quit the country , and so little do she think of make a match between I and my angel . but the cabin be mercifully engage by a North Carolina gentleman and his family , and before the next ship sail   which bear this letter to my dearest George   they have agree to stop with I . almost all the lady in this neighbourhood have wait on they . when the marriage take place , I hope Madam Esmond will be reconcile . my Fanny 's father be a british officer ; and sure , our be no more . some day , please Heaven , we shall visit Europe , and the place where my wild oat be sown , and where I commit so many extravagance from which my dear brother rescue I . 
 " the lady send you their affection and duty , and to my sister . we hear his Excellency General Lambert be much beloved in Jamaica : and I shall write to our dear friend there announce my happiness . my dear brother will participate in it , and I be ever his grateful and affectionate H. E. W. 
 " P.S. Till Mountain tell I , I have no more notion than the ded that Madam E. have actially stopt your allowance ; besides make you pay for ever so much near upon 1000 pound Mountain say for good , etc . , provide for the virginian proparty . then there be all the charge of I out of prison , which I. O. U. with all my hart . draw upon I , please , dearest brother to any amount adresse I to care of Messrs. Horn and Sandon , Williamsburg , privit ; who remitt by present occasion a bill for 225 pound , payable by their London agent on demand . please do not   acknolledge this in answer ; as there be no good in bother woman with account and with the extra 5 pound by a capp or what she like for my dear sister , and a toy for my nephew from Uncle Hal . " 
 the conclusion to which we come on the perusal of this document be , that the lady have superintend the style and spelling of my poor Hal 's letter , but that the postscript be add without their knowledge . and I be afraid we argue that the Virginian Squire be under female domination as Hercules , Samson , and fortis multi have be before he . 




 CHAPTER LXXXV . Inveni Portum 

 when my mother hear of my acceptance of a place at home , I think she be scarcely well pleased . she may have withdraw her supply , in order to starve I into a surrender , and force I to return with my family to Virginia , and to dependence under she . we never , up to her die day , have any explanation on the pecuniary dispute between we . she cut off my allowance : I utter not a word ; but manage to live without her aid . I never hear that she repent of her injustice , or acknowledge it , except from Harry 's private communication to I . in after day , when we meet , by a great gentleness in her behaviour , and an uncommon respect and affection show to my wife , Madam Esmond may have intend I should understand her tacit admission that she have be wrong ; but she make no apology , nor do I ask one . Harry be provide for   whose welfare I could not grudge , all my mother 's saving and economical scheme go to my advantage , who be her heir . time be when a few guineas would have be more useful to I than hundred which might come to I when I have no need ; but when Madam Esmond and I meet , the period of necessity be long pass away ; I have no need to scheme ignoble saving , or to grudge the doctor his fee : I have plenty , and she could but bring I more . no doubt she suffer in her own mind to think that my child have be hungry , and she have offer they no food ; and that stranger have relieve the necessity from which her proud heart have cause she to turn aside . proud ? be she prouder than I ? a soft word of explanation between we might have bring about a reconciliation year before it come but I would never speak , nor do she . when I commit a wrong , and know it subsequently , I love to ask pardon ; but ' tis as a satisfaction to my own pride , and to myself I be apologise for have be want to myself . and hence , I think   out of regard to that personage of ego , I scarce ever could degrade myself to do a meanness . how do man feel whose whole life   and many man 's life be   be lie , scheme , and subterfuge ? what sort of company do they keep when they be alone ? daily in life I watch man whose every smile be an artifice , and every wink be an hypocrisy . Doth such a fellow wear a mask in his own privacy , and to his own conscience ? if I choose to pass over an injury , I fear ' tis not from a christian and forgiving spirit : ' tis because I can afford to remit the debt , and disdain to ask a settlement of it . one or two sweet soul I have know in my life   and perhaps try   to whom forgiveness be no trouble a plant that grow naturally , as it be , in the soil . I know how to remit , I say , not forgive . I wonder be we proud man proud of be proud ? 
 so I show not the least sign of submission towards my parent in Virginia yonder , and we continue for year to live in estrangement , with occasionally a brief word or two   such as the announcement of the birth of a child , or what not   pass between my wife and she . after our first trouble in America about the Stamp Act , trouble fall on I in London likewise . though I have be on the Tory side in our quarrel   as indeed upon the lose side in most controversy , have no doubt that the Imperial Government have a full right to levy taxis in the colony , yet at the time of the dispute I must publish a pert letter to a member of the House of Burgesses in Virginia , in which the question of the habitual insolence of the mother country to the colony be so freely handle , and sentiment be utter so disagreeable to person in power , that I be deprive of my place as hackney - coach licenser , to the terror and horror of my uncle , who never could be bring to love people in disgrace . he have grow to have an extreme affection for my wife as well as my little boy ; but towards myself , personally , entertain a kind of pity contempt which always infinitely amuse I . he have a natural scorn and dislike for poverty , and a corresponding love for success and good fortune . any opinion depart at all from the regular track shock and frighten he , and all truth - telling make he turn pale . he must have have originally some warmth of heart and genuine love of kindre : for , spite of the dreadful shock I give he , he continue to see Theo and the child   and I too , give I a mournful recognition when we meet ; and though break - hearted by my free - spokenness , he do not refuse to speak to I as he have do at the time of our first difference , but look upon I as a melancholy lose creature , who be past all worldly help or hope . never mind , I must cast about for some new scheme of life ; and the repayment of Harry 's debt to I at this juncture enable I to live at least for some month even , or year to come . o strange fatuity of youth ! I often say . how be it that we dare to be so poor and so little cast down ? 
 at this time his Majesty 's royal uncle of Cumberland fall down and perish in a fit ; and , strange to say , his death occasion a remarkable change in my fortune . my poor Sir Miles Warrington never miss any court ceremony to which he could introduce himself . he be at all the drawing - room , christening , ball , funeral of the court . if ever a prince or princess be ail , his coach be at their door : Leicester Fields , Carlton House , Gunnersbury , be all the same to he , and nothing must satisfy he now but go to the stout duke 's funeral . he catch a great cold and an inflammation of the throat from stand bareheade at this funeral in the rain ; and one morning , before almost I have hear of his illness , a lawyer wait upon I at my lodging in Bloomsbury , and salute I by the name of Sir George Warrington . 
 Party and fear of the future be over now . we lay the poor gentleman by the side of his little son , in the family churchyard where so many of his race repose . little Miles and I be the chief mourner . an obsequious tenantry bow and curtsey before we , and do their utmost to conciliate my honour and my worship . the dowager and her daughter withdraw to Bath presently ; and I and my family take possession of the house , of which I have be master for thirty year . be not too eager , o my son ! have but a little patience , and I too shall sleep under yonder yew - tree , and the people will be toss up their cap for Sir Miles . 
 the record of a prosperous country life be easily and briefly tell . the steward 's book show what rent be pay and forgive , what crop be raise , and in what rotation . what visitor come to we , and how long they stay : what pensioner my wife have , and how they be doctor and relieve , and how they die : what year I be sheriff , and how often the hound meet near we ; all these be narrate in our house journal , which any of my heir may read who choose to take the trouble . we could not afford the fine mansion in Hill Street , which my predecessor have occupy ; but we take a small house , in which , however , we spend more money . we make not half the show   with livery , equipage , and plate   for which my uncle have be famous ; but our beer be strong , and my wife 's charity be perhaps more costly than those of the Dowager Lady Warrington . no doubt she think there be no harm in spoil the Philistines ; for she make we pay unconscionably for the good she leave behind she in our country - house , and I submit to most of her extortion with unutterable good - humour . what a value she imagine the potted plant in her greenhouse bore ! what a price she set upon that horrible old spinet she leave in her drawing - room ! and the frame piece of worst - work , perform by the accomplished Dora and the lovely Flora , have they be masterpiece of Titian or Vandyck , to be sure my lady dowager could hardly have value they at a high price . but though we pay so generously , though we be , I may say without boast , far kind to our poor than ever she have be , for a while we have the very bad reputation in the county , where all sort of story have be tell to my discredit . I think I might perhaps succeed to my uncle 's seat in Parliament , as well as to his land property ; but I find , I know not how , that I be vote to be a person of very dangerous opinion . I would not bribe : I would not coerce my own tenant to vote for I in the election of ' 68 . a gentleman come down from Whitehall with a pocket - book full of bank - note ; and I find that I have no chance against my competitor . 
 Bon Dieu ! now that we be at ease in respect of worldly mean , now that obedient tenant bow and curtsey as we go to church ; that we drive to visit our friend , or to the neighbouring town , in the great family coach with the four fat horse ; do we not often regret poverty , and the dear little cottage at Lambeth , where Want be ever prowl at the door ? do I not long to be bear - lead again , and vow that translate for bookseller be not such very hard drudgery ? when we go to London , we make sentimental pilgrimage to all our old haunt . I dare say my wife embrace all her landlady . you may be sure we ask all the friend of those old time to share the comfort of our new home with we . the Reverend Mr. Hagan and his lady visit we more than once . his appearance in the pulpit at b   where he preach very finely , as we think   cause an awful scandal there . Sampson come too , another unlucky Levite , and be welcome as long as he would stay among we . Mr. Johnson talk of come , but he put we off once or twice . I suppose our house be dull . I know that I myself would be silent for day , and fear that my moodiness must often have try the sweetest - temper woman in the world who live with I . I do not care for field sport . the kill one partridge be so like kill another , that I wonder how man could pass day after day in the pursuit of that kind of slaughter . their fox - hunt story would begin at four o'clock , when the tablecloth be remove , and last till supper - time . I sate silent , and listened : day after day I fall asleep : no wonder I be not popular with my company . 
 what admission be this I be make ? here be the storm over , the rock avoid , the ship in port and the sailor not overcontente ? be Susan I have be sigh for during the voyage , not the beauty I expect to find she ? in the first place , Susan and all the family can look in her William 's logbook , and so , madam , I be not go to put my secret down there . no , Susan , I never have secret from thee . I never care for another woman . I have see more beautiful , but none that suit I as well as your ladyship . I have meet Mrs. Carter and Miss Mulso , and Mrs. Thrale and Madam Kaufmann , and the angelical Gunnings , and her Grace of Devonshire , and a host of beauty who be not angelic , by any mean : and I be not dazzle by they . Nay , young folk , I may have lead your mother a weary life , and be a very Bluebeard over she , but then I have no other head in the closet . only , the first pleasure of take possession of our kingdom over , I own I begin to be quickly tired of the crown . when the captain wear it his Majesty will be a very different Prince . he can ride a - hunt five day in the week , and find the sport amusing . I believe he would hear the same sermon at church fifty time , and not yawn more than I do at the first delivery . but sweet Joan , beloved Baucis ! be thy faithful husband and true lover always , thy Darby be rather ashamed of have be testy so often ! and , be arrive at the consummation of happiness , Philemon ask pardon for fall asleep so frequently after dinner . there come a period of my life , when have reach the summit of felicity I be quite tired of the prospect I have there : I yawn in Eden , and say , " be this all ? what , no lion to bite ? no rain to fall ? no thorn to prick you in the rose - bush when you sit down ? only Eve , for ever sweet and tender , and fig for breakfast , dinner , supper , from week 's end to week 's end ! " shall I make my confession ? Hearken ! well , then , if I must make a clean breast of it . 
            
 here three page be tear out of Sir George Warrington 's MS . book , for which the editor be sincerely sorry . 
 I know the theory and practice of the Roman Church ; but , be breed of another persuasion   and sceptical and heterodox regard that , I can not   help doubt the other , too , and wonder whether Catholics , in their confession , confess all ? do we Protestants ever do so ; and have education render those other fellow - man so different from we ? at least , amongst we , we be not accustomed to suppose catholic priest or layman more frank and open than ourselves . which bring I back to my question , do any man confess all ? do yonder dear creature know all my life , who have be the partner of it for thirty year ; who , whenever I have tell she a sorrow , have be ready with the good of her gentle power to soothe it ; who have watch when I do not speak , and when I be silent have be silent herself , or with the charming hypocrisy of woman have wear smile and an easy appearance so as to make I imagine she feel no care , or would not even ask to disturb her lord 's secret when he seem to indicate a desire to keep it private ? oh , the dear hypocrite ! have I not watch she hide the boy ' peccadillo from papa 's anger ? have I not know her cheat out of her housekeeping to pay off their little extravagance ; and talk to I with an artless face , as if she do not know that our revered captain have have dealing with the gentleman of Duke 's Place , and our learn collegian , at the end of his term , have very press reason for sport his oak   as the phrase be   against some of the University tradesman ? why , from the very early day , thou wise woman , thou wert for ever conceal something from I , this one steal jam from the cupboard ; that one get into disgrace at school ; that naughty rebel   put on the cap , young folk , accord to the fit   flinging an inkstand at mamma in a rage , whilst I be tell the gown and the carpet be spoil by accident . we all hide from one another . we have all secret . we be all alone . we sin by ourselves , and , let we trust , repent too . yonder dear woman would give her foot to spare mine a twinge of the gout ; but , when I have the fit , the pain be in my slipper . at the end of the novel or the play , the hero and heroine marry or die , and so there be an end of they as far as the poet be concern , who huzzas for his young couple till the postchaise turn the corner ; or fetch the hearse and plume , and shovel they underground . but when Mr. Random and Mr. Thomas Jones be marry , be all over ? be there no quarrel at home ? be there no Lady Bellastons abroad ? be there no constable to be outrun ? no temptation to conquer we , or be conquer by we ? the Sirens sing after Ulysses long after his marriage , and the suitor whisper in Penelope 's ear , and he and she have many a weary day of doubt and care , and so have we all . as regard money I be put out of trouble by the inheritance I make : but do not Atra Cura sit behind baronet as well as equite ? my friend in London use to congratulate I on my happiness . who would not like to be master of a good house and a good estate ? but can Gumbo shut the hall - door upon blue devil , or lie they always in a red sea of claret ? do a man sleep the well who have four - and - twenty hour to doze in ? do his intellect brighten after a sermon from the dull old vicar ; a ten minute ' cackle and flattery from the village apothecary ; or the conversation of Sir John and Sir Thomas with their lady , who come ten moonlight muddy mile to eat a haunch , and play a rubber ? ' tis all very well to have tradesman bow to your carriage - door , room make for you at quarter - session , and my lady wife take down the second or the third to dinner : but these pleasure fade nay , have their inconvenience . in our part of the country , for seven year after we come to Warrington Manor , our two what they call good neighbour be my Lord Tutbury and Sir John Mudbrook . we be of an old date than the Mudbrooks ; consequently , my Lady Tutbury always fall to my lot , when we din together , who be deaf and fall asleep after dinner ; or if I have Lady Mudbrook , she chatter with a folly so incessant and intense , that even my wife could hardly keep her complacency   consummate hypocrite as her ladyship be , know the rage with which I be fume at the other 's clatter . I come to London . I show my tongue to Dr. Heberden . I pour out my catalogue of complaint . " Psha , my dear Sir George ! " say the unfeele physician . " Headaches , languor , bad sleep , bad temper "   " not bad temper : Sir George have the sweetest temper in the world , only he be sometimes a little melancholy , " say my wife .   " bad sleep , bad temper , " continue the implacable doctor . " my dear lady , his inheritance have be his ruin , and a little poverty and a great deal of occupation would do he all the good in life . " 
 no , my brother Harry ought to have be the squire , with remainder to my son Miles , of course . Harry 's letter be full of gaiety and good spirit . his estate prosper : his negro multiply ; his crop be large ; he be a member of our House of Burgesses ; he adore his wife ; could he but have a child his happiness would be complete . have Hal be master of Warrington Manor - house , in my place , he would have be belove through the whole country ; he would have be steward at all the race , the gay of all the jolly huntsman , the bien venu at all the mansion round about , where people scarce care to perform the ceremony of welcome at sight of my glum face . as for my wife , all the world like she , and agree in pity she . I do not   know how the report get abroad , but ' twa generally agree that I treat she with awful cruelty , and that for jealousy I be a perfect Bluebeard . ah I ! and so it be true that I have have many dark hour ; that I pass day in long silence ; that the conversation of fool and whipper - snapper make I rebellious and peevish , and that , when I feel contempt , I sometimes do not   know how to conceal it , or I should say do not . I hope as I grow old I grow more charitable . because I do not love bawl and gallop after a fox , like the captain yonder , I be not his superior ; but , in this respect , humbly own that he be mine . he have perception which be deny I ; enjoyment which I can not understand . because I be blind the world be not dark . I try now and listen with respect when Squire Codgers talk of the day 's run . I do my good to laugh when Captain Rattleton tell his garrison story . I step up to the harpsichord with old Miss Humby   our neighbour from Beccles   and try and listen as she warble her ancient ditty . I play whist laboriously . be I not try to do the duty of life ? and I have a right to be garrulous and egotistical , because I have be read Montaigne all the morning . 
 I be not surprised , know by what influence my brother be lead , to find his name in the list of Virginia burgess who declare that the sole right of impose taxis on the inhabitant of this colony be now , and ever hath be , legally and constitutionally vest in the House of Burgesses , and call upon the other colony to pray for the Royal interposition in favour of the violate right of America . and it be now , after we have be some three year settle in our english home , that a correspondence between we and Madam Esmond begin to take place . it be my wife who   upon some pretext such as woman always know how to find   re - establish the relation between we . Mr. Miles must need have the small - pox , from which he miraculously recover without lose any portion of his beauty ; and on his recovery the mother write her prettiest little wheedle letter to the grandmother of the fortunate babe . she coax she with all sort of modest phrase and humble offering of respect and goodwill . she narrate anecdote of the precocious genius of the lad   what hath subsequently happen , I wonder , to stop the growth of that gallant young officer 's brain ? , and she must have send over to his grandmother a lock of the darling boy 's hair , for the old lady , in her reply , acknowledge the receipt of some such present . I wonder , as it come from England , they allow it to pass our custom - house at Williamsburg . in return for these peace - offering and smuggled token of submission , come a tolerably gracious letter from my Lady of Castlewood . she inveigh against the dangerous spirit pervade the colony : she lament to think that her unhappy son be consort with people who , she fear , will be no well than rebel and traitor . she do not wonder , consider who his friend and adviser be . how can a wife take from an almost menial situation be expect to sympathise with person of rank and dignity who have the honour of the Crown at heart ? if evil time be come for the monarchy   for the folk in America appear to be disinclined to pay taxis , and require that everything should be do for they without cost , she remember how to monarchs in misfortune , the Esmonds her father the Marquis especially have ever be faithful . she know not what opinion   though she might judge from my newfangled Lord Chatham   be in fashion in England . she pray , at least , she might hear that one of her son be not on the side of rebellion . when we come , in after day , to look over old family paper in Virginia , we find " letter from my daughter Lady Warrington , " neatly tie up with a ribbon . my Lady Theo insist I should not open they ; and the truth , I believe , be , that they be so full of praise of her husband that she think my vanity would suffer from read they . 
 when Madam begin to write , she give we brief notice of Harry and his wife . " the two woman , " she write , ' still govern everything with my poor boy at Fannystown   as he choose to call his house . they must save money there , for I hear but a shabby account of their manner of entertaining . the Mount Vernon gentleman continue to be his great friend , and he vote in the House of Burgesses very much as his guide advise he . why he should be so sparing of his money I can not understand : I hear , of five negro who go with his equipage to my Lord Bottetourt 's , only two have shoe to their foot . I have reason to save , have son for whom I wish to provide , but he hath no child , wherein he certainly be spar from much grief , though , no doubt , Heaven in its wisdom mean our good by the trial which , through our child , it cause we to endure . his mother - in - law , " she add in one of her letter , " have be ail . ever since his marriage , my poor Henry have be the creature of these two artful woman , and they rule he entirely . nothing , my dear daughter , be more contrary to common sense and to Holy Scripture than this . be we not tell , wife , be obedient to your husband ? have Mr. Warrington live , I should have endeavour to follow up that sacred precept , hold that nothing so become a woman as humility and obedience . " 
 presently we have a letter seal with black , and announce the death of our dear good mountain , for whom I have a hearty regret and affection , remember her sincere love for we as child . Harry deplore the event in his honest way , and with tear which actually blot his paper . and Madam Esmond , allude to the circumstance , say : " my late housekeeper , Mrs. Mountain , as soon as she find her illness be fatal , send to I request a last interview on her deathbed , intending , doubtless , to pray my forgiveness for her treachery towards I . I send her word that I could forgive she as a Christian , and heartily hope   though I confess I doubt it   that she have a due sense of her crime towards I . but our meeting , I consider , be of no use , and could only occasion unpleasantness between we . if she repent , though at the eleventh hour , it be not too late , and I sincerely trust that she be now do so . and , would you believe her lamentable and hardened condition ? she send I word through Dinah , my woman , whom I dispatch to she with medicine for her soul 's and her body 's health , that she have nothing to repent of as far as regard her conduct to I , and she want to be leave alone ! Poor Dinah distribute the medicine to my negro , and our people take it eagerly whilst Mrs. Mountain , leave to herself , succumb to the fever . oh , the perversity of human kind ! this poor creature be too proud to take my remedy , and be now beyond the reach of cure and physician . you tell I your little Miles be subject to fit of cholic . my remedy , and I will beg you to let I know if effectual , be , " etc . etc . and here follow the prescription , which thou didst not take , o my son , my heir , and my pride ! because thy fond mother have her mother 's favourite powder , on which in his infantine trouble our firstborn be dutifully nurture . do word not exactly consonant with truth pass between the lady in their correspondence ? I fear my Lady Theo be not altogether candid : else how to account for a phrase in one of Madam Esmond 's letter , who say : " I be glad to hear the powder have do the dear child good . they be , if not on a first , on a second or third application , almost infallible , and have be the blessed mean of relieve many person round I , both infant and adult , white and colour . I send my grandson an indian bow and arrow . shall these old eye never behold he at Castlewood , I wonder , and be Sir George so busy with his book and his politic that he can not   afford a few month to his mother in Virginia ? I be much alone now . my son 's chamber be just as he leave it : the same book be in the press : his little hanger and fowling - piece over the bed , and my father 's picture over the mantelpiece . I never allow anything to be alter in his room or his brother 's . I fancy the child play near I sometimes , and that I can see my dear father 's head as he doze in his chair . mine be grow almost as white as my father 's . be I never to behold my child ere I go hence ? the Lord 's will be do . " 




 CHAPTER LXXXVI . at home 

 such an appeal as this of our mother would have soften heart much less obdurate than our ; and we talk of a speedy visit to Virginia , and of hire all the Young Rachel 's cabin accommodation . but our child must fall ill , for whom the voyage would be dangerous , and from whom the mother of course could not part ; and the Young Rachel make her voyage without we that year . another year there be another difficulty , in my worship 's first attack of the gout   which occupy I a good deal , and afterwards certainly clear my wit and enliven my spirit ; and now come another much sad cause for delay in the sad news we receive from Jamaica . some two year after our establishment at the Manor , our dear General return from his government , a little rich in the world 's good than when he go away , but have undergo a loss for which no wealth could console he , and after which , indeed , he do not care to remain in the West Indies . my Theo 's poor mother the most tender and affectionate friend   save one   I have ever have die abroad of the fever . her last regret be that she should not be allow to live to see our child and ourselves in prosperity . 
 " she see we , though we do not see she ; and she thank you , George , for have be good to her child , " her husband say . 
 he , we think , would not be long ere he join she . his love for she have be the happiness and business of his whole life . to be away from she seem live no more . it be pitiable to watch the good man as he sate with we . my wife , in her air and in many tone and gesture , constantly recall her mother to the bereaved widower 's heart . what cheer we could give he in his calamity we offer ; but , especially , little Hetty be now , under Heaven , his chief support and consolation . she have refuse more than one advantageous match in the Island , the General tell we ; and on her return to England , my Lord Wrotham 's heir lay himself at her foot . but she love well to stay with her father , Hetty say . as long as he be not tired of she she care for no husband . 
 " Nay , " say we , when this last great match be propose , " let the General stay six month with we at the Manor here , and you can have he at Oakhurst for the other six . " 
 but Hetty declare her father never could bear Oakhurst again now that her mother be go ; and she would marry no man for his coronet and money not she ! the General , when we talk this matter over , say gravely that the child have no desire for marry , owe possibly to some disappointment in early life , of which she never speak ; and we , respect her feeling , be for our part equally silent . my brother Lambert have by this time a college live near to Winchester , and a wife of course to adorn his parsonage . we profess but a moderate degree of like for this lady , though we make she welcome when she come to we . her idea regard our poor Hetty 's determined celibacy be different to that which I have . this Mrs. Jack be a chatterbox of a woman , in the habit of speak her mind very freely , and of pride herself excessively on her skill in give pain to her friend . 
 " my dear Sir George , " she be pleased to say , " I have often and often tell our dear Theo that I would not   have a pretty sister in my house to make tea for Jack when I be upstairs , and always to be at hand when I be want in the kitchen or nursery , and always to be dress neat and in she good when I be very likely make pie or pudding or look to the child . I have every confidence in Jack , of course . I should like to see he look at another woman , indeed ! and so I have in Jemima but they do not   come together in my house when I be upstairs that I promise you ! and so I tell my sister Warrington . " 
 " be I to understand , " say the General , " that you have do my Lady Warrington the favour to warn she against her sister , my daughter Miss Hester ? " 
 " yes , pa , of course I have . a duty be a duty , and a woman be a woman , and a man 's a man , as I know very well . do not   tell I ! he be a man . every man be a man , with all his sanctify air ! " 
 " you yourself have a married sister , with whom you be stay when my son Jack first have the happiness of make your acquaintance ? " remark the General . 
 " yes , of course I have a married sister ; every one know that and I have be as good as a mother to her child , that I have ! " 
 " and be I to gather from your conversation that your attraction prove a powerful temptation for your sister 's husband ? " 
 " Law , General ! I do not   know how you can go for to say I ever say any such a thing ! " cry Mrs. Jack , red and voluble . 
 " do not   you perceive , my dear madam , that it be you who have insinuate as much , not only regard yourself , but regard my own two daughter ? " 
 " never , never , never , as I be a christian woman ! and it be most cruel of you to say so , sir . and I do say a sister be good out of the house , that I do ! and as Theo 's time be come , I warn she , that be all . " 
 " have you discover , my good madam , whether my poor Hetty have steal any of the spoon ? when I come to breakfast this morning , my daughter be alone , and there must have be a score of piece of silver on the table . " 
 " Law , sir ! who ever say a word about spoon ? do I ever accuse the poor dear ? if I do , may I drop down dead at this moment on this hearth - rug ! and I be not   use to be speak to in this way . and I and Jack have both remark it ; and I have   do my duty , that I have . " and here Mrs. Jack flounce out of the room , in tear . 
 " and have the woman have the impudence to tell you this , my child ? " ask the General , when Theo   who be a little delicate   come to the tea - table . 
 " she have tell I every day since she have be here . she come into my dressing - room to tell I . she come to my nursery , and say , ' ah , I would not   have a sister prowl about my nursery , that I would not . ' ah , how pleasant it be to have amiable and well - breed relative , say I. " 
 " Thy poor mother have be spar this woman , " groan the General . 
 " our mother would have make she well , papa , " say Theo , kiss he . 
 " yes , dear . " and I see that both of they be at their prayer . 
 but this must be own , that to love one 's relative be not always an easy task ; to live with one 's neighbour be sometimes not amusing . from Jack Lambert 's demeanour next day , I could see that his wife have give he her version of the conversation . Jack be sulky , but not dignified . he be angry , but his anger do not prevent his appetite . he preach a sermon for we which be entirely stupid . and little Miles , once more in sable , sate at his grandfather 's side , his little hand place in that of the kind old man . 
 would he stay and keep house for we during our virginian trip ? the housekeeper should be put under the full domination of Hetty . the butler 's key should be hand over to he ; for Gumbo , not I think with an over good grace , be to come with we to Virginia : have , it must be premise , unite himself with Mrs. Molly in the bond of matrimony , and people a cottage in my park with sundry tawny Gumbos . under the care of our good General and his daughter we leave our house , then ; we travel to London , and thence to Bristol , and our obsequious agent there have the opportunity of declare that he should offer up prayer for our prosperity , and of vow that child so beautiful as ours   we have an infant by this time to accompany Miles   be never see on any ship before . we make a voyage without accident . how strange the feeling be as we land from our boat at Richmond ! a coach and a host of negro be there in wait to receive we ; and hard by a gentleman on horseback , with negro in our livery , too , who spring from his horse and rush up to embrace we . not a little charm be both of we to see our dear Hal . he ride with we to our mother 's door . yonder she stand on the step to welcome we ; and Theo kneel down to ask her blessing . 
 Harry ride in the coach with we as far as our mother 's house ; but would not , as he say , spoil sport by enter with we . " she see I , " he own , " and we be pretty good friend ; but Fanny and she be well apart ; and there be no love lose between them , I can promise you . come over to I at the Tavern , George , when thou art free . and to - morrow I shall have the honour to present her sister to Theo . ' twas only from happen to be in town yesterday that I hear the ship be signal , and wait to see you . I have send a negro boy home to my wife , and she will be here to pay her respect to my Lady Warrington . " and Harry , after this brief greeting , jump out of the carriage , and leave we to meet our mother alone . 
 since I part from she I have see a great deal of fine company , and Theo and I have pay our respect to the King and Queen at St. James 's ; but we have see no more stately person than this who welcome we , and raise my wife from her knee , embrace she and lead she into the house . ' twas a plain , wood - build place , with a gallery round , as our virginian house be ; but if it have be a palace , with a little empress inside , our reception could not have be more courteous . there be old Nathan , still the major - domo , a score of kind black face of black , grin welcome . some whose name I remember as child be grow out of remembrance , to be sure , to be buxom lad and lass ; and some I have leave with black pate be grizzle now with snowy poll : and some who be bear since my time be peer at doorway with their great eye and little naked foot . it be , " I be little Sip , Master George ! " and " I be Dinah , Sir George ! " and " I be Master Miles 's boy ! " say a little chap in a new livery and boot of nature 's black . Ere the day be over the whole household have find a pretext for pass before we , and grin and bow and make we welcome . I do not   know how many repast be serve to we . in the evening my Lady Warrington have to receive all the gentry of the little town , which she do with perfect grace and good - humour , and I have to shake hand with a few old acquaintance old enemy I be go to say ; but I have come into a fortune and be no long a naughty prodigal . why , a drove of fat calf be kill in my honour ! my poor Hal be of the entertainment , but gloomy and crestfallen . his mother speak to he , but it be as a queen to a rebellious prince , her son who be not yet forgive . we two slip away from the company , and go up to the room assign to I : but there , as we begin a free conversation , our mother , taper in hand , appear with her pale face . do I want anything ? be everything quite as I wish it ? she have peep in at the dear child , who be sleep like cherub . how she do caress they , and delight over they ! how she be charm with Miles 's dominating air , and the little Theo 's smile and dimple ! " supper be just come on the table , Sir George . if you like our cookery well than the tavern , Henry , I beg you to stay . " what a different welcome there be in the word and tone address to each of we ! Hal hang down his head , and follow to the low room . a clergyman beg a blessing on the meal . he touch with not a little art and eloquence upon our arrival at home , upon our safe passage across the stormy water , upon the love and forgiveness which await we in the mansion of the Heavenly Parent when the storm of life be over . 
 here be a new clergyman , quite unlike some whom I remember about we in early day , and I praise he , but Madam Esmond shake her head . she be afraid his principle be very dangerous : she be afraid other have adopt those dangerous principle . have I not see the paper sign by the burgess and merchant at Williamsburg the year before the Lees , Randolphs , Bassets , Washingtons , and the like , and oh , my dear , that I should have to say it , our name , that is , your brother 's   by what influence I do not like to say , and this unhappy Mr. Belman 's who beg a blessing last night ? 
 if there have be quarrel in our little colonial society when I leave home , what be these to the feud I find rag on my return ? we have send the Stamp Act to America , and be force to repeal it . then we must try a new set of duty on glass , paper , and what not , and repeal that Act too , with the exception of a duty on tea . from Boston to Charleston the tea be confiscate . even my mother , loyal as she be , give up her favourite drink ; and my poor wife would have have to forgo her , but we have bring a quantity for our private drinking on board ship , which have pay four time as much duty at home . not that I for my part would have hesitate about pay duty . the home Government must have some mean of revenue , or its pretension to authority be idle . they say the colony be try and tyrannise over ; I say the home Government be try and tyrannise over .   ' Tis but an affair of argument and history , now ; we try the question , and be beat ; and the matter be settle as completely as the conquest of Britain by the Normans .   and all along , from conviction I trust , I own to have take the british side of the quarrel . in that brief and unfortunate experience of war which I have have in my early life , the universal cry of the army and well - affect person be , that Mr. Braddock 's expedition have fail , and defeat and disaster have fall upon we in consequence of the remissness , the selfishness , and the rapacity of many of the very people for whose defence against the french arm have be take up . the colonist be for have all do for they , and for do nothing , they make extortionate bargain with the champion who come to defend they ; they fail in contract ; they furnish niggardly supply ; they multiply delay until the hour for beneficial action be past , and until the catastrophe come which never need have occur but for their ill - will . what shout of joy be there , and what ovation for the great british Minister who have devise and effect the conquest of Canada ! Monsieur de Vaudreuil say justly that that conquest be the signal for the defection of the north american colony from their allegiance to Great Britain ; and my Lord Chatham , have do his good to achieve the first part of the scheme , contribute more than any man in England towards the completion of it . the colony be insurgent , and he applaud their rebellion . what score of thousand of waverer must he have encourage into resistance ! it be a general who say to an army in revolt , " God save the king ! my man , you have a right to mutiny ! " no wonder they set up his statue in this town , and his picture in t'other ; whilst here and there they hang Ministers and Governors in effigy . to our virginian town of Williamsburg , some wiseacre must subscribe to bring over a portrait of my lord , in the habit of a roman orator speak in the Forum , to be sure , and point to the palace of Whitehall , and the special window out of which Charles I. be behead ! here be a neat allegory , and a pretty compliment to a british statesman ! I hear , however , that my lord 's head be paint from a bust , and so be take off without his knowledge . 
 now my country be England , not America or Virginia ; and I take , or rather take , the english side of the dispute . my sympathy have always be with home , where I be now a squire and a citizen : but have my lot be to plant tobacco , and live on the bank of James River or Potomac , no doubt my opinion have be alter . when , for instance , I visit my brother at his new house and plantation , I find he and his wife as staunch Americans as we be british . we have some word upon the matter in dispute , who have not in those troublesome time ? but our argument be carry on without rancour ; even my new sister could not bring we to that , though she do she good when we be together , and in the curtain lecture which I have no doubt she inflict on her spouse , like a notable housewife as she be . but we trust in each other so entirely that even Harry 's duty towards his wife would not make he quarrel with his brother . he love I from old time , when my word be law with he ; he still protest that he and every virginian gentleman of his side be loyal to the Crown . War be not declare as yet , and gentleman of different opinion be courteous enough to one another . Nay , at our public dinner and festival , the health of the King be still ostentatiously drunk ; and the assembly of every colony , though prepare for Congress , though resist all attempt at taxation on the part of the home authority , be loud in its expression of regard for the King our Father , and pathetic in its appeal to that paternal sovereign to put away evil counsellor from he , and listen to the voice of moderation and reason . up to the last , our virginian gentry be a grave , orderly , aristocratic folk , with the strong sense of their own dignity and station . in later day , and nearer home , we have hear of fraternisation and equality . amongst the great folk of our Old World I have never see a gentleman stand more on his dignity and maintain it well than Mr. Washington : no not the King against whom he take arm . in the eye of all the gentry of the french court , who gaily join in the crusade against we , and so take their revenge for Canada , the great american chief always appear as anax andron , and they allow that his well could not be see in Versailles itself . though they be quarrel with the Governor , the gentleman of the House of Burgesses still maintain amicable relation with he , and exchange dignified courtesy . when my Lord Bottetourt arrive , and hold his court at Williamsburg in no small splendour and state , all the gentry wait upon he , Madam Esmond include . and at his death , Lord Dunmore , who succeed he , and bring a fine family with he , be treat with the utmost respect by our gentry privately , though publicly the House of Assembly and the Governor be at war . 
 their quarrel be a matter of history , and concern I personally only so far as this , that our burgess be convene for the 1st of March in the year after my arrival in Virginia , it be agree that we should all pay a visit to our capital , and our duty to the Governor . since Harry 's unfortunate marriage Madam Esmond have not perform this duty , though always previously accustom to pay it ; but now that her eld son be arrive in the colony , my mother opine that we must certainly wait upon his Excellency the Governor , nor be we sorry , perhaps , to get away from our little Richmond to enjoy the gaiety of the provincial capital . Madam engage , and at a great price , the good house to be have at Richmond for herself and her family . now I be rich , her generosity be curious . I have more than once to interpose   her old servant likewise wonder at her new way of life , and beg she not to be so lavish . but she gently say , in former day she have occasion to save , which now exist no more . Harry have enough , sure , with such a wife as he have take out of the housekeeper 's room . if she choose to be a little extravagant now , why should she hesitate ? she have not her dear daughter and grandchild with she every day   she fall in love with all three of they , and spoil they as much as they be capable of be spoil . besides , in former day I could not accuse she of too much extravagance , and this I think be almost the only allusion she make to the pecuniary difference between we . so she have her people dress in their good , and her good wine , plate , and furniture from Castlewood by sea at no small charge , and her dress in which she have be marry in George II . 's reign , and we all flatter ourselves that our coach make the great figure of any except his Excellency 's , and we engage Signor Formicalo , his Excellency 's major - domo , to superintend the series of feast that be give in my honour ; and more fleshpot be set a - stew in our kitchen in one month , our servant say , than have be know in the family since the young gentleman go away . so great be Theo 's influence over my mother , that she actually persuade she , that year , to receive our sister Fanny , Hal 's wife , who would have stay upon the plantation rather than face Madam Esmond . but , trust to Theo 's promise of amnesty , Fanny   to whose house we have pay more than one visit   come up to town , and make her curtsey to Madam Esmond , and be forgive . and rather than be forgive in that way , I own , for my part , that I would prefer perdition or utter persecution . 
 " you know these , my dear ? " say Madam Esmond , point to her fine silver sconce . " Fanny hath often clean they when she be with I at Castlewood . and this dress , too , Fanny know , I dare say ? her poor mother have the care of it . I always have the great confidence in she . " 
 here there be wrath flash from Fanny 's eye , which our mother , who have forgive she , do not perceive not she ! 
 " oh , she be a treasure to I ! " Madam resume . " I never should have nurse my boy through their illness but for your mother 's admirable care of they . Colonel Lee , permit I to present you to my daughter , my Lady Warrington . her ladyship be a neighbour of your relative the Bunburys at home . here come his Excellency . welcome , my lord ! " 
 and our princess perform before his lordship one of those curtsey of which she be not a little proud ; and I fancy I see some of the company venture to smile . 
 " by George ! madam , " say Mr. Lee , ' since Count Borulawski , I have not see a bow so elegant as your ladyship 's . " 
 " and pray , sir , who be Count Borulawski ? " ask Madam . 
 " he be a nobleman high in favour with his polish Majesty , " reply Mr. Lee . " may I ask you , madam , to present I to your distinguished son ? " 
 " this be Sir George Warrington , " say my mother , point to I . 
 " Pardon I , madam . I mean Captain Warrington , who be by Mr. Wolfe 's side when he die . I have be content to share his fate , so I have be near he . " 
 and the ardent Lee swagger up to Harry , and take his hand with respect , and pay he a compliment or two , which make I , at least , pardon he for his late impertinence ; for my dear Hal walk gloomily through his mother 's room in his old uniform of the famous corps which he have quit . 
 we have have many meeting , which the stern mother could not interrupt , and in which that instinctive love which bind we to one another , and which nothing could destroy , have opportunity to speak . entirely unlike each other in our pursuit , our taste , our opinion his life be one of eager exercise , active sport , and all the amusement of the field , while mine be to dawdle over book and spend my time in languid self - contemplation we have , nevertheless , have such a sympathy as almost pass the love of woman . my poor Hal confess as much to I , for his part , in his artless manner , when we go away without wife or womankind , except a few negro leave in the place , and pass a week at Castlewood together . 
 the lady do not love each other . I know enough of my Lady Theo , to see after a very few glance whether or not she take a liking to another of her amiable sex . all my power of persuasion or command fail to change the stubborn creature 's opinion . have she ever say a word against Mrs. this or Miss that ? not she ! have she be otherwise than civil ? no , assuredly ! my Lady Theo be polite to a beggar - woman , treat her kitchenmaid like duchess , and murmur a compliment to the dentist for his elegant manner of pull her tooth out . she would black my boot , or clean the grate , if I ordain it   always look like a duchess the while ; but as soon as I say to she , " my dear creature , be fond of this lady , or t'other ! " all obedience cease ; she execute the most refined curtsey ; smile and kiss even to order ; but perform that mysterious undefinable freemasonic signal , which pass between woman , by which each know that the other hat she . so , with regard to Fanny , we have meet at her house , and at other . I remember she affectionately from old day , I fully credit poor Hal 's violent protest and tearful oath , that , by George , it be our mother 's persecution which make he marry she . he could not   stand by and see a poor thing torture as she be , without come to her rescue ; no , by heaven , he could not ! I say I believe all this ; and have for my sister - in - law a genuine compassion , as well as an early regard ; and yet I have no love to give she ; and , in reply to Hal 's passionate outbreak in praise of her beauty and worth , and eager query to I whether I do not think she a perfect paragon ? I could only answer with faint compliment or vague approval , feel all the while that I be disappoint my poor ardent fellow , and curse inwardly that revolt against flattery and falsehood into which I sometimes frantically rush . why should I not say , " yes dear Hal , thy wife be a paragon ; her singing be delightful , her hair and shape be beautiful ; " as I might have say by a little common stretch of politeness ? why could I not cajole this or that stupid neighbour or relative , as I have hear Theo do a thousand time , find all sort of lively prattle to amuse they , whilst I sit before they dumb and gloomy ? I say it be a sin not to have more word to say in praise of Fanny . we ought to have praise she , we ought to have like she . my Lady Warrington certainly ought to have like she , for she can play the hypocrite , and I can not . and there be this young creature pretty , graceful , shape like a nymph , with beautiful black eye and we care for they no more than for two gooseberry ! at Warrington my wife and I , when we pretend to compare note , elaborately compliment each other on our new sister 's beauty . what lovely eye ! oh yes ! what a sweet little dimple on her chin ! ah oui ! what wonderful little foot ! perfectly Chinese ! where should we in London get slipper small enough for she ? and , these compliment exhaust , we know that we do not like Fanny the value of one penny - piece ; we know that we dislike she ; we know that we ha ... well , what hypocrite woman be ! we hear from many quarter how eagerly my brother have take up the new anti - english opinion , and what a champion he be of so - call american right and freedom . " it be she do , my dear , " say I to my wife . " if I have say so much , I be sure you would have scold I , " say my Lady Warrington , laugh : and I do straightway begin to scold she , and say it be most cruel of she to suspect our new sister ; and what earthly right have we to do so ? but I say again , I know Madam Theo so well , that when once she have get a prejudice against a person in her little head , not all the king 's horse nor all the king 's man will get it out again . I vow nothing would induce she to believe that Harry be not henpecke nothing . 
 well , we go to Castlewood together without the woman , and stay at the dreary , dear old place , where we have be so happy , and I , at least , so gloomy . it be winter , and duck - time , and Harry go away to the river , and shoot dozen and score and bushel of canvasback , whilst I remain in my grandfather 's library amongst the old mouldering book which I love in my childhood which I see in a dim vision still rest on a little boy 's lap , as he sit by an old white - head gentleman 's knee . I read my book ; I sleep in my own bed and room religiously keep , as my mother tell I , and leave as on the day when I go to Europe . Hal 's cheery voice would wake I , as of old . like all man who love to go a - field , he be an early riser : he would come and wake I , and sit on the foot of the bed and perfume the air with his morning pipe , as the house negro lay great log on the fire . it be a happy time ! Old Nathan have tell I of cunning crypt where ancestral rum and claret be deposit . we have have care , struggle , battle , bitter grief , and disappointment ; we be boy again as we sit there together . I be a boy now even as I think of the time . 
 that unlucky tea - tax , which alone of the taxis lately impose upon the colony , the home Government be determine to retain , be meet with defiance throughout America . ' tis true we pay a shilling in the pound at home , and ask only threepence from Boston or Charleston ; but as a question of principle , the impost be refuse by the province , which indeed ever show a most spirited determination to pay as little as they could help . in Charleston the tea - ship be unload , and the cargo store in cellar . from New York and Philadelphia , the vessel be turn back to London . in Boston   where there be an armed force , whom the inhabitant be perpetually mobbing , certain patriot , paint and disguise as Indians , board the ship , and fling the obnoxious cargoe into the water . the wrath of our white Father be kindle against this city of Mohocks in masquerade . the notable Boston Port Bill be bring forward in the British House of Commons ; the port be closed , and the Custom House remove to Salem . the Massachusetts Charter be annul ; and , in just apprehension that riot might ensue , in deal with the perpetrator of which the colonial court might be lead to act partially , Parliament decreed that person indict for act of violence and armed resistance , might be send home , or to another colony , for trial . if such act set all America in a flame , they certainly drive all wellwisber of our country into a fury . I might have sentence Master Miles Warrington , at five year old , to a whipping , and he would have cry , take down his little small - clothe and submit : but suppose I offer   and he richly deserve it   to chastise Captain Miles of the Prince 's dragoon ? he would whirl my paternal cane out of my hand , box my hair - powder out of my ear . Lord a - mercy ! I tremble at the very idea of the controversy ? he would assert his independence in a word ; and if , I say , I think the home Parliament have a right to levy taxis in the colony , I own that we take mean most captious , most insolent , most irritate , and , above all , most impotent , to assert our claim . 
 my Lord Dunmore , our Governor of Virginia , upon Lord Bottetourt 's death , receive I into some intimacy soon after my arrival in the colony , be willing to live on good term with all our gentry . my mother 's severe loyalty be no secret to he ; indeed , she wave the king 's banner in all company , and talk so loudly and resolutely , that Randolph and Patrick Henry himself be strike dumb before she . it be Madam Esmond 's celebrated reputation for loyalty   his Excellency laughingly tell I   which induce he to receive her eld son to grace . 
 " I have have the bad character of you from home , " his lordship say . " little bird whisper to I , Sir George , that you be a man of the most dangerous principle . you be a friend of Mr. Wilkes and Alderman Beckford . I be not sure you have not be at Medmenham Abbey . you have live with player , poet , and all sort of wild people . I have be warn against you , sir , and I find you " 
 " not so black as I have be paint , " I interrupt his lordship , with a smile . 
 " faith , " say my lord , " if I tell Sir George Warrington that he seem to I a very harmless , quiet gentleman , and that ' tis a great relief to I to talk to he amidst these loud politician ; these lawyer with their perpetual noise about Greece and Rome ; these virginian squire who be for ever profess their loyalty and respect , whilst they be shake their fist in my face I hope nobody overhear we , " say my lord , with an arch smile , " and nobody will carry my opinion home . " 
 his lordship 's ill opinion have be remove by a well knowledge of I , our acquaintance daily grow more intimate ; and , especially between the lady of his family and my own , a close friendship arise between they and my wife at least . Hal 's wife , receive kindly at the little provincial court , as all lady be , make herself by no mean popular there by the hot and eager political tone which she adopt . she assail all the Government measure with indiscriminate acrimony . be they lenient ? she say the perfidious British Government be only prepare a snare , and bid its time until it could forge heavy chain for unhappy America . be they angry ? why do not every american citizen rise , assert his right as a freeman , and serve every british governor , officer , soldier , as they have treat the East India Company 's tea ? my mother , on the other hand , be pleased to express her opinion with equal frankness , and , indeed , to press her advice upon his Excellency with a volubility which may have fatigue that representative of the Sovereign . call out the militia ; send for fresh troop from New York , from home , from anywhere ; lock up the Capitol !   this advice be follow , it must be own   and send every one of the ringleader amongst those wicked burgess to prison ! be Madam Esmond 's daily counsel to the Governor by word and letter . and if not only the burgess , but the burgess ' wife could have be lead off to punishment and captivity , I think this Brutus of a woman would scarce have appeal against the sentence . 




 CHAPTER LXXXVII . the last of God save the king 

 what perverse law of Fate be it that ever place I in a minority ? should a law be propose to hand over this realm to the Pretender of Rome , or the Grand Turk , and submit it to the new sovereign 's religion , it might pass , as I should certainly be vote against it . at home in Virginia , I find myself disagree with everybody as usual . by the Patriots I be vote   as indeed I profess myself to be   a tory ; by the Tories I be presently declare to be a dangerous Republican . the time be utterly out of joint . o curse spite ! Ere I have be a year in Virginia , how I wish myself back by the bank of the Waveney ! but the aspect of affair be so troublous , that I could not leave my mother , a lone lady , to face possible war and disaster , nor would she quit the country at such a juncture , nor should a man of spirit leave it . at his Excellency 's table , and over his Excellency 's plentiful claret , that point be agree on by number of the well - affect , that vow be vow over countless brimming bumper . no : it be statue signum , signifer ! we Cavaliers would all rally round it ; and at these time , our Governor talk like the brave of the brave . 
 now , I will say , of all my virginian acquaintance , Madam Esmond be the most consistent . our gentlefolk have come in number to Williamsburg ; and a great number of they propose to treat her Excellency , the Governor 's lady , to a ball , when the news reach we of the Boston Port Bill . Straightway the House of Burgesses adopt an indignant protest against this measure of the British Parliament , and decree a solemn day of fast and humiliation throughout the country , and of solemn prayer to Heaven to avert the calamity of Civil War . meanwhile , the invitation to my Lady Dunmore have be already give and accept , the gentleman agree that their ball should take place on the appoint evening , and then sackcloth and ash should be assume some day afterwards . 
 " a ball ! " say Madam Esmond . " I go to a ball which be give by a set of rebel who be go publicly to insult his Majesty a week afterwards ! I will die soon ! " and she write to the gentleman who be steward for the occasion to say , that view the dangerous state of the country , she , for her part , could not think of attend a ball . 
 what be her surprise then , the next time she go abroad in her chair , to be cheer by a hundred person , white and black , and shout of " Huzzah , Madam ! " " Heaven bless your ladyship ! " they evidently think her patriotism have cause her determination not to go to the ball . 
 Madam , that there should be no mistake , put her head out of the chair , and cry out " God save the king " as loud as she can . the people cry " God save the king , " too . everybody cry " God save the king " in those day . on the night of that entertainment , my poor Harry , as a Burgess of the House , and one of the giver of the feast , don his uniform red coat of Wolfe 's   which he so soon be to exchange for another colour , and go off with Madam Fanny to the ball . my Lady Warrington and her humble servant , as be stranger in the country , and english people as it be , be permit by Madam to attend the assembly from which she of course absent herself . I have the honour to dance a country - dance with the lady of Mount Vernon , whom I find a most lively , pretty , and amiable partner ; but be bind to say that my wife 's praise of she be receive with a very grim acceptance by my mother , when Lady Warrington come to recount the event of the evening . could not Sir George Warrington have dance with my Lady Dunmore or her daughter , or with anybody but Mrs. Washington ; to be sure the Colonel think so well of himself and his wife , that no doubt he consider she the grand lady in the room ; and she who remember he a road - surveyor at a guinea a day ! well , indeed ! there be no measure the pride of these provincial upstart , and as for this gentleman , my Lord Dunmore 's partiality for he have evidently turn his head . I do not know about Mr. Washington 's pride , I know that my good mother never could be get to love he or anything that be his . 
 she be no well pleased with he for go to the ball , than with his conduct three day afterwards , when the day of fast and humiliation be appoint , and when he attend the service which our new clergyman perform . she invite Mr. Belman to dinner that day , and sundry colonial authority . the clergyman excuse himself . Madam Esmond toss up her head , and say he might do as he like . she make a parade of a dinner ; she light her house up at night , when all the rest of the city be in darkness and gloom ; she beg Mr. Hardy , one of his Excellency 's aide - de - camp , to sing " God save the king , " to which the people in the street outside listened , think that it might be a part of some religious service which Madam be celebrate ; but then she call for " Britons , strike home ! " which the simple young gentleman just from Europe begin to perform , when a great yell arise in the street , and a large stone , fling from some rebellious hand , plump into the punch - bowl before I , and scatter it and its content about our dining - room . 
 my mother go to the window nothing daunt . I can see her rigid little figure now , as she stand with a toss - up head , outstretche frille arm , and the twinkle star for a background , and sing in chorus , " Britons , strike home ! strike home ! " the crowd in front of the paling shout and roar , " Silence ! for shame ! go back ! " but she will not go back , not she . " fling more stone , if you dare ! " say the brave little lady ; and more might have come , but some gentleman issue out of the Raley Tavern interpose with the crowd . " you must not   insult a lady , " say a voice I think I know . " Huzza , Colonel ! Hurrah , Captain ! God bless your honour ! " say the people in the street . and thus the enemy be pacify . 
 my mother , protest that the whole disturbance be over , would have have Mr. Hardy sing another song , but he give a sickly grin , and say , " he really do not like to sing to such accompaniment , " and the concert for that evening be end ; though I be bind to say that some scoundrel return at night , frighten my poor wife almost out of wit , and break every single window in the front of our tenement . " Britons , strike home ! " be a little too much ; Madam should have content herself with " God save the king . " Militia be drill , bullet be cast , supply of ammunition get ready , cunning plan for disappoint the royal ordinance devise and carry out ; but , to be sure , " God save the king " be the cry everywhere , and in reply to my objection to the gentleman - patriot , " why , you be scheme for a separation ; you be bring down upon you the inevitable wrath of the great power in the world ! " the answer to I always be , " we mean no separation at all ; we yield to no man in loyalty ; we glory in the name of Britons , " and so forth , and so forth . the powder - barrel be heap in the cellar , the train be lay , but Mr. Fawkes be persistent in his dutiful petition to King and Parliament and mean no harm , not he ! ' tis true when I speak of the power of our country , I imagine she would exert it ; that she would not expect to overcome three million of fellow - Britons on their own soil with a few battalion , a half - dozen general from Bond Street , and a few thousand bravo hire out of Germany . as if we want to insult the thirteen colony as well as to subdue they , we must set upon they these horde of Hessians , and the murderer out of the indian wigwam . be our great quarrel not to be fight without tali auxilio and istis defensoribus ? ah ! ' tis easy , now we be worst , to look over the map of the great empire wrest from we , and show how we ought not to have lose it . Long Island ought to have exterminate Washington 's army ; he ought never to have come out of Valley Forge except as a prisoner . the South be ours after the battle of Camden , but for the inconceivable meddling of the Commander - in - chief at New York , who paralyse the exertion of the only capable British General who appear during the war , and send he into that miserable cul - de - sac at York Town , whence he could only issue defeat and a prisoner . oh , for a week more ! a day more , an hour more of darkness or light ! in read over our american campaign from their unhappy commencement to their inglorious end , now that we be able to see the enemy 's movement and condition as well as our own , I fancy we can see how an advance , a march , might have put enemy into our power who have no means to withstand it , and change the entire issue of the struggle . but it be ordain by Heaven , and for the good , as we can now have no doubt , of both empire , that the great Western Republic should separate from we : and the gallant soldier who fight on her side , their indomitable and heroic Chief above all , have the glory of face and overcome , not only veteran soldier amply provide and inure to war , but wretchedness , cold , hunger , dissension , treason within their own camp , where all must have go to rack , but for the pure unquenchable flame of patriotism that be for ever burn in the bosom of the heroic leader . what a constancy , what a magnanimity , what a surprising persistence against fortune ! Washington before the enemy be no well nor braver than hundred that fight with he or against he   who have not hear the repeat sneer against " Fabius " in which his factious captain be accustom to indulge ? , but Washington the Chief of a nation in arm , do battle with distracted party ; calm in the midst of conspiracy ; serene against the open foe before he and the dark enemy at his back ; Washington inspire order and spirit into troop hungry and in rag ; sting by ingratitude , but betray no anger , and ever ready to forgive ; in defeat invincible , magnanimous in conquest , and never so sublime as on that day when he lay down his victorious sword and seek his noble retirement : here indeed be a character to admire and revere ; a life without a stain , a fame without a flaw . quando invenie parem ? in that more extensive work , which I have plan and partly write on the subject of this great war , I hope I have do justice to the character of its great leader .   and I trust that in the opinion I have record regard he , I have show that I also can be just and magnanimous towards those who view I personally with no favour . for my brother Hal be at Mount Vernon , and always eager to bring I and his beloved Chief on good term , show his Excellency some of the early sheet of my history . General Washington   who read but few book , and have not the slight pretension to literary taste   remark , " if you will have my opinion , my dear General , I think Sir George 's project work , from the speciman I have of it , be certain to offend both party . " G. E. W. . and this from the sheer force of respect which his eminent virtue extort . with the young Mr. Washington of my own early day I have not the honour to enjoy much sympathy : though my brother , whose character be much more frank and affectionate than mine , be always his fast friend in early time , when they be equal , as in latter day when the General , as I do own and think , be all mankind 's superior . 
 I have mention that contrariety in my disposition , and , perhaps , in my brother 's , which somehow place we on wrong side in the quarrel which ensue , and which from this time forth rag for five year , until the mother country be fain to acknowledge her defeat . Harry should have be the Tory , and I the Whig . theoretically my opinion be very much more liberal than those of my brother , who , especially after his marriage , become what our indian nabob call a Bahadoor a person ceremonious , stately , and exact respect . when my Lord Dunmore , for instance , talk about liberate the negro , so as to induce they to join the King 's standard , Hal be for hang the Governor and the Black Guards   as he call they   whom his Excellency have crimp . " if you , gentleman be fight for freedom , " say I , ' sure the negro may fight , too . " on which Harry roar out , shake his fist , " infernal villain , if I meet any of them , they shall die by this hand ! " and my mother agree that this idea of a negro insurrection be the most abominable and parricidal notion which have ever spring up in her unhappy country . she at least be more consistent than brother Hal . she would have black and white obedient to the power that be : whereas Hal only could admit that freedom be the right of the latter colour . 
 as a proof of her argument , Madam Esmond and Harry too would point to an instance in our own family in the person of Mr. Gumbo . have get his freedom from I , as a reward for his admirable love and fidelity to I when time be hard , Gumbo , on his return to Virginia , be scarce a welcome guest in his old quarter , amongst my mother 's servant . he be free , and they be not : he be , as it be , a centre of insurrection . he give himself no small air of protection and consequence amongst they ; brag of his friend in Europe   " at home , " as he call it , and his doing there ; and for a while bring the household round about he to listen to he and admire he , like the monkey who have see the world . now , Sady , Hal 's boy , who go to America of his own desire , be not free . hence jealousy between he and Mr. Gum ; and battle , in which they both practise the noble art of boxing and butting , which they have learn at Marybone Gardens and Hockley - in - the - Hole . nor be Sady the only jealous person : almost all my mother 's servant hat Signor Gumbo for the air which he give himself ; and I be sorry to say , that our faithful Molly , his wife , be as jealous as his old fellow - servant . the black could not pardon she for have demean herself so far as to marry one of their kind . she meet with no respect , could exercise no authority , come to her mistress with ceaseless complaint of the idleness , knavery , lie , steal of the black people ; and finally with a story of jealousy against a certain Dinah , or Diana , who , I heartily trust , be as innocent as her namesake the moonlight visitant of endymion . now , on the article of morality Madam Esmond be a very draconess ; and a person accuse be a person guilty . she make charge against Mr. Gumbo to which he reply with asperity . forget that he be a free gentleman , my mother now order Gumbo to be whip , on which molly fly at her ladyship , all her wrath at her husband 's infidelity vanishing at the idea of the indignity put upon he ; there be a rebellion in our house at Castlewood . a quarrel take place between I and my mother , as I take my man 's side . Hal and Fanny side with she , on the contrary ; and in so far the difference do good , as it bring about some little intimacy between Madam and her young child . this little difference be speedily heal ; but it be clear that the Standard of Insurrection must be remove out of our house ; and we determine that Mr. Gumbo and his lady should return to Europe . 
 my wife and I would willingly have go with they , God wot , for our boy sicken and lose his strength , and catch the fever in our swampy country ; but at this time she be expect to lie in   of our son Henry , and she know , too , that I have promise to stay in Virginia . it be agree that we should send the two back ; but when I offer Theo to go , she say her place be with her husband ; her father and Hetty at home would take care of our child ; and she scarce would allow I to see a tear in her eye whilst she be make her preparation for the departure of her little one . dost thou remember the time , madam , and the silence round the worktable , as the pile of little shirt be make ready for the voyage ? and the stealthy visit to the child 's chamber whilst they be asleep and yet with you ? and the terrible time of parting , as our barge with the servant and child row to the ship , and you stand on the shore ? have the Prince of Wales be go on that voyage , he could not have be well provide . where , sirrah , be the tompion watch your grandmother give you ? and how do you survive the box of cake which the good lady stow away in your cabin ? 
 the ship which take out my poor Theo 's child , return with the Reverend Mr. Hagan and my Lady Maria on board , who meekly choose to resign her rank , and be know in the colony   which be not to be a colony very long   only as Mrs. Hagan . at the time when I be in favour with my Lord Dunmore , a live fall vacant in Westmoreland county , he give it to our kinsman , who arrive in Virginia time enough to christen our boy Henry , and to preach some sermon on the then gloomy state of affair , which Madam Esmond pronounce to be prodigious fine . I think my Lady Maria win Madam 's heart by insist on go out of the room after she . " my father , your brother , be an earl , ' tis true , " say she , " but you know your ladyship be a marquis 's daughter , and I never can think of take precedence of you ! " so fond do Madam become of her niece , that she even allow Hagan to read play my own humble composition amongst other and be fairly force to own that there be merit in the tragedy of Pocahontas , which our parson deliver with uncommon energy and fire . 
 Hal and his wife come but rarely to Castlewood and Richmond when the chaplain and his lady be with we . Fanny be very curt and rude with Maria , use to giggle and laugh strangely in her company , and repeatedly remind she of her age , to our mother 's astonishment , who would often ask , be there any cause of quarrel between her niece and her daughter - in - law ? I keep my own counsel on these occasion , and be often not a little touch by the meekness with which the eld lady bear her persecution . Fanny love to torture she in her husband 's presence   who , poor fellow , be also in happy ignorance about his wife 's early history , and the other bear her agony , wince as little as might be . I sometimes would remonstrate with Madam Harry , and ask she be she a Red Indian , that she torture her victim so ? " have not I have torture enough in my time ? " say the young lady , and look as though she be determined to pay back the injury inflict on she . 
 " Nay , " say I , " you be breed in our wigwam , and I do not   remember anything but kindness ! " 
 " kindness ! " cry she . " no slave be ever treat as I be . the blow which wound most , often be those which never be aim . the people who hate we be not those we have injure . " 
 I think of little Fanny in our early day , silent , smile , willing to run and do all our bidding for we , and I grieve for my poor brother , who have take this sly creature into his bosom . 




 CHAPTER LXXXVIII . Yankee Doodle come to Town 

 one of the us to which we put America in the day of our british dominion be to make it a refuge for our sinner . besides convict and assign servant whom we transport to our colony , we discharge on their shore scapegrace and young son , for whom dissipation , despair , and bailiff make the old country uninhabitable . and as Mr. Cook , in his voyage , make his newly discover islander present of english animal   and other specimen of european civilisation , we use to take care to send sample of our black sheep over to the colony , there to browse as well they might , and propagate their precious breed . I myself be perhaps a little guilty in this matter , in busy myself to find a living in America for the worthy Hagan , husband of my kinswoman , at least be guilty in so far as this , that as we could get he no employment in England , we be glad to ship he to Virginia , and give he a colonial pulpit - cushion to thump . he demean himself there as a brave honest gentleman , to be sure ; he do his duty thoroughly by his congregation , and his king too ; and in so far do credit to my small patronage . Madam Theo use to urge this when I confide to she my scruple of conscience on this subject , and show , as her custom be and be , that my conduct in this , as in all other matter , be dictate by the high principle of morality and honour . but would I have give Hagan our living at home , and select he and his wife to minister to our parish ? I fear not . I never have a doubt of our cousin 's sincere repentance ; but I think I be secretly glad when she go to work it out in the wilderness . and I say this , acknowledge my pride and my error . twice , when I want they most , this kind Maria aid I with her sympathy and friendship . she bear her own distress courageously , and soothe those of other with admirable affection and devotion . and yet I , and some of mine   not Theo , would look down upon she . oh , for shame , for shame on our pride ! 
 my poor Lady Maria be not the only one of our family who be to be send out of the way to american wilderness . have borrow , steal , cheat at home , until he could cheat , borrow , and steal no more , the Honourable William Esmond , Esquire , be accommodate with a place at New York ; and his noble brother and royal master heartily desire that they might see he no more . when the trouble begin , we hear of the fellow and his doing in his new habitation . lie and mischief be his avant - courier wherever he travel . my Lord Dunmore inform I that Mr. Will declare publicly , that our estate of Castlewood be only our during his brother 's pleasure ; that his father , out of consideration for Madam Esmond , his lordship 's half - sister , have give she the place for life , and that he , William , be in negotiation with his brother , the present Lord Castlewood , for the purchase of the reversion of the estate ! we have the deed of gift in our strongroom at Castlewood , and it be furthermore register in due form at Williamsburg ; so that we be easy on that score . but the intention be everything ; and Hal and I promise , as soon as ever we meet Mr. William , to get from he a confirmation of this pretty story . what Madam Esmond 's feeling and expression be when she hear it , I need scarcely here particularise . " what ! my father , the Marquis of Esmond , be a liar , and I be a cheat , be I ? " cry my mother . " he will take my son 's property at my death , will he ? " and she be for writing , not only to Lord Castlewood in England , but to his Majesty himself at St. James 's , and be only prevent by my assurance that Mr. Will 's lie be notorious amongst all his acquaintance , and that we could not expect , in our own case , that he should be so inconsistent as to tell the truth . we hear of he presently as one of the loud amongst the Loyalists in New York , as Captain , and presently Major of a corps of volunteer who be send their address to the well - dispose in all the other colony , and announce their perfect readiness to die for the mother country . 
 we could not lie in a house without a whole window , and close the shutter of that unlucky mansion we have hire at Williamsburg , Madam Esmond leave our little capital , and my family return to Richmond , which also be desert by the member of the   dissolve   Assembly . Captain Hal and his wife return pretty early to their plantation ; and I , not a little annoyed at the course which event be take , divide my time pretty much between my own family and that of our Governor , who profess himself very eager to have my advice and company . there be the strong political difference , but as yet no actual personal quarrel . even after the dissolution of our House of Assembly   the member of which adjourn to a tavern , and there hold that famous meeting where , I believe , the idea of a congress of all the colony be first propose , the gentleman who be strong in opposition remain good friend with his Excellency , partook of his hospitality , and join he in excursion of pleasure . the session over , the gentry go home and have meeting in their respective county ; and the Assemblies in most of the other province have be also abruptly dissolve , it be agree everywhere that a general congress should be hold . Philadelphia , as the large and most important city on our continent , be select as the place of meeting ; and those celebrated conference begin , which be but the angry preface of war . we be still at God save the king ; we be still present our humble petition to the throne ; but when I go to visit my brother Harry at Fanny 's Mount   his new plantation lie not far from our , but with Rappahannock between we , and towards Mattaponey River , he ride out on business one morning , and I in the afternoon happen to ride too , and be tell by one of the groom that master be go towards Willis 's Ordinary ; in which direction , think no harm , I follow . and upon a clear place not far from Willis 's , as I advance out of the wood , I come on Captain Hal on horseback , with three- or four - and - thirty countryman round about he , arm with every sort of weapon , pike , scythe , fowling - piece , and musket ; and the Captain , with two or three likely young fellow as officer under he , put the man through their exercise . as I ride up a queer expression come over Hal 's face . " present arm ! " say he   and the army try to perform the salute as well they could . " Captain Cade , this be my brother , Sir George Warrington . " 
 " as a relation of your , Colonel , " say the individual address as captain , " the gentleman be welcome , " and he hold out a hand accordingly . 
 " and and a true friend to Virginia , " say Hal , with a redden face . 
 " yes , please God ! gentleman , " say I , on which the regiment give a hearty huzzay for the Colonel and his brother . the drill over , the officer , and the man too , be for adjourn to Willis 's and take some refreshment , but Colonel Hal say he could not drink with they that afternoon , and we trot homeward together . 
 " so , Hal , the cat be out of the bag ! " I say . 
 he give I a hard look . " I guess there be wilder cat in it . it must come to this , George . I say , you must not   tell Madam , " he add . 
 " Good God ! " I cry , " do you mean that with fellow such as those I see yonder , you and your friend be go to make fight against the great nation and the good army in the world ? " 
 " I guess we shall get an awful whipping , " say Hal , " and that be the fact . but then , George , " he add , with his sweet kind smile , " we be young , and a whipping or two may do we good . will not   it do we good , dolly , you old slut ? " and he give a playful touch with his whip to an old dog of all trade , that be run by he . 
 I do not try to urge upon he   I have do so in vain many time previously   our british side of the question , the side which appear to I to be the good . he be accustom to put off my reason by say , " all mighty well , brother , you speak as an Englishman , and have cast in your lot with your country , as I have with mine . " to this argument I own there be no answer , and all that remain for the disputant be to fight the matter out , when the strong be in the right . which have the right in the war of the last century ? the king or the parliament ? the side that be uppermost be the right , and on the whole much more humane in their victory than the Cavaliers would have be have they win . Nay , suppose we Tories have win the day in America ; how frightful and bloody that triumph would have be ! what rope and scaffold one imago , what noble head lay low ! a strange feeling this , I own ; I be on the Loyalist side , and yet want the whig to win . my brother Hal , on the other hand , who distinguish himself greatly with his regiment , never allow a word of disrespect against the enemy whom he oppose . " the officer of the british army , " he use to say , " be gentleman : at least , I have not hear that they be very much change since my time . there may be scoundrel and ruffian amongst the enemy 's troop ; I dare say we could find some such amongst our own . our business be to beat his Majesty 's force , not call they name ; any rascal can do that . " and from a name which Mr. Lee give my brother , and many of his rough horseman do not understand , Harry be often call " Chevaleer Baird " in the Continental army . he be a knight , indeed , without fear and without reproach . 
 as for the argument , " what could such people as those you be drill do against the british army ? " Hal have as confident answer . 
 " they can beat they , " say he , " Mr. George , that be what they can do . " 
 " great heaven ! " I cry , " do you mean with your company of Wolfe 's you would hesitate to attack five hundred such ? " 
 " with my company of the 67th , I would go anywhere . and , agree with you , that at this present moment I know more of soldiering than they ; but place I on that open ground where you find we , arm as you please , and half a dozen of my friend , with rifle , in the wood round about I ; which would get the well ? you know well , Mr. Braddock 's aide - de - camp ! " 
 there be no arguing with such a determination as this . " Thou know my way of thinking , Hal , " I say ; " and have surprise you at your work , I must tell my lord what I have see . " 
 " tell he , of course . you have see our county militia exercise . you will see as much in every colony from here to the Saint Lawrence or Georgia . as I be an old soldier , they have elect I colonel . what more natural ? Come , brother , let we trot on ; dinner will be ready , and Mrs. Fan do not like I to keep it wait . " and so we make for his house , which be open like all the house of our virginian gentleman , and where not only every friend and neighbour , but every stranger and traveller , be sure to find a welcome . 
 " so , Mrs. Fan , " I say , " I have find out what game my brother have be play . " 
 " I trust the Colonel will have plenty of sport ere long , " say she , with a toss of her head . 
 my wife think Harry have be hunt , and I do not care to undeceive she , though what I have see and he have tell I , make I naturally very anxious . 




 CHAPTER lxxxix . a Colonel without a regiment 

 when my visit to my brother be conclude , and my wife and young child have return to our maternal house at Richmond , I make it my business to go over to our Governor , then at his country house , near Williamsburg , and confer with he regard these open preparation for war , which be be make not only in our own province , but in every one of the colony as far as we could learn . gentleman , with whose name history have since make all the world familiar , be appoint from Virginia as delegate to the General Congress about to be hold in Philadelphia . in Massachusetts the people and the royal troop be face each other almost in open hostility : in Maryland and Pennsylvania we flatter ourselves that a much more loyal spirit be prevalent : in the Carolinas and Georgia the mother country could reckon upon staunch adherent , and a great majority of the inhabitant : and it never be to be suppose that our own Virginia would forgo its ancient loyalty . we have but few troop in the province , but its gentry be proud of their descent from the Cavaliers of the old time : and round about our Governor be swarm of loud and confident loyalist who be only eager for the moment when they might draw the sword , and scatter the rascally rebel before they . of course , in these meeting I be force to hear many a hard word against my poor Harry . his wife , all agree   and not without good reason , perhaps , have lead he to adopt these extreme anti - british opinion which he have of late declare ; and he be infatuate by his attachment to the gentleman of Mount Vernon , it be far say , whose opinion my brother always follow , and who , day by day , be commit himself far in the dreadful and desperate course of resistance . " this be your friend , " the people about his Excellency say , " this be the man you favour , who have have your special confidence , and who have repeatedly share your hospitality ! " it could not but be own much of this be true : though what some of our eager Loyalists call treachery be indeed rather a proof of the longing desire Mr. Washington and other gentleman have , not to withdraw from their allegiance to the Crown , but to remain faithful , and exhaust the very last chance of reconciliation , before they risk the other terrible alternative of revolt and separation . let traitor arm , and villain draw the parricidal sword ! we at least would remain faithful ; the unconquerable power of England would be exert , and the misguided and ungrateful province punish and bring back to their obedience . with what cheer we drink his Majesty 's health after our banquet ! we would die in defence of his right ; we would have a Prince of his Royal house to come and govern his ancient dominion ! in consideration of my own and my excellent mother 's loyalty , my brother 's benighted conduct should be forgive . be it yet too late to secure he by offer he a good command ? would I not intercede with he , who , it be know , have a great influence over he ? in our Williamsburg council we be alternately in every state of exaltation and triumph , of hope , of fury against the rebel , of anxious expectancy of home succour , of doubt , distrust , and gloom . 
 I promise to intercede with my brother ; and write to he , I own , with but little hope of success , repeat , and try to strengthen the argument which I have many a time use in our conversation . my mother , too , use her authority ; but from this , I own , I expect little advantage . she assail he , as her habit be , with such text of scripture as she think bear out her own opinion , and threaten punishment to he . she menace he with the penalty which must fall upon those who be disobedient to the power that be . she point to his eld brother 's example ; and hint , I fear , at his subjection to his wife , the very bad argument she could use in such a controversy . she do not show I her own letter to he ; possibly she know I might find fault with the energy of some of the expression she think proper to employ ; but she show I his answer , from which I gather what the style and tenor of her argument have be . and if Madam Esmond bring Scripture to her aid , Mr. Hal , to my surprise , bring score of text to bear upon she in reply , and address she in a very neat , temperate , and even elegant composition , which I think his wife herself be scarcely capable of pen . indeed , I find he have enlist the service of Mr. Belman , the New Richmond clergyman , who have take up strong opinion on the Whig side , and who preach and print sermon against Hagan   who , as I have say , be of our faction , in which I fear Belman have the good of the dispute . 
 my exhortation to Hal have no more success than our mother 's . he do not answer my letter . be still far press by the friend of the Government , I write over most imprudently to say I would visit he at the end of the week at Fanny 's Mount ; but on arrive , I only find my sister , who receive I with perfect cordiality , but inform I that Hal be go into the country , ever so far towards the Blue Mountains to look at some horse , and be to be away she do not know how long he be to be away ! 
 I know then there be no hope . " my dear , " I say , " as far as I can judge from the sign of the time , the train that have be lay these year must have a match put to it before long . Harry be rid away . God know to what end . " 
 " the Lord prosper the righteous cause , Sir George , " say she . 
 " amen , with all my heart . you and he speak as Americans ; I as an Englishman . tell he from I , that when anything in the course of nature shall happen to our mother , I have enough for I and mine in England , and shall resign all our land here in Virginia to he . " 
 " you do not   mean that , George ? " she cry , with brighten eye . " well , to be sure , it be but right and fair , " she presently add . " why should you , who be the eld but by an hour , have everything ? a palace and land in England the plantation here the title and child and my poor Harry none ? but ' tis generous of you all the same leastway handsome and proper , and I do not   expect it of you ; and you do not   take after your mother in this , Sir George , that you do not , nohow . give my love to sister Theo ! " and she offer I a cheek to kiss , ere I ride away from her door . with such a woman as Fanny to guide he , how could I hope to make a convert of my brother ? 
 have meet with this poor success in my enterprise , I ride back to our Governor , with whom I agree that it be time to arm in earnest , and prepare ourselves against the shock that certainly be at hand . he and his whole Court of Officials be not a little agitated and excited ; needlessly savage , I think , in their abuse of the wicked Whigs , and loud in their shout of Old England for ever ; but they be all eager for the day when the contend party could meet hand to hand , and they could have an opportunity of rid those wicked whig down . and I leave my lord , have receive the thank of his Excellency in Council , and engage to do my good endeavour to raise a body of man in defence of the Crown . hence the corps , call afterwards the Westmoreland Defenders , have its rise , of which I have the honour to be appoint Colonel , and which I be to command when it appear in the field . and that fortunate event must straightway take place , so soon as the county know that a gentleman of my station and name would take the command of the force . the announcement be duly make in the Government Gazette , and we fill in our officer readily enough ; but the recruit , it must be own , be slow to come in , and quick to disappear . nevertheless , friend Hagan eagerly come forward to offer himself as chaplain . Madam Esmond give we our colour , and progress about the country engage volunteer ; but the most eager recruiter of all be my good old tutor , little Mr. Dempster , who have be out as a boy on the Jacobite side in Scotland , and who go specially into the Carolinas , among the child of his banish old comrade , who have wear the white cockade of Prince Charles , and who most of all show themselves in this contest still loyal to the Crown . 
 Hal 's expedition in search of horse lead he not only so far as the Blue Mountains in our colony , but thence on a long journey to Annapolis and Baltimore ; and from Baltimore to Philadelphia , to be sure ; where a second General Congress be now sit , attend by our virginian gentleman of the last year . meanwhile , all the almanac tell what have happen . Lexington have happen , and the first shot be fire in the war which be to end in the independence of our native country . we still protest of our loyalty to his Majesty ; but we state our determination to die or be free ; and some twenty thousand of our loyal petitioner assemble round about Boston with arm in their hand and cannon , to which they have help themselves out of the Government store . Mr. Arnold have begin that career which be to end so brilliantly , by the daring and burglarious capture of two fort , of which he force the door . three general from Bond Street , with a large reinforcement , be on their way to help Mr. Gage out of his ugly position at Boston . presently the army be actually engage ; and our british general commence their career of conquest and pacification in the colony by the glorious blunder of Breed 's Hill . here they fortify themselves , feel themselves not strong enough for the moment to win any more glorious victory over the rebel ; and the two army lie watch each other whilst Congress be deliberate at Philadelphia who should command the force of the confederate colony . 
 we all know on whom the most fortunate choice of the nation fall . of the virginian regiment which march to join the new General - in - Chief , one be command by Henry Esmond Warrington , Esq . , late a Captain in his Majesty 's service ; and by his side ride his little wife , of whose bravery we often subsequently hear . I be glad , for one , that she have quit Virginia ; for , have she remain after her husband 's departure , our mother would infallibly have go over to give her battle ; and I be thankful , at least , that that terrific incident of civil war be spar to our family and history . 
 the rush of our farmer and country - folk be almost all direct towards the new northern army ; and our people be not a little flatter at the selection of a virginian gentleman for the principal command . with a thrill of wrath and fury the province hear of the blood draw at Lexington ; and man yell denunciation against the cruelty and wantonness of the bloody british invader . the invader be but do his duty , and be meet and resist by man in arm , who wish to prevent he from help himself to his own ; but people do not stay to weigh their word when they mean to be angry ; the colonist have take their side ; and , with what I own to be a natural spirit and ardour , be determined to have a trial of strength with the braggart domineering mother country . Breed 's Hill become a mountain , as it be , which all man of the American Continent might behold , with Liberty , Victory , Glory , on its flaming summit . these dreaded troop could be withstood , then , by farmer and plowman . these famous officer could be outgeneral by doctor , lawyer , and civilian ! grant that Britons could conquer all the world ; here be their child who could match and conquer Britons ! indeed , I do not   know which of the two deserve the palm , either for bravery or vainglory . we be in the habit of laugh at our french neighbour for boasting , gasconading , and so forth ; but for a steady self - esteem and indomitable confidence in our own courage , greatness , magnanimity ; who can compare with Britons , except their child across the Atlantic ? 
 the people round about we take the people 's side for the most part in the struggle , and , truth to say , Sir George Warrington find his regiment of Westmoreland Defenders but very thinly manned at the commencement , and woefully diminish in number presently , not only after the news of battle from the north , but in consequence of the behaviour of my Lord our Governor , whose conduct enrage no one more than his own immediate partisan , and the loyal adherent of the Crown throughout the colony . that he would plant the King 's standard , and summon all loyal gentleman to rally round it , have be a measure agree in countless meeting , and applaud over thousand of bumper . I have a pretty good memory , and could mention the name of many a gentleman , now a smug officer of the United States Government , whom I have hear hiccup out a prayer that he might be allow to perish under the fold of his country 's flag ; or roar a challenge to the bloody traitor absent with the rebel army . but let bygone be bygone . this , however , be matter of public history , that his lordship , our Governor , a peer of Scotland , the Sovereign 's representative in his Old Dominion , who so loudly invite all the liege to join the King 's standard , be the first to put it in his pocket , and fly to his ship out of reach of danger . he would not leave they , save as a pirate at midnight to burn and destroy . meanwhile , we loyal gentry remain on shore , commit to our cause , and only subject to great danger in consequence of the weakness and cruelty of he who ought to have be our leader . it be the beginning of June , our orchard and garden be all bloom with plenty and summer ; a week before I have be over at Williamsburg , exchange compliment with his Excellency , devise plan for future movement by which we should be able to make good head against rebellion , shake hand heartily at parting , and vincere aut mori the very last word upon all our lip . our little family be gather at Richmond , talk over , as we do daily , the prospect of affair in the north , the quarrel between our own Assembly and his Excellency , by whom they have be afresh convene , when our ghostly Hagan rush into our parlour , and ask , " have we hear the news of the Governor ? " 
 " have he dissolve the Assembly again , and put that scoundrel Patrick Henry in iron ? " ask Madam Esmond . 
 " no such thing ! his lordship with his lady and family have leave their palace privately at night . they be on board a man - of - war off York , whence my lord have send a despatch to the Assembly , beg they to continue their sitting , and announce that he himself have only quit his Government House out of fear of the fury of the people . " 
 what be to become of the sheep , now the shepherd have run away ? no entreaty could be more pathetic than those of the gentleman of the House of Assembly , who guarantee their Governor security if he would but land , and implore he to appear amongst they , if but to pass bill and transact the necessary business . no : the man - of - war be his seat of government , and my lord desire his House of Commons to wait upon he there . this be erect the King 's standard with a vengeance . our Governor have leave we ; our Assembly perforce rule in his stead ; a rabble of people follow the fugitive Viceroy on board his ship . a mob of negro desert out of the plantation to join this other deserter . he and his black ally land here and there in darkness , and emulate the most lawless of our opponent in their alacrity at seize and burn . he not only invite runaway negro , but he send an ambassador to Indians with entreaty to join his standard . when he come on shore it be to burn and destroy : when the people resist , as at Norfolk and Hampton , he retreat and betook himself to his ship again . 
 even my mother , after that miserable flight of our chief , be scared at the aspect of affair , and doubt of the speedy put down of the rebellion . the arming of the negro be , in her opinion , the most cowardly blow of all . the loyal gentry be ruin , and rob , many of they , of their only property . a score of our bad hand desert from Richmond and Castlewood , and flee to our courageous Governor 's fleet ; not all of they , though some of they , be slain , and a couple hang by the enemy for plunder and robbery perpetrate whilst with his lordship 's precious army . because her property be wantonly injure , and his Majesty 's chief officer an imbecile , would Madam Esmond desert the cause of Royalty and Honour ? my good mother be never so prodigiously dignified , and loudly and enthusiastically loyal , as after she hear of our Governor 's lamentable defection . the people round about she , though most of they of quite a different way of thinking , listen to her speech without unkindness . her oddity be know far and wide through our province ; where , I be afraid , many of the wag amongst our young man be accustom to smoke she , as the phrase then be , and draw out her story about the Marquis her father , about the splendour of her family , and so forth . but along with her oddity , her charity and kindness be remember , and many a rebel , as she call they , have a sneaking regard for the pompous little Tory lady . 
 as for the Colonel of the Westmoreland Defenders , though that gentleman 's command dwindle utterly away after the outrageous conduct of his chief , yet I escape from some very serious danger which might have befall I and mine in consequence of some dispute which I be know to have have with my Lord Dunmore . go on board his ship after he have burn the store at Hampton , and issue the proclamation call the negro to his standard , I make so free as to remonstrate with he in regard to both measure ; I implore he to return to Williamsburg , where hundred of we , thousand , I hop , would be ready to defend he to the last extremity ; and in my remonstrance use term so free , or rather , as I suspect , indicate my contempt for his conduct so clearly by my behaviour , that his lordship fly into a rage , say I be a rebel like all the rest of they , and order I under arrest there on board his own ship . in my quality of militia officer   since the breaking out of the trouble I commonly use a red coat , to show that I wear the King 's colour   I beg for a court - martial immediately ; and turn round to two officer who have be present during our altercation , desire they to remember all that have pass between his lordship and I . these gentleman be no doubt of my way of thinking as to the chief 's behaviour , and our interview end in my going ashore unaccompanie by a guard . the story get wind amongst the Whig gentry , and be improve in the telling . I have speak out my mind manfully to the Governor ; no Whig could have utter sentiment more liberal . when riot take place in Richmond , and of the Loyalists remain there , many be in peril of life and betook themselves to the ship , my mother 's property and house be never endanger , nor her family insult . we be still at the stage when a reconciliation be fondly think possible . " ah ! if all the Tories be like you , " a distinguished Whig have say to I , " we and the people at home should soon come together again . " this , of course , be before the famous Fourth of July , and that Declaration which render reconcilement impossible . afterwards , when party grow more rancorous , motif much less creditable be assign for my conduct , and it be say I choose to be a Liberal Tory because I be a cunning fox , and wish to keep my estate whatever way thing go . and this , I be bind to say , be the opinion regard my humble self which have obtain in very high quarter at home , where a profound regard for my own interest have be suppose not uncommonly to have occasion my conduct during the late unhappy trouble . 
 there be two or three person in the world   for I have not tell my mother how I be resolve to cede to my brother all my life - interest in our american property   who know that I have no mercenary motif in regard to the conduct I pursue . it be not worth while to undeceive other ; what be life worth , if a man be force to feel himself a la piste of all the calumny utter against he ? and I do not quite know to this present day , how it happen that my mother , that notorious Loyalist , be leave for several year quite undisturbed in her house at Castlewood , a stray troop or company of Continentals be occasionally quarter upon she . I do not know for certain , I say , how this piece of good fortune happen , though I can give a pretty shrewd guess as to the cause of it . Madam Fanny , after a campaign before Boston , come back to Fanny 's Mount , leave her Colonel . my modest Hal , until the conclusion of the war , would accept no high rank , believe that in command of a regiment he could be more useful than in charge of a division . Madam Fanny , I say , come back , and it be remarkable after her return how her old asperity towards my mother seem to be remove , and what an affection she show for she and all the property . she be great friend with the Governor and some of the most influential gentleman of the new Assembly : Madam Esmond be harmless , and for her son 's sake , who be bravely battle for his country , her error should be lightly visit : I know not how it be , but for year she remain unharmed , except in respect of heavy Government requisition , which of course she have to pay , and it be not until the redcoat appear about our house , that much serious evil come to it . 




 CHAPTER XC 

 in which we both fight and run away 

 what be the use of a Colonel without a regiment ? the Governor and Council who have make such a parade of thank in endow I with mine , be away out of sight , skulk on board ship , with an occasional piracy and arson on shore . my Lord Dunmore 's black ally frighten away those of his own blood ; and besides these negro whom he have summon round he in arm , we hear that he have send an envoy among the Indians of the South , and that they be to come down in number and tomahawk our people into good behaviour . " and these be to be our ally ! " I say to my mother , exchange ominous look with she , and remembering , with a ghastly distinctness , that savage whose face glare over mine , and whose knife be at my throat when Florac strike he down on Braddock 's Field . we put our house of Castlewood into as good a state of defence as we could devise ; but , in truth , it be more of the red man and the black than of the rebel we be afraid . I never see my mother lose courage but once , and then when she be recount to we the particular of our father 's death in a foray of Indians more than forty year ago . see some figure one night move in front of our house , nothing could persuade the good lady but that they be savage , and she sink on her knee cry out , " the Lord have mercy upon we ! the Indians the Indians ! " 
 my lord 's negro ally vanish on board his ship , or where they could find pay and plunder ; but the paint hero from the South never make their appearance , though I own to have look at my mother 's grey head , my wife 's brown hair , and our little one 's golden ringlet , with a horrible pang of doubt lest these should fall the victim of ruffian war . and it be we who fight with such weapon , and enlist these ally ! but that I dare not   so to speak   be set myself up as interpreter of Providence , and point out the special finger of Heaven   as many people be will not to do , I would say our employment of these Indians , and of the german mercenary , bring their own retribution with they in this war . in the field , where the mercenary be attack by the Provincials , they yield , and it be triumph over they that so raise the spirit of the Continental army ; and the murder of one woman   Miss McCrea   by a half - dozen drunken Indians , do more harm to the Royal cause than the loss of a battle or the destruction of regiment . 
 now , the indian panic over , Madam Esmond 's courage return : and she begin to be seriously and not unjustly uneasy at the danger which I run myself , and which I bring upon other , by remain in Virginia . 
 " what harm can they do I , " say she , " a poor woman ? if I have one son a colonel without a regiment , I have another with a couple of hundred continental behind he in Mr. Washington 's camp . if the Royalists come , they will let I off for your sake ; if the rebel appear , I shall have Harry 's passport . I do not   wish , sir , I do not   like that your delicate wife and this dear little baby should be here , and only increase the risk of all of we ! we must have they away to Boston or New York . do not   talk about defend I ! who will think of hurt a poor , harmless , old woman ? if the rebel come , I shall shelter behind Mrs. Fanny 's petticoat , and shall be much safe without you in the house than in it . " this she say in part , perhaps , because ' twa reasonable ; more so because she would have I and my family out of the danger ; and danger or not , for her part feel that she be determined to remain in the land where her father be bury , and she be bear . she be live backwards , so to speak . she have see the new generation , and bless they , and bid they farewell . she belong to the past , and old day and memory . 
 while we be debate about the Boston scheme , come the news that the British have evacuate that luckless city altogether , never have venture to attack Mr. Washington in his camp at Cambridge   though he lie there for many month without powder at our mercy ; but wait until he procure ammunition , and seize and fortify Dorchester height , which command the town , out of which the whole british army and colony be oblige to beat a retreat . that the King 's troop win the battle at Bunker 's Hill , there be no more doubt than that they beat the French at Blenheim ; but through the war their chief seem constantly to have be afraid of assault entrenched continental afterwards ; else why , from July to March , hesitate to strike an almost defenceless enemy ? why the hesitation at Long Island , when the Continental army be in our hand ? why that astonishing timorousness of Howe before Valley Forge , where the relic of a force starve , sickening , and in rag , could scarcely man the line , which they hold before a great , victorious , and perfectly appoint army ? 
 as the hope and fear of the contend party rise and fall , it be curious to mark the altered tone of the partisan of either . when the news come to we in the country of the evacuation of Boston , every little Whig in the neighbourhood make his bow to Madam , and advise she to a speedy submission . she do not carry her loyalty quite so openly as heretofore , and flaunt her flag in the face of the public , but she never swerve . every night and morning in private poor Hagan pray for the Royal Family in our own household , and on Sundays any neighbour be welcome to attend the service , where my mother act as a very emphatic clerk , and the prayer for the High Court of Parliament under our most religious and gracious King be very stoutly deliver . the brave Hagan be a parson without a living , as I be a Militia Colonel without a regiment . Hagan have continue to pray stoutly for King George in Williamsburg , long after his Excellency our Governor have run away : but on come to church one Sunday to perform his duty , he find a corporal 's guard at the church - door , who tell he that the Committee of Safety have put another divine in his place , and he be request to keep a quiet tongue in his head . he tell the man to " lead he before their chief "   our honest friend always love tall word and tragic attitude ; and accordingly be march through the street to the Capitol , with a chorus of white and coloured blackguard at the skirt of his gown ; and have an interview with Messrs. Henry and the new State officer , and confront the robber , as he say , in their den . of course he be for make an heroic speech before these gentleman   and be one of many man who perhaps would have no objection to be make martyr , so that they might be roast coram populo , or torture in a full house , but Mr. Henry be determined to give he no such chance . after keep Hagan three or four hour wait in an anteroom in the company of negro , when the worthy divine enter the new chief magistrate 's room with an undaunted mien , and begin a prepared speech with " Sir , by what authority be I , a minister of the " " Mr. Hagan , " say the other , interrupt he , " I be too busy to listen to speech . and as for King George , he have henceforth no more authority in this country than King Nebuchadnezzar . mind you that , and hold your tongue , if you please ! Stick to King John , sir , and King Macbeth ; and if you will send round your benefit - ticket , all the Assembly shall come and hear you . do you ever see Mr. Hagan on the board , when you be in London , General ? " and , so say , Henry turn round upon Mr. Washington 's second in command , General Lee , who be now come into Virginia upon State affair , and our shamefaced good Hagan be bustle out of the room , redden , and almost cry with shame . after this event we think that Hagan 's ministration be well confine to we in the country , and remove the worthy pastor from his restive lamb in the city . 
 the selection of Virginians to the very high civil and military appointment of the new government bribe and flatter many of our lead people , who , otherwise , and but for the outrageous conduct of our government , might have remain faithful to the Crown , and make good head against the rise rebellion . but , although we Loyalists be gag and muzzle , though the Capitol be in the hand of the whig , and our vaunted levy of loyal recruit so many Falstaff 's regiment for the most part , the faithful still keep intelligence with one another in the colony , and with our neighbour ; and though we do not rise , and though we run away , and though , in examination before committee , justice , and so forth , some of our frightened people give themselves republican air , and vow perdition to king and noble ; yet we know each other pretty well , and accord as the chance be more or less favourable to we , the master more or less hard we conceal our colour , show our colour , half show our colour , or downright apostatise for the nonce , and cry , " down with King George ! " our negro bear about , from house to house , all sort of message and token . endless underhand plot and scheme be engage in by those who could not afford the light . the battle over , the neutral come and join the win side , and shout as loudly as the patriot . the runaway be not count . will any man tell I that the signer and ardent well - wisher of the Declaration of Independence be not in a minority of the nation , and that the minority do not win ? we know that apart of the defeat army of Massachusetts be about to make an important expedition southward , upon the success of which the very great hope be found ; and I , for one , be anxious to make a movement as soon as there be any chance of activity , have put myself in communication with the ex - Governor Martin , of North Carolina , whom I propose to join , with three or four of our virginian gentleman , officer of that notable corp of which we only want private . we make no particular mystery about our departure from Castlewood ; the affair of Congress be not go so well yet that the new government could afford to lay any particular stress or tyranny upon person of a doubtful way of thinking . gentleman 's house be still open ; and in our southern fashion we would visit our friend for month at a time . my wife and I , with our infant and a fitting suite of servant , take leave of Madam Esmond on a visit to a neighbouring plantation . we go thence to another friend 's house , and then to another , till finally we reach Wilmington , in North Carolina , which be the point at which we expect to stretch a hand to the succour which be come to meet we . 
 Ere our arrival , our brother Carolinian Royalists have show themselves in some force . their encounter with the Whigs have be unlucky . the poor highlander have be no more fortunate in their present contest in favour of King George , than when they have draw their sword against he in their own country . we do not reach Wilmington until the end of May , by which time we find Admiral Parker 's squadron there , with General Clinton and five british regiment on board , whose object be a descent upon Charleston . 
 the General , to whom I immediately make myself know , see that my regiment consist of Lady Warrington , our infant , whom she be nurse , and three negro servant , receive we at first with a very grim welcome . but Captain Horner of the Sphinx frigate , who have be on the Jamaica station , and receive , like all the rest of the world , many kindness from our dear Governor there , when he hear that my wife be General Lambert 's daughter , eagerly receive she on board , and give up his good cabin to our service ; and so we be refugee , too , like my Lord Dunmore , have wave our flag , to be sure , and pocket it , and slip out at the back door . from Wilmington we bear away quickly to Charleston , and in the course of the voyage and our delay in the river , previous to our assault on the place , I make some acquaintance with Mr. Clinton , which increase to a further intimacy . it be the King 's birthday when we appear in the river : we determine it be a glorious day for the commencement of the expedition . 
 it do not take place for some day after , and I leave out , purposely , all description of my Penelope parting from her Hector , go forth on this expedition . in the first place , Hector be perfectly well   though a little gouty , nor have any rascal of a Pyrrhus make a prize of his widow : and in time of war and commotion , be not such scene of woe and terror , and parting , occur every hour ? I can see the gentle face yet over the bulwark , as we descend the ship 's side into the boat , and the smile of the infant on her arm . what old story , to be sure ! Captain Miles , have no natural taste for poetry , you have forget the verse , no doubt , in Mr. Pope 's Homer , in which you be describe as part with your heroic father ; but your mother often read they to you as a boy , and keep the gorget I wear on that day somewhere amongst her dressing - box now . 
 my second venture at fighting be no more lucky than my first . we come back to our ship that evening thoroughly beat . the madcap Lee , whom Clinton have face at Boston , now meet he at Charleston . Lee , and the gallant garrison there , make a brilliant and most successful resistance . the fort on Sullivan 's Island , which we attack , be a nut we could not crack . the fire of all our frigate be not strong enough to pound its shell ; the passage by which we move up to the assault of the place be not fordable , as those officer find Sir Henry at the head of they , who be always the first to charge who attempt to wade it . death by shot , by drown , by catch my death of cold , I have brave before I return to my wife ; and our frigate be aground for a time and get off with difficulty , be agreeably cannonade by the enemy until she get off her bank . 
 a small incident in the midst of this unlucky struggle be the occasion of a subsequent intimacy which arise between I and Sir Harry Clinton , and bind I to that most gallant officer during the Period in which it be my fortune to follow the war . of his qualification as a leader there may be many opinion : I fear to say , regard a man I heartily respect and admire , there ought only to be one . of his personal bearing and his courage there can be no doubt ; he be always eager to show it ; and whether at the final charge on Breed 's Hill , when at the head of the rally troop he carry the continental line , or here before Sullivan 's Fort , or a year later at Fort Washington , when , standard in hand , he sweep up the height , and enter the fort at the head of the storm column , Clinton be always foremost in the race of battle , and the King 's service know no more admirable soldier . 
 we be take to the water from our boat , with the intention of force a column to the fort , through a way which our own gun have render practicable , when a shot strike a boat alongside of we , so well aim , as actually to put three - fourth of the boat 's crew hor de combat , and knock down the officer steering , and the flag behind he . I could not help cry out , " Bravo ! well aim ! " for no ninepin ever go down more helplessly than these poor fellow before the round shot . then the General , turn round to I , say , rather grimly , " Sir , the behaviour of the enemy seem to please you ! " " I be pleased , sir , " say I , " that my countryman , yonder , should fight as become our nation . " we flounder on towards the fort in the midst of the same amiable attention from small arm and great , until we find the water be up to our breast and deepen at every step , when we be fain to take to our boat again and pull out of harm 's way . Sir Henry wait upon my Lady Warrington on board the Sphinx after this , and be very gracious to she , and mighty facetious regard the character of the humble writer of the present memoir , whom his Excellency always describe as a rebel at heart . I pray my child may live to see or engage in no great revolution , such as that , for instance , rag in the country of our miserable french neighbour . save a very , very few indeed , the actor in those great tragedy do not bear to be scan too closely ; the chief be often no well than rant quack ; the hero ignoble puppet ; the heroine anything but pure . the prize be not always to the brave . in our revolution it certainly do fall , for once and for a wonder , to the most deserving : but who know his enemy now ? his great and surprising triumph be not in those rare engagement with the enemy where he obtain a trifling mastery ; but over Congress ; over hunger and disease ; over lukewarm friend , or smile foe in his own camp , whom his great spirit have to meet and master . when the struggle be over , and our important chief who have conduct it begin to squabble and accuse each other in their own defence before the nation what charge and counter - charge be bring ; what pretext of delay be urge ; what piteous excuse be put forward that this fleet arrive too late ; that that regiment mistook its order ; that these cannon - ball would not fit those gun ; and so to the end of the chapter ! here be a general who beat we with no shot at time , and no powder , and no money ; and he never think of a convention ; his courage never capitulate ! through all the doubt and darkness , the danger and long tempest of the war , I think it be only the american leader 's indomitable soul that remain entirely steady . 
 of course our Charleston expedition be make the most of , and pronounce a prodigious victory by the enemy , who have learn   from their parent , perhaps   to cry victory if a corporal 's guard be surprised , as loud as if we have win a pitched battle . Mr. Lee rush back to New York , the conqueror of conqueror , trumpet his glory , and by no man receive with more eager delight than by the Commander - in - chief of the American Army . it be my dear Lee and my dear General between they , then ; and it hath always touch I in the history of our early Revolution to note that simple confidence and admiration with which the General - in - Chief be will not to regard officer under he , who have happen previously to serve with the King 's army . so the Mexicans of old look and wonder when they first see an armed spanish horseman ! and this mad , flashy braggart   and another Continental general , whose name and whose luck afterwards be sufficiently notorious   you may be sure take advantage of the modesty of the Commander - in - chief , and advise , and bluster , and sneer , and disobey order ; daily present fresh obstacle   as if he have not enough otherwise !   in the path over which only Mr. Washington 's astonishing endurance could have enable he to march . 
 whilst we be away on our South Carolina expedition , the famous Fourth of July have take place , and we and the thirteen United States be part for ever . my own native state of Virginia have also distinguish itself by announce that all man be equally free ; that all power be vest in the people , who have an inalienable right to alter , reform , or abolish their form of government at pleasure , and that the idea of an hereditary first magistrate be unnatural and absurd ! our General present I with this document fresh from Williamsburg , as we be sail northward by the Virginia cape , and , amidst not a little amusement and laughter , point out to I the faith to which , from the Fourth inst . inclusive , I be bind . there be no help for it ; I be a Virginian my godfather have promise and vow , in my name , that all man be equally free   include , of course , the race of poor Gumbo , that the idea of a monarchy be absurd , and that I have the right to alter my form of government at pleasure . I think of Madam Esmond at home , and how she would look when these article of faith be bring she to subscribe ; how would Hagan receive they ? he demolish they in a sermon , in which all the logic be on his side , but the U.S. Government have not , somehow , be affect by the discourse ; and when he come to touch upon the point that all man be free , therefore Gumbo and Sady , and Nathan , have assuredly a right to go to Congress : " Tut , tut ! my good Mr. Hagan , " say my mother , " let we hear no more of this nonsense ; but leave such wickedness and folly to the rebel ! " 
 by the middle of August we be before New York , whither Mr. Howe have bring his army that have betake itself to Halifax after its inglorious expulsion from Boston . the American Commander - in - Chief be at New York , and a great battle inevitable ; and I look forward to it with an inexpressible feeling of doubt and anxiety , know that my dear brother and his regiment form part of the troop whom we must attack , and could not but overpower . almost the whole of the american army come over to fight on a small island , where every officer on both side know that they be to be beat , and whence they have not a chance of escape . two frigate , out of a hundred we have place so as to command the enemy 's entrenched camp and point of retreat across East River to New York , would have destroy every bark in which he seek to fly , and compel he to lay down his arm on shore . he fight : his hasty levy be utterly overthrow ; some of his general , his good troop , his artillery take ; the remnant huddle into their entrench camp after their rout , the pursuer enter it with they . the victor be call back ; the enemy be then pen up in a corner of the island , and could not escape . " they be at our mercy , and be ours to - morrow , " say the gentle General . not a ship be set to watch the american force ; not a sentinel of our could see a movement in their camp . a whole army cross under our eye in one single night to the mainland without the loss of a single man ; and General Howe be suffer to remain in command after this feat , and to complete his glory of Long Island and Breed 's Hill , at Philadelphia ! a friend , to be sure , cross in the night to say the enemy 's army be be ferry over , but he fall upon a picket of Germans : they could not understand he : their commander be booze or asleep . in the morning , when the spy be bring to some one who could comprehend the american language , the whole continental force have cross the East River , and the empire over thirteen colony have slip away . 
 the opinion I have about our chief be by no mean uncommon in the army ; though , perhaps , wisely keep secret by gentleman under Mr. Howe 's immediate command . be I more unlucky than other folk , I wonder ? or why be my imprudent saying carry about more than my neighbour ' ? my rage that such a use be make of such a victory be no great than that of score of gentleman with the army . why must my name forsooth be give up to the Commander - in - Chief as that of the most guilty of the grumbler ? personally , General Howe be perfectly brave , amiable , and good - humour . 
 " so , Sir George , " say he , " you find fault with I , as a military man , because there be a fog after the battle on Long Island , and your friend , the Continentals , give I the slip ! surely we take and kill enough of they ; but there be no satisfy you gentleman amateur ! " and he turn his back on I , and shrug his shoulder , and talk to some one else . Amateur I might be , and he the most amiable of man ; but if King George have say to he , " never more be officer of mine , " yonder agreeable and pleasant Cassio would most certainly have have his desert . 
 I soon find how our Chief have come in possession of his information regard myself . my admirable cousin , Mr. William Esmond who of course have forsake New York and his post , when all the Royal authority flee out of the place , and Washington occupy it , return along with our troop and fleet ; and , be a gentleman of good birth and name , and well acquaint with the city , make himself agreeable to the newcomer of the Royal army , the young blood , merry fellow , and macaronis , by introduce they to play - table , tavern , and yet bad place , with which the worthy gentleman continue to be familiar in the New World as in the Old . Coelum non animum . however will have change his air , or whithersoever he transport his carcase , he carry a rascal in his skin . 
 I have hear a dozen story of his saying regard my family , and be determine neither to avoid he nor seek he ; but to call he to account whensoever we meet ; and , chance one day to be at a coffee - house in a friend 's company , my worthy kinsman swagger in with a couple of young lad of the army , whom he find it be his pleasure and profit now to lead into every kind of dissipation . I happen to know one of Mr. Will 's young companion , an aide - de - camp of General Clinton 's , who have be in my close company both at Charleston , before Sullivan 's Island , and in the action of Brooklyn , where our General gloriously lead the right wing of the english army . they take a box without notice we at first , though I hear my name three or four time mention by my brawling kinsman , who end some drunken speech he be make by slap his fist on the table , and swearing , " by , I will do for he , and the bloody rebel , his brother ! " 
 " ah ! Mr. Esmond , " say I , come forward with my hat on .   he look a little pale behind his punch - bowl .   " I have long want to see you , to set some little matter right about which there have be a difference between we . " 
 " and what may those be , sir ? " say he , with a volley of oath . 
 " you have choose to cast a doubt upon my courage , and say that I shirk a meeting with you when we be young man . our relationship and our age ought to prevent we from have recourse to such murderous folly "   Mr. Will start up , look fierce and relieve , " but I give you notice , that though I can afford to overlook lie against myself , if I hear from you a word in disparagement of my brother , Colonel Warrington , of the Continental Army , I will hold you accountable . " 
 " indeed , gentleman ! mighty fine , indeed ! you take notice of Sir George Warrington 's word ! " cry Mr. Will over his punch - bowl . 
 " you have be pleased to say , " I continue , grow angry as I speak , and be a fool therefore for my pain , " that the very estate we hold in this country be not ours , but of right revert to your family ! " 
 " so they be ours ! by George , they be ours ! I have   hear my brother Castlewood say so a score of time ! " swear Mr. Will . 
 " in that case , sir , " say I , hotly , " your brother , my Lord Castlewood , tell no more truth than yourself . we have the title at hone in Virginia . they be register in the court there ; and if ever I hear one word more of this impertinence , I shall call you to account where no constable will be at hand to interfere ! " 
 " I wonder , " cry will , in a choking voice , " that I do not   cut he into twenty thousand piece as he stand there before I with his confound yellow face . it be my brother Castlewood win his money no , it be his brother ; d you , which be you , the rebel or the other ? I hate the ugly face of both of you , and , hic ! if you be for the king , show you be for the king , and drink his health ! " and he sink down into his box with a hiccup and a wild laugh , which he repeat a dozen time , with a hundred more oath and vociferous outcry that I should drink the King 's health . 
 to reason with a creature in this condition , or ask explanation or apology from he , be absurd . I leave Mr. Will to reel to his lodging under the care of his young friend who be surprised to find an old toper so suddenly affected and so utterly prostrate by liquor and limp home to my wife , whom I find happy in possession of a brief letter from Hal , which a countryman have bring in ; and who say not a word about the affair of the Continentals with whom he be engage , but write a couple of page of rapturous eulogium upon his brother 's behaviour in the field , which my dear Hal be pleased to admire , as he admire everything I say and do . 
 I rather look for a messenger from my amiable kinsman in consequence of the speech which have pass between we the night before , and do not know but that I might be call by Will to make my word good ; and when accordingly Mr. Lacy   our companion of the previous evening   make his appearance at an early hour of the forenoon , I be beckon my Lady Warrington to leave we , when , with a laugh and a cry of " oh dear , no ! " Mr. Lacy beg her ladyship not to disturb herself . 
 " I have see , " say he , " a gentleman who beg to send you his apology if he utter a word last night which could offend you . " 
 " what apology ? what word ? " ask the anxious wife . 
 I explain that roaring Will Esmond have meet I in a coffee - house on the previous evening , and quarrel with I , as he have do with hundred before . " it appear the fellow be constantly abusive , and invariably plead drunkenness , and apologise the next morning , unless he be can over - night , " remark Captain Lacy . and my lady , I dare say , make a little sermon , and ask why we gentleman will go to idle coffee - house and run the risk of meeting roar , roystere Will Esmonds ? 
 our sojourn in New York be enliven by a project for burn the city which some ardent patriot entertain and partially execute . several such scheme be lay in the course of the war , and each one of the principal city be doom to fire ; though , in the interest of peace and goodwill , I hope it will be remember that these plan never originate with the cruel government of a tyrant king , but be always propose by gentleman on the Continental side , who vow that , rather than remain under the ignominious despotism of the ruffian of Brunswick , the fair town of America should burn . I presume that the sage who be for burn down Boston be not actual proprietor in that place , and the New York burner might come from other part of the country from Philadelphia , or what not . Howbeit , the British spar you , gentleman , and we pray you give we credit for this act of moderation . 
 I have not the fortune to be present in the action on the White Plains , be detain by the hurt which I have receive at Long Island , and which break out again and again , and take some time in the healing . the tender of nurse watch I through my tedious malady , and be eager for the day when I should doff my militia coat and return to the quiet English home where Hetty and our good General be tend our child . indeed I do not   know that I have yet forgive myself for the pain and terror that I must have cause my poor wife , by keep she separate from her young one , and away from her home , because , forsooth , I wish to see a little more of the war then go on . our grand tour in Europe have be all very well . we have behold St. Peter 's at Rome , and the Bishop thereof ; the Dauphiness of France   alas , to think that glorious head should ever have be bring so low !   at Paris ; and the rightful king of England at Florence . I have dip my gout in a half - dozen bath and spa , and play card in a hundred court , as my Travels in Europe   which I propose to publish after my completion of the history of the American War   will testify .   neither of these two project work of Sir George Warrington be bring , as it appear , to a completion .   and , during our peregrination , my hypochondria diminish   which plague I woefully at home ; and my health and spirit visibly improve . perhaps it be because she see the evident benefit I have from excitement and change , that my wife be reconcile to my continue to enjoy they ; and though secretly suffer pang at be away from her nursery and her eld boy   for whom she ever have have an absurd infatuation , the dear hypocrite scarce allow a look of anxiety to appear on her face ; encourage I with smile ; profess herself eager to follow I ; ask why it should be a sin in I to covet honour ? and , in a word , be ready to stay , to go , to smile , to be sad ; to scale mountain , or to go down to the sea in ship ; to say that cold be pleasant , heat tolerable , hunger good sport , dirty lodging delightful ; though she be wretched sailor , very delicate about the little she eat , and an extreme sufferer both of cold and heat . hence , as I will to stay on yet a while on my native continent , she be certain nothing be so good for I ; and when I be minded to return home oh , how she brighten , and kiss her infant , and tell he how he should see the beautiful garden at home , and Aunt Theo , and grandpapa , and his sister , and Miles . " Miles ! " cry the little parrot , mock its mother and crowing ; as if there be any mighty privilege in see Mr. Miles , forsooth , who be under Doctor Sumner 's care at Harrow - on - the - Hill , where , to do the gentleman justice , he show that he could eat more tart than any boy in the school , and take most creditable prize at football and hare - and - hound . 




 CHAPTER XCI . Satis Pugnae 

 it have always seem to I   I speak under the correction of military gentleman   that the entrenchment of Breed 's Hill serve the Continental army throughout the whole of our american war . the slaughter inflict upon we from behind those line be so severe , and the behaviour of the enemy so resolute , that the british chief respect the barricade of the Americans hereafter ; and be they fire from behind a row of blanket , certain of our general rather hesitate to force they . in the affair of the White Plains , when , for a second time , Mr. Washington 's army be quite at the mercy of the victor , we subsequently hear that our conquering troop be hold back before a barricade actually compose of cornstalk and straw . another opportunity be give we , and last during a whole winter , during which the dwindle and dismayed troop of Congress lie starve and unarmed under our grasp , and the magnanimous Mr. Howe leave the famous camp of Valley Forge untouched , whilst his great , brave , and perfectly appoint army fiddle and gamble and feast in Philadelphia . and , by Byng 's countryman , triumphal arch be erect , tournament be hold in pleasant mockery of the middle age , and wreath and garland offer by beautiful lady to this clement chief , with fantastical motto and posy announce that his laurel should be immortal ! why have my ungrateful countryman in America never erect statue to this general ? they have not in all their army an officer who fight their battle well ; who enable they to retrieve their error with such adroitness ; who take care that their defeat should be so little hurtful to themselves ; and when , in the course of event , the strong force naturally get the uppermost , who show such an untiring tenderness , patience , and complacency in help the poor disabled opponent on to his leg again . ah ! think of eighteen year before and the fiery young warrior whom England have send out to fight her adversary on the american continent . Fancy he for ever pace round the defence behind which the foe lie shelter ; by night and by day alike sleepless and eager ; consume away in his fierce wrath and longing , and never close his eye , so intent be it in watch ; wind the track with untiring scent that pant and hunger for blood and battle ; prowl through midnight forest , or climb silent over precipice before dawn ; and watch till his great heart be almost wear out , until the foe show himself at last , when he spring on he and grapple with he , and , dying , slay he ! think of Wolfe at Quebec , and hearken to Howe 's fiddle as he sit smile amongst the dancer at Philadelphia ! 
 a favourite scheme with our minister at home and some of our general in America , be to establish a communication between Canada and New York , by which mean it be hop New England might be cut off from the neighbouring colony , overpower in detail , and force into submission . Burgoyne be entrust with the conduct of the plan , and he set forth from Quebec , confidently promise to bring it to a successful issue . his march begin in military state : the trumpet of his proclamation blow before he ; he bid the colonist to remember the immense power of England ; and summon the misguided rebel to lay down their arm . he bring with he a formidable english force , an army of german veteran not less powerful , a dreadful band of indian warrior , and a brilliant train of artillery . it be suppose that the people round his march would rally to the Royal cause and standard . the Continental force in front of he be small at first , and Washington 's army be weaken by the withdrawal of troop who be hurry forward to meet this canadian invasion . a british detachment from New York be to force its way up the Hudson , sweep away the enemy on the route , and make a junction with Burgoyne at Albany . then be the time when Washington 's weakened army should have be strike too ; but a great power willed otherwise : nor be I , for one , even go to regret the termination of the war . as we look over the game now , how clear seem the blunder which be make by the lose side ! from the beginning to the end we be for ever arrive too late . our supply and reinforcement from home be too late . our troop be in difficulty , and our succour reach they too late . our fleet appear off York Town just too late , after Cornwallis have surrender . a way of escape be open to Burgoyne , but he resolve upon retreat too late . I have hear discomfited officer in after day prove infallibly how a different wind would have save America to we ; how we must have destroy the french fleet but for a tempest or two ; how once , twice , thrice , but for nightfall , Mr. Washington and his army be in our power . who have not speculate , in the course of his reading of history , upon the " have be " and the " might have be " in the world ? I take my tattered old map - book from the shelf , and see the board on which the great contest be play ; I wonder at the curious chance which lose it : and , put aside any idle talk about the respective bravery of the two nation , can not   but see that we have the good card , and that we lose the game . 
 I own the sport have a considerable fascination for I , and stir up my languid blood . my brother Hal , when settle on his plantation in Virginia , be perfectly satisfied with the sport and occupation he find there . the company of the country neighbour suffice he ; he never tired of look after his crop and people , take his fish , shoot his duck , hunt in his wood , or enjoy his rubber and his supper . Happy Hal , in his great barn of a house , under his roomy porch , his dog lie round his foot ; his friend , the Virginian will wimble , at free quarter in his mansion ; his negro fat , lazy , and rag : his shrewd little wife rule over they and her husband , who always obey she implicitly when live , and who be pretty speedily console when she die ! I say happy , though his lot would have be intolerable to I : wife , and friend , and plantation , and town life at Richmond   Richmond succeed to the honour of be the capital when our Province become a State . how happy he whose foot fit the shoe which fortune give he ! my income be five time as great , my house in England as large , and build of brick and face with freestone ; my wife would I have change she for any other wife in the world ? my child well , I be content with my Lady Warrington 's opinion about they . but with all these plum and peach and rich fruit out of Plenty 's horn pour into my lap , I fear I have be but an ingrate ; and Hodge , my gatekeeper , who share his bread and scrap of bacon with a family as large as his master 's , seem to I to enjoy his meal as much as I do , though Mrs. Molly prepare her good dish and sweetmeat , and Mr. Gumbo uncork the choice bottle from the cellar . ah I ! sweetmeat have lose their savour for I , however they may rejoice my young one from the nursery , and the perfume of claret pall upon old nose ! our parson have pour out his sermon many and many a time to I , and perhaps I do not care for they much when he first broach they . dost thou remember , honest friend ?   sure he do , for he have repeat the story over the bottle as many time as his sermon almost , and my Lady Warrington pretend as if she have never hear it   I say , Joe Blake , thou rememberest full well , and with advantage , that October evening when we scramble up an embrasure at Fort Clinton and a clubbed musket would have dash these valuable brain out , have not Joe 's sword whip my rebellious countryman through the gizzard . Joe wear a red coat in those day   the uniform of the brave Sixty - third , whose leader , the bold Sill , fall pierce with many wound beside he . he exchange his red for black and my pulpit . his doctrine be sound , and his sermon short . we read the paper together over our wine . not two month ago we read our old friend Howe 's glorious deed of the first of June . we be tell how the noble Rawdon , who fight with we at Fort Clinton , have join the Duke of York : and to - day his Royal Highness be in full retreat before Pichegru : and he and my son Miles have take valencienne for nothing ! ah , parson ! would you not like to put on your old Sixty - third coat ?   though I doubt Mrs. Blake could never make the button and button - hole meet again over your big body . the boy be act a play with my militia sword . oh , that I be young again , Mr. Blake ! that I have not the gout in my toe ; and I would saddle Rosinante and ride back into the world , and feel the pulse beat again , and play a little of life 's glorious game ! 
 the last " hit " which I see play , be gallantly win by our side ; though ' tis true that even in this parti the Americans win the rubber our people gain only the ground they stand on , and the gun , store , and ship which they capture and destroy , whilst our effort at rescue be too late to prevent the catastrophe impend over Burgoyne 's unfortunate army . after one of those delay which always be happen to retard our plan and weaken the blow which our chief intend to deliver , an expedition be get under weigh from New York at the close of the month of September , ' 77 ; that , could it have but advance a fortnight early , might have save the doomed force of Burgoyne . Sed Dis aliter visum . the delay here be not Sir Henry Clinton 's fault , who could not leave his city unprotected ; but the wind and weather which delay the arrival of reinforcement which we have long await from England . the fleet which bring they bring we long and fond letter from home , with the very last news of the child under the care of their good Aunt Hetty and their grandfather . the mother 's heart yearn towards the absent young one . she make I no reproach : but I could read her importunity in her anxious eye , her terror for I , and her longing for her child . " why stay long ? " she seem to say . " you who have no calling to this war , or to draw the sword against your countryman why continue to imperil your life and my happiness ? " I understand her appeal . we be to enter upon no immediate service of danger ; I tell she Sir Henry be only go to accompany the expedition for a part of the way . I would return with he , the reconnaissance over , and Christmas , please Heaven , should see our family once more unite in England . 
 a force of three thousand man , include a couple of slender regiment of American Loyalists and New York Militia   with which latter my distinguished relative , Mr. Will Esmond , go as captain , be embark at New York , and our armament sail up the noble Hudson River , that present fine aspect than the Rhine in Europe to my mind : nor be any fire open upon we from those beetle cliff and precipitous " palisade , " as they be call , by which we sail ; the enemy , strange to say , be for once unaware of the movement we contemplate . our first landing be on the eastern bank , at a place call Verplancks Point , whence the Congress troop withdraw after a slight resistance , their leader , the tough old Putnam   so famous during the war   suppose that our march be to be direct towards the Eastern Highlands , by which we intend to penetrate to Burgoyne . Putnam fall back to occupy these pass , a small detachment of ours be send forward as if in pursuit , which he imagine be to be follow by the rest of our force . meanwhile , before daylight , two thousand man without artillery , be carry over to Stoney Point on the western shore , opposite Verplancks , and under a great hill call the Dunderberg by the old dutch lord of the stream , and which hang precipitously over it . a little stream at the northern base of this mountain intersect it from the opposite height on which Fort Clinton stand , name not after our general , but after one of the two gentleman of the same name , who be amongst the old and most respected of the provincial gentry of New York , and who be at this moment actually in command against Sir Henry . on the next height to Clinton be Fort Montgomery ; and behind they rise a hill call Bear Hill ; whilst at the opposite side of the magnificent stream stand " Saint Antony 's Nose , " a prodigious peak indeed , which the Dutch have quaintly christen . 
 the attack on the two fort be almost simultaneous . half our man be detach for the assault on Fort Montgomery , under the brave Campbell , who fall before the rampart . Sir Henry , who would never be out of danger where he could find it , personally lead the remainder , and hop , he say , that we should have well luck than before the Sullivan Island . a path lead up to the Dunderberg , so narrow as scarcely to admit three man abreast , and in utter silence our whole force scale it , wonder at every rugged step to meet with no opposition . the enemy have not even keep a watch on it ; nor be we descry until we be descend the height , at the base of which we easily disperse a small force send hurriedly to oppose we . the firing which here take place render all idea of a surprise impossible . the fort be before we . with such arm as the troop have in their hand , they have to assault ; and silently and swiftly , in the face of the artillery playing upon they , the troop ascend the hill . the man have order on no account to fire . take the colour of the Sixty - third , and bear they aloft , Sir Henry mount with the stormer . the place be so steep that the man push each other over the wall and through the embrasure ; and it be there that Lieutenant Joseph Blake , the father of a certain Joseph Clinton Blake , who look with the eye of affection on a certain young lady , present himself to the living of Warrington by save the life of the unworthy patron thereof . 
 about a fourth part of the garrison , as we be tell , escape out of the fort , the rest be kill or wound , or remain our prisoner within the work . Fort Montgomery be , in like manner , storm and take by our people ; and , at night , as we look down from the height where the king 's standard have be just plant , we be treat to a splendid illumination in the river below . under Fort Montgomery , and stretch over to that lofty prominence , call Saint Antony 's Nose , a boom and chain have be lay with a vast cost and labour , behind which several american frigate and galley be anchor . the fort be take , these ship attempt to get up the river in the darkness , out of the reach of gun which they know must destroy they in the morning . but the wind be unfavourable , and escape be find to be impossible . the crew therefore take to the boat , and so land , have previously set the ship on fire with all their sail set ; and we behold these magnificent pyramid of flame burn up to the heaven and reflect in the water below , until , in the midst of prodigious explosion , they sink and disappear . 
 on the next day a parlementaire come in from the enemy , to inquire as to the state of his troop leave wound or prisoner in our hand , and the continental officer bring I a note , which give I a strange shock , for it show that in the struggle of the previous evening my brother have be engage . it be date October 7 , from Major - General George Clinton 's divisional headquarter , and it state briefly that " Colonel H. Warrington , of the Virginia line , hop that Sir George Warrington escape unhurt in the assault of last evening , from which the Colonel himself be so fortunate as to retire without the least injury . " never do I say my prayer more heartily and gratefully than on that night , devoutly thank Heaven that my dear brother be spar , and make a vow at the same time to withdraw out of the fratricidal contest , into which I only have enter because Honour and Duty seem imperatively to call I . 
 I own I feel an inexpressible relief when I have come to the resolution to retire and betake myself to the peaceful shade of my own vine and fig - tree at home . I long , however , to see my brother ere I return , and ask , and easily obtain an errand to the camp of the American General Clinton from our own chief . the headquarters of his division be now some mile up the river , and a boat and a flag of truce quickly bring I to the point where his out - picket receive I on the shore . my brother be very soon with I . he have only lately join General Clinton 's division with letter from headquarters at Philadelphia , and he chance to hear , after the attack on Fort Clinton , that I have be present during the affair . we pass a brief delightful night together : Mr. Sady , who always follow Hal to the war , cook a feast in honour of both his master . there be but one bed of straw in the hut where we have quarter , and Hal and I sleep on it , side by side , as we have do when we be boy . we have a hundred thing to say regard past time and present . his kind heart gladden when I tell he of my resolve to retire to my acre and to take off the red coat which I wear : he fling his arm round it . " praise be God ! " say he . " oh , heaven , George ! think what might have happen have we meet in the affair two night ago ! " and he turn quite pale at the thought . he ease my mind with respect to our mother . she be a bitter tory , to be sure , but the Chief have give special injunction regard her safety . " and Fanny "   Hal 's wife   " watch over she , and she be as good as a company ! " cry the enthusiastic husband . " be not   she clever ? be not   she handsome ? be not   she good ? " cry Hal , never , fortunately , wait for a reply to these ardent query . " and to think that I be nearly marry Maria once ! oh , mercy , what an escape I have ! " he add . " hagan pray for the king , every morning and night , at Castlewood , but they bolt the door , and nobody hear . gracious power ! his wife be sixty if she be a day ; and oh , George ! the quantity she drink be ... " but why tell the failing of our good cousin ? I be pleased to think she live to drink the health of King George long after his Old Dominion have pass for ever from his sceptre . 
 the morning come when my brief mission to the camp be end , and the truest of friend and fond of brother accompany I to my boat , which lie wait at the riverside . we exchange an embrace at parting , and his hand hold mine yet for a moment ere I step into the barge which bear I rapidly down the stream . " shall I see thee once more , dear and good companion of my youth ? " I think . " amongst our cold englishman , can I ever hope to meet with a friend like thee ? when hadst thou ever a thought that be not kindly and generous ? when a wish , or a possession , but for I you would sacrifice it ? how brave be you , and how modest ; how gentle , and how strong ; how simple , unselfish , and humble ; how eager to see other ' merit ; how diffident of your own ! " he stand on the shore till his figure grow dim before , I . there be that in my eye which prevent I from see he long . 
 Brilliant as Sir Henry 's success have be , it be achieve , as usual , too late : and serve but as a small set - off against the disaster of Burgoyne which ensue immediately , and which our advance be utterly inadequate to relieve . More than one secret messenger be despatch to he who never reach he , and of whom we never learn the fate . of one wretch who offer to carry intelligence to he , and whom Sir Henry despatch with a letter of his own , we hear the miserable doom . fall in with some of the troop of General George Clinton , who happen to be in red uniform   part of the prize of a british ship 's cargo , doubtless , which have be take by american privateer , the spy think he be in the english army , and advance towards the sentry . he find his mistake too late . his letter be discover upon he , and he have to die for bear it . in ten day after the success at the Forts occur the great disaster at Saratoga , of which we carry the dismal particular in the fleet which bear we home . I be afraid my wife be unable to mourn for it . she have her child , her father , her sister to revisit , and daily and nightly thank to pay to Heaven that have bring her husband safe out of danger . 




 CHAPTER XCII . under Vine and Fig - Tree 

 Need I describe , young folk , the delight of the meeting at home , and the mother 's happiness with all her brood once more under her fond wing ? it be write in her face , and acknowledge on her knee . our house be large enough for all , but Aunt Hetty would not stay in it . she say , fairly , that to resign her motherhood over the eld child , who have be her for nearly three year , cost she too great a pang ; and she could not bear for yet a while to be with they , and to submit to take only the second place . so she and her father go away to a house at Bury St. Edmunds , not far from we , where they live , and where she spoil her eld nephew and niece in private . it be the year after we come home that Mr. B , the Jamaica planter , die , who leave she the half of his fortune ; and then I hear , for the first time , how the worthy gentleman have be greatly enamoured of she in Jamaica , and , though she have refuse he , have thus show his constancy to she . Heaven know how much property of Aunt Hetty 's Monsieur Miles hath already devour ! the price of his commission and outfit ; his gorgeous uniform ; his play - debt and little transaction in the Minories ; do you think , sirrah , I do not know what human nature be ; what be the cost of Pall Mall tavern , petit souper , play even in moderation at the Cocoa - Tree ; and that a gentleman can not purchase all these enjoyment with the five hundred a year which I allow he ? Aunt Hetty declare she have make up her mind to be an old maid . " I make a vow never to marry until I could find a man as good as my dear father , " she say ; " and I never do , Sir George . no , my dear Theo , not half as good ; and Sir George may put that in his pipe and smoke it . " 
 and yet when the good General die   calm , and full of year , and glad to depart , I think it be my wife who shed the most tear . " I weep because I think I do not love he enough , " say the tender creature : whereas Hetty scarce depart from her calm , at least outwardly and before any of we ; talk of he constantly still , as though he be alive ; recall his merry saying , his gentle , kind way with his child   when she brighten up and look herself quite a girl again , and sit cheerfully look up to the slab in church which record his name and some of his virtue , and for once tell no lie . 
 I have fancy , sometimes , that my brother Hal , for whom Hetty have a juvenile passion , always retain a hold of her heart ; and when he come to see we , ten year ago , I tell he of this childish romance of Het 's , with the hope , I own , that he would ask she to replace Mrs. Fanny , who have be gather to her father , and regard whom my wife   with her usual propensity to consider herself a miserable sinner   always reproach herself , because , forsooth , she do not regret Fanny enough . Hal , when he come to we , be plunge in grief about her loss ; and vow that the world do not contain such another woman . our dear old General , who be still in life then , take he in and house he , as he have do in the happy early day . the woman play he the very same tune which he have hear when a boy at Oakhurst . everybody 's heart be very soft with old recollection , and Harry never tired of pour out his grief and his recital of his wife 's virtue to Het , and anon of talk fondly about his dear Aunt Lambert , whom he love with all his heart , and whose praise , you may be sure , be welcome to the faithful old husband , out of whose thought his wife 's memory be never , I believe , absent for any three wake minute of the day . 
 General Hal go to Paris as an American General Officer in his blue and yellow   which Mr. Fox and other gentleman have bring into fashion here likewise , and be make much of at Versailles , although he be present by Monsieur le Marquis de Lafayette to the most christian King and Queen , who do not love Monsieur le Marquis . and I believe a Marquise take a fancy to the Virginian General , and would have marry he out of hand , have he not resist , and flee back to England and Warrington and Bury again , especially to the latter place , where the folk would listen to he as he talk about his late wife , with an endless patience and sympathy . as for we , who have know the poor paragon , we be civil , but not quite so enthusiastic regard she , and rather puzzle sometimes to answer our child 's question about Uncle Hal 's angel wife . 
 the two Generals and myself , and Captain Miles , and Parson Blake   who be knock over at Monmouth , the year after I leave America , and come home to change his coat , and take my living , use to fight the battle of the Revolution over our bottle ; and the parson use to cry , " By Jupiter , General "   he compound for Jupiter , when he lay down his military habit , " you be the Tory , and Sir George be the Whig ! he be always find fault with our leader , and you be for ever stand up for they ; and when I pray for the king last Sunday , I hear you follow I quite loud . " 
 " and so I do , Blake , with all my heart ; I can not   forget I wear his coat , " say Hal . 
 " ah , if Wolfe have be alive for twenty year more ! " say Lambert . 
 " ah , sir , " cry Hal , " you should hear the General talk about he ! " 
 " what general ? " say I   to vex he . 
 " my general , " say Hal , stand up , and fill a bumper . " his Excellency General George Washington ! " 
 " with all my heart , " cry I , but the parson look as if he do not like the toast or the claret . 
 Hal never tired in speak of his General ; and it be on some such evening of friendly converse , that he tell we how he have actually be in disgrace with this General whom he love so fondly . their difference seem to have be about Monsieur le Marquis de Lafayette before mention , who play such a fine part in history of late , and who hath so suddenly disappear out of it . his previous rank in our own service , and his acknowledge gallantry during the war , ought to have secure Colonel Warrington 's promotion in the Continental army , where a whipper - snapper like M. de Lafayette have but to arrive and straightway to be compliment by Congress with the rank of Major - General . Hal , with the freedom of an old soldier , have express himself somewhat contemptuously regard some of the appointment make by Congress , with whom all sort of miserable intrigue and cabal be set to work by unscrupulous officer who be greedy of promotion . Mr. Warrington , imitate perhaps in this the example of his now illustrious friend of Mount Vernon , affect to make the war en gentilhomme take his pay , to be sure , but spend it upon comfort and clothing for his man , and as for rank , declare it be a matter of no earthly concern to he , and that he would as soon serve as colonel as in any high grade . no doubt he add contemptuous remark regard certain General Officers of Congress army , their origin , and the cause of their advancement : notably he be very angry about the sudden promotion of the young french lad just name the Marquis , as they love to call he in the republican army , and who , by the way , be a prodigious favourite of the Chief himself . there be not three officer in the whole Continental force   after poor madcap Lee be take prisoner and disgrace   who could speak the Marquis 's language , so that Hal could judge the young Major - General more closely and familiarly than other gentleman , include the Commander - in - chief himself . Mr. Washington good - naturedly rat friend Hal for be jealous of the beardless commander of Auvergne ; be himself not a little pleased by the filial regard and profound veneration which the enthusiastic young nobleman always show for he ; and have , moreover , the very good politic reason for treat the Marquis with friendship and favour . 
 meanwhile , as it afterwards turn out , the Commander - in - Chief be most urgently press Colonel Warrington 's promotion upon Congress ; and , as if his difficulty before the enemy be not enough , he be at this hard time of winter entrench at Valley Forge , command five or six thousand man at the most , almost without fire , blanket , food , or ammunition , in the face of Sir William Howe 's army , which be perfectly appoint , and three time as numerous as his own ; as if , I say , this difficulty be not enough to try he , he have far to encounter the cowardly distrust of Congress , and insubordination and conspiracy amongst the officer in his own camp . during the awful winter of ' 77 , when one blow strike by the sluggard at the head of the british force might have end the war , and all be doubt , confusion , despair in the opposite camp   save in one indomitable breast alone , my brother have an interview with the Chief , which he have subsequently describe to I , and of which Hal could never speak without give way to the deep emotion . Mr. Washington have win no such triumph as that which the dare - devil courage of Arnold and the elegant imbecility of Burgoyne have procure for Gates and the northern army . save in one or two minor encounter , which prove how dare his bravery be , and how uncease his watchfulness , General Washington have meet with defeat after defeat from an enemy in all point his superior . the Congress mistrust he . many an officer in his own camp hat he . those who have be disappoint in ambition , those who have be detect in peculation , those whose selfishness or incapacity his honest eye have spy out , be all more , or less in league against he . Gates be the chief towards whom the malcontent turn . Mr. Gates be the only genius fit to conduct the war ; and with a vaingloriousness , which he afterwards generously own , he do not refuse the homage which be pay he . 
 to show how dreadful be the trouble and anxiety with which General Washington have to contend , I may mention what at this time be call the " Conway Cabal . " a certain Irishman a Chevalier of St. Louis , and an officer in the french service arrive in America early in the year ' 77 in quest of military employment . he be speedily appoint to the rank of brigadier , and could not be content , forsooth , without an immediate promotion to be major - general . 
 Mr. C. have friend at Congress , who , as the General - in - Chief be inform , have promise he his speedy promotion . General Washington remonstrate , represent the injustice of promote to the high rank the young brigadier in the service ; and whilst the matter be pende , be put in possession of a letter from Conway to General Gates , whom he compliment , say , that " Heaven have be determine to save America , or a weak general and bad councillor would have ruin it . " the General enclose the note to Mr. Conway , without a word of comment ; and Conway offer his resignation , which be refuse by Congress , who appoint he Inspector - General of the army , with the rank of Major - General . 
 " and it be at this time , " say Harry   with many passionate exclamation indicate his rage with himself and his admiration of his leader , " when , by heaven , the glorious Chief be oppress by trouble enough to drive ten thousand man mad that I must interfere with my jealousy about the Frenchman ! I have not say much , only some nonsense to Greene and Cadwalader about get some frog against the Frenchman come to dine with we , and have a bagful of Marquises over from Paris , as we be not able to command ourselves ; but I should have know the Chief 's trouble , and that he have a well head than mine , and might have have the grace to hold my tongue . 
 " for a while the General say nothing , but I could remark , by the coldness of his demeanour , that something have occur to create a schism between he and I . Mrs. Washington , who have come to camp , also see that something be wrong . woman have artful way of soothe man and find their secret out . I be not sure that I should have ever try to learn the cause of the General 's displeasure , for I be as proud as he be , and besides "   say Hal , " when the Chief be angry , it be not pleasant come near he , I can promise you . " my brother be indeed subjugate by his old friend , and obey he and bow before he as a boy before a schoolmaster . 
 " at last , " Hal resume , " Mrs. Washington find out the mystery . ' speak to I after dinner , Colonel Hal , ' say she . ' come out to the parade - ground , before the dining - house , and I will tell you all . ' I leave a half - score of general officer and brigadier drink round the General 's table , and find Mrs. Washington wait for I . she then tell I it be the speech I have make about the box of Marquises , with which the General be offend . ' I should not have heed it in another , ' he have say , ' but I never think Harry Warrington would have join against I . ' 
 " I have to wait on he for the word that night , and find he alone at his table . ' can your Excellency give I five minute ' time ? ' I say , with my heart in my mouth . ' yes , surely , sir , ' say he , point to the other chair . ' will you please to be seat ? ' 
 " ' it use not always to be Sir and Colonel Warrington , between I and your excellency , ' I say . 
 " he say , calmly , ' the time be alter . ' 
 " ' et nos mutamur in illis , ' say I. ' Times and people be both change . ' 
 " ' you have some business with I ? ' he ask . 
 " ' be I speak to the Commander - in - chief or to my old friend ? ' I ask . 
 " he look at I gravely . ' well , to both , sir , ' he say . ' pray sit , Harry . ' 
 " ' if to General Washington , I tell his Excellency that I , and many officer of this army , be not well pleased to see a boy of twenty make a major - general over we , because he be a Marquis , and because he can not   speak the english language . if I speak to my old friend , I have to say that he have show I very little of trust or friendship for the last few week ; and that I have no desire to sit at your table , and have impertinent remark make by other there , of the way in which his Excellency turn his back on I . ' 
 " ' which charge shall I take first , Harry ? ' he ask , turn his chair away from the table , and cross his leg as if ready for a talk . ' you be jealous , as I gather , about the Marquis ? ' 
 " ' jealous , sir ! ' say I. ' an aide - de - camp of Mr. Wolfe be not jealous of a Jack - a - dandy who , five year ago , be be whip at school ! ' 
 " ' you yourself decline high rank than that which you hold , ' say the Chief , turn a little red . 
 " ' but I never bargain to have a macaroni Marquis to command I ! ' I cry . ' I will not , for one , carry the young gentleman 's order ; and since Congress and your Excellency choose to take your general out of the nursery , I shall humbly ask leave to resign , and retire to my plantation . ' 
 " ' do , Harry ; that be true friendship ! ' say the Chief , with a gentleness that surprise I . ' now that your old friend be in a difficulty , ' tis surely the good time to leave he . ' 
 " ' Sir ! ' say I. 
 " ' do as so many of the rest be do , Mr. Warrington . Et tu , Brute , as the play say . well , well , Harry ! I do not think it of you ; but , at least , you be in the fashion . ' 
 " ' you ask which charge you should take first ? ' I say . 
 " ' Ch , the promotion of the Marquis ? I recommend the appointment to Congress , no doubt ; and you and other gentleman disapprove it . ' 
 " ' I have speak for myself , sir , ' say I. 
 " ' if you take I in that tone , Colonel Warrington , I have nothing to answer ! ' say the Chief , rise up very fiercely ; ' and presume that I can recommend officer for promotion without ask your previous sanction . ' 
 " ' be on that tone , sir , ' say I , ' let I respectfully offer my resignation to your Excellency , found my desire to resign upon the fact , that Congress , at your Excellency 's recommendation , offer its high command to boy of twenty , who be scarcely even acquaint with our language . ' and I rise up and make his Excellency a bow . 
 " ' great heaven , Harry ! ' he cry   about this Marquis 's appointment he be beat , that be the fact , and he could not reply to I , ' can not   you believe that in this critical time of our affair , there be reason why special favour should be show to the first Frenchman of distinction who come amongst we ? ' 
 " ' no doubt , sir . if your Excellency acknowledge that Monsieur de Lafayette 's merit have nothing to do with the question . ' 
 " ' I acknowledge or deny nothing , sir ! ' say the General , with a stamp of his foot , and look as though he could be terribly angry if he would . ' be I here to be catechise by you ? stay . Hark , Harry ! I speak to you as a man of the world nay , as an old friend . this appointment humiliate you and other , you say ? be it so ! must we not bear humiliation , along with the other burthen and grief , for the sake of our country ? it be no more just perhaps that the Marquis should be set over you gentleman , than that your Prince Ferdinand or your Prince of Wales at home should have a command over veteran . but if in appoint this young nobleman we please a whole nation , and bring ourselves twenty million of ally , will you and other gentleman sulk because we do he honour ? ' tis easy to sneer at he   though , believe I , the Marquis have many more merit than you allow he ; to my mind it be more generous , as well as more polite , of Harry Warrington to welcome this stranger for the sake of the prodigious benefit our country may draw from he not to laugh at his peculiarity , but to aid he and help his ignorance by your experience as an old soldier : that be what I would do that be the part I expect of thee for it be the generous and manly one , Harry : but you choose to join my enemy , and when I be in trouble you say you will leave I . that be why I have be hurt : that be why I have be cold . I think I might count on your friendship and and you can tell whether I be right or no . I rely on you as on a brother , and you come and tell I you will resign . be it so ! be embark in this contest , by God 's will I will see it to an end . you be not the first , Mr. Warrington , have leave I on the way . ' 
 " he speak with so much tenderness , and as he speak his face wear such a look of unhappiness , that an extreme remorse and pity seize I , and I call out I know not what incoherent expression regard old time , and vow that if he would say the word , I never would leave he . you never love he , George , " say my brother , turn to I , " but I do beyond all mortal man ; and , though I be not clever like you , I think my instinct be in the right . he have a greatness not approach by other man . " 
 " I do not   say no , brother , " say I , " now . " 
 " Greatness , pooh ! " say the parson , growl over his wine . 
 " we walk into Mrs. Washington 's tea - room arm - in - arm , " Hal resume ; ' she look up quite kind , and see we be friend . ' be it all over , Colonel Harry ? ' she whisper . ' I know he have apply ever so often about your promotion ' 
 " ' I never will take it , ' say I. and that be how I come to do penance , " say Harry , tell I the story , " with Lafayette the next winter . "   Hal could imitate the Frenchman very well .   " ' I will go weez heem , ' say I. ' I know the way to Quebec , and when we be not in action with Sir Guy , I can hear his Excellency the Major - General say his lesson . ' there be no fight , you know we could get no army to act in Canada , and return to headquarters ; and what do you think disturb the Frenchman most ? the idea that people would laugh at he , because his command have come to nothing . and so they do laugh at he , and almost to his face too , and who could help it ? if our Chief have any weak point it be this Marquis . 
 " after our little difference we become as great friend as before if a man may be say to be friend with a Sovereign Prince , for as such I somehow could not help regard the General : and one night , when we have sate the company out , we talk of old time , and the jolly day of sport we have together both before and after Braddock 's ; and that pretty duel you be near have when we be boy . he laugh about it , and say he never see a man look more wicked and more bent on kill than you do : ' and to do Sir George justice , I think he have hat I ever since , ' say the Chief . ' ah ! ' he add , ' an open enemy I can face readily enough . ' tis the secret foe who cause the doubt and anguish ! we have sit with more than one at my table to - day , to whom I be oblige to show a face of civility , whose hand I must take when they be offer , though I know they be stab my reputation , and be eager to pull I down from my place . you speak but lately of be humiliate because a junior be set over you in command . what humiliation be yours compare to mine , who have to play the farce of welcome to these traitor ; who have to bear the neglect of Congress , and see man who have insult I promote in my own army ? if I consult my own feeling as a man , would I continue in this command ? you know whether my temper be naturally warm or not , and whether as a private gentleman I should be likely to suffer such slight and outrage as be put upon I daily ; but in the advancement of the sacred cause in which we be engage , we have to endure not only hardship and danger , but calumny and wrong , and may God give we strength to do our duty ! ' and then the General show I the paper regard the affair of that fellow Conway , whom Congress promote in spite of the intrigue , and down whose black throat John Cadwalader send the good ball he ever fire in his life . 
 " and it be here , " say Hal , conclude his story , " as I look at the Chief talk at night in the silence of the camp , and remember how lonely he be , what an awful responsibility he carry , how spy and traitor be eat out of his dish , and an enemy lie in front of he who might at any time overpower he , that I think , ' sure , this be the great man now in the world ; and what a wretch I be to think of my jealousy and annoyance , whilst he be walk serenely under his immense care ! ' " 
 " we talk but now of Wolfe , " say I. " here , indeed , be a great than Wolfe . to endure be great than to dare ; to tire out hostile fortune ; to be daunt by no difficulty ; to keep heart when all have lose it ; to go through intrigue spotless ; and to forgo even ambition when the end be gain who can say this be not greatness , or show the other Englishman who have achieve so much ? " 
 " I wonder , Sir George , you do not take Mr. Washington 's side , and wear the blue and buff yourself , " grumble Parson Blake . 
 " you and I think scarlet most become to our complexion , Joe Blake ! " say Sir George . " and my wife think there would not have be room for two such great man on one side . " 
 " well , at any rate , you be well than that odious , swearing , crazy General Lee , who be second in command ! " cry Lady Warrington . " and I be certain Mr. Washington never could write poetry and tragedy as you can ! what do the General say about George 's tragedy , Harry ? " 
 Harry burst into a roar of laughter   in which , of course , Mr. Miles must join his uncle . 
 " well ! " say he , " it be a fact that Hagan read one at my house to the General and Mrs. Washington and several more , and they all fall sound asleep ! " 
 " he never like my husband , that be the truth ! " say Theo , toss up her head , " and ' tis all the more magnanimous of Sir George to speak so well of he . " 
 and then Hal tell how , his battle over , his country free , his great work of liberation complete , the General lay down his victorious sword , and meet his comrade of the army in a last adieu . the last british soldier have quit the shore of the Republic , and the Commander - in - chief propose to leave New York for Annapolis , where Congress be sit , and there resign his commission . about noon , on the 4th December , a barge be in wait at Whitehall Ferry to convey he across the Hudson . the chief of the army assemble at a tavern near the ferry , and there the General join they . seldom as he show his emotion , outwardly , on this day he could not disguise it . he fill a glass of wine , and say , ' I bid you farewell with a heart full of love and gratitude , and wish your latter day may be as prosperous and happy as those past have be glorious and honourable . ' then he drink to they . ' I can not come to each of you to take my leave , ' he say , ' but shall be oblige if you will each come and shake I by the hand . ' 
 General Knox , who be near , come forward , and the Chief , with tear in his eye , embrace he . the other come , one by one , to he , and take their leave without a word . a line of infantry be form from the tavern to the ferry , and the General , with his officer follow he , walk silently to the water . he stand up in the barge , take off his hat , and wave a farewell . and his comrade remain bareheade on the shore till their leader 's boat be out of view . 
 as Harry speak very low , in the grey of evening , with sometimes a break in his voice , we all sit touch and silent . Hetty go up and kiss her father . 
 " you tell we of other , General Harry , " she say , pass a handkerchief across her eye , " of Marion and Sumpter , of Greene and Wayne , and Rawdon and Cornwallis , too , but you never mention Colonel Warrington ! " 
 " my dear , he will tell you his story in private ! " whisper my wife , cling to her sister , " and you can write it for he . " 
 but it be not to be . my Lady Theo , and her husband too , I own , catch the infection from she , never would let Harry rest , until we have coax , wheedle , and order he to ask Hetty in marriage . he obey , and it be she who now decline . " she have always , " she say , " the true regard for he from the dear old time when they have meet as almost child together . but she would never leave her father . when it please God to take he , she hop she would be too old to think of bear any other name but her own . Harry should have her love always as the good of brother ; and as George and Theo have such a nurseryful of child , " add Hester , " we must show our love to they , by save for the young one . " she send he her answer in writing , leave home on a visit to friend at a distance , as though she would have he to understand that her decision be final . as such Hal receive it . he do not break his heart . Cupid 's arrow , lady , do not   bite very deep into the tough skin of gentleman of our age ; though , to be sure , at the time of which I write , my brother be still a young man , be little more than fifty . Aunt Het be now a staid little lady with a voice of which year have touch the sweet chord , and a head which Time have powder over with silver . there be day when she look surprisingly young and blooming . ah I , my dear , it seem but a little while since the hair be golden brown , and the cheek as fresh as rose ! and then come the bitter blast of love unrequite which wither they ; and that long loneliness of heart which , they say , follow . why should Theo and I have be so happy , and thou so lonely ? why should my meal be garnish with love , and spread with plenty , while yon solitary outcast shiver at my gate ? I bow my head humbly before the Dispenser of pain and poverty , wealth and health ; I feel sometimes as if , for the prize which have fall to the lot of I unworthy , I do not dare to be grateful . but I hear the voice of my child in their garden , or look up at their mother from my book , or perhaps my sick - bed , and my heart fill with instinctive gratitude towards the bountiful Heaven that have so bl I . 
 since my accession to my uncle 's title and estate my intercourse with my good cousin Lord Castlewood have be very rare . I have always suppose he to be a follower of the win side in politic , and be not a little astonished to hear of his sudden appearance in opposition . a disappointment in respect to a place at court , of which he pretend to have have some promise , be partly the occasion of his rupture with the Ministry . it be say that the most August Person in the realm have flatly refuse to receive into the R - y - l household a nobleman whose character be so notoriously bad , and whose example   so the August Objector be pleased to say   would ruin and corrupt any respectable family . I hear of the Castlewoods during our travel in Europe , and that the mania for play have again seize upon his lordship . his impair fortune have be retrieve by the prudence of his wife and father - in - law , he have again begin to dissipate his income at hombre and lansquenet . there be tale of malpractice in which he have be discover , and even of chastisement inflict upon he by the victim of his unscrupulous art . his wife 's beauty and freshness fade early ; we meet but once at Aix - la - Chapelle , where Lady Castlewood beseech my wife to go and see she , and afflict Lady Warrington 's kind heart by story of the neglect and outrage of which her unfortunate husband be guilty . we be willing to receive these as some excuse and palliation for the unhappy lady 's own conduct . a notorious adventurer , gambler , and spadassin , call himself the Chevalier de Barry , and say to be a relative of the mistress of the french king , but afterwards turn out to be an Irishman of low extraction , be in constant attendance upon the Earl and Countess at this time , and conspicuous for the audacity of his lie , the extravagance of his play , and somewhat mercenary gallantry towards the other sex , and a ferocious bravo courage , which , however , fail he on one or two awkward occasion , if common report say true . he subsequently marry , and render miserable a lady of title and fortune in England . the poor little american lady 's interested union with Lord Castlewood be scarcely more happy . 
 I remember our little Miles 's infantile envy be excite by learn that Lord Castlewood 's second son , a child a few month young than himself , be already an ensign on the irish establishment , whose pay the fond parent regularly draw . this piece of preferment my lord must have get for his cadet whilst he be on good term with the Minister , during which period of favour Will Esmond be also shift off to New York . whilst I be in America myself , we read in an english journal that Captain Charles Esmond have resign his commission in his Majesty 's service , as not wish to take up arm against the countryman of his mother , the Countess of Castlewood . " it be the doing of the old fox , Van den Bosch , " Madam Esmond say ; " he wish to keep his virginian property safe , whatever side should win ! " I may mention , with respect to this old worthy , that he continue to reside in England for a while after the Declaration of Independence , not at all deny his sympathy with the american cause , but keep a pretty quiet tongue , and allege that such a very old man as himself be past the age of action or mischief , in which opinion the Government concur , no doubt , as he be leave quite unmolested . but of a sudden a warrant be out after he , when it be surprising with what agility he stir himself , and skip off to France , whence he presently embark upon his return to Virginia . 
 the old man bear the bad reputation amongst the Loyalists of our colony ; and be nickname " Jack the Painter " amongst they , much to his indignation , after a certain miscreant who be hang in England for burn naval store in our port there . he profess to have lose prodigious sum at home by the persecution of the government , distinguish himself by the loud patriotism and the most violent religious outcry in Virginia ; where , nevertheless , he be not much more like by the Whigs than by the party who still remain faithful to the Crown . he wonder that such an old Tory as Madam Esmond of Castlewood be suffer to go at large , and be for ever cry out against she amongst the gentleman of the new Assembly , the Governor , and officer of the State . he and Fanny have high word in Richmond one day , when she tell he he be an old swindler and traitor , and that the mother of Colonel Henry Warrington , the bosom friend of his Excellency the Commander - in - Chief , be not to be insult by such a little smuggling slave - driver as he ! I think it be in the year 1780 an accident happen , when the old Register Office at Williamsburg be burn down , in which there be a copy of the formal assignment of the Virginia property from Francis Lord Castlewood to my grandfather Henry Esmond , Esquire . " oh , " say Fanny , " of course this be the work of Jack the Painter ! " and Mr. Van den Bosch be for prosecute she for libel , but that Fanny take to her bed at this juncture , and die . 
 Van den Bosch make contract with the new Government , and sell they bargain , as the phrase be . he supply horse , meat , forage , all of bad quality ; but when Arnold come into Virginia   in the King 's service   and burn right and left , Van den Bosch 's store and tobacco - house somehow be spar . some secret whig now take their revenge on the old rascal . a couple of his ship in James River , his store , and a quantity of his cattle in their stall be roast amidst a hideous bellowing ; and he get a note , as he be in Arnold 's company , say that friend have serve he as he serve other ; and contain " Tom the Glazier 's compliment to brother Jack the Painter . " nobody pity the old man , though he go well - nigh mad at his loss . in Arnold 's suite come the Honourable Captain William Esmond , of the New York Loyalists , as aide - de - camp to the General . when Howe occupy Philadelphia , Will be say to have make some money keep a gambling - house with an officer of the dragoon of Anspach . I know not how he lose it . he could not have have much when he consent to become an aide - de - camp of Arnold . 
 now , the King 's officer have reappear in the province , Madam Esmond think fit to open her house at Castlewood and invite they thither and actually receive Mr. Arnold and his suite . " it be not for I , " she say , " to refuse my welcome to a man whom my Sovereign have admit to grace . " and she throw her house open to he , and treat he with great though frigid respect whilst he remain in the district . the General go , and , his precious aide - de - camp with he , some of the rascal who follow in their suite remain behind in the house where they have receive so much hospitality , insult the old lady in her hall , insult her people , and finally set fire to the old mansion in a frolic of drunken fury . our house at Richmond be not burn , luckily , though Mr. Arnold have fire the town ; and thither the undaunted old lady proceed , surround by her people , and never swerve in her loyalty , in spite of her ill - usage . " the Esmonds , " she say , " be accustom to royal ingratitude . " 
 and now Mr. Van den Bosch , in the name of his grandson and my Lord Castlewood , in England , set up a claim to our property in Virginia . he say it be not my lord 's intention to disturb Madam Esmond in her enjoyment of the estate during her life , but that his father , it have always be understand , have give his kinsman a life - interest in the place , and only continue it to his daughter out of generosity . now my lord propose that his second son should inhabit Virginia , for which the young gentleman have always show the warm sympathy . the outcry against Van den Bosch be so great that he would have be tar and feather , have he remain in Virginia . he betake himself to Congress , represent himself as a martyr ruin in the cause of liberty , and pray for compensation for himself and justice for his grandson . 
 my mother live long in dreadful apprehension , have in truth a secret , which she do not like to disclose to any one . her title be burn ! the deed of assignment in her own house , the copy in the Registry at Richmond , have alike be destroy by chance ? by villainy ? who could say ? she do not like to confide this trouble in write to I . she open herself to Hal , after the surrender of York Town , and he acquaint I with the fact in a letter by a british officer return home on his parole . then I remember the unlucky word I have let slip before Will Esmond at the coffee - house at New York ; and a part of this iniquitous scheme break upon I . 
 as for Mr. Will : there be a tablet in Castlewood Church , in Hampshire , inscribe , Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori , and announce that " this marble be place by a mourning brother , to the memory of the Honourable William Esmond , Esquire , who die in North America , in the service of his king . " but how ? when , towards the end of 1781 , a revolt take place in the Philadelphia Line of the Congress Army , and Sir Henry Clinton send out agent to the mutineer , what become of they ? the man take the spy prisoner , and proceed to judge they , and my brother   whom they know and love , and have often follow under fire , who have be send from camp to make term with the troop , recognise one of the spy , just as execution be about to be do upon he and the wretch , with horrid outcry , grovel and kneeling at Colonel Warrington 's foot , besought he for mercy , and promise to confess all to he . to confess what ? Harry turn away sick at heart . will 's mother and sister never know the truth . they always fancy it be in action he be kill . 
 as for my lord earl , whose noble son have be the intendant of an illustrious Prince , and who have enrich himself at play with his r -l master : I go to see his lordship when I hear of this astounding design against our property , and remonstrate with he on the matter . for myself , as I show he , I be not concern , as I have determine to cede my right to my brother . he receive I with perfect courtesy ; smile when I speak of my disinterestedness ; say he be sure of my affectionate feeling towards my brother , but what must be his towards his son ? he have always hear from his father : he would take his Bible oath of that : that , at my mother 's death , the property would return to the head of the family . at the story of the title which Colonel Esmond have cede , he shrug his shoulder , and treat it as a fable . " on ne fait pas de ce folie la ! " say he , offer I snuff , " and your grandfather be a man of esprit ! my little grandmother be eprise of he : and my father , the most good - natured soul alive , lend they the virginian property to get they out of the way ! C'etoit un scandale , mon cher , un joli petit scandale ! " oh , if my mother have but hear he ! I might have be dispose to take a high tone : but he say , with the utmost good - nature , " my dear Knight , be you go to fight about the character of our grandmother ? allon donc ! come , I will be fair with you ! we will compromise , if you like , about this virginian property ! " and his lordship name a sum great than the actual value of the estate . 
 Amazed at the coolness of this worthy , I walk away to my coffee - house , where , as it happen , an old friend be to dine with I , for whom I have a sincere regard . I have feel a pang at not be able to give this gentleman my living of Warrington on - Waveney , but I could not , as he himself confess honestly . his life have be too loose , and his example in my village could never have be edify : besides , he would have die of ennui there , after be accustom to a town life ; and he have a prospect finally , he tell I , of settle himself most comfortably in London and the church .   he be the second Incumbent of Lady Whittlesea 's Chapel , Mayfair , and marry Elizabeth , relict of Hermann Voelcker , Esq . , the eminent brewer .   my guest , I need not say , be my old friend Sampson , who never fail to dine with I when I come to town , and I tell he of my interview with his old patron . 
 I could not have light upon a well confidant . " gracious power ! " say Sampson , " the man 's roguery beat all belief ! when I be secretary and factotum at Castlewood , I can take my oath I see more than once a copy of the deed of assignment by the late lord to your grandfather : ' in consideration of the love I bear to my kinsman Henry Esmond , Esq . , husband of my dear mother Rachel , Lady Viscountess Dowager of Castlewood , I , etc . ' so it run . I know the place where ' tis keep let we go thither as fast as horse will carry we to - morrow . there be somebody there never mind whom , Sir George who have an old regard for I . the paper may be there to this very day , and o Lord , o Lord , but I shall be thankful if I can in any way show my gratitude to you and your glorious brother ! " his eye fill with tear . he be an altered man . at a certain period of the port wine Sampson always allude with compunction to his past life , and the change which have take place in his conduct since the awful death of his friend Doctor Dodd . 
 Quick as we be , we do not arrive at Castlewood too soon . I be look at the fountain in the court , and listen to that sweet sad music of its plashing , which my grandfather tell of in his memoire , and people the place with bygone figure , with beatrix in her beauty ; with my Lord Francis in scarlet , call to his dog and mount his grey horse ; with the young page of old who win the castle and the heiress when Sampson come run down to I with an old volume in rough calf - bind in his hand , contain draft of letter , copy of agreement , and various writing , some by a secretary of my Lord Francis , some in the slim handwriting of his wife my grandmother , some bear the signature of the last lord ; and here be a copy of the assignment sure enough , as it have be send to my grandfather in Virginia . " Victoria , Victoria ! " cry Sampson , shake my hand , embrace everybody . " here be a guinea for thee , Betty . we will have a bowl of punch at the Three Castles to - night ! " as we be talk , the wheel of postchaise be hear , and a couple of carriage drive into the court contain my lord and a friend , and their servant in the next vehicle . his lordship look only a little pale than usual at see I . 
 " what procure I the honour of Sir George Warrington 's visit , and pray , Mr. Sampson , what do you do here ? " say my lord . I think he have forget the existence of this book , or have never see it ; and when he offer to take his Bible oath of what he have hear from his father , have simply volunteer a perjury . 
 I be shake hand with his companion , a nobleman with whom I have have the honour to serve in America . " I come , " I say , " to convince myself of a fact , about which you be mistaken yesterday ; and I find the proof in your lordship 's own house . your lordship be pleased to take your lordship 's Bible oath , that there be no agreement between your father and his mother , relative to some property which I hold . when Mr. Sampson be your lordship 's secretary , he perfectly remember have see a copy of such an assignment , and here it be . " 
 " and do you mean , Sir George Warrington , that unknown to I you have be visit my paper ? " cry my lord . 
 " I doubt the correctness of your statement , though back by your lordship 's Bible oath , " I say with a bow . 
 " this , sir , be robbery ! give the paper back ! " bawl my lord . 
 " robbery be a rough word , my lord . shall I tell the whole story to Lord Rawdon ? " 
 " what , be it about the Marquisate ? Connu , connu , my dear Sir George ! we always call you the Marquis in New York . I do not   know who bring the story from Virginia . " 
 I never have hear this absurd nickname before , and do not care to notice it . " my Lord Castlewood , " I say , " not only doubt , but yesterday lay a claim to my property , take his Bible oath that " 
 Castlewood give a kind of gasp , and then say , " great heaven ! do you mean , Sir George , that there actually be an agreement extant ? yes . here it be my father 's handwriting , sure enough ! then the question be clear . upon my o well , upon my honour as a gentleman ! I never know of such an agreement , and must have be mistake in what my father say . this paper clearly show the property be your : and not be mine why , I wish you joy of it ! " and he hold out his hand with the blandest smile . 
 " and how thankful you will be to I , my lord , for have enable he to establish the right , " say Sampson , with a leer on his face . 
 " thankful ? no , confound you . not in the least ! " say my lord . " I be a plain man ; I do not   disguise from my cousin that I would rather have have the property than he . Sir George , you will stay and dine with we . a large party be come down here shoot ; we ought to have you one of we ! " 
 " my lord , " say I , button the book under my coat , " I will go and get this document copy , and then return it to your lordship . as my mother in Virginia have have her paper burn , she will be put out of much anxiety by have this assignment safely lodge . " 
 " what , have Madam Esmond 's paper be burn ? when the deuce be that ? " ask my lord . 
 " my lord , I wish you a very good afternoon . Come , Sampson , you and I will go and dine at the Three Castles . " and I turn on my heel , make a bow to Lord R , and from that day to this I have never set my foot within the hall of my ancestor . 
 shall I ever see the old mother again , I wonder ? she live in Richmond , never have rebuild her house in the country . when Hal be in England , we send her picture of both her son , paint by the admirable Sir Joshua Reynolds . we sate to he , the last year Mr. Johnson be alive , I remember . and the Doctor , peer about the studio , and see the image of Hal in his uniform   the appearance of it cause no little excitement in those day , ask who be this ? and be inform that it be the famous American General General Warrington , Sir George 's brother . " General who ? " cry the Doctor , " General where ? Pooh ! I do not   know such a service ! " and he turn his back and walk out of the premise . my worship be paint in scarlet , and we have replica of both performance at home . but the picture which Captain Miles and the girl declare to be most like be a family sketch by my ingenious neighbour , Mr. Bunbury , who have draw I and my lady with Monsieur Gumbo follow we , and write under the piece , " SIR GEORGE , MY LADY , and their master . " 
 here my master come ; he have poke out all the house - fire , have look to all the bolt , have order the whole male and female crew to their chamber ; and begin to blow my candle out , and say , " Time , Sir George , to go to bed ! twelve o'clock ! " 
 " bless I ! so indeed it be . " and I close my book , and go to my rest , with a blessing on those now around I asleep . 
 the END