the history of HENRY ESMOND . 





 BOOK I 

 the early youth of HENRY ESMOND , up to the TIME of his leave TRINITY COLLEGE , in CAMBRIDGE . 

 the actor in the old tragedy , as we read , pip their iambic to a tune , speak from under a mask , and wear stilt and a great head - dress . ' twa think the dignity of the Tragic Muse require these appurtenance , and that she be not to move except to a measure and cadence . so Queen Medea slay her child to a slow music : and King Agamemnon perish in a die fall   to use Mr. Dryden 's word : the Chorus stand by in a set attitude , and rhythmically and decorously bewail the fate of those great crown person . the Muse of History hath encumber herself with ceremony as well as her Sister of the Theatre . she too wear the mask and the cothurnus , and speak to measure . she too , in our age , busy herself with the affair only of king ; wait on they obsequiously and stately , as if she be but a mistress of court ceremony , and have nothing to do with the registering of the affair of the common people . I have see in his very old age and decrepitude the old french King Lewis the Fourteenth , the type and model of kinghood who never move but to measure , who live and die accord to the law of his Court - marshal , persist in enact through life the part of Hero ; and , divest of poetry , this be but a little wrinkle old man , pock - mark , and with a great periwig and red heel to make he look tall a hero for a book if you like , or for a brass statue or a paint ceiling , a god in a roman shape , but what more than a man for Madame Maintenon , or the barber who shave he , or Monsieur Fagon , his surgeon ? I wonder shall History ever pull off her periwig and cease to be court - ride ? shall we see something of France and England besides Versailles and Windsor ? I see Queen Anne at the latter place tear down the Park slope , after her stag - hounds , and drive her one - horse chaise a hot , red - faced woman , not in the least resemble that statue of she which turn its stone back upon St. Paul 's , and face the coach struggle up Ludgate Hill . she be neither well breed nor wise than you and I , though we knelt to hand she a letter or a wash - hand basin . why shall history go on kneeling to the end of time ? I be for have she rise up off her knee , and take a natural posture : not to be for ever perform cringe and congee like a court - chamberlain , and shuffle backwards out of door in the presence of the sovereign . in a word , I would have history familiar rather than heroic : and think that Mr. Hogarth and Mr. Fielding will give our child a much well idea of the manner of the present age in England , than the Court Gazette and the newspaper which we get thence . 
 there be a german officer of Webb 's , with whom we use to joke , and of whom a story   whereof I myself be the author   be get to be believe in the army , that he be eld son of the hereditary Grand Bootjack of the Empire , and the heir to that honor of which his ancestor have be very proud , have be kick for twenty generation by one imperial foot , as they draw the boot from the other . I have hear that the old Lord Castlewood , of part of whose family these present volume be a chronicle , though he come of quite as good blood as the Stuarts whom he serve   and who as regard mere lineage be no well than a dozen English and scottish house I could name , be prouder of his post about the Court than of his ancestral honor , and value his dignity   as Lord of the Butteries and Groom of the King 's Posset   so highly , that he cheerfully ruin himself for the thankless and thriftless race who bestow it . he pawn his plate for King Charles the First , mortgage his property for the same cause , and lose the great part of it by fine and sequestration : stand a siege of his castle by Ireton , where his brother Thomas capitulate   afterward make term with the Commonwealth , for which the eld brother never forgave he , and where his second brother Edward , who have embrace the ecclesiastical profession , be slay on Castlewood Tower , be engage there both as preacher and artilleryman . this resolute old loyalist , who be with the King whilst his house be thus be batter down , escape abroad with his only son , then a boy , to return and take a part in Worcester fight . on that fatal field Eustace Esmond be kill , and Castlewood flee from it once more into exile , and henceforward , and after the restoration , never be away from the Court of the monarch   for whose return we offer thank in the Prayer - Book   who sell his country and who take bribe of the french king . 
 what spectacle be more august than that of a great king in exile ? who be more worthy of respect than a brave man in misfortune ? Mr. Addison have paint such a figure in his noble piece of Cato . but suppose fugitive Cato fuddle himself at a tavern with a wench on each knee , a dozen faithful and tipsy companion of defeat , and a landlord call out for his bill ; and the dignity of misfortune be straightway lose . the Historical Muse turn away shamefaced from the vulgar scene , and close the door on which the exile 's unpaid drink be score up upon he and his pot and his pipe , and the tavern - chorus which he and his friend be sing . such a man as Charles should have have an Ostade or Mieris to paint he . your Knellers and Le Bruns only deal in clumsy and impossible allegory : and it hath always seem to I blasphemy to claim Olympus for such a wine - drabble divinity as that . 
 about the King 's follower , the Viscount Castlewood orphan of his son , ruin by his fidelity , bear many wound and mark of bravery , old and in exile his kinsman I suppose should be silent ; nor if this patriarch fall down in his cup , call fie upon he , and fetch passer - by to laugh at his red face and white hair . what ! do a stream rush out of a mountain free and pure , to roll through fair pasture , to feed and throw out bright tributary , and to end in a village gutter ? life that have noble commencement have often no well ending ; it be not without a kind of awe and reverence that an observer should speculate upon such career as he trace the course of they . I have see too much of success in life to take off my hat and huzzah to it as it pass in its gilt coach : and would do my little part with my neighbor on foot , that they should not gape with too much wonder , nor applaud too loudly . be it the Lord Mayor go in state to mince - pie and the Mansion House ? be it poor Jack of Newgate 's procession , with the sheriff and javelin - man , conduct he on his last journey to Tyburn ? I look into my heart and think that I sin as good as my Lord Mayor , and know I be as bad as Tyburn Jack . give I a chain and red gown and a pudding before I , and I could play the part of Alderman very well , and sentence Jack after dinner . starve I , keep I from book and honest people , educate I to love dice , gin , and pleasure , and put I on Hounslow Heath , with a purse before I , and I will take it . " and I shall be deservedly hang , " say you , wish to put an end to this prosing . I do not   say no . I can not   but accept the world as I find it , include a rope 's end , as long as it be in fashion . 




 CHAPTER I. 

 an account of the family of esmond of CASTLEWOOD HALL . 

 when Francis , fourth Viscount Castlewood , come to his title , and presently after to take possession of his house of Castlewood , county hant , in the year 1691 , almost the only tenant of the place besides the domestic be a lad of twelve year of age , of whom no one seem to take any note until my Lady Viscountess light upon he , go over the house with the housekeeper on the day of her arrival . the boy be in the room know as the Book - room , or Yellow Gallery , where the portrait of the family use to hang , that fine piece among other of Sir Antonio Van Dyck of George , second Viscount , and that by Mr. Dobson of my lord the third Viscount , just deceased , which it seem his lady and widow do not think fit to carry away , when she send for and carry off to her house at Chelsey , near to London , the picture of herself by Sir Peter Lely , in which her ladyship be represent as a huntress of Diana 's court . 
 the new and fair lady of Castlewood find the sad , lonely , little occupant of this gallery busy over his great book , which he lay down when he be aware that a stranger be at hand . and , know who that person must be , the lad stand up and bow before she , perform a shy obeisance to the mistress of his house . 
 she stretch out her hand indeed when be it that that hand would not stretch out to do an act of kindness , or to protect grief and ill - fortune ? " and this be our kinsman , " she say " and what be your name , kinsman ? " 
 " my name be Henry Esmond , " say the lad , look up at she in a sort of delight and wonder , for she have come upon he as a Dea certe , and appear the most charming object he have ever look on . her golden hair be shin in the gold of the sun ; her complexion be of a dazzling bloom ; her lip smile , and her eye beam with a kindness which make Harry Esmond 's heart to beat with surprise . 
 " his name be Henry Esmond , sure enough , my lady , " say Mrs. Worksop , the housekeeper   an old tyrant whom Henry Esmond plague more than he hat , and the old gentlewoman look significantly towards the late lord 's picture , as it now be in the family , noble and severe - look , with his hand on his sword , and his order on his cloak , which he have from the Emperor during the war on the Danube against the Turk . 
 see the great and undeniable likeness between this portrait and the lad , the new Viscountess , who have still hold of the boy 's hand as she look at the picture , blush and drop the hand quickly , and walk down the gallery , follow by Mrs. Worksop . 
 when the lady come back , Harry Esmond stand exactly in the same spot , and with his hand as it have fall when he drop it on his black coat . 
 her heart melt , I suppose   indeed she hath since own as much , at the notion that she should do anything unkind to any mortal , great or small ; for , when she return , she have send away the housekeeper upon an errand by the door at the farth end of the gallery ; and , come back to the lad , with a look of infinite pity and tenderness in her eye , she take his hand again , place her other fair hand on his head , and say some word to he , which be so kind , and say in a voice so sweet , that the boy , who have never look upon so much beauty before , feel as if the touch of a superior being or angel smite he down to the ground , and kiss the fair protect hand as he kneel on one knee . to the very last hour of his life , Esmond remember the lady as she then speak and look , the ring on her fair hand , the very scent of her robe , the beam of her eye light up with surprise and kindness , her lip bloom in a smile , the sun make a golden halo round her hair . 
 as the boy be yet in this attitude of humility , enter behind he a portly gentleman , with a little girl of four year old in his hand . the gentleman burst into a great laugh at the lady and her adorer , with his little queer figure , his sallow face , and long black hair . the lady blush , and seem to deprecate his ridicule by a look of appeal to her husband , for it be my Lord Viscount who now arrive , and whom the lad know , have once before see he in the late lord 's lifetime . 
 " so this be the little priest " say my lord , look down at the lad ; " welcome , kinsman . " 
 " he be say his prayer to mamma , " say the little girl , who come up to her papa 's knee ; and my lord burst out into another great laugh at this , and kinsman Henry look very silly . he invent a half - dozen of speech in reply , but ' twa month afterwards when he think of this adventure : as it be , he have never a word in answer . 
 " Le pauvre enfant , il n'a que nous , " say the lady , look to her lord ; and the boy , who understand she , though doubtless she think otherwise , thank she with all his heart for her kind speech . 
 " and he shall not   want for friend here , " say my lord in a kind voice , ' shall he , little Trix ? " 
 the little girl , whose name be Beatrix , and whom her papa call by this diminutive , look at Henry Esmond solemnly , with a pair of large eye , and then a smile shine over her face , which be as beautiful as that of a cherub , and she come up and put out a little hand to he . a keen and delightful pang of gratitude , happiness , affection , fill the orphan child 's heart , as he receive from the protector , whom heaven have send to he , these touching word and token of friendliness and kindness . but an hour since , he have feel quite alone in the world : when he hear the great peal of bell from Castlewood church ringing that morning to welcome the arrival of the new lord and lady , it have ring only terror and anxiety to he , for he know not how the new owner would deal with he ; and those to whom he formerly look for protection be forget or dead . pride and doubt too have keep he within - door , when the Vicar and the people of the village , and the servant of the house , have go out to welcome my Lord Castlewood for Henry Esmond be no servant , though a dependant ; no relative , though he bear the name and inherit the blood of the house ; and in the midst of the noise and acclamation attend the arrival of the new lord   for whom , you may be sure , a feast be get ready , and gun be fire , and tenant and domestic huzzahe when his carriage approach and roll into the court - yard of the hall , no one ever take any notice of young Henry Esmond , who sit unobserved and alone in the Book - room , until the afternoon of that day , when his new friend find he . 
 when my lord and lady be go away thence , the little girl , still hold her kinsman by the hand , bid he to come too . " thou wilt always forsake an old friend for a new one , Trix , " say her father to her good - naturedly ; and go into the gallery , give an arm to his lady . they pass thence through the music - gallery , long since dismantle , and Queen Elizabeth 's Rooms , in the clock - tower , and out into the terrace , where be a fine prospect of sunset and the great darkle wood with a cloud of rook return ; and the plain and river with Castlewood village beyond , and purple hill beautiful to look at and the little heir of Castlewood , a child of two year old , be already here on the terrace in his nurse 's arm , from whom he run across the grass instantly he perceive his mother , and come to she . 
 " if thou canst not be happy here , " say my lord , look round at the scene , " thou art hard to please , Rachel . " 
 " I be happy where you be , " she say , " but we be happy of all at Walcote Forest . " then my lord begin to describe what be before they to his wife , and what indeed little Harry know well than he viz . , the history of the house : how by yonder gate the page run away with the heiress of Castlewood , by which the estate come into the present family ; how the roundhead attack the clock - tower , which my lord 's father be slay in defend . " I be but two year old then , " say he , " but take forty - six from ninety , and how old shall I be , kinsman Harry ? " 
 " Thirty , " say his wife , with a laugh . 
 " a great deal too old for you , Rachel , " answer my lord , look fondly down at she . indeed she seem to be a girl , and be at that time scarce twenty year old . 
 " you know , Frank , I will do anything to please you , " say she , " and I promise you I will grow old every day . " 
 " you must not   call papa , Frank ; you must call papa my lord now , " say Miss Beatrix , with a toss of her little head ; at which the mother smile , and the good - natured father laugh , and the little trotting boy laugh , not know why but because he be happy , no doubt as every one seem to be there . how those trivial incident and word , the landscape and sunshine , and the group of people smile and talk , remain fixed on the memory ! 
 as the sun be set , the little heir be send in the arm of his nurse to bed , whither he go howl ; but little Trix be promise to sit to supper that night " and you will come too , kinsman , will not   you ? " she say . 
 Harry Esmond blush : " I I have supper with Mrs. Worksop , " say he . 
 " D n it , " say my lord , " thou shalt sup with we , Harry , to - night ! shall not   refuse a lady , shall he , Trix ? " and they all wonder at Harry 's performance as a trencher - man , in which character the poor boy acquit himself very remarkably ; for the truth be he have have no dinner , nobody think of he in the bustle which the house be in , during the preparation antecedent to the new lord 's arrival . 
 " no dinner ! poor dear child ! " say my lady , heap up his plate with meat , and my lord , fill a bumper for he , bid he call a health ; on which Master Harry , cry " the king , " toss off the wine . my lord be ready to drink that , and most other toast : indeed only too ready . he would not hear of Doctor Tusher   the Vicar of Castlewood , who come to supper   go away when the sweetmeat be bring : he have not have a chaplain long enough , he say , to be tired of he : so his reverence keep my lord company for some hour over a pipe and a punch - bowl ; and go away home with rather a reeling gait , and declare a dozen of time , that his lordship 's affability surpass every kindness he have ever have from his lordship 's gracious family . 
 as for young Esmond , when he get to his little chamber , it be with a heart full of surprise and gratitude towards the new friend whom this happy day have bring he . he be up and watch long before the house be astir , long to see that fair lady and her child that kind protector and patron : and only fearful lest their welcome of the past night should in any way be withdraw or alter . but presently little Beatrix come out into the garden , and her mother follow , who greet Harry as kindly as before . he tell she at great length the history of the house   which he have be teach in the old lord 's time , and to which she listen with great interest ; and then he tell she , with respect to the night before , that he understand French , and thank she for her protection . 
 " do you ? " say she , with a blush ; " then , sir , you shall teach I and beatrix . " and she ask he many more question regard himself , which have well be tell more fully and explicitly than in those brief reply which the lad make to his mistress 's question . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 relate HOW FRANCIS , FOURTH VISCOUNT , arrive AT CASTLEWOOD . 

 ' tis know that the name of Esmond and the estate of Castlewood , com . hant , come into possession of the present family through Dorothea , daughter and heiress of Edward , Earl and Marquis Esmond , and Lord of Castlewood , which lady marry , 23 Eliz . , Henry Poyns , gent . ; the say Henry be then a page in the household of her father . Francis , son and heir of the above Henry and Dorothea , who take the maternal name which the family hath bear subsequently , be make Knight and Baronet by King James the First ; and be of a military disposition , remain long in Germany with the Elector - Palatine , in whose service Sir Francis incur both expense and danger , lend large sum of money to that unfortunate Prince ; and receive many wound in the battle against the Imperialists , in which Sir Francis engage . 
 on his return home Sir Francis be reward for his service and many sacrifice , by his late Majesty James the First , who graciously confer upon this try servant the post of Warden of the Butteries and Groom of the King 's Posset , which high and confidential office he fill in that king 's and his unhappy successor 's reign . 
 his age , and many wound and infirmity , oblige Sir Francis to perform much of his duty by deputy : and his son , Sir George Esmond , knight and banneret , first as his father 's lieutenant , and afterwards as inheritor of his father 's title and dignity , perform this office during almost the whole of the reign of King Charles the First , and his two son who succeed he . 
 Sir George Esmond marry , rather beneath the rank that a person of his name and honor might aspire to , the daughter of Thos . Topham , of the city of London , alderman and goldsmith , who , take the parliamentary side in the trouble then commence , disappoint Sir George of the property which he expect at the demise of his father - in - law , who devise his money to his second daughter , Barbara , a spinster . 
 Sir George Esmond , on his part , be conspicuous for his attachment and loyalty to the Royal cause and person : and the King be at Oxford in 1642 , Sir George , with the consent of his father , then very aged and infirm , and reside at his house of Castlewood , melt the whole of the family plate for his Majesty 's service . 
 for this , and other sacrifice and merit , his Majesty , by patent under the Privy Seal , date Oxford , Jan. , 1643 , be pleased to advance Sir Francis Esmond to the dignity of Viscount Castlewood , of Shandon , in Ireland : and the Viscount 's estate be much impoverish by loan to the King , which in those troublesome time his Majesty could not repay , a grant of land in the plantation of Virginia be give to the Lord Viscount . ; part of which land be in possession of descendant of his family to the present day . 
 the first Viscount Castlewood die full of year , and within a few month after he have be advanced to his honor . he be succeed by his eld son , the before - name George ; and leave issue besides , Thomas , a colonel in the King 's army , who afterwards join the Usurper 's government ; and Francis , in holy order , who be slay whilst defend the House of Castlewood against the Parliament , anno 1647 . 
 George Lord Castlewood   the second Viscount , of King Charles the First 's time , have no male issue save his one son , Eustace Esmond , who be kill , with half of the Castlewood man beside he , at Worcester fight . the land about Castlewood be sell and apportion to the Commonwealth man ; Castlewood be concern in almost all of the plot against the Protector , after the death of the king , and up to King Charles the Second 's restoration . my lord follow that king 's Court about in its exile , have ruin himself in its service . he have but one daughter , who be of no great comfort to her father ; for misfortune have not teach those exile sobriety of life ; and it be say that the Duke of York and his brother the King both quarrel about Isabel Esmond . she be maid of honor to the Queen Henrietta Maria ; she early join the Roman Church ; her father , a weak man , follow she not long after at Breda . 
 on the death of Eustace Esmond at Worcester , Thomas Esmond , nephew to my Lord Castlewood , and then a stripling , become heir to the title . his father have take the Parliament side in the quarrel , and so have be estrange from the chief of his house ; and my Lord Castlewood be at first so much enraged to think that his title   albeit little more than an empty one now   should pass to a rascally Roundhead , that he would have marry again , and indeed propose to do so to a vintner 's daughter at bruge , to whom his lordship owe a score for lodge when the King be there , but for fear of the laughter of the Court , and the anger of his daughter , of whom he stand in awe ; for she be in temper as imperious and violent as my lord , who be much enfeeble by wound and drinking , be weak . 
 Lord Castlewood would have have a match between his daughter Isabel and her cousin , the son of that Francis Esmond who be kill at Castlewood siege . and the lady , it be say , take a fancy to the young man , who be her junior by several year   which circumstance she do not consider to be a fault in he ; but have pay his court , and be admit to the intimacy of the house , he suddenly fling up his suit , when it seem to be pretty prosperous , without give a pretext for his behavior . his friend rally he at what they laughingly choose to call his infidelity ; Jack Churchill , Frank Esmond 's lieutenant in the Royal Regiment of foot - guard , get the company which Esmond vacate , when he leave the Court and go to Tangier in a rage at discover that his promotion depend on the complaisance of his elderly affiance bride . he and Churchill , who have be condiscipuli at St. Paul 's School , have word about this matter ; and Frank Esmond say to he with an oath , " Jack , your sister may be so - and - so , but by Jove my wife shall not ! " and sword be draw , and blood draw too , until friend separate they on this quarrel . few man be so jealous about the point of honor in those day ; and gentleman of good birth and lineage think a royal blot be an ornament to their family coat . Frank Esmond retire in the sulk , first to Tangier , whence he return after two year ' service , settle on a small property he have of his mother , near to Winchester , and become a country gentleman , and keep a pack of beagle , and never come to Court again in King Charles 's time . but his uncle Castlewood be never reconcile to he ; nor , for some time afterwards , his cousin whom he have refuse . 
 by place , pension , bounty from France , and gift from the king , whilst his daughter be in favor , Lord Castlewood , who have spend in the Royal service his youth and fortune , do not retrieve the latter quite , and never care to visit Castlewood , or repair it , since the death of his son , but manage to keep a good house , and figure at Court , and to save a considerable sum of ready money . 
 and now , his heir and nephew , Thomas Esmond , begin to bid for his uncle 's favor . Thomas have serve with the Emperor , and with the Dutch , when King Charles be compel to lend troop to the States ; and against they , when his Majesty make an alliance with the french king . in these campaign Thomas Esmond be more remark for duelling , brawling , vice , and play , than for any conspicuous gallantry in the field , and come back to England , like many another english gentleman who have travel , with a character by no mean improve by his foreign experience . he have dissipate his small paternal inheritance of a young brother 's portion , and , as truth must be tell , be no well than a hanger - on of ordinary , and a brawler about Alsatia and the Friars , when he bethink he of a mean of mend his fortune . 
 his cousin be now of more than middle age , and have nobody 's word but her own for the beauty which she say she once possess . she be lean , and yellow , and long in the tooth ; all the red and white in all the toy - shop in London could not make a beauty of her Mr. Killigrew call she the Sybil , the death's - head put up at the King 's feast as a memento mori ,   c. in fine , a woman who might be easy of conquest , but whom only a very bold man would think of conquer . this bold man be Thomas Esmond . he have a fancy to my Lord Castlewood 's saving , the amount of which rumor have very much exaggerated . Madame Isabel be say to have Royal jewel of great value ; whereas poor Tom Esmond 's last coat but one be in pawn . 
 my lord have at this time a fine house in Lincoln's - Inn - Fields , nigh to the Duke 's Theatre and the Portugal ambassador 's chapel . Tom Esmond , who have frequent the one as long as he have money to spend among the actress , now come to the church as assiduously . he look so lean and shabby , that he pass without difficulty for a repentant sinner ; and so , become convert , you may be sure take his uncle 's priest for a director . 
 this charitable father reconcile he with the old lord , his uncle , who a short time before would not speak to he , as Tom pass under my lord 's coach window , his lordship go in state to his place at Court , while his nephew slunk by with his battered hat and feather , and the point of his rapi stick out of the scabbard to his twopenny ordinary in Bell Yard . 
 Thomas Esmond , after this reconciliation with his uncle , very soon begin to grow sleek , and to show sign of the benefit of good living and clean linen . he fast rigorously twice a week , to be sure ; but he make amend on the other day : and , to show how great his appetite be , Mr. Wycherley say , he end by swallow that fly - blow rank old morsel his cousin . there be endless joke and lampoon about this marriage at Court : but Tom ride thither in his uncle 's coach now , call he father , and have win could afford to laugh . this marriage take place very shortly before King Charles die : whom the Viscount of Castlewood speedily follow . 
 the issue of this marriage be one son , whom the parent watch with an intense eagerness and care ; but who , in spite of nurse and physician , have only a brief existence . his tainted blood do not run very long in his poor feeble little body . symptom of evil break out early on he ; and , part from flattery , part superstition , nothing would satisfy my lord and lady , especially the latter , but have the poor little cripple touch by his Majesty at his church . they be ready to cry out miracle at first   the doctor and quack - salver be constantly in attendance on the child , and experiment on his poor little body with every conceivable nostrum   but though there seem , from some reason , a notable amelioration in the infant 's health after his Majesty touch he , in a few week afterward the poor thing die cause the lampooner of the Court to say , that the King , in expel evil out of the infant of Tom Esmond and Isabella his wife , expel the life out of it , which be nothing but corruption . 
 the mother 's natural pang at lose this poor little child must have be increase when she think of her rival Frank Esmond 's wife , who be a favorite of the whole Court , where my poor Lady Castlewood be neglect , and who have one child , a daughter , flourish and beautiful , and be about to become a mother once more . 
 the Court , as I have hear , only laugh the more because the poor lady , who have pretty well pass the age when lady be accustomed to have child , nevertheless determine not to give hope up , and even when she come to live at Castlewood , be constantly send over to Hexton for the doctor , and announce to her friend the arrival of an heir . this absurdity of hers be one amongst many other which the wag use to play upon . indeed , to the last day of her life , my Lady Viscountess have the comfort of fancy herself beautiful , and persist in bloom up to the very midst of winter , paint rose on her cheek long after their natural season , and attire herself like summer though her head be cover with snow . 
 gentleman who be about the Court of King Charles , and King James , have tell the present writer a number of story about this queer old lady , with which it be not necessary that posterity should be entertain . she be say to have have great power of invective and , if she fight with all her rival in King James 's favor , ' tis certain she must have have a vast number of quarrel on her hand . she be a woman of an intrepid spirit , and , it appear , pursue and rather fatigue his Majesty with her right and her wrong . some say that the cause of she leave Court be jealousy of Frank Esmond 's wife : other , that she be force to retreat after a great battle which take place at Whitehall , between her ladyship and Lady Dorchester , Tom Killigrew 's daughter , whom the King delight to honor , and in which that ill - favor Esther get the well of our elderly Vashti . but her ladyship , for her part , always aver that it be her husband 's quarrel , and not her own , which occasion the banishment of the two into the country ; and the cruel ingratitude of the Sovereign in give away , out of the family , that place of Warden of the Butteries and Groom of the King 's Posset , which the two last Lords Castlewood have hold so honorably , and which be now confer upon a fellow of yesterday , and a hanger - on of that odious Dorchester creature , my Lord Bergamot ;   " I never , " say my lady , " could have come to see his Majesty 's posset carry by any other hand than an Esmond . I should have dash the salver out of Lord Bergamot 's hand , have I meet he . " and those who know her ladyship be aware that she be a person quite capable of perform this feat , have she not wisely keep out of the way . 
    Lionel Tipton , create Baron Bergamot , ann . 1686 , 
  Gentleman Usher of the Back Stairs , and afterwards appoint 
  Warden of the Butteries and Groom of the King 's Posset   on 
  the decease of George , second Viscount Castlewood , 
  accompany his Majesty to St. Germain 's , where he die 
  without issue . no Groom of the Posset be appoint by the 
  Prince of Orange , nor hath there be such an officer in any 
  succeed reign . 
 hold the purse - string in her own control , to which , indeed , she like to bring most person who come near she , Lady Castlewood could command her husband 's obedience , and so break up her establishment at London ; she have remove from Lincoln's - Inn - Fields to Chelsey , to a pretty new house she buy there ; and bring her establishment , her maid , lap - dog , and gentlewoman , her priest , and his lordship her husband , to Castlewood Hall , that she have never see since she quit it as a child with her father during the trouble of King Charles the First 's reign . the wall be still open in the old house as they have be leave by the shot of the Commonwealthmen . a part of the mansion be restore and furbish up with the plate , hanging , and furniture bring from the house in London . my lady mean to have a triumphal entry into Castlewood village , and expect the people to cheer as she drive over the Green in her great coach , my lord beside she , her gentlewoman , lap - dog , and cockatoo on the opposite seat , six horse to her carriage , and servant arm and mount follow it and precede it . but ' twa in the height of the No - Popery cry ; the folk in the village and the neighboring town be scar by the sight of her ladyship 's paint face and eyelid , as she bob her head out of the coach window , meaning , no doubt , to be very gracious ; and one old woman say , " Lady Isabel ! lord - a - mercy , it be Lady Jezebel ! " a name by which the enemy of the right honorable Viscountess be afterwards in the habit of designate she . the country be then in a great no - Popery fervor ; her ladyship 's know conversion , and her husband 's , the priest in her train , and the service perform at the chapel of Castlewood   though the chapel have be build for that worship before any other be hear of in the country , and though the service be perform in the most quiet manner , get she no favor at first in the county or village . by far the great part of the estate of Castlewood have be confiscate , and be parcel out to Commonwealthmen . one or two of these old cromwellian soldier be still alive in the village , and look grimly at first upon my Lady Viscountess , when she come to dwell there . 
 she appear at the Hexton Assembly , bring her lord after she , scar the country folk with the splendor of her diamond , which she always wear in public . they say she wear they in private , too , and sleep with they round her neck ; though the writer can pledge his word that this be a calumny . " if she be to take they off , " my Lady Sark say , " Tom Esmond , her husband , would run away with they and pawn they . " ' twas another calumny . my Lady Sark be also an exile from Court , and there have be war between the two lady before . 
 the village people begin to be reconcile presently to their lady , who be generous and kind , though fantastic and haughty , in her way ; and whose praise Dr. Tusher , the Vicar , sound loudly amongst his flock . as for my lord , he give no great trouble , be consider scarce more than an appendage to my lady , who , as daughter of the old lord of Castlewood , and possessor of vast wealth , as the country folk say   though indeed nine - tenth of it exist but in rumor , be look upon as the real queen of the Castle , and mistress of all it contain . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 whither in the time of THOMAS , THIRD VISCOUNT , I had PRECEDED HIM as page to ISABELLA . 
 come up to London again some short time after this retreat , the Lord Castlewood despatch a retainer of his to a little cottage in the village of Ealing , near to London , where for some time have dwell an old french refugee , by name Mr. Pastoureau , one of those whom the persecution of the huguenot by the french king have bring over to this country . with this old man live a little lad , who go by the name of Henry Thomas . he remember to have live in another place a short time before , near to London too , amongst loom and spinning - wheel , and a great deal of psalm - singing and church - going , and a whole colony of Frenchmen . 
 there he have a dear , dear friend , who die , and whom he call Aunt . she use to visit he in his dream sometimes ; and her face , though it be homely , be a thousand time dearer to he than that of Mrs. Pastoureau , Bon Papa Pastoureau 's new wife , who come to live with he after aunt go away . and there , at Spittlefields , as it use to be call , live Uncle George , who be a weaver too , but use to tell Harry that he be a little gentleman , and that his father be a captain , and his mother an angel . 
 when he say so , Bon Papa use to look up from the loom , where he be embroider beautiful silk flower , and say , " Angel ! she belong to the babylonish scarlet woman . " Bon Papa be always talk of the scarlet woman . he have a little room where he always use to preach and sing hymn out of his great old nose . Little Harry do not like the preaching ; he like well the fine story which aunt use to tell he . Bon Papa 's wife never tell he pretty story ; she quarrel with Uncle George , and he go away . 
 after this , Harry 's Bon Papa and his wife and two child of her own that she bring with she , come to live at Ealing . the new wife give her child the good of everything , and Harry many a whipping , he know not why . besides blow , he get ill name from she , which need not be set down here , for the sake of old Mr. Pastoureau , who be still kind sometimes . the unhappiness of those day be long forgive , though they cast a shade of melancholy over the child 's youth , which will accompany he , no doubt , to the end of his day : as those tender twig be bent the tree grow afterward ; and he , at least , who have suffer as a child , and be not quite pervert in that early school of unhappiness , learn to be gentle and long - suffering with little child . 
 Harry be very glad when a gentleman dress in black , on horseback , with a mount servant behind he , come to fetch he away from Ealing . the noverca , or unjust stepmother , who have neglect he for her own two child , give he supper enough the night before he go away , and plenty in the morning . she do not beat he once , and tell the child to keep their hand off he . one be a girl , and Harry never could bear to strike a girl ; and the other be a boy , whom he could easily have beat , but he always cry out , when Mrs. Pastoureau come sail to the rescue with arm like a flail . she only wash Harry 's face the day he go away ; nor ever so much as once box his ear . she whimper rather when the gentleman in black come for the boy ; and old Mr. Pastoureau , as he give the child his blessing , scowl over his shoulder at the strange gentleman , and grumble out something about Babylon and the scarlet lady . he be grow quite old , like a child almost . Mrs. Pastoureau use to wipe his nose as she do to the child . she be a great , big , handsome young woman ; but , though she pretend to cry , Harry think ' twa only a sham , and spring quite delighted upon the horse upon which the lackey help he . 
 he be a Frenchman ; his name be Blaise . the child could talk to he in his own language perfectly well : he know it well than English indeed , have live hitherto chiefly among french people : and be call the Little Frenchman by other boy on Ealing Green . he soon learn to speak English perfectly , and to forget some of his French : child forget easily . some early and fainter recollection the child have of a different country ; and a town with tall white house : and a ship . but these be quite indistinct in the boy 's mind , as indeed the memory of Ealing soon become , at least of much that he suffer there . 
 the lackey before whom he ride be very lively and voluble , and inform the boy that the gentleman rid before he be my lord 's chaplain , Father Holt that he be now to be call Master Harry Esmond that my Lord Viscount Castlewood be his parrain that he be to live at the great house of Castlewood , in the province of shire , where he would see Madame the Viscountess , who be a grand lady . and so , seat on a cloth before Blaise 's saddle , Harry Esmond be bring to London , and to a fine square call Covent Garden , near to which his patron lodge . 
 Mr. Holt , the priest , take the child by the hand , and bring he to this nobleman , a grand languid nobleman in a great cap and flower morning - gown , suck orange . he pat Harry on the head and give he an orange . 
 " C'est bien can , " he say to the priest after eye the child , and the gentleman in black shrug his shoulder . 
 " let Blaise take he out for a holiday , " and out for a holiday the boy and the valet go . Harry go jump along ; he be glad enough to go . 
 he will remember to his life 's end the delight of those day . he be take to see a play by Monsieur Blaise , in a house a thousand time great and fine than the booth at Ealing Fair and on the next happy day they take water on the river , and Harry see London Bridge , with the house and bookseller ' shop thereon , look like a street , and the Tower of London , with the Armor , and the great lion and bear in the moat all under company of Monsieur Blaise . 
 presently , of an early morning , all the party set forth for the country , namely , my Lord Viscount and the other gentleman ; Monsieur Blaise and Harry on a pillion behind they , and two or three man with pistol lead the baggage - horse . and all along the road the Frenchman tell little Harry story of brigand , which make the child 's hair stand on end , and terrify he ; so that at the great gloomy inn on the road where they lay , he besought to be allow to sleep in a room with one of the servant , and be compassionate by Mr. Holt , the gentleman who travel with my lord , and who give the child a little bed in his chamber . 
 his artless talk and answer very likely incline this gentleman in the boy 's favor , for next day Mr. Holt say Harry should ride behind he , and not with the french lacky ; and all along the journey put a thousand question to the child as to his foster - brother and relation at Ealing ; what his old grandfather have teach he ; what language he know ; whether he could read and write , and sing , and so forth . and Mr. Holt find that Harry could read and write , and possess the two language of French and English very well ; and when he ask Harry about sing , the lad break out with a hymn to the tune of Dr. Martin Luther , which set Mr. Holt a - laugh ; and even cause his grand parrain in the laced hat and periwig to laugh too when Holt tell he what the child be sing . for it appear that Dr. Martin Luther 's hymn be not sing in the church Mr. Holt preach at . 
 " you must never sing that song any more : do you hear , little mannikin ? " say my Lord Viscount , hold up a finger . 
 " but we will try and teach you a well , Harry , " Mr. Holt say ; and the child answer , for he be a docile child , and of an affectionate nature , " that he love pretty song , and would try and learn anything the gentleman would tell he . " that day he so please the gentleman by his talk , that they have he to dine with they at the inn , and encourage he in his prattle ; and Monsieur Blaise , with whom he ride and din the day before , wait upon he now . 
 " ' tis well , ' tis well ! " say Blaise , that night   in his own language   when they lie again at an inn . " we be a little lord here ; we be a little lord now : we shall see what we be when we come to Castlewood , where my lady be . " 
 " when shall we come to Castlewood , Monsieur Blaise ? " say Harry . 
 " Parbleu ! my lord do not press himself , " Blaise say , with a grin ; and , indeed , it seem as if his lordship be not in a great hurry , for he spend three day on that journey which Harry Esmond hath often since ride in a dozen hour . for the last two of the day Harry ride with the priest , who be so kind to he , that the child have grow to be quite fond and familiar with he by the journey 's end , and have scarce a thought in his little heart which by that time he have not confide to his new friend . 
 at length , on the third day , at evening , they come to a village stand on a green with elm round it , very pretty to look at ; and the people there all take off their hat , and make curtsy to my Lord Viscount , who bow to they all languidly ; and there be one portly person that wear a cassock and a broad - leaf hat , who bow low than any one and with this one both my lord and Mr. Holt have a few word . " this , Harry , be Castlewood church , " say Mr. Holt , " and this be the pillar thereof , learn Doctor Tusher . take off your hat , sirrah , and salute Dr. Tusher ! " 
 " come up to supper , Doctor , " say my lord ; at which the Doctor make another low bow , and the party move on towards a grand house that be before they , with many gray tower and vane on they , and window flame in the sunshine ; and a great army of rook , wheel over their head , make for the wood behind the house , as Harry see ; and Mr. Holt tell he that they live at Castlewood too . 
 they come to the house , and pass under an arch into a court - yard , with a fountain in the centre , where many man come and hold my lord 's stirrup as he descend , and pay great respect to Mr. Holt likewise . and the child think that the servant look at he curiously , and smile to one another and he recall what Blaise have say to he when they be in London , and Harry have speak about his godpapa , when the Frenchman say , " Parbleu , one see well that my lord be your godfather ; " word whereof the poor lad do not know the meaning then , though he apprehend the truth in a very short time afterwards , and learn it , and think of it with no small feeling of shame . 
 take Harry by the hand as soon as they be both descend from their horse , Mr. Holt lead he across the court , and under a low door to room on a level with the ground ; one of which Father Holt say be to be the boy 's chamber , the other on the other side of the passage be the Father 's own ; and as soon as the little man 's face be wash , and the Father 's own dress arrange , Harry 's guide take he once more to the door by which my lord have enter the hall , and up a stair , and through an ante - room to my lady 's drawing - room an apartment than which Harry think he have never see anything more grand no , not in the Tower of London which he have just visit . indeed , the chamber be richly ornament in the manner of Queen Elizabeth 's time , with great stain window at either end , and hanging of tapestry , which the sun shin through the colored glass paint of a thousand line ; and here in state , by the fire , sit a lady to whom the priest take up Harry , who be indeed amazed by her appearance . 
 my Lady Viscountess 's face be daub with white and red up to the eye , to which the paint give an unearthly glare : she have a tower of lace on her head , under which be a bush of black curl borrow curl so that no wonder little Harry Esmond be scared when he be first present to she the kind priest act as master of the ceremony at that solemn introduction and he star at she with eye almost as great as her own , as he have star at the player woman who act the wicked tragedy - queen , when the player come down to Ealing Fair . she sit in a great chair by the fire - corner ; in her lap be a spaniel - dog that bark furiously ; on a little table by she be her ladyship 's snuff - box and her sugar - plum box . she wear a dress of black velvet , and a petticoat of flame - color brocade . she have as many ring on her finger as the old woman of Banbury Cross ; and pretty small foot which she be fond of show , with great gold clock to her stocking , and white pantofle with red heel ; and an odor of musk be shake out of her garment whenever she move or quit the room , lean on her tortoise - shell stick , little fury barking at her heel . 
 Mrs. Tusher , the parson 's wife , be with my lady . she have be wait - woman to her ladyship in the late lord 's time , and , have her soul in that business , take naturally to it when the Viscountess of Castlewood return to inhabit her father 's house . 
 " I present to your ladyship your kinsman and little page of honor , Master Henry Esmond , " Mr. Holt say , bow lowly , with a sort of comical humility . " make a pretty bow to my lady , Monsieur ; and then another little bow , not so low , to Madame Tusher the fair priestess of Castlewood . " 
 " where I have live and hope to die , sir , " say Madame Tusher , give a hard glance at the brat , and then at my lady . 
 upon she the boy 's whole attention be for a time direct . he could not keep his great eye off from she . since the Empress of Ealing , he have see nothing so awful . 
 " do my appearance please you , little page ? " ask the lady . 
 " he would be very hard to please if it do not , " cry Madame Tusher . 
 " have do , you silly Maria , " say Lady Castlewood . 
 " where I be attach , I be attach , Madame and I would die rather than not say so . " 
 " Je meur ou je m'attache , " Mr. Holt say with a polite grin . " the ivy say so in the picture , and cling to the oak like a fond parasite as it be . " 
 " Parricide , sir ! " cry Mrs. Tusher . 
 " Hush , Tusher you be always bicker with Father Holt , " cry my lady . " come and kiss my hand , child ; " and the oak hold out a BRANCH to little Harry Esmond , who take and dutifully kiss the lean old hand , upon the gnarl knuckle of which there glitter a hundred ring . 
 " to kiss that hand would make many a pretty fellow happy ! " cry Mrs. Tusher : on which my lady cry out , " go , you foolish Tusher ! " and tap she with her great fan , Tusher run forward to seize her hand and kiss it . Fury arise and bark furiously at Tusher ; and Father Holt look on at this queer scene , with arch , grave glance . 
 the awe exhibit by the little boy perhaps please the lady to whom this artless flattery be bestow : for have go down on his knee   as Father Holt have direct he , and the mode then be   and perform his obeisance , she say , " Page Esmond , my groom of the chamber will inform you what your duty be , when you wait upon my lord and I ; and good Father Holt will instruct you as become a gentleman of our name . you will pay he obedience in everything , and I pray you may grow to be as learn and as good as your tutor . " 
 the lady seem to have the great reverence for Mr. Holt , and to be more afraid of he than of anything else in the world . if she be ever so angry , a word or look from Father Holt make her calm : indeed he have a vast power of subject those who come near he ; and , among the rest , his new pupil give himself up with an entire confidence and attachment to the good Father , and become his willing slave almost from the first moment he see he . 
 he put his small hand into the Father 's as he walk away from his first presentation to his mistress , and ask many question in his artless childish way . " who be that other woman ? " he ask . " she be fat and round ; she be more pretty than my Lady Castlewood . " 
 " she be Madame Tusher , the parson 's wife of Castlewood . she have a son of your age , but big than you . " 
 " why do she like so to kiss my lady 's hand . it be not good to kiss . " 
 " taste be different , little man . Madame Tusher be attach to my lady , have be her waiting - woman before she be marry , in the old lord 's time . she marry Doctor Tusher the chaplain . the english household divine often marry the waiting - woman . " 
 " you will not marry the french woman , will you ? I see she laugh with Blaise in the buttery . " 
 " I belong to a church that be old and well than the english church , " Mr. Holt say   make a sign whereof Esmond do not then understand the meaning , across his breast and forehead ; " in our church the clergy do not marry . you will understand these thing well soon . " 
 " be not Saint Peter the head of your church ? Dr. Rabbits of Ealing tell we so . " 
 the Father say , " yes , he be . " 
 " but Saint Peter be marry , for we hear only last Sunday that his wife 's mother lie sick of a fever . " on which the Father again laugh , and say he would understand this too well soon , and talk of other thing , and take away Harry Esmond , and show he the great old house which he have come to inhabit . 
 it stand on a rise green hill , with wood behind it , in which be rook ' nest , where the bird at morning and return home at evening make a great cawing . at the foot of the hill be a river , with a steep ancient bridge cross it ; and beyond that a large pleasant green flat , where the village of Castlewood stand , and stand , with the church in the midst , the parsonage hard by it , the inn with the blacksmith 's forge beside it , and the sign of the " Three Castles " on the elm . the London road stretch away towards the rise sun , and to the west be swell hill and peak , behind which many a time Harry Esmond see the same sun setting , that he now look on thousand of mile away across the great ocean in a new Castlewood , by another stream , that bear , like the new country of wander AEneas , the fond name of the land of his youth . 
 the Hall of Castlewood be build with two court , whereof one only , the fountain - court , be now inhabit , the other have be batter down in the cromwellian war . in the fountain - court , still in good repair , be the great hall , near to the kitchen and buttery . a dozen of living - room look to the north , and communicate with the little chapel that face eastward and the building stretch from that to the main gate , and with the hall   which look to the west   into the court now dismantle . this court have be the most magnificent of the two , until the Protector 's cannon tear down one side of it before the place be take and storm . the besieger enter at the terrace under the clock - tower , slay every man of the garrison , and at their head my lord 's brother , Francis Esmond . 
 the Restoration do not bring enough money to the Lord Castlewood to restore this ruin part of his house ; where be the morning parlor , above they the long music - gallery , and before which stretch the garden - terrace , where , however , the flower grow again which the boot of the roundhead have tread in their assault , and which be restore without much cost , and only a little care , by both lady who succeed the second viscount in the government of this mansion . round the terrace - garden be a low wall with a wicket lead to the woode height beyond , that be call Cromwell 's Battery to this day . 
 Young Harry Esmond learn the domestic part of his duty , which be easy enough , from the groom of her ladyship 's chamber : serve the Countess , as the custom commonly be in his boyhood , as page , wait at her chair , bring her scented water and the silver basin after dinner sit on her carriage - step on state occasion , or on public day introduce her company to she . this be chiefly of the catholic gentry , of whom there be a pretty many in the country and neighboring city ; and who ride not seldom to Castlewood to partake of the hospitality there . in the second year of their residence , the company seem especially to increase . my lord and my lady be seldom without visitor , in whose society it be curious to contrast the difference of behavior between Father Holt , the director of the family , and Doctor Tusher , the rector of the parish Mr. Holt move amongst the very high as quite their equal , and as command they all ; while poor Doctor Tusher , whose position be indeed a difficult one , have be chaplain once to the Hall , and still to the protestant servant there , seem more like an usher than an equal , and always rise to go away after the first course . 
 also there come in these time to Father Holt many private visitor , whom , after a little , Henry Esmond have little difficulty in recognize as ecclesiastic of the Father 's persuasion , whatever their dress   and they adopt all   might be . these be closet with the Father constantly , and often come and ride away without pay their devoir to my lord and lady to the lady and lord rather his lordship be little more than a cipher in the house , and entirely under his domineering partner . a little fowling , a little hunting , a great deal of sleep , and a long dine at card and table , carry through one day after another with his lordship . when meeting take place in this second year , which often would happen with closed door , the page find my lord 's sheet of paper scribble over with dog and horse , and ' twa say he have much ado to keep himself awake at these council : the Countess rule over they , and he act as little more than her secretary . 
 Father Holt begin speedily to be so much occupy with these meeting as rather to neglect the education of the little lad who so gladly put himself under the kind priest 's order . at first they read much and regularly , both in Latin and French ; the Father not neglect in anything to impress his faith upon his pupil , but not force he violently , and treat he with a delicacy and kindness which surprise and attach the child , always more easily win by these method than by any severe exercise of authority . and his delight in their walk be to tell Harry of the glory of his order , of its martyr and hero , of its Brethren convert the heathen by myriad , traverse the desert , face the stake , rule the court and council , or brave the torture of king ; so that Harry Esmond think that to belong to the Jesuits be the great prize of life and brave end of ambition ; the great career here , and in heaven the sure reward ; and begin to long for the day , not only when he should enter into the one church and receive his first communion , but when he might join that wonderful brotherhood , which be present throughout all the world , and which number the wise , the brave , the highest bear , the most eloquent of man among its member . Father Holt bid he keep his view secret , and to hide they as a great treasure which would escape he if it be reveal ; and , proud of this confidence and secret vest in he , the lad become fondly attach to the master who initiate he into a mystery so wonderful and awful . and when little Tom Tusher , his neighbor , come from school for his holiday , and say how he , too , be to be breed up for an english priest , and would get what he call an exhibition from his school , and then a college scholarship and fellowship , and then a good living it task young Harry Esmond 's power of reticence not to say to his young companion , " Church ! priesthood ! fat living ! my dear Tommy , do you call yours a church and a priesthood ? what be a fat living compare to convert a hundred thousand heathen by a single sermon ? what be a scholarship at Trinity by the side of a crown of martyrdom , with angel await you as your head be take off ? could your master at school sail over the Thames on his gown ? have you statue in your church that can bleed , speak , walk , and cry ? my good Tommy , in dear Father Holt 's church these thing take place every day . you know Saint Philip of the Willows appear to Lord Castlewood , and cause he to turn to the one true church . no saint ever come to you . " and Harry Esmond , because of his promise to Father Holt , hide away these treasure of faith from T. Tusher , deliver himself of they nevertheless simply to Father Holt ; who stroke his head , smile at he with his inscrutable look , and tell he that he do well to meditate on these great thing , and not to talk of they except under direction . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 I be place under a popish priest and breed to that RELIGION . VISCOUNTESS castlewood . 
 have time enough be give , and his childish inclination be properly nurture , Harry Esmond have be a Jesuit priest ere he be a dozen year old , and might have finish his day a martyr in China or a victim on Tower Hill : for , in the few month they spend together at Castlewood , Mr. Holt obtain an entire mastery over the boy 's intellect and affection ; and have bring he to think , as indeed Father Holt think with all his heart too , that no life be so noble , no death so desirable , as that which many brother of his famous order be ready to undergo . by love , by a brightness of wit and good - humor that charm all , by an authority which he know how to assume , by a mystery and silence about he which increase the child 's reverence for he , he win Harry 's absolute fealty , and would have keep it , doubtless , if scheme great and more important than a poor little boy 's admission into order have not call he away . 
 after be at home for a few month in tranquillity   if theirs might be call tranquillity , which be , in truth , a constant bickering , my lord and lady leave the country for London , take their director with they : and his little pupil scarce ever shed more bitter tear in his life than he do for night after the first parting with his dear friend , as he lie in the lonely chamber next to that which the Father use to occupy . he and a few domestic be leave as the only tenant of the great house : and , though Harry sedulously do all the task which the Father set he , he have many hour unoccupied , and read in the library , and bewilder his little brain with the great book he find there . 
 after a while , the little lad grow accustomed to the loneliness of the place ; and in after day remember this part of his life as a period not unhappy . when the family be at London the whole of the establishment travel thither with the exception of the porter who be , moreover , brewer , gardener , and woodman and his wife and child . these have their lodging in the gate - house hard by , with a door into the court ; and a window look out on the green be the Chaplain 's room ; and next to this a small chamber where Father Holt have his book , and Harry Esmond his sleep closet . the side of the house face the east have escape the gun of the Cromwellians , whose battery be on the height face the western court ; so that this eastern end bear few mark of demolition , save in the chapel , where the paint window survive Edward the Sixth have be break by the Commonwealthmen . in Father Holt 's time little Harry Esmond act as his familiar and faithful little servitor ; beat his clothe , fold his vestment , fetch his water from the well long before daylight , ready to run anywhere for the service of his beloved priest . when the Father be away , he lock his private chamber ; but the room where the book be be leave to little Harry , who , but for the society of this gentleman , be little less solitary when Lord Castlewood be at home . 
 the french wit saith that a hero be none to his valet - de - chambre , and it require less quick eye than my lady 's little page be naturally endow with , to see that she have many quality by no means heroic , however much Mrs. Tusher might flatter and coax she . when Father Holt be not by , who exercise an entire authority over the pair , my lord and my lady quarrel and abuse each other so as to make the servant laugh , and to frighten the little page on duty . the poor boy tremble before his mistress , who call he by a hundred ugly name , who make nothing of box his ear , and tilt the silver basin in his face which it be his business to present to she after dinner . she hath repair , by subsequent kindness to he , these severity , which it must be own make his childhood very unhappy . she be but unhappy herself at this time , poor soul ! and I suppose make her dependant lead her own sad life . I think my lord be as much afraid of she as her page be , and the only person of the household who master she be Mr. Holt . Harry be only too glad when the Father din at table , and to slink away and prattle with he afterwards , or read with he , or walk with he . luckily my Lady Viscountess do not rise till noon . Heaven help the poor waiting - woman who have charge of her toilet ! I have often see the poor wretch come out with red eye from the closet where those long and mysterious rite of her ladyship 's dress be perform , and the backgammon - box lock up with a rap on Mrs. Tusher 's finger when she play ill , or the game be go the wrong way . 
 bless be the king who introduce card , and the kind inventor of piquet and cribbage , for they employ six hour at least of her ladyship 's day , during which her family be pretty easy . without this occupation my lady frequently declare she should die . her dependant one after another relieved guard ' twa rather a dangerous post to play with her ladyship and take the card turn about . Mr. Holt would sit with she at piquet during hour together , at which time she behave herself properly ; and as for Dr. Tusher , I believe he would have leave a parishioner 's die bed , if summon to play a rubber with his patroness at Castlewood . sometimes , when they be pretty comfortable together , my lord take a hand . besides these my lady have her faithful poor Tusher , and one , two , three gentlewoman whom Harry Esmond could recollect in his time . they could not bear that genteel service very long ; one after another try and fail at it . these and the housekeeper , and little Harry Esmond , have a table of their own . poor lady their life be far hard than the page 's . he be sound asleep , tuck up in his little bed , whilst they be sit by her ladyship read she to sleep , with the " News Letter " or the " Grand Cyrus . " my lady use to have box of new play from London , and Harry be forbid , under the pain of a whipping , to look into they . I be afraid he deserve the penalty pretty often , and get it sometimes . Father Holt apply it twice or thrice , when he catch the young scapegrace with a delightful wicked comedy of Mr. Shadwell 's or Mr. Wycherley 's under his pillow . 
 these , when he take any , be my lord 's favorite reading . but he be averse to much study , and , as his little page fancy , to much occupation of any sort . 
 it always seem to young Harry Esmond that my lord treat he with more kindness when his lady be not present , and Lord Castlewood would take the lad sometimes on his little journey a - hunting or a - birding ; he love to play at card and tric - trac with he , which game the boy learn to pleasure his lord : and be grow to like he well daily , show a special pleasure if Father Holt give a good report of he , pat he on the head , and promise that he would provide for the boy . however , in my lady 's presence , my lord show no such mark of kindness , and affect to treat the lad roughly , and rebuke he sharply for little fault , for which he in a manner ask pardon of young Esmond when they be private , say if he do not speak roughly , she would , and his tongue be not such a bad one as his lady 's a point whereof the boy , young as he be , be very well assure . 
 great public event be happen all this while , of which the simple young page take little count . but one day , rid into the neighboring town on the step of my lady 's coach , his lordship and she and Father Holt be inside , a great mob of people come hoot and jeer round the coach , bawl out " the Bishops for ever ! " " down with the Pope ! " " No Popery ! no Popery ! Jezebel , Jezebel ! " so that my lord begin to laugh , my lady 's eye to roll with anger , for she be as bold as a lioness , and fear nobody ; whilst Mr. Holt , as Esmond see from his place on the step , sink back with rather an alarmed face , cry out to her ladyship , " for God 's sake , madam , do not speak or look out of window ; sit still . " but she do not obey this prudent injunction of the Father ; she thrust her head out of the coach window , and scream out to the coachman , " flog your way through they , the brute , James , and use your whip ! " 
 the mob answer with a roar jeer of laughter , and fresh cry of " Jezebel ! Jezebel ! " my lord only laugh the more : he be a languid gentleman : nothing seem to excite he commonly , though I have see he cheer and halloo the hound very briskly , and his face   which be generally very yellow and calm   grow quite red and cheerful during a burst over the Downs after a hare , and laugh , and swear , and huzzah at a cockfight , of which sport he be very fond . and now , when the mob begin to hoot his lady , he laugh with something of a mischievous look , as though he expect sport , and think that she and they be a match . 
 James the coachman be more afraid of his mistress than the mob , probably , for he whip on his horse as he be bid , and the post - boy that ride with the first pair   my lady always ride with her coach - and - six ,   give a cut of his thong over the shoulder of one fellow who put his hand out towards the lead horse 's rein . 
 it be a market - day , and the country - people be all assemble with their basket of poultry , egg , and such thing ; the postilion have no soon lash the man who would have take hold of his horse , but a great cabbage come whirl like a bombshell into the carriage , at which my lord laugh more , for it knock my lady 's fan out of her hand , and plump into Father Holt 's stomach . then come a shower of carrot and potato . 
 " for Heaven 's sake be still ! " say Mr. Holt ; " we be not ten pace from the ' Bell ' archway , where they can shut the gate on we , and keep out this canaille . " 
 the little page be outside the coach on the step , and a fellow in the crowd aim a potato at he , and hit he in the eye , at which the poor little wretch set up a shout ; the man laugh , a great big saddler 's apprentice of the town . " ah ! you d - little yell popish bastard , " he say , and stoop to pick up another ; the crowd have gather quite between the horse and the inn door by this time , and the coach be bring to a dead stand - still . my lord jump as briskly as a boy out of the door on his side of the coach , squeeze little Harry behind it ; have hold of the potato - thrower 's collar in an instant , and the next moment the brute 's heel be in the air , and he fall on the stone with a thump . 
 " you hulk coward ! " say he ; " you pack of scream blackguard ! how dare you attack child , and insult woman ? fle another shot at that carriage , you sneak pigskin cobbler , and by the Lord I will send my rapi through you ! " 
 some of the mob cry , " Huzzah , my lord ! " for they know he , and the saddler 's man be a know bruiser , near twice as big as my lord Viscount . 
 " make way there , " say he   he speak in a high shrill voice , but with a great air of authority . " make way , and let her ladyship 's carriage pass . " the man that be between the coach and the gate of the " Bell " actually do make way , and the horse go in , my lord walk after they with his hat on his head . 
 as he be go in at the gate , through which the coach have just roll , another cry begin , of " No Popery no papist ! " my lord turn round and face they once more . 
 " God save the king ! " say he at the high pitch of his voice . " who dare abuse the King 's religion ? you , you d d psalm - sing cobbler , as sure as I be a magistrate of this county I will commit you ! " the fellow shrink back , and my lord retreat with all the honor of the day . but when the little flurry cause by the scene be over , and the flush pass off his face , he relapse into his usual languor , trifle with his little dog , and yawn when my lady speak to he . 
 this mob be one of many thousand that be go about the country at that time , huzzahe for the acquittal of the seven bishop who have be try just then , and about whom little Harry Esmond at that time know scarce anything . it be assize at Hexton , and there be a great meeting of the gentry at the " Bell ; " and my lord 's people have their new livery on , and Harry a little suit of blue and silver , which he wear upon occasion of state ; and the gentlefolk come round and talk to my lord : and a judge in a red gown , who seem a very great personage , especially compliment he and my lady , who be mighty grand . Harry remember her train bear up by her gentlewoman . there be an assembly and ball at the great room at the " Bell , " and other young gentleman of the county family look on as he do . one of they jeer he for his black eye , which be swell by the potato , and another call he a bastard , on which he and Harry fall to fisticuff . my lord 's cousin , Colonel Esmond of Walcote , be there , and separate the two lad a great tall gentleman , with a handsome good - natured face . the boy do not know how nearly in after - life he should be ally to Colonel Esmond , and how much kindness he should have to owe he . 
 there be little love between the two family . my lady use not to spare Colonel Esmond in talk of he , for reason which have be hint already ; but about which , at his tender age , Henry Esmond could be expect to know nothing . 
 very soon afterwards , my lord and lady go to London with Mr. Holt , leave , however , the page behind they . the little man have the great house of Castlewood to himself ; or between he and the housekeeper , Mrs. Worksop , an old lady who be a kinswoman of the family in some distant way , and a protestant , but a staunch Tory and king' - man , as all the Esmonds be . he use to go to school to Dr. Tusher when he be at home , though the doctor be much occupy too . there be a great stir and commotion everywhere , even in the little quiet village of Castlewood , whither a party of people come from the town , who would have break Castlewood Chapel window , but the village people turn out , and even old Sieveright , the republican blacksmith , along with they : for my lady , though she be a Papist , and have many odd way , be kind to the tenantry , and there be always a plenty of beef , and blanket , and medicine for the poor at Castlewood Hall . 
 a kingdom be change hand whilst my lord and lady be away . King James be fly , the Dutchmen be come ; awful story about they and the Prince of Orange use old Mrs. Worksop to tell to the idle little page . 
 he like the solitude of the great house very well ; he have all the play - book to read , and no Father Holt to whip he , and a hundred childish pursuit and pastime , without door and within , which make this time very pleasant . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 my superiors be engage in plots for the restoration of KING JAMES II . 

 not have be able to sleep , for thinking of some line for eel which he have place the night before , the lad be lie in his little bed , wait for the hour when the gate would be open , and he and his comrade , John Lockwood , the porter 's son , might go to the pond and see what fortune have bring they . at daybreak John be to awaken he , but his own eagerness for the sport have serve as a reveillez long since so long , that it seem to he as if the day never would come . 
 it might have be four o'clock when he hear the door of the opposite chamber , the Chaplain 's room , open , and the voice of a man cough in the passage . Harry jump up , think for certain it be a robber , or hop perhaps for a ghost , and , fling open his own door , see before he the Chaplain 's door open , and a light inside , and a figure stand in the doorway , in the midst of a great smoke which issue from the room . 
 " who be there ? " cry out the boy , who be of a good spirit . 
 " silentium ! " whisper the other ; " ' tis I , my boy ! " and , hold his hand out , Harry have no difficulty in recognize his master and friend , Father Holt . a curtain be over the window of the Chaplain 's room that look to the court , and Harry see that the smoke come from a great flame of paper which be burn in a brazier when he enter the Chaplain 's room . after give a hasty greeting and blessing to the lad , who be charm to see his tutor , the Father continue the burning of his paper , draw they from a cupboard over the mantel - piece wall , which Harry have never see before . 
 Father Holt laugh , see the lad 's attention fix at once on this hole . " that be right , Harry , " he say ; " faithful little famulus , see all and say nothing . you be faithful , I know . " 
 " I know I would go to the stake for you , " say Harry . 
 " I do not   want your head , " say the Father , pat it kindly ; " all you have to do be to hold your tongue . let we burn these paper , and say nothing to anybody . should you like to read they ? " 
 Harry Esmond blush , and hold down his head ; he have look as the fact be , and without think , at the paper before he ; and though he have see it , could not understand a word of it , the letter be quite clear enough , but quite without meaning . they burn the paper , beat down the ash in a brazier , so that scarce any trace of they remain . 
 Harry have be accustom to see Father Holt in more dress than one ; it not be safe , or worth the danger , for popish ecclesiastic to wear their proper dress ; and he be , in consequence , in no wise astonish that the priest should now appear before he in a riding - dress , with large buff leather boot , and a feather to his hat , plain , but such as gentleman wear . 
 " you know the secret of the cupboard , " say he , laugh , " and must be prepare for other mystery ; " and he open but not a secret cupboard this time only a wardrobe , which he usually keep lock , and from which he now take out two or three dress and perruque of different color , and a couple of sword of a pretty make   Father Holt be an expert practitioner with the small - sword , and every day , whilst he be at home , he and his pupil practise this exercise , in which the lad become a very great proficient , a military coat and cloak , and a farmer 's smock , and place they in the large hole over the mantel - piece from which the paper have be take . 
 " if they miss the cupboard , " he say , " they will not find these ; if they find they , they will tell no tale , except that Father Holt wear more suit of clothe than one . all Jesuits do . you know what deceiver we be , Harry . " 
 Harry be alarm at the notion that his friend be about to leave he ; but " no , " the priest say , " I may very likely come back with my lord in a few day . we be to be tolerate ; we be not to be persecute . but they may take a fancy to pay a visit at Castlewood ere our return ; and , as gentleman of my cloth be suspect , they might choose to examine my paper , which concern nobody at least not they . " and to this day , whether the paper in cipher relate to politic , or to the affair of that mysterious society whereof Father Holt be a member , his pupil , Harry Esmond , remain in entire ignorance . 
 the rest of his good , his small wardrobe ,   c. Holt leave untouched on his shelf and in his cupboard , take down with a laugh , however and flinging into the brazier , where he only half burn they , some theological treatise which he have be write against the English divine . " and now , " say he , " Henry , my son , you may testify , with a safe conscience , that you see I burn Latin sermon the last time I be here before I go away to London ; and it will be daybreak directly , and I must be away before Lockwood be stir . " 
 " will not Lockwood let you out , sir ? " Esmond ask . Holt laugh ; he be never more gay or good - humor than when in the midst of action or danger . 
 " Lockwood know nothing of my be here , mind you , " he say ; " nor would you , you little wretch ! have you sleep well . you must forget that I have be here ; and now farewell . close the door , and go to your own room , and do not   come out till stay , why should you not know one secret more ? I know you will never betray I . " 
 in the Chaplain 's room be two window ; the one look into the court face westward to the fountain ; the other , a small casement strongly bar , and look on to the green in front of the Hall . this window be too high to reach from the ground ; but , mount on a buffet which stand beneath it , Father Holt show I how , by press on the base of the window , the whole framework of lead , glass , and iron stanchion descend into a cavity work below , from which it could be draw and restore to its usual place from without ; a broken pane be purposely open to admit the hand which be to work upon the spring of the machine . 
 " when I be go , " Father Holt say , " you may push away the buffet , so that no one may fancy that an exit have be make that way ; lock the door ; place the key where shall we put the key ? under ' Chrysostom ' on the book - shelf ; and if any ask for it , say I keep it there , and tell you where to find it , if you have need to go to my room . the descent be easy down the wall into the ditch ; and so , once more farewell , until I see thee again , my dear son . " and with this the intrepid Father mount the buffet with great agility and briskness , step across the window , lift up the bar and framework again from the other side , and only leave room for Harry Esmond to stand on tiptoe and kiss his hand before the casement close , the bar fix as firmly as ever , seemingly , in the stone arch overhead . when Father Holt next arrive at Castlewood , it be by the public gate on horseback ; and he never so much as allude to the existence of the private issue to Harry , except when he have need of a private messenger from within , for which end , no doubt , he have instruct his young pupil in the mean of quit the Hall . 
 Esmond , young as he be , would have die soon than betray his friend and master , as Mr. Holt well know ; for he have try the boy more than once , put temptation in his way , to see whether he would yield to they and confess afterwards , or whether he would resist they , as he do sometimes , or whether he would lie , which he never do . Holt instruct the boy on this point , however , that if to keep silence be not to lie , as it certainly be not , yet silence be , after all , equivalent to a negation and therefore a downright no , in the interest of justice or your friend , and in reply to a question that may be prejudicial to either , be not criminal , but , on the contrary , praiseworthy ; and as lawful a way as the other of elude a wrongful demand . for instance   say he , suppose a good citizen , who have see his Majesty take refuge there , have be ask , " be King Charles up that oak - tree ? " his duty would have be not to say , yes so that the Cromwellians should seize the king and murder he like his father but no ; his Majesty be private in the tree , and therefore not to be see there by loyal eye : all which instruction , in religion and moral , as well as in the rudiment of the tongue and science , the boy take eagerly and with gratitude from his tutor . when , then , Holt be go , and tell Harry not to see he , it be as if he have never be . and he have this answer pat when he come to be question a few day after . 
 the Prince of Orange be then at Salisbury , as young Esmond learn from see Doctor Tusher in his good cassock   though the road be muddy , and he never be know to wear his silk , only his stuff one , a - horseback , with a great orange cockade in his broad - leaf hat , and Nahum , his clerk , ornament with a like decoration . the doctor be walk up and down in front of his parsonage , when little Esmond see he , and hear he say he be go to pay his duty to his Highness the Prince , as he mount his pad and ride away with Nahum behind . the village people have orange cockade too , and his friend the blacksmith 's laugh daughter pin one into Harry 's old hat , which he tear out indignantly when they bid he to cry " God save the Prince of Orange and the protestant religion ! " but the people only laugh , for they like the boy in the village , where his solitary condition move the general pity , and where he find friendly welcome and face in many house . Father Holt have many friend there too , for he not only would fight the blacksmith at theology , never lose his temper , but laugh the whole time in his pleasant way ; but he cure he of an ague with quinquina , and be always ready with a kind word for any man that ask it , so that they say in the village ' twas a pity the two be Papists . 
 the Director and the Vicar of Castlewood agree very well ; indeed , the former be a perfectly - breed gentleman , and it be the latter 's business to agree with everybody . Doctor Tusher and the lady's - maid , his spouse , have a boy who be about the age of little Esmond ; and there be such a friendship between the lad , as propinquity and tolerable kindness and good - humor on either side would be pretty sure to occasion . Tom Tusher be send off early , however , to a school in London , whither his father take he and a volume of sermon , in the first year of the reign of King James ; and Tom return but once , a year afterwards , to Castlewood for many year of his scholastic and collegiate life . thus there be less danger to Tom of a perversion of his faith by the Director , who scarce ever see he , than there be to Harry , who constantly be in the Vicar 's company ; but as long as Harry 's religion be his Majesty 's , and my lord 's , and my lady 's , the Doctor say gravely , it should not be for he to disturb or disquiet he : it be far from he to say that his Majesty 's Church be not a branch of the Catholic Church ; upon which Father Holt use , accord to his custom , to laugh , and say that the Holy Church throughout all the world , and the noble Army of Martyrs , be very much oblige to the Doctor . 
 it be while Dr. Tusher be away at Salisbury that there come a troop of dragoon with orange scarfs , and quarter in Castlewood , and some of they come up to the Hall , where they take possession , rob nothing however beyond the hen - house and the beer - cellar : and only insist upon go through the house and look for paper . the first room they ask to look at be Father Holt 's room , of which Harry Esmond bring the key , and they open the drawer and the cupboard , and toss over the paper and clothe but find nothing except his book and clothe , and the vestment in a box by themselves , with which the dragoon make merry , to Harry Esmond 's horror . and to the question which the gentleman put to Harry , he reply that Father Holt be a very kind man to he , and a very learn man , and Harry suppose would tell he none of his secret if he have any . he be about eleven year old at this time , and look as innocent as boy of his age . 
 the family be away more than six month , and when they return they be in the deep state of dejection , for King James have be banish , the Prince of Orange be on the throne , and the dire persecution of those of the catholic faith be apprehend by my lady , who say she do not believe that there be a word of truth in the promise of toleration that dutch monster make , or in a single word the perjure wretch say . my lord and lady be in a manner prisoner in their own house ; so her ladyship give the little page to know , who be by this time grow of an age to understand what be pass about he , and something of the character of the people he live with . 
 " we be prisoner , " say she ; " in everything but chain , we be prisoner . let they come , let they consign I to dungeon , or strike off my head from this poor little throat "   and she clasp it in her long finger . " the blood of the Esmonds will always flow freely for their king . we be not like the Churchills the Judases , who kiss their master and betray he . we know how to suffer , how even to forgive in the royal cause "   no doubt it be to that fatal business of lose the place of Groom of the Posset to which her ladyship allude , as she do half a dozen time in the day . " let the tyrant of Orange bring his rack and his odious dutch torture the beast ! the wretch ! I spit upon he and defy he . cheerfully will I lay this head upon the block ; cheerfully will I accompany my lord to the scaffold : we will cry ' God save King James ! ' with our die breath , and smile in the face of the executioner . " and she tell her page , a hundred time at least , of the particular of the last interview which she have with his Majesty . 
 " I fling myself before my liege 's foot , " she say , " at Salisbury . I devote myself my husband my house , to his cause . perhaps he remember old time , when Isabella Esmond be young and fair ; perhaps he recall the day when ' twa not I that knelt at least he speak to I with a voice that remind I of day go by . ' egad ! ' say his Majesty , ' you should go to the Prince of Orange ; if you want anything . ' ' no , sire , ' I reply , ' I would not kneel to a Usurper ; the Esmond that would have serve your Majesty will never be groom to a traitor 's posset . ' the royal exile smile , even in the midst of his misfortune ; he deign to raise I with word of consolation . the Viscount , my husband , himself , could not be angry at the august salute with which he honor I ! " 
 the public misfortune have the effect of make my lord and his lady well friend than they ever have be since their courtship . my lord Viscount have show both loyalty and spirit , when these be rare quality in the dispirit party about the king ; and the praise he get elevate he not a little in his wife 's good opinion , and perhaps in his own . he waken up from the listless and supine life which he have be lead ; be always rid to and fro in consultation with this friend or that of the king 's ; the page of course know little of his doing , but remark only his great cheerfulness and alter demeanor . 
 Father Holt come to the Hall constantly , but officiate no long openly as chaplain ; he be always fetch and carry : stranger , military and ecclesiastic   Harry know the latter , though they come in all sort of disguise , be continually arrive and depart . my lord make long absence and sudden reappearance , use sometimes the mean of exit which Father Holt have employ , though how often the little window in the Chaplain 's room let in or let out my lord and his friend , Harry could not tell . he stoutly keep his promise to the Father of not pry , and if at midnight from his little room he hear noise of person stir in the next chamber , he turn round to the wall , and hide his curiosity under his pillow until it fall asleep . of course he could not help remark that the priest 's journey be constant , and understanding by a hundred sign that some active though secret business employ he : what this be may pretty well be guess by what soon happen to my lord . 
 no garrison or watch be put into Castlewood when my lord come back , but a Guard be in the village ; and one or other of they be always on the Green keep a look - out on our great gate , and those who go out and in . Lockwood say that at night especially every person who come in or go out be watch by the outlying sentry . ' twa lucky that we have a gate which their Worships know nothing about . my lord and Father Holt must have make constant journey at night : once or twice little Harry act as their messenger and discreet little aide - de - camp . he remember he be bid to go into the village with his fishing - rod , enter certain house , ask for a drink of water , and tell the good man , " there would be a horse - market at Newbury next Thursday , " and so carry the same message on to the next house on his list . 
 he do not know what the message mean at the time , nor what be happen : which may as well , however , for clearness ' sake , be explain here . the Prince of Orange be go to Ireland , where the King be ready to meet he with a great army , it be determined that a great rise of his Majesty 's party should take place in this country ; and my lord be to head the force in our county . of late he have take a great lead in affair than before , have the indefatigable Mr. Holt at his elbow , and my Lady Viscountess strongly urge he on ; and my Lord Sark be in the Tower a prisoner , and Sir Wilmot Crawley , of Queen 's Crawley , have go over to the Prince of Orange 's side my lord become the most considerable person in our part of the county for the affair of the King . 
 it be arrange that the regiment of Scots Grays and Dragoons , then quarter at Newbury , should declare for the King on a certain day , when likewise the gentry affect to his Majesty 's cause be to come in with their tenant and adherent to Newbury , march upon the dutch troop at read under Ginckel ; and , these overthrow , and their indomitable little master away in Ireland , ' twa think that our side might move on London itself , and a confident victory be predict for the King . 
 as these great matter be in agitation , my lord lose his listless manner and seem to gain health ; my lady do not scold he , Mr. Holt come to and fro , busy always ; and little Harry long to have be a few inch tall , that he might draw a sword in this good cause . 
 one day , it must have be about the month of July , 1690 , my lord , in a great horseman 's coat , under which Harry could see the shining of a steel breastplate he have on , call little Harry to he , put the hair off the child 's forehead , and kiss he , and bade God bless he in such an affectionate way as he never have use before . Father Holt bless he too , and then they take leave of my Lady Viscountess , who come from her apartment with a pocket - handkerchief to her eye , and her gentlewoman and Mrs. Tusher support she . " you be go to to ride , " say she . " oh , that I might come too but in my situation I be forbid horse exercise . " 
 " we kiss my Lady Marchioness 's hand , " say Mr. Holt . 
 " my lord , God speed you ! " she say , step up and embrace my lord in a grand manner . " Mr. Holt , I ask your blessing : " and she kneel down for that , whilst Mrs. Tusher toss her head up . 
 Mr. Holt give the same benediction to the little page , who go down and hold my lord 's stirrup for he to mount ; there be two servant wait there too and they ride out of Castlewood gate . 
 as they cross the bridge , Harry could see an officer in scarlet ride up touch his hat , and address my lord . 
 the party stop , and come to some parley or discussion , which presently end , my lord put his horse into a canter after take off his hat and make a bow to the officer , who ride alongside he step for step : the trooper accompany he fall back , and rid with my lord 's two man . they canter over the Green , and behind the elm   my lord wave his hand , Harry think , and so they disappear . that evening we have a great panic , the cow - boy come at milking - time rid one of our horse , which he have find graze at the outer park - wall . 
 all night my Lady Viscountess be in a very quiet and subdued mood . she scarce find fault with anybody ; she play at card for six hour ; little page Esmond go to sleep . he pray for my lord and the good cause before close his eye . 
 it be quite in the gray of the morning when the porter 's bell ring , and old Lockwood , wake up , let in one of my lord 's servant , who have go with he in the morning , and who return with a melancholy story . the officer who ride up to my lord have , it appear , say to he , that it be his duty to inform his lordship that he be not under arrest , but under surveillance , and to request he not to ride abroad that day . 
 my lord reply that riding be good for his health , that if the Captain choose to accompany he he be welcome ; and it be then that he make a bow , and they canter away together . 
 when he come on to Wansey Down , my lord all of a sudden pull up , and the party come to a halt at the cross - way . 
 " Sir , " say he to the officer , " we be four to two ; will you be so kind as to take that road , and leave I go mine ? " 
 " your road be mine , my lord , " say the officer . 
 " then " say my lord ; but he have no time to say more , for the officer , draw a pistol , snap it at his lordship ; as at the same moment Father Holt , draw a pistol , shoot the officer through the head . it be do , and the man dead in an instant of time . the orderly , gaze at the officer , look seared for a moment , and gallop away for his life . 
 " Fire ! fire ! " cry out Father Holt , send another shot after the trooper , but the two servant be too much surprised to use their piece , and my lord call to they to hold their hand , the fellow get away . 
 " Mr. Holt , qui pensait a tout , " say Blaise , " get off his horse , examine the pocket of the dead officer for paper , give his money to we two , and say , ' the wine be draw , M. le Marquis , ' why do he say Marquis to M. le Vicomte ? ' we must drink it . ' 
 " the poor gentleman 's horse be a well one than that I ride , " Blaise continue ; " Mr. Holt bid I get on he , and so I give a cut to Whitefoot , and she trot home . we ride on towards Newbury ; we hear fire towards midday : at two o'clock a horseman come up to we as we be give our cattle water at an inn and say , ' all be do ! the Ecossais declare an hour too soon General Ginckel be down upon they . ' the whole thing be at an end . 
 " ' and we have   shoot an officer on duty , and let his orderly escape , ' say my lord . 
 " ' Blaise , ' say Mr. Holt , write two line on his table - book , one for my lady and one for you , Master Harry ; ' you must go back to Castlewood , and deliver these , ' and behold I . " 
 and he give Harry the two paper . he read that to himself , which only say , " burn the paper in the cupboard , burn this . you know nothing about anything . " Harry read this , run up stair to his mistress 's apartment , where her gentlewoman sleep near to the door , make she bring a light and wake my lady , into whose hand he give the paper . she be a wonderful object to look at in her night attire , nor have Harry ever see the like . 
 as soon as she have the paper in her hand , Harry step back to the Chaplain 's room , open the secret cupboard over the fireplace , burn all the paper in it , and , as he have see the priest do before , take down one of his reverence 's manuscript sermon , and half burn that in the brazier . by the time the paper be quite destroy it be daylight . Harry run back to his mistress again . her gentlewoman usher he again into her ladyship 's chamber ; she tell he   from behind her nuptial curtain   to bid the coach be get ready , and that she would ride away anon . 
 but the mystery of her ladyship 's toilet be as awfully long on this day as on any other , and , long after the coach be ready , my lady be still attire herself . and just as the Viscountess step forth from her room , ready for departure , young John Lockwood come run up from the village with news that a lawyer , three officer , and twenty or four - and - twenty soldier , be march thence upon the house . John have but two minute the start of they , and , ere he have well tell his story , the troop ride into our court - yard . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 the issue of the plots . the death of THOMAS , THIRD viscount of castlewood ; and the imprisonment of his VISCOUNTESS . 
 at first my lady be for die like Mary , queen of Scots   to whom she fancy she bear a resemblance in beauty , and , stroke her scraggy neck , say , " they will find Isabel of Castlewood be equal to her fate . " her gentlewoman , Victoire , persuade she that her prudent course be , as she could not fly , to receive the troop as though she suspect nothing , and that her chamber be the good place wherein to await they . so her black Japan casket , which Harry be to carry to the coach , be take back to her ladyship 's chamber , whither the maid and mistress retire . Victoire come out presently , bid the page to say her ladyship be ill , confine to her bed with the rheumatism . 
 by this time the soldier have reach Castlewood . Harry Esmond see they from the window of the tapestry parlor ; a couple of sentinel be post at the gate a half - dozen more walk towards the stable ; and some other , precede by their commander , and a man in black , a lawyer probably , be conduct by one of the servant to the stair lead up to the part of the house which my lord and lady inhabit . 
 so the Captain , a handsome kind man , and the lawyer , come through the ante - room to the tapestry parlor , and where now be nobody but young Harry Esmond , the page . 
 " tell your mistress , little man , " say the Captain , kindly , " that we must speak to she . " 
 " my mistress be ill a - bed , " say the page . 
 " what complaint have she ? " ask the Captain . 
 the boy say , " the rheumatism ! " 
 " Rheumatism ! that be a sad complaint , " continue the good - natured Captain ; " and the coach be in the yard to fetch the doctor , I suppose ? " 
 " I do not   know , " say the boy . 
 " and how long have her ladyship be ill ? " 
 " I do not   know , " say the boy . 
 " when do my lord go away ? " 
 " yesterday night . " 
 " with Father Holt ? " 
 " with Mr. Holt . " 
 " and which way do they travel ? " ask the lawyer . 
 " they travel without I , " say the page . 
 " we must see Lady Castlewood . " 
 " I have order that nobody go in to her ladyship she be sick , " say the page ; but at this moment Victoire come out . " hush ! " say she ; and , as if not know that any one be near , " what be this noise ? " say she . " be this gentleman the Doctor ? " 
 " Stuff ! we must see Lady Castlewood , " say the lawyer , push by . 
 the curtain of her ladyship 's room be down , and the chamber dark , and she be in bed with a nightcap on her head , and prop up by her pillow , look none the less ghastly because of the red which be still on her cheek , and which she could not afford to forego . 
 " be that the doctor ? " she say . 
 " there be no use with this deception , madam , " Captain Westbury say   for so he be name . " my duty be to arrest the person of Thomas , Viscount Castlewood , a nonjuring peer of Robert Tusher , Vicar of Castlewood and Henry Holt , know under various other name and designation , a Jesuit priest , who officiate as chaplain here in the late king 's time , and be now at the head of the conspiracy which be about to break out in this country against the authority of their Majesties King William and Queen Mary and my order be to search the house for such paper or trace of the conspiracy as may be find here . your ladyship will please give I your key , and it will be as well for yourself that you should help we , in every way , in our search . " 
 " you see , sir , that I have the rheumatism , and can not move , " say the lady , look uncommonly ghastly as she sit up in her bed , where , however , she have have her cheek paint , and a new cap put on , so that she might at least look she good when the officer come . 
 " I shall take leave to place a sentinel in the chamber , so that your ladyship , in case you should wish to rise , may have an arm to lean on , " Captain Westbury say . " your woman will show I where I be to look ; " and Madame Victoire , chatter in her half french and half english jargon , open while the Captain examine one drawer after another ; but , as Harry Esmond think , rather carelessly , with a smile on his face , as if he be only conduct the examination for form 's sake . 
 before one of the cupboard Victoire fling herself down , stretch out her arm , and , with a pierce shriek , cry , " Non , jamais , monsieur l'officier ! Jamais ! I will rather die than let you see this wardrobe . " 
 but Captain Westbury would open it , still with a smile on his face , which , when the box be open , turn into a fair burst of laughter . it contain not paper regard the conspiracy but my lady 's wig , wash , and rouge - pot , and Victoire say man be monster , as the Captain go on with his perquisition . he tap the back to see whether or no it be hollow , and as he thrust his hand into the cupboard , my lady from her bed call out , with a voice that do not sound like that of a very sick woman , " be it your commission to insult lady as well as to arrest gentleman , Captain ? " 
 " these article be only dangerous when wear by your ladyship , " the Captain say , with a low bow , and a mock grin of politeness . " I have find nothing which concern the Government as yet only the weapon with which beauty be authorize to kill , " say he , point to a wig with his sword - tip . " we must now proceed to search the rest of the house . " 
 " you be not go to leave that wretch in the room with I , " cry my lady , point to the soldier . 
 " what can I do , madam ? somebody you must have to smooth your pillow and bring your medicine permit I " 
 " Sir ! " scream out my lady . 
 " Madam , if you be too ill to leave the bed , " the Captain then say , rather sternly , " I must have in four of my man to lift you off in the sheet . I must examine this bed , in a word ; paper may be hide in a bed as elsewhere ; we know that very well and       . " 
 here it be her ladyship 's turn to shriek , for the Captain , with his fist shake the pillow and bolster , at last come to " burn " as they say in the play of forfeit , and wrench away one of the pillow , say , " look ! do not I tell you so ? here be a pillow stuff with paper . " 
 " some villain have betray we , " cry out my lady , sit up in the bed , show herself full dress under her night - rail . 
 " and now your ladyship can move , I be sure ; permit I to give you my hand to rise . you will have to travel for some distance , as far as Hexton Castle to - night . will you have your coach ? your woman shall attend you if you like and the japan - box ? " 
 " Sir ! you do not   strike a man when he be down , " say my lady , with some dignity : " can you not spare a woman ? " 
 " your ladyship must please to rise , and let I search the bed , " say the Captain ; " there be no more time to lose in bandy talk . " 
 and , without more ado , the gaunt old woman get up . Harry Esmond recollect to the end of his life that figure , with the brocade dress and the white night - rail , and the gold - clock red stocking , and white red - heeled shoe , sit up in the bed , and step down from it . the trunk be ready pack for departure in her ante - room , and the horse ready harness in the stable : about all which the Captain seem to know , by information get from some quarter or other ; and whence Esmond could make a pretty shrewd guess in after - time , when Dr. Tusher complain that King William 's government have basely treat he for service do in that cause . 
 and here he may relate , though he be then too young to know all that be happen , what the paper contain , of which Captain Westbury have make a seizure , and which paper have be transfer from the japan - box to the bed when the officer arrive . 
 there be a list of gentleman of the county in Father Holt 's hand write Mr. Freeman 's   King James 's   friend a similar paper be find among those of Sir John Fenwick and Mr. Coplestone , who suffer death for this conspiracy . 
 there be a patent confer the title of Marquis of Esmond on my Lord Castlewood and the heir - male of his body ; his appointment as Lord - Lieutenant of the County , and Major - General . 
    to have this rank of Marquis restore in the family have 
  always be my Lady Viscountess 's ambition ; and her old 
  maiden aunt , Barbara Topham , the goldsmith 's daughter , die 
  about this time , and leave all her property to Lady 
  Castlewood , I have hear that her ladyship send almost the 
  whole of the money to King James , a proceeding which so 
  irritate my Lord Castlewood that he actually go to the 
  parish church , and be only appease by the Marquis 's title 
  which his exile Majesty send to he in return for the 
  15,000L. his faithful subject lend he . 
 there be various letter from the nobility and gentry , some ardent and some doubtful , in the King 's service ; and   very luckily for he   two letter concern Colonel Francis Esmond : one from Father Holt , which say , " I have be to see this Colonel at his house at Walcote , near to Wells , where he reside since the king 's departure , and press he very eagerly in Mr. Freeman 's cause , show he the great advantage he would have by trade with that merchant , offer he large premium there as agree between we . but he say no : he consider Mr. Freeman the head of the firm , will never trade against he or embark with any other trading company , but consider his duty be do when Mr. Freeman leave England . this Colonel seem to care more for his wife and his beagle than for affair . he ask I much about young H. E. , ' that bastard , ' as he call he ; doubt my lord 's intention respect he . I reassure he on this head , state what I know of the lad , and our intention respect he , but with regard to Freeman he be inflexible . " 
 and another letter be from Colonel Esmond to his kinsman , to say that one Captain Holton have be with he offer he large bribe to join , you know WHO , and say that the head of the house of Castlewood be deeply engage in that quarter . but for his part he have break his sword when the K. leave the country , and would never again fight in that quarrel . the P. of O. be a man , at least , of a noble courage , and his duty , and , as he think , every Englishman 's , be to keep the country quiet , and the French out of it : and , in fine , that he would have nothing to do with the scheme . 
 of the existence of these two letter and the content of the pillow , Colonel Frank Esmond , who become Viscount Castlewood , tell Henry Esmond afterwards , when the letter be show to his lordship , who congratulate himself , as he have good reason , that he have not join in the scheme which prove so fatal to many concerned in it . but , naturally , the lad know little about these circumstance when they happen under his eye : only be aware that his patron and his mistress be in some trouble , which have cause the flight of the one and the apprehension of the other by the officer of King William . 
 the seizure of the paper effect , the gentleman do not pursue their further search through Castlewood House very rigorously . they examine Mr. Holt 's room , be lead thither by his pupil , who show , as the Father have bid he , the place where the key of his chamber lay , open the door for the gentleman , and conduct they into the room . 
 when the gentleman come to the half - burn paper in the brazier , they examine they eagerly enough , and their young guide be a little amused at their perplexity . 
 " what be these ? " say one . 
 " they be write in a foreign language , " say the lawyer . " what be you laugh at , little whelp ? " add he , turn round as he see the boy smile . 
 " Mr. Holt say they be sermon , " Harry say , " and bid I to burn they ; " which indeed be true of those paper . 
 " sermon indeed it be treason , I would lay a wager , " cry the lawyer . 
 " egad ! it be greek to I , " say Captain Westbury . " can you read it , little boy ? " 
 " yes , sir , a little , " Harry say . 
 " then read , and read in English , sir , on your peril , " say the lawyer . and Harry begin to translate : 
 " hath not one of your own writer say , ' the child of Adam be now labor as much as he himself ever do , about the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , shake the bough thereof , and seek the fruit , be for the most part unmindful of the tree of life . ' oh blind generation ! ' tis this tree of knowledge to which the serpent have lead you " and here the boy be oblige to stop , the rest of the page be char by the fire : and ask of the lawyer " shall I go on , sir ? " 
 the lawyer say " this boy be deep than he seem : who know that he be not laugh at we ? " 
 " let us have in Dick the Scholar , " cry Captain Westbury , laugh : and he call to a trooper out of the window " Ho , Dick , come in here and construe . " 
 a thick - set soldier , with a square good - humor face , come in at the summon , salute his officer . 
 " tell we what be this , Dick , " say the lawyer . 
 " my name be Steele , sir , " say the soldier . " I may be Dick for my friend , but I do not   name gentleman of your cloth amongst they . " 
 " well then , Steele . " 
 " Mr. Steele , sir , if you please . when you address a gentleman of his Majesty 's Horse Guards , be pleased not to be so familiar . " 
 " I do not   know , sir , " say the lawyer . 
 " how should you ? I take it you be not accustomed to meet with gentleman , " say the trooper . 
 " hold thy prate , and read that bit of paper , " say Westbury . 
 " ' Tis Latin , " say Dick , glance at it , and again salute his officer , " and from a sermon of Mr. Cudworth 's , " and he translate the word pretty much as Henry Esmond have render they . 
 " what a young scholar you be , " say the Captain to the boy . 
 " depend on't , he know more than he tell , " say the lawyer . " I think we will pack he off in the coach with old Jezebel . " 
 " for construe a bit of Latin ? " say the Captain , very good - naturedly . 
 " I would as lief go there as anywhere , " Harry Esmond say , simply , " for there be nobody to care for I . " 
 there must have be something touch in the child 's voice , or in this description of his solitude for the Captain look at he very good - naturedly , and the trooper , call Steele , put his hand kindly on the lad 's head , and say some word in the Latin tongue . 
 " what do he say ? " say the lawyer . 
 " Faith , ask Dick himself , " cry Captain Westbury . 
 " I say I be not ignorant of misfortune myself , and have learn to succor the miserable , and that be not your trade , Mr. Sheepskin , " say the trooper . 
 " you have well leave Dick the Scholar alone , Mr. Corbet , " the Captain say . and Harry Esmond , always touch by a kind face and kind word , feel very grateful to this good - natured champion . 
 the horse be by this time harness to the coach ; and the Countess and Victoire come down and be put into the vehicle . this woman , who quarrel with Harry Esmond all day , be melt at part with he , and call he " dear angel , " and " poor infant , " and a hundred other name . 
 the Viscountess , give he her lean hand to kiss , bid he always be faithful to the house of Esmond . " if evil should happen to my lord , " say she , " his SUCCESSOR , I trust , will be find , and give you protection . situate as I be , they will not dare wreak their vengeance on I now . " and she kiss a medal she wear with great fervor , and Henry Esmond know not in the least what her meaning be ; but hath since learn that , old as she be , she be for ever expect , by the good office of saint and relic , to have an heir to the title of Esmond . 
 Harry Esmond be too young to have be introduce into the secret of politic in which his patron be implicate ; for they put but few question to the boy   who be little of stature , and look much young than his age , and such question as they put he answer cautiously enough , and profess even more ignorance than he have , for which his examiner willingly enough give he credit . he do not say a word about the window or the cupboard over the fireplace ; and these secret quite escape the eye of the searcher . 
 so then my lady be consign to her coach , and send off to Hexton , with her woman and the man of law to bear her company , a couple of trooper rid on either side of the coach . and Harry be leave behind at the Hall , belong as it be to nobody , and quite alone in the world . the captain and a guard of man remain in possession there ; and the soldier , who be very good - natured and kind , eat my lord 's mutton and drink his wine , and make themselves comfortable , as they well might do in such pleasant quarter . 
 the captain have their dinner serve in my lord 's tapestry parlor , and poor little Harry think his duty be to wait upon Captain Westbury 's chair , as his custom have be to serve his lord when he sit there . 
 after the departure of the Countess , Dick the Scholar take Harry Esmond under his special protection , and would examine he in his humanity and talk to he both of French and Latin , in which tongue the lad find , and his new friend be willing enough to acknowledge , that he be even more proficient than Scholar Dick . hear that he have learn they from a Jesuit , in the praise of whom and whose goodness Harry be never tired of speak , Dick , rather to the boy 's surprise , who begin to have an early shrewdness , like many child breed up alone , show a great deal of theological science , and knowledge of the point at issue between the two church ; so that he and Harry would have hour of controversy together , in which the boy be certainly worst by the argument of this singular trooper . " I be no common soldier , " Dick would say , and indeed it be easy to see by his learning , breeding , and many accomplishment , that he be not . " I be of one of the most ancient family in the empire ; I have have my education at a famous school , and a famous university ; I learn my first rudiment of Latin near to Smithfield , in London , where the martyr be roast . " 
 " you hang as many of our , " interpose Harry ; " and , for the matter of persecution , Father Holt tell I that a young gentleman of Edinburgh , eighteen year of age , student at the college there , be hang for heresy only last year , though he recant , and solemnly ask pardon for his error . " 
 " Faith ! there have be too much persecution on both side : but ' twa you teach we . " 
 " Nay , ' twas the Pagans begin it , " cry the lad , and begin to instance a number of saint of the Church , from the proto - martyr downward " this one 's fire go out under he : that one 's oil cool in the caldron : at a third holy head the executioner chop three time and it would not come off . show we martyr in your church for whom such miracle have be do . " 
 " Nay , " say the trooper gravely , " the miracle of the first three century belong to my church as well as your , Master Papist , " and then add , with something of a smile upon his countenance , and a queer look at Harry " and yet , my little catechiser , I have sometimes think about those miracle , that there be not much good in they , since the victim 's head always finish by come off at the third or fourth chop , and the caldron , if it do not boil one day , boil the next . Howbeit , in our time , the Church have lose that questionable advantage of respite . there never be a shower to put out Ridley 's fire , nor an angel to turn the edge of Campion 's axe . the rack tear the limb of Southwell the Jesuit and Sympson the Protestant alike . for faith , everywhere multitude die willingly enough . I have read in Monsieur Rycaut 's ' history of the Turks , ' of thousand of Mahomet 's follower rush upon death in battle as upon certain Paradise ; and in the great Mogul 's dominion people fle themselves by hundred under the car of the idol annually , and the widow burn themselves on their husband ' body , as ' tis well know . ' tis not the dying for a faith that be so hard , Master Harry every man of every nation have do that ' tis the living up to it that be difficult , as I know to my cost , " he add with a sigh . " and ah ! " he add , " my poor lad , I be not strong enough to convince thee by my life though to die for my religion would give I the great of joy but I have a dear friend in Magdalen College in Oxford ; I wish Joe Addison be here to convince thee , as he quickly could for I think he be a match for the whole College of Jesuits ; and what be more , in his life too . in that very sermon of Dr. Cudworth 's which your priest be quote from , and which suffer martydom in the brazier , " Dick add with a smile , " I have a thought of wear the black coat   but be ashamed of my life , you see , and take to this sorry red one ; I have often think of Joe Addison Dr. Cudworth say , ' a good conscience be the good look - glass of heaven ' and there be serenity in my friend 's face which always reflect it I wish you could see he , Harry . " 
 " do he do you a great deal of good ? " ask the lad , simply . 
 " he might have do , " say the other " at least he teach I to see and approve well thing . ' tis my own fault , deteriora sequi . " 
 " you seem very good , " the boy say . 
 " I be not what I seem , alas ! " answer the trooper and indeed , as it turn out , poor Dick tell the truth for that very night , at supper in the hall , where the gentleman of the troop take their repast , and pass most part of their day dice and smoking of tobacco , and singing and cursing , over the Castlewood ale Harry Esmond find Dick the Scholar in a woful state of drunkenness . he hiccup out a sermon and his laugh companion bid he sing a hymn , on which Dick , swear he would run the scoundrel through the body who insult his religion , make for his sword , which be hang on the wall , and fall down flat on the floor under it , say to Harry , who run forward to help he , " ah , little Papist , I wish Joseph Addison be here ! " 
 though the trooper of the King 's Life - Guards be all gentleman , yet the rest of the gentleman seem ignorant and vulgar boor to Harry Esmond , with the exception of this good - natured Corporal Steele the Scholar , and Captain Westbury and Lieutenant Trant , who be always kind to the lad . they remain for some week or month encamp in Castlewood , and Harry learn from they , from time to time , how the lady at Hexton Castle be treat , and the particular of her confinement there . ' tis know that King William be disposed to deal very leniently with the gentry who remain faithful to the old King 's cause ; and no prince usurp a crown , as his enemy say he do ,   righteously take it , as I think now ,   ever cause less blood to be shed . as for woman - conspirator , he keep spy on the least dangerous , and lock up the other . Lady Castlewood have the good room in Hexton Castle , and the gaoler 's garden to walk in ; and though she repeatedly desire to be lead out to execution , like Mary Queen of Scots , there never be any thought of take she paint old head off , or any desire to do aught but keep her person in security . 
 and it appear she find that some be friend in her misfortune , whom she have , in her prosperity , consider as her bad enemy . Colonel Francis Esmond , my lord 's cousin and her ladyship 's , who have marry the Dean of Winchester 's daughter , and , since King James 's departure out of England , have live not very far away from Hexton town , hear of his kinswoman 's strait , and be friend with Colonel Brice , command for King William in Hexton , and with the Church dignitary there , come to visit her ladyship in prison , offer to his uncle 's daughter any friendly service which lie in his power . and he bring his lady and little daughter to see the prisoner , to the latter of whom , a child of great beauty and many win way , the old Viscountess take not a little liking , although between her ladyship and the child 's mother there be little more love than formerly . there be some injury which woman never forgive one another ; and Madam Francis Esmond , in marry her cousin , have do one of those irretrievable wrong to Lady Castlewood . but as she be now humiliate , and in misfortune , Madam Francis could allow a truce to her enmity , and could be kind for a while , at least , to her husband 's discard mistress . so the little beatrix , her daughter , be permit often to go and visit the imprisoned Viscountess , who , in so far as the child and its father be concern , get to abate in her anger towards that branch of the Castlewood family . and the letter of Colonel Esmond come to light , as have be say , and his conduct be know to the King 's council , the Colonel be put in a well position with the exist government than he have ever before be ; any suspicion regard his loyalty be entirely do away ; and so he be enable to be of more service to his kinswoman than he could otherwise have be . 
 and now there befall an event by which this lady recover her liberty , and the house of Castlewood get a new owner , and fatherless little Harry Esmond a new and most kind protector and friend . whatever that secret be which Harry be to hear from my lord , the boy never hear it ; for that night when Father Holt arrive , and carry my lord away with he , be the last on which Harry ever see his patron . what happen to my lord may be briefly tell here . have find the horse at the place where they be lie , my lord and Father Holt ride together to Chatteris , where they have temporary refuge with one of the Father 's penitent in that city ; but the pursuit be hot for they , and the reward for the apprehension of one or the other considerable , it be deem advisable that they should separate ; and the priest betake himself to other place of retreat know to he , whilst my lord pass over from Bristol into Ireland , in which kingdom King James have a court and an army . my lord be but a small addition to this ; bring , indeed , only his sword and the few piece in his pocket ; but the King receive he with some kindness and distinction in spite of his poor plight , confirm he in his new title of Marquis , give he a regiment , and promise he further promotion . but title or promotion be not to benefit he now . my lord be wound at the fatal battle of the Boyne , fly from which field   long after his master have set he an example   he lie for a while conceal in the marshy country near to the town of Trim , and more from catarrh and fever catch in the bog than from the steel of the enemy in the battle , sank and die . may the earth lie light upon Thomas of Castlewood ! he who write this must speak in charity , though this lord do he and his two grievous wrong : for one of these he would have make amend , perhaps , have life be spar he ; but the other lie beyond his power to repair , though ' tis to be hop that a great power than a priest have absolve he of it . he get the comfort of this absolution , too , such as it be : a priest of Trim write a letter to my lady to inform she of this calamity . 
 but in those day letter be slow of travel , and our priest 's take two month or more on its journey from Ireland to England : where , when it do arrive , it do not find my lady at her own house ; she be at the King 's house of Hexton Castle when the letter come to Castlewood , but it be open for all that by the officer in command there . 
 Harry Esmond well remember the receipt of this letter , which Lockwood bring in as Captain Westbury and Lieutenant Trant be on the green playing at bowl , young Esmond look on at the sport , or read his book in the arbor . 
 " here 's news for Frank Esmond , " say Captain Westbury ; " Harry , do you ever see Colonel Esmond ? " and Captain Westbury look very hard at the boy as he speak . 
 Harry say he have see he but once when he be at Hexton , at the ball there . 
 " and do he say anything ? " 
 " he say what I do not   care to repeat , " Harry answer . for he be now twelve year of age : he know what his birth be , and the disgrace of it ; and he feel no love towards the man who have most likely stain his mother 's honor and his own . 
 " do you love my Lord Castlewood ? " 
 " I wait until I know my mother , sir , to say , " the boy answer , his eye fill with tear . 
 " something have happen to Lord Castlewood , " Captain Westbury say in a very grave tone ' something which must happen to we all . he be dead of a wound receive at the Boyne , fight for King James . " 
 " I be glad my lord fight for the right cause , " the boy say . 
 " it be well to meet death on the field like a man , than face it on Tower - hill , as some of they may , " continue Mr. Westbury . " I hope he have make some testament , or provide for thee somehow . this letter say he recommend unicum filium suum dilectissimum to his lady . I hope he have leave you more than that . " 
 Harry do not know , he say . he be in the hand of Heaven and Fate ; but more lonely now , as it seem to he , than he have be all the rest of his life ; and that night , as he lie in his little room which he still occupy , the boy think with many a pang of shame and grief of his strange and solitary condition : how he have a father and no father ; a nameless mother that have be bring to ruin , perhaps , by that very father whom Harry could only acknowledge in secret and with a blush , and whom he could neither love nor revere . and he sicken to think how Father Holt , a stranger , and two or three soldier , his acquaintance of the last six week , be the only friend he have in the great wide world , where he be now quite alone . the soul of the boy be full of love , and he long as he lie in the darkness there for some one upon whom he could bestow it . he remember , and must to his die day , the thought and tear of that long night , the hour tolling through it . who be he , and what ? why here rather than elsewhere ? I have a mind , he think , to go to that priest at Trim , and find out what my father say to he on his death - bed confession . be there any child in the whole world so unprotected as I be ? shall I get up and quit this place , and run to Ireland ? with these thought and tear the lad pass that night away until he weep himself to sleep . 
 the next day , the gentleman of the guard , who have hear what have befall he , be more than usually kind to the child , especially his friend Scholar Dick , who tell he about his own father 's death , which have happen when Dick be a child at Dublin , not quite five year of age . " that be the first sensation of grief , " Dick say , " I ever know . I remember I go into the room where his body lay , and my mother sit weep beside it . I have my battledore in my hand , and fall a - beat the coffin , and call papa ; on which my mother catch I in her arm , and tell I in a flood of tear Papa could not hear I , and would play with I no more , for they be go to put he under ground , whence he could never come to we again . and this , " say Dick kindly , " have make I pity all child ever since ; and cause I to love thee , my poor fatherless , motherless lad . and , if ever thou want a friend , thou shalt have one in Richard Steele . " 
 Harry Esmond thank he , and be grateful . but what could Corporal Steele do for he ? take he to ride a spare horse , and be servant to the troop ? though there might be a bar in Harry Esmond 's shield , it be a noble one . the counsel of the two friend be , that little Harry should stay where he be , and abide his fortune : so Esmond stay on at Castlewood , await with no small anxiety the fate , whatever it be , which be over he . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 I be LEFT AT castlewood an orphan , and FIND MOST kind PROTECTORS there . 

 during the stay of the soldier in Castlewood , honest Dick the Scholar be the constant companion of the lonely little orphan lad Harry Esmond : and they read together , and they play bowl together , and when the other trooper or their officer , who be free - speak over their cup ,   as be the way of that day , when neither man nor woman be over - nice ,   talk unbecomingly of their amour and gallantry before the child , Dick , who very likely be set the whole company laugh , would stop their joke with a maxima debetur pueris reverentia , and once offer to lug out against another trooper call Hulking Tom , who want to ask Harry Esmond a ribald question . 
 also , Dick see that the child have , as he say , a sensibility above his year , and a great and praiseworthy discretion , confide to Harry his love for a vintner 's daughter , near to the Tollyard , Westminster , whom Dick address as Saccharissa in many verse of his composition , and without whom he say it would be impossible that he could continue to live . he vow this a thousand time in a day , though Harry smile to see the love - lorn swain have his health and appetite as well as the most heart - whole trooper in the regiment : and he swear Harry to secrecy too , which vow the lad religiously keep , until he find that officer and private be all take into Dick 's confidence , and have the benefit of his verse . and it must be own likewise that , while Dick be sigh after Saccharissa in London , he have consolation in the country ; for there come a wench out of Castlewood village who have wash his linen , and who cry sadly when she hear he be go : and without pay her bill too , which Harry Esmond take upon himself to discharge by give the girl a silver pocket - piece , which Scholar Dick have present to he , when , with many embrace and prayer for his prosperity , Dick part from he , the garrison of Castlewood be order away . Dick the Scholar say he would never forget his young friend , nor indeed do he : and Harry be sorry when the kind soldier vacate Castlewood , look forward with no small anxiety   for care and solitude have make he thoughtful beyond his year   to his fate when the new lord and lady of the house come to live there . he have live to be past twelve year old now ; and have never have a friend , save this wild trooper , perhaps , and Father Holt ; and have a fond and affectionate heart , tender to weakness , that would fain attach itself to somebody , and do not seem at rest until it have find a friend who would take charge of it . 
 the instinct which lead Henry Esmond to admire and love the gracious person , the fair apparition of whose beauty and kindness have so move he when he first behold she , become soon a devoted affection and passion of gratitude , which entirely fill his young heart , that as yet , except in the case of dear Father Holt , have have very little kindness for which to be thankful . o Dea certe , think he , remember the line out of the AEneas which Mr. Holt have teach he . there seem , as the boy think , in every look or gesture of this fair creature , an angelical softness and bright pity in motion or repose she seem gracious alike ; the tone of her voice , though she utter word ever so trivial , give he a pleasure that amount almost to anguish . it can not be call love , that a lad of twelve year of age , little more than a menial , feel for an exalt lady , his mistress : but it be worship . to catch her glance , to divine her errand and run on it before she have speak it ; to watch , follow , adore she ; become the business of his life . meanwhile , as be the way often , his idol have idol of her own , and never think of or suspect the admiration of her little pigmy adorer . 
 my lady have on her side her three idol : first and foremost , Jove and supreme ruler , be her lord , Harry 's patron , the good Viscount of Castlewood . all wish of his be law with she . if he have a headache , she be ill . if he frown , she tremble . if he joke , she smile and be charm . if he go a - hunting , she be always at the window to see he ride away , her little son crow on her arm , or on the watch till his return . she make dish for his dinner : spice wine for he : make the toast for his tankard at breakfast : hush the house when he sleep in his chair , and watch for a look when he wake . if my lord be not a little proud of his beauty , my lady adore it . she cling to his arm as he pace the terrace , her two fair little hand clasp round his great one ; her eye be never tired of look in his face and wonder at its perfection . her little son be his son , and have his father 's look and curly brown hair . her daughter Beatrix be his daughter , and have his eye be there ever such beautiful eye in the world ? all the house be arrange so as to bring he ease and give he pleasure . she like the small gentry round about to come and pay he court , never care for admiration for herself ; those who want to be well with the lady must admire he . not regard her dress , she would wear a gown to rag , because he have once like it : and , if he bring she a brooch or a ribbon , would prefer it to all the most costly article of her wardrobe . 
 my lord go to London every year for six week , and the family be too poor to appear at Court with any figure , he go alone . it be not until he be out of sight that her face show any sorrow : and what a joy when he come back ! what preparation before his return ! the fond creature have his arm - chair at the chimney - side delight to put the child in it , and look at they there . nobody take his place at the table ; but his silver tankard stand there as when my lord be present . 
 a pretty sight it be to see , during my lord 's absence , or on those many morning when sleep or headache keep he a - bed , this fair young lady of Castlewood , her little daughter at her knee , and her domestic gather round she , read the Morning Prayer of the English Church . esmond long remember how she look and speak , kneel reverently before the sacred book , the sun shin upon her golden hair until it make a halo round about she . a dozen of the servant of the house kneel in a line opposite their mistress ; for a while Harry Esmond keep apart from these mystery , but Doctor Tusher show he that the prayer read be those of the Church of all age , and the boy 's own inclination prompt he to be always as near as he might to his mistress , and to think all thing she do right , from listen to the prayer in the ante - chamber , he come presently to kneel down with the rest of the household in the parlor ; and before a couple of year my lady have make a thorough convert . indeed , the boy love his catechiser so much that he would have subscribe to anything she bid he , and be never tired of listen to her fond discourse and simple comment upon the book , which she read to he in a voice of which it be difficult to resist the sweet persuasion and tender appeal kindness . this friendly controversy , and the intimacy which it occasion , bind the lad more fondly than ever to his mistress . the happy period of all his life be this ; and the young mother , with her daughter and son , and the orphan lad whom she protect , read and work and play , and be child together . if the lady look forward as what fond woman do not ? towards the future , she have no plan from which Harry Esmond be leave out ; and a thousand and a thousand time , in his passionate and impetuous way , he vow that no power should separate he from his mistress ; and only ask for some chance to happen by which he might show his fidelity to she . now , at the close of his life , as he sit and recall in tranquillity the happy and busy scene of it , he can think , not ungratefully , that he have be faithful to that early vow . such a life be so simple that year may be chronicle in a few line . but few man 's life - voyage be destine to be all prosperous ; and this calm of which we be speak be soon to come to an end . 
 as Esmond grow , and observe for himself , he find of necessity much to read and think of outside that fond circle of kinsfolk who have admit he to join hand with they . he read more book than they care to study with he ; be alone in the midst of they many a time , and pass night over labor , futile perhaps , but in which they could not join he . his dear mistress divine his thought with her usual jealous watchfulness of affection : begin to forebode a time when he would escape from his home - nest ; and , at his eager protestation to the contrary , would only sigh and shake her head . before those fatal decree in life be execute , there be always secret prevision and warning omen . when everything yet seem calm , we be aware that the storm be come . Ere the happy day be over , two at least of that home - party feel that they be draw to a close ; and be uneasy , and on the look - out for the cloud which be to obscure their calm . 
 ' twas easy for Harry to see , however much his lady persist in obedience and admiration for her husband , that my lord tired of his quiet life , and grow weary , and then testy , at those gentle bond with which his wife would have hold he . as they say the Grand Lama of Thibet be very much fatigue by his character of divinity , and yawn on his altar as his bonze kneel and worship he , many a home - god grow heartily sick of the reverence with which his family - devotee pursue he , and sigh for freedom and for his old life , and to be off the pedestal on which his dependant would have he sit for ever , whilst they adore he , and ply he with flower , and hymn , and incense , and flattery ; so , after a few year of his marriage my honest Lord Castlewood begin to tire ; all the high - fly rapture and devotional ceremony with which his wife , his chief priestess , treat he , first send he to sleep , and then drive he out of door ; for the truth must be tell , that my lord be a jolly gentleman , with very little of the august or divine in his nature , though his fond wife persist in revere it and , besides , he have to pay a penalty for this love , which person of his disposition seldom like to defray : and , in a word , if he have a love wife , have a very jealous and exact one . then he weary of this jealousy ; then he break away from it ; then come , no doubt , complaint and recrimination ; then , perhaps , promise of amendment not fulfil ; then upbraiding not the more pleasant because they be silent , and only sad look and tearful eye convey they . then , perhaps , the pair reach that other stage which be not uncommon in married life , when the woman perceive that the god of the honeymoon be a god no more ; only a mortal like the rest of we and so she look into her heart , and lo ! vacuae sede et inania arcana . and now , suppose our lady to have a fine genius and a brilliant wit of her own , and the magic spell and infatuation remove from she which have lead she to worship as a god a very ordinary mortal and what follow ? they live together , and they dine together , and they say " my dear " and " my love " as heretofore ; but the man be himself , and the woman herself : that dream of love be over as everything else be over in life ; as flower and fury , and grief and pleasure , be over . 
 very likely the Lady Castlewood have cease to adore her husband herself long before she get off her knee , or would allow her household to discontinue worship he . to do he justice , my lord never exact this subservience : he laugh and joke and drank his bottle , and swear when he be angry , much too familiarly for any one pretend to sublimity ; and do his good to destroy the ceremonial with which his wife choose to surround he . and it require no great conceit on young Esmond 's part to see that his own brain be well than his patron 's , who , indeed , never assume any air of superiority over the lad , or over any dependant of his , save when he be displeased , in which case he would express his mind in oath very freely ; and who , on the contrary , perhaps , spoil " Parson Harry , " as he call young Esmond , by constantly praise his part and admire his boyish stock of learn . 
 it may seem ungracious in one who have receive a hundred favor from his patron to speak in any but a reverential manner of his elder ; but the present writer have have descendant of his own , whom he have bring up with as little as possible of the servility at present exact by parent from child   under which mask of duty there often lurk indifference , contempt , or rebellion : and as he would have his grandson believe or represent he to be not an inch tall than Nature have make he : so , with regard to his past acquaintance , he would speak without anger , but with truth , as far as he know it , neither extenuate nor set down aught in malice . 
 so long , then , as the world move accord to Lord Castlewood 's wish , he be good - humor enough ; of a temper naturally sprightly and easy , like to joke , especially with his inferior , and charm to receive the tribute of their laughter . all exercise of the body he could perform to perfection shoot at a mark and fly , break horse , rid at the ring , pitch the quoit , play at all game with great skill . and not only do he do these thing well , but he think he do they to perfection ; hence he be often trick about horse , which he pretend to know well than any jockey ; be make to play at ball and billiard by sharper who take his money , and come back from London wofully poorer each time than he go , as the state of his affair testify when the sudden accident come by which his career be bring to an end . 
 he be fond of the parade of dress , and pass as many hour daily at his toilette as an elderly coquette . a tenth part of his day be spend in the brushing of his tooth and the oiling of his hair , which be curl and brown , and which he do not like to conceal under a periwig , such as almost everybody of that time wear .   we have the liberty of our hair back now , but powder and pomatum along with it . when , I wonder , will these monstrous poll - taxis of our age be withdraw , and man allow to carry their color , black , red , or gray , as Nature make they ?   and as he like she to be well dress , his lady spar no pain in that matter to please he ; indeed , she would dress her head or cut it off if he have bid she . 
 it be a wonder to young Esmond , serve as page to my lord and lady , to hear , day after day , to such company as come , the same boisterous story tell by my lord , at which his lady never fail to smile or hold down her head , and Doctor Tusher to burst out laugh at the proper point , or cry , " Fie , my lord , remember my cloth ! " but with such a faint show of resistance , that it only provoke my lord far . Lord Castlewood 's story rise by degree , and become strong after the ale at dinner and the bottle afterwards ; my lady always take flight after the very first glass to Church and King , and leave the gentleman to drink the rest of the toast by themselves . 
 and , as Harry Esmond be her page , he also be call from duty at this time . " my lord have live in the army and with soldier , " she would say to the lad , " amongst whom great license be allow . you have have a different nurture , and I trust these thing will change as you grow old ; not that any fault attache to my lord , who be one of the good and most religious man in this kingdom . " and very likely she believe so . ' tis strange what a man may do , and a woman yet think he an angel . 
 and as Esmond have take truth for his motto , it must be own , even with regard to that other angel , his mistress , that she have a fault of character which flaw her perfection . with the other sex perfectly tolerant and kindly , of her own she be invariably jealous ; and a proof that she have this vice be , that though she would acknowledge a thousand fault that she have not , to this which she have she could never be get to own . but if there come a woman with even a semblance of beauty to Castlewood , she be so sure to find out some wrong in she , that my lord , laugh in his jolly way , would often joke with she concern her foible . comely servant - maid might come for hire , but none be take at Castlewood . the housekeeper be old ; my lady 's own waiting - woman squint , and be mark with the small - pox ; the housemaid and scullion be ordinary country wench , to whom Lady Castlewood be kind , as her nature make she to everybody almost ; but as soon as ever she have to do with a pretty woman , she be cold , retire , and haughty . the country lady find this fault in she ; and though the man all admire she , their wife and daughter complain of her coldness and aim , and say that Castlewood be pleasanter in Lady Jezebel 's time   as the dowager be call   than at present . some few be of my mistress 's side . Old Lady Blenkinsop Jointure , who have be at court in King James the First 's time , always take her side ; and so do old Mistress Crookshank , Bishop Crookshank 's daughter , of Hexton , who , with some more of their like , pronounce my lady an angel : but the pretty woman be not of this mind ; and the opinion of the country be that my lord be tie to his wife 's apron - string , and that she rule over he . 
 the second fight which Harry Esmond have , be at fourteen year of age , with Bryan Hawkshaw , Sir John Hawkshaw 's son , of Bramblebrook , who , advance this opinion , that my lady be jealous and henpecke my lord , put Harry in such a fury , that Harry fall on he and with such rage , that the other boy , who be two year old and by far big than he , have by far the bad of the assault , until it be interrupt by Doctor Tusher walk out of the dinner - room . 
 Bryan Hawkshaw get up bleed at the nose , have , indeed , be surprised , as many a strong man might have be , by the fury of the assault upon he . 
 " you little bastard beggar ! " he say , " I will murder you for this ! " 
 and indeed he be big enough . 
 " Bastard or not , " say the other , grind his tooth , " I have a couple of sword , and if you like to meet I , as a man , on the terrace to - night " 
 and here the Doctor come up , the colloquy of the young champion end . very likely , big as he be , Hawkshaw do not care to continue a fight with such a ferocious opponent as this have be . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 after good fortune COMES EVIL . 

 since my Lady Mary Wortley Montagu bring home the custom of inoculation from Turkey   a perilous practice many deem it , and only a useless rushing into the jaw of danger , I think the severity of the small - pox , that dreadful scourge of the world , have somewhat be abate in our part of it ; and remember in my time hundred of the young and beautiful who have be carry to the grave , or have only rise from their pillow frightfully scarred and disfigure by this malady . many a sweet face hath leave its rose on the bed on which this dreadful and wither blight have lay they . in my early day , this pestilence would enter a village and destroy half its inhabitant : at its approach , it may well be imagine , not only the beautiful but the strong be alarmed , and those flee who could . one day in the year 1694   I have good reason to remember it , Doctor Tusher run into Castlewood House , with a face of consternation , say that the malady have make its appearance at the blacksmith 's house in the village , and that one of the maid there be down in the small - pox . 
 the blacksmith , besides his forge and iron for horse , have an ale - house for man , which his wife keep , and his company sit on bench before the inn - door , look at the smithy while they drink their beer . now , there be a pretty girl at this inn , the landlord 's man call Nancy Sievewright , a bounce , fresh - look lass , whose face be as red as the hollyhock over the pale of the garden behind the inn . at this time Harry Esmond be a lad of sixteen , and somehow in his walk and ramble it often happen that he fall in with Nancy Sievewright 's bonny face ; if he do not want something do at the blacksmith 's he would go and drink ale at the " Three Castles , " or find some pretext for see this poor Nancy . poor thing , Harry mean or imagine no harm ; and she , no doubt , as little , but the truth be they be always meet in the lane , or by the brook , or at the garden - paling , or about Castlewood : it be , " Lord , Mr. Henry ! " and " how do you do , Nancy ? " many and many a time in the week . ' tis surprising the magnetic attraction which draw people together from ever so far . I blush as I think of poor Nancy now , in a red bodice and buxom purple cheek and a canvas petticoat ; and that I devise scheme , and set trap , and make speech in my heart , which I seldom have courage to say when in presence of that humble enchantress , who know nothing beyond milk a cow , and open her black eye with wonder when I make one of my fine speech out of Waller or Ovid . Poor Nancy ! from the midst of far - off year thine honest country face beam out ; and I remember thy kind voice as if I have hear it yesterday . 
 when Doctor Tusher bring the news that the small - pox be at the " Three Castles , " whither a tramper , it be say , have bring the malady , Henry Esmond 's first thought be of alarm for poor Nancy , and then of shame and disquiet for the Castlewood family , lest he might have bring this infection ; for the truth be that Mr. Harry have be sit in a back room for an hour that day , where Nancy Sievewright be with a little brother who complain of headache , and be lie stupefied and cry , either in a chair by the corner of the fire , or in Nancy 's lap , or on mine . 
 Little Lady Beatrix scream out at Dr. Tusher 's news ; and my lord cry out , " God bless I ! " he be a brave man , and not afraid of death in any shape but this . he be very proud of his pink complexion and fair hair but the idea of death by small - pox scar he beyond all other end . " we will take the child and ride away to - morrow to Walcote : " this be my lord 's small house , inherit from his mother , near to Winchester . 
 " that be the good refuge in case the disease spread , " say Dr. Tusher . " ' tis awful to think of it begin at the ale - house ; half the people of the village have visit that to - day , or the blacksmith 's , which be the same thing . my clerk Nahum lodge with they I can never go into my reading - desk and have that fellow so near I . I won't have that man near I . " 
 " if a parishioner die in the small - pox send to you , would you not go ? " ask my lady , look up from her frame of work , with her calm blue eye . 
 " by the Lord , I would not , " say my lord . 
 " we be not in a popish country ; and a sick man doth not absolutely need absolution and confession , " say the Doctor . " ' tis true they be a comfort and a help to he when attainable , and to be administer with hope of good . but in a case where the life of a parish priest in the midst of his flock be highly valuable to they , he be not call upon to risk it   and therewith the life , future prospect , and temporal , even spiritual welfare of his own family   for the sake of a single person , who be not very likely in a condition even to understand the religious message whereof the priest be the bringer be uneducated , and likewise stupefied or delirious by disease . if your ladyship or his lordship , my excellent good friend and patron , be to take it . . . " 
 " God forbid ! " cry my lord . 
 " amen , " continue Dr. Tusher . " amen to that prayer , my very good lord ! for your sake I would lay my life down " and , to judge from the alarmed look of the Doctor 's purple face , you would have think that that sacrifice be about to be call for instantly . 
 to love child , and be gentle with they , be an instinct , rather than a merit , in Henry Esmond ; so much so , that he think almost with a sort of shame of his liking for they , and of the softness into which it betray he ; and on this day the poor fellow have not only have his young friend , the milkmaid 's brother , on his knee , but have be draw picture and tell story to the little Frank Castlewood , who have occupy the same place for an hour after dinner , and be never tired of Henry 's tale , and his picture of soldier and horse . as luck would have it , Beatrix have not on that evening take her usual place , which generally she be glad enough to have , upon her tutor 's lap . for beatrix , from the early time , be jealous of every caress which be give to her little brother Frank . she would fling away even from the maternal arm , if she see Frank have be there before she ; insomuch that Lady Esmond be oblige not to show her love for her son in the presence of the little girl , and embrace one or the other alone . she would turn pale and red with rage if she catch sign of intelligence or affection between Frank and his mother : would sit apart , and not speak for a whole night , if she think the boy have a well fruit or a large cake than her ; would fling away a ribbon if he have one ; and from the early age , sit up in her little chair by the great fireplace opposite to the corner where Lady Castlewood commonly sit at her embroidery , would utter infantine sarcasm about the favor show to her brother . these , if speak in the presence of Lord Castlewood , tickle and amuse his humor ; he would pretend to love Frank well , and dandle and kiss he , and roar with laughter at Beatrix 's jealousy . but the truth be , my lord do not often witness these scene , nor very much trouble the quiet fireside at which his lady pass many long evening . my lord be hunt all day when the season admit ; he frequent all the cock - fight and fair in the country , and would ride twenty mile to see a main fought , or two clown break their head at a cudgelling - match ; and he like well to sit in his parlor drinking ale and punch with Jack and Tom , than in his wife 's drawing - room : whither , if he come , he bring only too often bloodshot eye , a hiccupping voice , and a reeling gait . the management of the house , and the property , the care of the few tenant and the village poor , and the account of the estate , be in the hand of his lady and her young secretary , Harry Esmond . my lord take charge of the stable , the kennel , and the cellar and he fill this and empty it too . 
 so it chance that upon this very day , when poor Harry Esmond have have the blacksmith 's son , and the peer 's son , alike upon his knee , little beatrix , who would come to her tutor willingly enough with her book and her writing , have refuse he , see the place occupy by her brother , and , luckily for she , have sit at the further end of the room , away from he , play with a spaniel dog which she have ,   and for which , by fit and start , she would take a great affection ,   and talk at Harry Esmond over her shoulder , as she pretend to caress the dog , say that Fido would love she , and she would love Fido , and nothing but Fido all her life . 
 when , then , the news be bring that the little boy at the " Three Castles " be ill with the small - pox , poor Harry Esmond feel a shock of alarm , not so much for himself as for his mistress 's son , whom he might have bring into peril . beatrix , who have pout sufficiently ,   and who , whenever a stranger appear , begin , from infancy almost , to play off little grace to catch his attention ,   her brother be now go to bed , be for take her place upon Esmond 's knee : for , though the doctor be very obsequious to she , she do not like he , because he have thick boot and dirty hand   the pert young miss say , and because she hat learn the catechism . 
 but as she advance towards Esmond from the corner where she have be sulk , he start back and place the great chair on which he be sit between he and her say in the french language to Lady Castlewood , with whom the young lad have read much , and whom he have perfect in this tongue " Madam , the child must not approach I ; I must tell you that I be at the blacksmith 's to - day , and have his little boy upon my lap . " 
 " where you take my son afterwards , " Lady Castlewood say , very angry , and turn red . " I thank you , sir , for give he such company . beatrix , " she say in English , " I forbid you to touch Mr. Esmond . come away , child come to your room . come to your room I wish your Reverence good - night and you , sir , have you not well go back to your friend at the ale - house ? " her eye , ordinarily so kind , dart flash of anger as she speak ; and she toss up her head   which hang down commonly   with the mien of a princess . 
 " hey - day ! " say my lord , who be stand by the fireplace indeed he be in the position to which he generally come by that hour of the evening " Hey - day ! Rachel , what be you in a passion about ? lady ought never to be in a passion . ought they , Doctor Tusher ? though it do good to see Rachel in a passion Damme , Lady Castlewood , you look dev'lish handsome in a passion . " 
 " it be , my lord , because Mr. Henry Esmond , have nothing to do with his time here , and not have a taste for our company , have be to the ale - house , where he have some friend . " 
 my lord burst out , with a laugh and an oath " you young slyboot , you have   be at Nancy Sievewright . D - the young hypocrite , who would have think it in he ? I say , Tusher , he be be after " 
 " Enough , my lord , " say my lady , " do not   insult I with this talk . " 
 " upon my word , " say poor Harry , ready to cry with shame and mortification , " the honor of that young person be perfectly unstaine for I . " 
 " oh , of course , of course , " say my lord , more and more laugh and tipsy . " upon his HONOR , Doctor Nancy Sieve . . . " 
 " take mistress Beatrix to bed , " my lady cry at this moment to Mrs. Tucker her woman , who come in with her ladyship 's tea . " put she into my room no , into your , " she add quickly . " go , my child : go , I say : not a word ! " and beatrix , quite surprised at so sudden a tone of authority from one who be seldom accustomed to raise her voice , go out of the room with a scared countenance , and wait even to burst out a - crying until she get to the door with Mrs. Tucker . 
 for once her mother take little heed of her sobbing , and continue to speak eagerly " my lord , " she say , " this young man your dependant tell I just now in French he be ashamed to speak in his own language that he have be at the ale - house all day , where he have have that little wretch who be now ill of the small - pox on his knee . and he come home reeking from that place yes , reek from it and take my boy into his lap without shame , and sit down by I , yes , by I . he may have kill Frank for what I know kill our child . why be he bring in to disgrace our house ? why be he here ? let he go let he go , I say , to - night , and pollute the place no more . " 
 she have never once utter a syllable of unkindness to Harry Esmond ; and her cruel word smite the poor boy , so that he stand for some moment bewilder with grief and rage at the injustice of such a stab from such a hand . he turn quite white from red , which he have be . 
 " I can not help my birth , madam , " he say , " nor my other misfortune . and as for your boy , if if my come nigh to he pollute he now , it be not so always . good - night , my lord . Heaven bless you and yours for your goodness to I . I have tire her ladyship 's kindness out , and I will go ; " and , sink down on his knee , Harry Esmond take the rough hand of his benefactor and kiss it . 
 " he want to go to the ale - house let he go , " cry my lady . 
 " I be d d if he shall , " say my lord . " I do not   think you could be so d d ungrateful , Rachel . " 
 her reply be to burst into a flood of tear , and to quit the room with a rapid glance at Harry Esmond , as my lord , not heed they , and still in great good - humor , raise up his young client from his kneeling posture   for a thousand kindness have cause the lad to revere my lord as a father , and put his broad hand on Harry Esmond 's shoulder . 
 " she be always so , " my lord say ; " the very notion of a woman drive her mad . I take to liquor on that very account , by Jove , for no other reason than that ; for she can not   be jealous of a beer - barrel or a bottle of rum , can she , Doctor ? D - it , look at the maid just look at the maid in the house "   my lord pronounce all the word together just - look - at - the - maze - in - the - house : jever - see - such - maze ?   " you would not   take a wife out of Castlewood now , would you , Doctor ? " and my lord burst out laugh . 
 the Doctor , who have be look at my Lord Castlewood from under his eyelid , say , " but joke apart , and , my lord , as a divine , I can not treat the subject in a jocular light , nor , as a pastor of this congregation , look with anything but sorrow at the idea of so very young a sheep go astray . " 
 " Sir , " say young Esmond , burst out indignantly , ' she tell I that you yourself be a horrid old man , and have offer to kiss she in the dairy . " 
 " for shame , Henry , " cry Doctor Tusher , turn as red as a turkey - cock , while my lord continue to roar with laughter . " if you listen to the falsehood of an abandon girl " 
 " she be as honest as any woman in England , and as pure for I , " cry out Henry , " and , as kind , and as good . for shame on you to malign she ! " 
 " far be it from I to do so , " cry the Doctor . " heaven grant I may be mistake in the girl , and in you , sir , who have a truly precocious genius ; but that be not the point at issue at present . it appear that the small - pox break out in the little boy at the ' three Castles ; ' that it be on he when you visit the ale - house , for your own reason ; and that you sit with the child for some time , and immediately afterwards with my young lord . " the Doctor raise his voice as he speak , and look towards my lady , who have now come back , look very pale , with a handkerchief in her hand . 
 " this be all very true , sir , " say Lady Esmond , look at the young man . 
 " ' tis to be fear that he may have bring the infection with he . " 
 " from the ale - house yes , " say my lady . 
 " D - it , I forget when I collar you , boy , " cry my lord , step back . " keep off , Harry my boy ; there be no good in run into the wolf 's jaw , you know . " 
 my lady look at he with some surprise , and instantly advance to Henry Esmond , take his hand . " I beg your pardon , Henry , " she say ; " I speak very unkindly . I have no right to interfere with you with your " 
 my lord break out into an oath . " can not   you leave the boy alone , my lady ? " she look a little red , and faintly press the lad 's hand as she drop it . 
 " there be no use , my lord , " she say ; " Frank be on his knee as he be make picture , and be run constantly from Henry to I . the evil be do , if any . " 
 " not with I , damme , " cry my lord . " I have   be smoke , " and he light his pipe again with a coal " and it keep off infection ; and as the disease be in the village plague take it I would have you leave it . we will go to - morrow to Walcote , my lady . " 
 " I have no fear , " say my lady ; " I may have have it as an infant : it break out in our house then ; and when four of my sister have it at home , two year before our marriage , I escape it , and two of my dear sister die . " 
 " I will not   run the risk , " say my lord ; " I be as bold as any man , but I will not bear that . " 
 " take beatrix with you and go , " say my lady . " for we the mischief be do ; and Tucker can wait upon we , who have have the disease . " 
 " you take care to choose them ugly enough , " say my lord , at which her ladyship hang down her head and look foolish : and my lord , call away Tusher , bid he come to the oak parlor and have a pipe . the Doctor make a low bow to her ladyship   of which salaam he be profuse , and walk off on his creak square - toe after his patron . 
 when the lady and the young man be alone , there be a silence of some moment , during which he stand at the fire , look rather vacantly at the die ember , whilst her ladyship busy herself with the tambour - frame and needle . 
 " I be sorry , " she say , after a pause , in a hard , dry voice , " I repeat I be sorry that I show myself so ungrateful for the safety of my son . it be not at all my wish that you should leave we , I be sure , unless you find pleasure elsewhere . but you must perceive , Mr. Esmond , that at your age , and with your taste , it be impossible that you can continue to stay upon the intimate footing in which you have be in this family . you have wish to go to the University , and I think ' tis quite as well that you should be send thither . I do not press this matter , think you a child , as you be , indeed , in year quite a child ; and I should never have think of treat you otherwise until until these circumstance come to light . and I shall beg my lord to despatch you as quick as possible : and will go on with Frank 's learning as well as I can ,   I owe my father thank for a little grounding , and you , I be sure , for much that you have teach I ,   and and I wish you a good - night , Mr. Esmond . " 
 and with this she drop a stately curtsy , and , take her candle , go away through the tapestry door , which lead to her apartment . esmond stand by the fireplace , blankly star after she . indeed , he scarce seem to see until she be go ; and then her image be impress upon he , and remain for ever fix upon his memory . he see her retreating , the taper light up her marble face , her scarlet lip quivering , and her shin golden hair . he go to his own room , and to bed , where he try to read , as his custom be ; but he never know what he be read until afterwards he remember the appearance of the letter of the book   it be in Montaigne 's essay , and the event of the day pass before he that be , of the last hour of the day ; for as for the morning , and the poor milkmaid yonder , he never so much as once think . and he could not get to sleep until daylight , and wake with a violent headache , and quite unrefreshed . 
 he have bring the contagion with he from the " Three Castles " sure enough , and be presently lay up with the smallpox , which spar the hall no more than it do the cottage . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 I have the SMALL - POX , and prepare to leave castlewood . 

 when Harry Esmond pass through the crisis of that malady , and return to health again , he find that little Frank Esmond have also suffer and rally after the disease , and the lady his mother be down with it , with a couple more of the household . " it be a Providence , for which we all ought to be thankful , " Doctor Tusher say , " that my lady and her son be spar , while Death carry off the poor domestic of the house ; " and rebuke Harry for ask , in his simple way , for which we ought to be thankful that the servant be kill , or the gentlefolk be save ? nor could young Esmond agree in the Doctor 's vehement protestation to my lady , when he visit she during her convalescence , that the malady have not in the least impair her charm , and have not be churl enough to injure the fair feature of the Viscountess of Castlewood ; whereas , in spite of these fine speech , Harry think that her ladyship 's beauty be very much injure by the small - pox . when the mark of the disease clear away , they do not , it be true , leave furrow or scar on her face   except one , perhaps , on her forehead over her left eyebrow ; but the delicacy of her rosy color and complexion be go : her eye have lose their brilliancy , her hair fall , and her face look old . it be as if a coarse hand have rub off the delicate tint of that sweet picture , and bring it , as one have see unskilful painting - cleaner do , to the dead color . also , it must be own , that for a year or two after the malady , her ladyship 's nose be swollen and redder . 
 there would be no need to mention these triviality , but that they actually influence many life , as trifle will in the world , where a gnat often play a great part than an elephant , and a mole - hill , as we know in King William 's case , can upset an empire . when Tusher in his courtly way   at which Harry Esmond always chafe and speak scornfully   vow and protest that my lady 's face be none the bad the lad break out and say , " it be bad and my mistress be not near so handsome as she be ; " on which poor Lady Castlewood give a rueful smile , and a look into a little Venice glass she have , which show she , I suppose , that what the stupid boy say be only too true , for she turn away from the glass , and her eye fill with tear . 
 the sight of these in Esmond 's heart always create a sort of rage of pity , and see they on the face of the lady whom he love well , the young blunderer sink down on his knee , and besought she to pardon he , say that he be a fool and an idiot , that he be a brute to make such a speech , he who have cause she malady ; and Doctor Tusher tell he that a bear he be indeed , and a bear he would remain , at which speech poor young Esmond be so dumbstricken that he do not even growl . 
 " he be MY bear , and I will not have he bait , Doctor , " my lady say , pat her hand kindly on the boy 's head , as he be still kneel at her foot . " how your hair have come off ! and mine , too , " she add with another sigh . 
 " it be not for myself that I care , " my lady say to Harry , when the parson have take his leave ; " but be I very much change ? alas ! I fear ' tis too true . " 
 " Madam , you have the dear , and kind , and sweetest face in the world , I think , " the lad say ; and indeed he think and think so . 
 " will my lord think so when he come back ? " the lady ask with a sigh , and another look at her Venice glass . " suppose he should think as you do , sir , that I be hideous yes , you say hideous he will cease to care for I . ' tis all man care for in woman , our little beauty . why do he select I from among my sister ? ' twas only for that . we reign but for a day or two : and be sure that Vashti know Esther be come . " 
 " Madam , " say Mr. Esmond , " Ahasuerus be the Grand Turk , and to change be the manner of his country , and accord to his law . " 
 " you be all Grand Turks for that matter , " say my lady , " or would be if you could . come , Frank , come , my child . you be well , praise be Heaven . your lock be not thin by this dreadful small - pox : nor your poor face scar be it , my angel ? " 
 Frank begin to shout and whimper at the idea of such a misfortune . from the very early time the young lord have be teach to admire his beauty by his mother : and esteem it as highly as any reign toast value her . 
 one day , as he himself be recover from his fever and illness , a pang of something like shame shoot across young Esmond 's breast , as he remember that he have never once during his illness give a thought to the poor girl at the smithy , whose red cheek but a month ago he have be so eager to see . poor Nancy ! her cheek have share the fate of rose , and be wither now . she have take the illness on the same day with Esmond she and her brother be both dead of the small - pox , and bury under the Castlewood yew - tree . there be no bright face look now from the garden , or to cheer the old smith at his lonely fireside . esmond would have like to have kiss she in her shroud   like the lass in Mr. Prior 's pretty poem ; but she rest many a foot below the ground , when Esmond after his malady first trod on it . 
 Doctor Tusher bring the news of this calamity , about which Harry Esmond long to ask , but do not like . he say almost the whole village have be stricken with the pestilence ; seventeen person be dead of it , among they mention the name of poor Nancy and her little brother . he do not fail to say how thankful we survivor ought to be . it be this man 's business to flatter and make sermon , it must be own he be most industrious in it , and be do the one or the other all day . 
 and so Nancy be go ; and Harry Esmond blush that he have not a single tear for she , and fall to compose an elegy in Latin verse over the rustic little beauty . he bid the dryad mourn and the river - nymph deplore she . as her father follow the calling of Vulcan , he say that surely she be like a daughter of Venus , though Sievewright 's wife be an ugly shrew , as he remember to have hear afterwards . he make a long face , but , in truth , feel scarcely more sorrowful than a mute at a funeral . these first passion of man and woman be mostly abortive ; and be dead almost before they be bear . esmond could repeat , to his last day , some of the doggerel line in which his muse bewail his pretty lass ; not without shame to remember how bad the verse be , and how good he think they ; how false the grief , and yet how he be rather proud of it . ' tis an error , surely , to talk of the simplicity of youth . I think no person be more hypocritical , and have a more affected behavior to one another , than the young . they deceive themselves and each other with artifice that do not impose upon man of the world ; and so we get to understand truth well , and grow simple as we grow old . 
 when my lady hear of the fate which have befall poor Nancy , she say nothing so long as Tusher be by , but when he be go , she take Harry Esmond 's hand and say 
 " Harry , I beg your pardon for those cruel word I use on the night you be take ill . I be shock at the fate of the poor creature , and be sure that nothing have happen of that with which , in my anger , I charge you . and the very first day we go out , you must take I to the blacksmith , and we must see if there be anything I can do to console the poor old man . poor man ! to lose both his child ! what should I do without mine ? " 
 and this be , indeed , the very first walk which my lady take , lean on Esmond 's arm , after her illness . but her visit bring no consolation to the old father ; and he show no softness , or desire to speak . " the Lord give and take away , " he say ; and he know what his servant 's duty be . he want for nothing less now than ever before , as there be few mouth to feed . he wish her ladyship and Master Esmond good morning he have grow tall in his illness , and be but very little marked ; and with this , and a surly bow , he go in from the smithy to the house , leave my lady , somewhat silence and shameface , at the door . he have a handsome stone put up for his two child , which may be see in Castlewood churchyard to this very day ; and before a year be out his own name be upon the stone . in the presence of death , that sovereign ruler , a woman 's coquetry be sear ; and her jealousy will hardly pass the boundary of that grim kingdom . ' tis entirely of the earth , that passion , and expire in the cold blue air , beyond our sphere . 
 at length , when the danger be quite over , it be announce that my lord and his daughter would return . esmond well remember the day . the lady his mistress be in a flurry of fear : before my lord come , she go into her room , and return from it with reddened cheek . her fate be about to be decide . her beauty be go be her reign , too , over ? a minute would say . my lord come rid over the bridge he could be see from the great window , clothe in scarlet , and mount on his gray hackney his little daughter amble by he in a bright riding - dress of blue , on a shin chestnut horse . my lady lean against the great mantel - piece , look on , with one hand on her heart she seem only the more pale for those red mark on either cheek . she put her handkerchief to her eye , and withdraw it , laugh hysterically the cloth be quite red with the rouge when she take it away . she run to her room again , and come back with pale cheek and red eye her son in her hand just as my lord enter , accompany by young Esmond , who have go out to meet his protector , and to hold his stirrup as he descend from horseback . 
 " what , Harry , boy ! " my lord say , good - naturedly , " you look as gaunt as a greyhound . the small - pox have not   improve your beauty , and your side of the house have not   never too much of it ho , ho ! " 
 and he laugh , and spring to the ground with no small agility , look handsome and red , within a jolly face and brown hair , like a Beef - eater ; esmond kneeling again , as soon as his patron have descend , perform his homage , and then go to greet the little beatrix , and help she from her horse . 
 " Fie ! how yellow you look , " she say ; " and there be one , two , red hole in your face ; " which , indeed , be very true ; Harry Esmond 's harsh countenance bearing , as long as it continue to be a human face , the mark of the disease . 
 my lord laugh again , in high good - humor . 
 " D - it ! " say he , with one of his usual oath , " the little slut see everything . she see the Dowager 's paint t'other day , and ask she why she wear that red stuff do not   you , Trix ? and the Tower ; and St. James 's ; and the play ; and the Prince George , and the Princess Anne do not   you , Trix ? " 
 " they be both very fat , and smell of brandy , " the child say . 
 Papa roar with laughing . 
 " Brandy ! " he say . " and how do you know , Miss Pert ? " 
 " because your lordship smell of it after supper , when I embrace you before you go to bed , " say the young lady , who , indeed , be as pert as her father say , and look as beautiful a little gipsy as eye ever gaze on . 
 " and now for my lady , " say my lord , go up the stair , and pass under the tapestry curtain that hang before the drawing - room door . esmond remember that noble figure , handsomely array in scarlet . within the last few month he himself have grow from a boy to be a man , and with his figure his thought have shoot up , and grow manly . 
 my lady 's countenance , of which Harry Esmond be accustom to watch the change , and with a solicitous affection to note and interpret the sign of gladness or care , wear a sad and depressed look for many week after her lord 's return : during which it seem as if , by caress and entreaty , she strove to win he back from some ill humor he have , and which he do not choose to throw off . in her eagerness to please he she practise a hundred of those art which have formerly charm he , but which seem now to have lose their potency . her song do not amuse he ; and she hush they and the child when in his presence . my lord sit silent at his dinner , drink greatly , his lady opposite to he , look furtively at his face , though also speechless . her silence annoy he as much as her speech ; and he would peevishly , and with an oath , ask she why she hold her tongue and look so glum ; or he would roughly check she when speak , and bid she not talk nonsense . it seem as if , since his return , nothing she could do or say could please he . 
 when a master and mistress be at strife in a house , the subordinate in the family take the one side or the other . Harry Esmond stand in so great fear of my lord , that he would run a league barefoot to do a message for he ; but his attachment for Lady Esmond be such a passion of grateful regard , that to spare she a grief , or to do she a service , he would have give his life daily : and it be by the very depth and intensity of this regard that he begin to divine how unhappy his adore lady 's life be , and that a secret care   for she never speak of her anxiety   be weigh upon she . 
 can any one , who have pass through the world and watch the nature of man and woman there , doubt what have befall she ? I have see , to be sure , some people carry down with they into old age the actual bloom of their youthful love , and I know that Mr. Thomas Parr live to be a hundred and sixty year old . but , for all that , threescore and ten be the age of man , and few get beyond it ; and ' tis certain that a man who marry for mere beaux yeux , as my lord do , consider this part of the contract at an end when the woman cease to fulfil her , and his love do not survive her beauty . I know ' tis often otherwise , I say ; and can think   as most man in their own experience may   of many a house , where , light in early year , the sainted lamp of love hath never be extinguish ; but so there be Mr. Parr , and so there be the great giant at the fair that be eight foot high exception to man and that poor lamp whereof I speak , that light at first the nuptial chamber , be extinguish by a hundred wind and draught down the chimney , or sputter out for want of feed . and then and then it be Chloe , in the dark , stark awake , and Strephon snore unheeding ; or vice versa , ' tis poor Strephon that have marry a heartless jilt , and awake out of that absurd vision of conjugal felicity , which be to last for ever , and be over like any other dream . one and other have make his bed , and so must lie in it , until that final day when life end , and they sleep separate . 
 about this time young Esmond , who have a knack of string verse , turn some of Ovid 's Epistles into rhyme , and bring they to his lady for her delectation . those which treat of forsake woman touch she immensely , Harry remark ; and when Oenone call after Paris , and Medea bade Jason come back again , the lady of Castlewood sigh , and say she think that part of the verse be the most pleasing . indeed , she would have chop up the Dean , her old father , in order to bring her husband back again . but her beautiful Jason be go , as beautiful Jasons will go , and the poor enchantress have never a spell to keep he . 
 my lord be only sulky as long as his wife 's anxious face or behavior seem to upbraid he . when she have get to master these , and to show an outwardly cheerful countenance and behavior , her husband 's good - humor return partially , and he swear and storm no long at dinner , but laugh sometimes , and yawn unrestrainedly ; absent himself often from home , invite more company thither , pass the great part of his day in the hunting - field , or over the bottle as before ; but with this difference , that the poor wife could no long see now , as she have do formerly , the light of love kindle in his eye . he be with she , but that flame be out : and that once welcome beacon no more shone there . 
 what be this lady 's feeling when force to admit the truth whereof her foreboding glass have give she only too true warning , that within her beauty her reign have end , and the day of her love be over ? what do a seaman do in a storm if mast and rudder be carry away ? he ship a jurymast , and steer as he well can with an oar . what happen if your roof fall in a tempest ? after the first stun of the calamity the sufferer start up , grope around to see that the child be safe , and put they under a shed out of the rain . if the palace burn down , you take shelter in the barn . what man 's life be not overtake by one or more of these tornado that send we out of the course , and fle we on rock to shelter as good we may ? 
 when Lady Castlewood find that her great ship have go down , she begin as good she might after she have rally from the effect of the loss , to put out small venture of happiness ; and hope for little gain and return , as a merchant on ' Change , indocilis pauperiem pati , have lose his thousand , embark a few guineas upon the next ship . she lay out she all upon her child , indulge they beyond all measure , as be inevitable with one of her kindness of disposition ; give all her thought to their welfare learning , that she might teach they ; and improve her own many natural gift and feminine accomplishment , that she might impart they to her young one . to be do good for some one else , be the life of most good woman . they be exuberant of kindness , as it be , and must impart it to some one . she make herself a good scholar of french , italian , and Latin , have be ground in these by her father in her youth ; hide these gift from her husband out of fear , perhaps , that they should offend he , for my lord be no bookman pish'd and psha'd at the notion of learn lady , and would have be angry that his wife could construe out of a latin book of which he could scarce understand two word . Young Esmond be usher , or house tutor , under she or over she , as it might happen . during my lord 's many absence , these school - day would go on uninterruptedly : the mother and daughter learn with surprising quickness ; the latter by fit and start only , and as suit her wayward humor . as for the little lord , it must be own that he take after his father in the matter of learn like marble and play , and the great horse and the little one which his father bring he , and on which he take he out a - hunting , a great deal well than Corderius and Lily ; marshal the village boy , and have a little court of they , already flog they , and domineer over they with a fine imperious spirit , that make his father laugh when he behold it , and his mother fondly warn he . the cook have a son , the woodman have two , the big lad at the porter 's lodge take his cuff and his order . Doctor Tusher say he be a young nobleman of gallant spirit ; and Harry Esmond , who be his tutor , and eight year his little lordship 's senior , have hard work sometimes to keep his own temper , and hold his authority over his rebellious little chief and kinsman . 
 in a couple of year after that calamity have befall which have rob Lady Castlewood of a little a very little of her beauty , and her careless husband 's heart   if the truth must be tell , my lady have find not only that her reign be over , but that her successor be appoint , a Princess of a noble house in Drury Lane somewhere , who be instal and visit by my lord at the town eight mile off pudet haec opprobria dicere nobis   a great change have take place in her mind , which , by struggle only know to herself , at least never mention to any one , and unsuspecte by the person who cause the pain she endure have be school into such a condition as she could not very likely have imagine possible a score of month since , before her misfortune have begin . 
 she have oldene in that time as people do who suffer silently great mental pain ; and learn much that she have never suspect before . she be teach by that bitter teacher Misfortune . a child the mother of other child , but two year back her lord be a god to she ; his word her law ; his smile her sunshine ; his lazy commonplace listen to eagerly , as if they be word of wisdom all his wish and freak obey with a servile devotion . she have be my lord 's chief slave and blind worshipper . some woman bear far than this , and submit not only to neglect but to unfaithfulness too but here this lady 's allegiance have fail she . her spirit rebel , and disown any more obedience . first she have to bear in secret the passion of lose the adore object ; then to get further initiation , and to find this worship be be but a clumsy idol : then to admit the silent truth , that it be she be superior , and not the monarch her master : that she have thought which his brain could never master , and be the well of the two ; quite separate from my lord although tie to he , and bind , as almost all people   save a very happy few , to work all her life alone . my lord sit in his chair , laugh his laugh , crack his joke , his face flush with wine my lady in her place over against he he never suspect that his superior be there , in the calm resign lady , cold of manner , with downcast eye . when he be merry in his cup , he would make joke about her coldness , and , " D - it , now my lady be go , we will have t'other bottle , " he would say . he be frank enough in tell his thought , such as they be . there be little mystery about my lord 's word or action . his Fair Rosamond do not live in a Labyrinth , like the lady of Mr. Addison 's opera , but parade with paint cheek and a tipsy retinue in the country town . have she a mind to be revenge , Lady Castlewood could have find the way to her rival 's house easily enough ; and , if she have come with bowl and dagger , would have be rout off the ground by the enemy with a volley of Billingsgate , which the fair person always keep by she . 
 meanwhile , it have be say , that for Harry Esmond his benefactress 's sweet face have lose none of its charm . it have always the kind of look and smile for he smile , not so gay and artless perhaps as those which Lady Castlewood have formerly wear , when , a child herself , play with her child , her husband 's pleasure and authority be all she think of ; but out of her grief and care , as will happen I think when these trial fall upon a kindly heart , and be not too unbearable , grow up a number of thought and excellence which have never come into existence , have not her sorrow and misfortune engender they . sure , occasion be the father of most that be good in we . as you have see the awkward finger and clumsy tool of a prisoner cut and fashion the most delicate little piece of carve work ; or achieve the most prodigious underground labor , and cut through wall of masonry , and see iron bar and fetter ; ' tis misfortune that awaken ingenuity , or fortitude , or endurance , in heart where these quality have never come to life but for the circumstance which give they a being . 
 " ' Twas after Jason leave she , no doubt , " Lady Castlewood once say with one of her smile to young Esmond   who be read to she a version of certain line out of euripide , " that Medea become a learn woman and a great enchantress . " 
 " and she could conjure the star out of heaven , " the young tutor add , " but she could not bring Jason back again . " 
 " what do you mean ? " ask my lady , very angry . 
 " indeed I mean nothing , " say the other , ' save what I have   read in book . what should I know about such matter ? I have see no woman save you and little beatrix , and the parson 's wife and my late mistress , and your ladyship 's woman here . " 
 " the man who write your book , " say my lady , " your Horaces , and ovid , and Virgils , as far as I know of they , all think ill of we , as all the hero they write about use we basely . we be breed to be slave always ; and even of our own time , as you be still the only lawgiver , I think our sermon seem to say that the good woman be she who bear her master 's chain most gracefully . ' tis a pity there be no nunnery permit by our church : beatrix and I would fly to one , and end our day in peace there away from you . " 
 " and be there no slavery in a convent ? " say Esmond . 
 " at least if woman be slave there , no one see they , " answer the lady . " they do not   work in street gang with the public to jeer they : and if they suffer , suffer in private . here come my lord home from hunting . take away the book . my lord do not love to see they . lesson be over for to - day , Mr. Tutor . " and with a curtsy and a smile she would end this sort of colloquy . 
 indeed " Mr. Tutor , " as my lady call Esmond , have now business enough on his hand in Castlewood house . he have three pupil , his lady and her two child , at whose lesson she would always be present ; besides write my lord 's letter , and arrange his accompt for he when these could be get from Esmond 's indolent patron . 
 of the pupil the two young people be but lazy scholar , and as my lady would admit no discipline such as be then in use , my lord 's son only learn what he like , which be but little , and never to his life 's end could be get to construe more than six line of Virgil . Mistress Beatrix chatter french prettily , from a very early age ; and sing sweetly , but this be from her mother 's teach not Harry Esmond 's , who could scarce distinguish between " Green Sleeves " and " Lillibullero ; " although he have no great delight in life than to hear the lady sing . he see they now   will he ever forget they ?   as they use to sit together of the summer evening the two golden head over the page the child 's little hand , and the mother 's beat the time , with their voice rise and fall in unison . 
 but if the child be careless , ' twas a wonder how eagerly the mother learn from her young tutor and teach he too . the happy instinctive faculty be this lady 's a faculty for discern latent beauty and hidden grace of book , especially book of poetry , as in a walk she would spy out field - flower and make posy of they , such as no other hand could . she be a critic , not by reason but by feel ; the sweet commentator of those book they read together ; and the happy hour of young Esmond 's life , perhaps , be those pass in the company of this kind mistress and her child . 
 these happy day be to end soon , however ; and it be by the Lady Castlewood 's own decree that they be bring to a conclusion . it happen about Christmas - time , Harry Esmond be now past sixteen year of age , that his old comrade , adversary , and friend , Tom Tusher , return from his school in London , a fair , well - grow , and sturdy lad , who be about to enter college , with an exhibition from his school , and a prospect of after promotion in the church . Tom Tusher 's talk be of nothing but Cambridge now ; and the boy , who be good friend , examine each other eagerly about their progress in book . Tom have learn some Greek and Hebrew , besides Latin , in which he be pretty well skilled , and also have give himself to mathematical study under his father 's guidance , who be a proficient in those science , of which esmond know nothing ; nor could he write Latin so well as Tom , though he could talk it well , have be teach by his dear friend the Jesuit Father , for whose memory the lad ever retain the warm affection , read his book , keep his sword clean in the little crypt where the Father have show they to Esmond on the night of his visit ; and often of a night sit in the chaplain 's room , which he inhabit , over his book , his verse , and rubbish , with which the lad occupy himself , he would look up at the window , think he wish it might open and let in the good Father . he have come and pass away like a dream ; but for the sword and book Harry might almost think the Father be an imagination of his mind and for two letter which have come to he , one from abroad , full of advice and affection , another soon after he have be confirm by the Bishop of Hexton , in which Father Holt deplore his fall away . but Harry Esmond feel so confident now of his be in the right , and of his own power as a casuist , that he think he be able to face the Father himself in argument , and possibly convert he . 
 to work upon the faith of her young pupil , Esmond 's kind mistress send to the library of her father the Dean , who have be distinguish in the dispute of the late king 's reign ; and , an old soldier now , have hang up his weapon of controversy . these he take down from his shelf willingly for young Esmond , whom he benefit by his own personal advice and instruction . it do not require much persuasion to induce the boy to worship with his beloved mistress . and the good old nonjure Dean flatter himself with a conversion which , in truth , be owe to a much gentle and fair persuader . 
 under her ladyship 's kind eye   my lord 's be seal in sleep pretty generally , Esmond read many volume of the work of the famous British Divines of the last age , and be familiar with Wake and Sherlock , with Stillingfleet and Patrick . his mistress never tired to listen or to read , to pursue the text with fond comment , to urge those point which her fancy dwelt on most , or her reason deem most important . since the death of her father the Dean , this lady hath admit a certain latitude of theological reading which her orthodox father would never have allow ; his favorite writer appeal more to reason and antiquity than to the passion or imagination of their reader , so that the work of Bishop Taylor , nay , those of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Law , have in reality find more favor with my Lady Castlewood than the severer volume of our great english schoolman . 
 in later life , at the University , Esmond reopen the controversy , and pursue it in a very different manner , when his patron have determine for he that he be to embrace the ecclesiastical life . but though his mistress 's heart be in this calling , his own never be much . after that first fervor of simple devotion , which his beloved Jesuit priest have inspire in he , speculative theology take but little hold upon the young man 's mind . when his early credulity be disturb , and his saint and virgin take out of his worship , to rank little high than the divinity of Olympus , his belief become acquiescence rather than ardor ; and he make his mind up to assume the cassock and band , as another man do to wear a breastplate and jack - boot , or to mount a merchant 's desk , for a livelihood , and from obedience and necessity , rather than from choice . there be score of such man in Mr. Esmond 's time at the university , who be go to the church with no well call than his . 
 when Thomas Tusher be go , a feeling of no small depression and disquiet fall upon young Esmond , of which , though he do not complain , his kind mistress must have divine the cause : for soon after she show not only that she understand the reason of Harry 's melancholy , but could provide a remedy for it . her habit be thus to watch , unobservedly , those to whom duty or affection bind she , and to prevent their design , or to fulfil they , when she have the power . it be this lady 's disposition to think kindness , and devise silent bounty and to scheme benevolence , for those about she . we take such goodness , for the most part , as if it be our due ; the Marys who bring ointment for our foot get but little thank . some of we never feel this devotion at all , or be move by it to gratitude or acknowledgment ; other only recall it year after , when the day be past in which those sweet kindness be spend on we , and we offer back our return for the debt by a poor tardy payment of tear . then forget tone of love recur to we , and kind glance shine out of the past oh so bright and clear ! oh so long after ! because they be out of reach ; as holiday music from withinside a prison wall or sunshine see through the bar ; more prized because unattainable more bright because of the contrast of present darkness and solitude , whence there be no escape . 
 all the notice , then , which Lady Castlewood seem to take of Harry Esmond 's melancholy , upon Tom Tusher 's departure , be , by a gayety unusual to she , to attempt to dispel his gloom . she make his three scholar   herself be the chief one   more cheerful than ever they have be before , and more docile , too , all of they learn and read much more than they have be accustom to do . " for who know , " say the lady , " what may happen , and whether we may be able to keep such a learn tutor long ? " 
 Frank Esmond say he for his part do not want to learn any more , and cousin Harry might shut up his book whenever he like , if he would come out a - fishing ; and little Beatrix declare she would send for Tom Tusher , and he would be glad enough to come to Castlewood , if Harry choose to go away . 
 at last come a messenger from Winchester one day , bearer of a letter , with a great black seal , from the Dean there , to say that his sister be dead , and have leave her fortune of 2,000l. among her six niece , the Dean 's daughter ; and many a time since have Harry Esmond recall the flushed face and eager look wherewith , after this intelligence , his kind lady regard he . she do not pretend to any grief about the deceased relative , from whom she and her family have be many year part . 
 when my lord hear of the news , he also do not make any very long face . " the money will come very handy to furnish the music - room and the cellar , which be get low , and buy your ladyship a coach and a couple of horse that will do indifferent to ride or for the coach . and , beatrix , you shall have a spinnet : and , Frank , you shall have a little horse from Hexton Fair ; and , Harry , you shall have five pound to buy some book , " say my lord , who be generous with his own , and indeed with other folk 's money . " I wish your aunt would die once a year , Rachel ; we could spend your money , and all your sister ' , too . " 
 " I have but one aunt and and I have another use for the money , my lord , " say my lady , turn very red . 
 " another use , my dear ; and what do you know about money ? " cry my lord . " and what the devil be there that I do not   give you which you want ! " 
 " I intend to give this money can not   you fancy how , my lord ? " 
 my lord swear one of his large oath that he do not know in the least what she mean . 
 " I intend it for Harry Esmond to go to college . Cousin Harry , " say my lady , " you must not   stay long in this dull place , but make a name to yourself , and for we too , Harry . " 
 " d n it , Harry be well enough here , " say my lord , for a moment look rather sulky . 
 " be Harry go away ? you do not   mean to say you will go away ? " cry out Frank and Beatrix at one breath . 
 " but he will come back : and this will always be his home , " cry my lady , with blue eye look a celestial kindness : " and his scholar will always love he ; will not   they ? " 
 " by G - d , Rachel , you be a good woman ! " say my lord , seize my lady 's hand , at which she blush very much , and shrink back , put her child before she . " I wish you joy , my kinsman , " he continue , give Harry Esmond a hearty slap on the shoulder . " I will not   balk your luck . go to Cambridge , boy , and when Tusher die you shall have the living here , if you be not well provide by that time . we will furnish the dining - room and buy the horse another year . I will give thee a nag out of the stable : take any one except my hack and the bay geld and the coach - horse ; and God speed thee , my boy ! " 
 " have the sorrel , Harry ; ' tis a good one . Father say ' tis the good in the stable , " say little Frank , clap his hand , and jump up . " let us come and see he in the stable . " and the other , in his delight and eagerness , be for leave the room that instant to arrange about his journey . 
 the Lady Castlewood look after he with sad penetrating glance . " he wish to be go already , my lord , " say she to her husband . 
 the young man hang back abash . " indeed , I would stay for ever , if your ladyship bid I , " he say . 
 " and thou wouldst be a fool for thy pain , kinsman , " say my lord . " Tut , tut , man . go and see the world . sow thy wild oat ; and take the good luck that Fate send thee . I wish I be a boy again , that I might go to college , and taste the Trumpington ale . " 
 " Ours , indeed , be but a dull home , " cry my lady , with a little of sadness and , maybe , of satire , in her voice : " an old glum house , half ruin , and the rest only half furnish ; a woman and two child be but poor company for man that be accustom to well . we be only fit to be your worship 's handmaid , and your pleasure must of necessity lie elsewhere than at home . " 
 " curse I , Rachel , if I know now whether thou art in earnest or not , " say my lord . 
 " in earnest , my lord ! " say she , still cling by one of her child . " be there much subject here for joke ? " and she make he a grand curtsy , and , give a stately look to Harry Esmond , which seem to say , " remember ; you understand I , though he do not , " she leave the room with her child . 
 " since she find out that confound Hexton business , " my lord say " and be hang to they that tell she ! she have not be the same woman . she , who use to be as humble as a milkmaid , be as proud as a princess , " say my lord . " take my counsel , Harry Esmond , and keep clear of woman . since I have have anything to do with the jade , they have give I nothing but disgust . I have a wife at Tangier , with whom , as she could not   speak a word of my language , you would have think I might lead a quiet life . but she try to poison I , because she be jealous of a Jew girl . there be your aunt , for aunt she be aunt Jezebel , a pretty life your father lead with she ! and here be my lady . when I see she on a pillion , rid behind the Dean her father , she look and be such a baby , that a sixpenny doll might have please she . and now you see what she be hand off , highty - tighty , high and mighty , an empress could not   be grander . pass we the tankard , Harry my boy . a mug of beer and a toast at morn , say my host . a toast and a mug of beer at noon , say my dear . D n it , Polly love a mug of ale , too , and lace with brandy , by Jove ! " indeed , I suppose they drink it together ; for my lord be often thick in his speech at mid - day dinner ; and at night at supper , speechless altogether . 
 Harry Esmond 's departure resolve upon , it seem as if the Lady Castlewood , too , rejoice to lose he ; for more than once , when the lad , ashamed perhaps at his own secret eagerness to go away   at any rate stricken with sadness at the idea of leave those from whom he have receive so many proof of love and kindness inestimable , try to express to his mistress his sense of gratitude to she , and his sorrow at quit those who have so sheltered and tend a nameless and houseless orphan , Lady Castlewood cut short his protest of love and his lamentation , and would hear of no grief , but only look forward to Harry 's fame and prospect in life . " our little legacy will keep you for four year like a gentleman . Heaven 's Providence , your own genius , industry , honor , must do the rest for you . Castlewood will always be a home for you ; and these child , whom you have teach and love , will not forget to love you . and , Harry , " say she   and this be the only time when she speak with a tear in her eye , or a tremor in her voice , " it may happen in the course of nature that I shall be call away from they : and their father and and they will need true friend and protector . promise I that you will be true to they as as I think I have be to you and a mother 's fond prayer and blessing go with you . " 
 " so help I God , madam , I will , " say Harry Esmond , fall on his knee , and kiss the hand of his dear mistress . " if you will have I stay now , I will . what matter whether or no I make my way in life , or whether a poor bastard die as unknown as he be now ? ' tis enough that I have your love and kindness surely ; and to make you happy be duty enough for I . " 
 " happy ! " say she ; " but indeed I ought to be , with my child , and " 
 " not happy ! " cry Esmond   for he know what her life be , though he and his mistress never speak a word concern it . " if not happiness , it may be ease . let I stay and work for you let I stay and be your servant . " 
 " indeed , you be well away , " say my lady , laugh , as she put her hand on the boy 's head for a moment . " you shall stay in no such dull place . you shall go to college and distinguish yourself as become your name . that be how you shall please I well ; and and if my child want you , or I want you , you shall come to we ; and I know we may count on you . " 
 " may heaven forsake I if you may not ! " Harry say , get up from his knee . 
 " and my knight long for a dragon this instant that he may fight , " say my lady , laughing ; which speech make Harry Esmond start , and turn red ; for indeed the very thought be in his mind , that he would like that some chance should immediately happen whereby he might show his devotion . and it please he to think that his lady have call he " her knight , " and often and often he recall this to his mind , and pray that he might be her true knight , too . 
 my lady 's bed - chamber window look out over the country , and you could see from it the purple hill beyond Castlewood village , the green common betwixt that and the Hall , and the old bridge which cross over the river . when Harry Esmond go away for Cambridge , little Frank run alongside his horse as far as the bridge , and there Harry stop for a moment , and look back at the house where the good part of his life have be pass . it lie before he with its gray familiar tower , a pinnacle or two shin in the sun , the buttress and terrace wall cast great blue shade on the grass . and Harry remember , all his life after , how he see his mistress at the window look out on he in a white robe , the little Beatrix 's chestnut curl rest at her mother 's side . both wave a farewell to he , and little Frank sob to leave he . yes , he would be his lady 's true knight , he vow in his heart ; he wave she an adieu with his hat . the village people have good - by to say to he too . all know that Master Harry be go to college , and most of they have a kind word and a look of farewell . I do not stop to say what adventure he begin to imagine , or what career to devise for himself before he have ride three mile from home . he have not read Monsieur Galland 's ingenious arabian tale as yet ; but be sure that there be other folk who build castle in the air , and have fine hope , and kick they down too , besides honest Alnaschar . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 I GO to CAMBRIDGE , and DO but little good there . 

 Mr lord , who say he should like to revisit the old haunt of his youth , kindly accompany Harry Esmond in his first journey to Cambridge . their road lie through London , where my Lord Viscount would also have Harry stay a few day to show he the pleasure of the town before he enter upon his university study , and whilst here Harry 's patron conduct the young man to my Lady Dowager 's house at Chelsey near London : the kind lady at Castlewood have specially order that the young gentleman and the old should pay a respectful visit in that quarter . 
 her ladyship the Viscountess Dowager occupy a handsome new house in Chelsey , with a garden behind it , and face the river , always a bright and animate sight with its swarm of sailor , barge , and wherry . Harry laugh at recognize in the parlor the well - remember old piece of Sir Peter Lely , wherein his father 's widow be represent as a virgin huntress , arm with a gilt bow - and - arrow , and encumber only with that small quantity of drapery which it would seem the virgin in King Charles 's day be accustom to wear . 
 my Lady Dowager have leave off this peculiar habit of huntress when she marry . but though she be now considerably past sixty year of age , I believe she think that airy nymph of the picture could still be easily recognize in the venerable personage who give an audience to Harry and his patron . 
 she receive the young man with even more favor than she show to the elder , for she choose to carry on the conversation in French , in which my Lord Castlewood be no great proficient , and express her satisfaction at find that Mr. Esmond could speak fluently in that language . " ' twas the only one fit for polite conversation , " she condescend to say , " and suitable to person of high breeding . " 
 my lord laugh afterwards , as the gentleman go away , at his kinswoman 's behavior . he say he remember the time when she could speak English fast enough , and joke in his jolly way at the loss he have have of such a lovely wife as that . 
 my Lady Viscountess deign to ask his lordship news of his wife and child ; she have hear that Lady Castlewood have have the small - pox ; she hop she be not so very much disfigure as people say . 
 at this remark about his wife 's malady , my Lord Viscount wince and turn red ; but the Dowager , in speak of the disfigurement of the young lady , turn to her look - glass and examine her old wrinkle countenance in it with such a grin of satisfaction , that it be all her guest could do to refrain from laugh in her ancient face . 
 she ask Harry what his profession be to be ; and my lord , say that the lad be to take order , and have the living of Castlewood when old Dr. Tusher vacate it , she do not seem to show any particular anger at the notion of Harry 's become a Church of England clergyman , nay , be rather glad than otherwise , that the youth should be so provide for . she bid Mr. Esmond not to forget to pay she a visit whenever he pass through London , and carry her graciousness so far as to send a purse with twenty guineas for he , to the tavern at which my lord put up   the " Greyhound , " in Charing Cross ; and , along with this welcome gift for her kinsman , she send a little doll for a present to my lord 's little daughter Beatrix , who be grow beyond the age of doll by this time , and be as tall almost as her venerable relative . 
 after see the town , and go to the play , my Lord Castlewood and Esmond ride together to Cambridge , spend two pleasant day upon the journey . those rapid new coach be not establish , as yet , that perform the whole journey between London and the University in a single day ; however , the road be pleasant and short enough to Harry Esmond , and he always gratefully remember that happy holiday which his kind patron give he . 
 Mr. Esmond be enter a pensioner of Trinity College in Cambridge , to which famous college my lord have also in his youth belong . Dr. Montague be master at this time , and receive my Lord Viscount with great politeness : so do Mr. Bridge , who be appoint to be Harry 's tutor . Tom Tusher , who be of Emanuel College , and be by this time a junior soph , come to wait upon my lord , and to take Harry under his protection ; and comfortable room be provide for he in the great court close by the gate , and near to the famous Mr. Newton 's lodging , Harry 's patron take leave of he with many kind word and blessing , and an admonition to he to behave well at the University than my lord himself have ever do . 
 ' tis needless in these memoir to go at any length into the particular of Harry Esmond 's college career . it be like that of a hundred young gentleman of that day . but he have the ill fortune to be old by a couple of year than most of his fellow - student ; and by his previous solitary mode of bring up , the circumstance of his life , and the peculiar thoughtfulness and melancholy that have naturally engender , he be , in a great measure , cut off from the society of comrade who be much young and high - spirited than he . his tutor , who have bow down to the ground , as he walk my lord over the college grass - plat , change his behavior as soon as the nobleman 's back be turn , and be at least Harry think so harsh and overbearing . when the lad use to assemble in their grege in hall , Harry find himself alone in the midst of that little flock of boy ; they raise a great laugh at he when he be set on to read Latin , which he do with the foreign pronunciation teach to he by his old master , the Jesuit , than which he know no other . Mr. Bridge , the tutor , make he the object of clumsy joke , in which he be fond of indulge . the young man 's spirit be chafe , and his vanity mortify ; and he find himself , for some time , as lonely in this place as ever he have be at Castlewood , whither he long to return . his birth be a source of shame to he , and he fancy a hundred slight and sneer from young and old , who , no doubt , have treat he well have he meet they himself more frankly . and as he look back , in calm day , upon this period of his life , which he think so unhappy , he can see that his own pride and vanity cause no small part of the mortification which he attribute to other 's ill will . the world deal good - naturedly with good - natured people , and I never know a sulky misanthropist who quarrel with it , but it be he , and not it , that be in the wrong . Tom Tusher give Harry plenty of good advice on this subject , for Tom have both good sense and good humor ; but Mr. Harry choose to treat his senior with a great deal of superfluous disdain and absurd scorn , and would by no mean part from his darling injury , in which , very likely , no man believe but himself . as for honest Doctor Bridge , the tutor find , after a few trial of wit with the pupil , that the young man be an ugly subject for wit , and that the laugh be often turn against he . this do not make tutor and pupil any well friend ; but have , so far , an advantage for Esmond , that Mr. Bridge be induce to leave he alone ; and so long as he keep his chapel , and do the college exercise require of he , Bridge be content not to see Harry 's glum face in his class , and to leave he to read and sulk for himself in his own chamber . 
 a poem or two in Latin and English , which be pronounce to have some merit , and a latin oration ,   for Mr. Esmond could write that language well than pronounce it ,   get he a little reputation both with the authority of the University and amongst the young man , with whom he begin to pass for more than he be worth . a few victory over their common enemy , Mr. Bridge , make they incline towards he , and look upon he as the champion of their order against the senior . such of the lad as he take into his confidence find he not so gloomy and haughty as his appearance lead they to believe ; and Don Dismallo , as he be call , become presently a person of some little importance in his college , and be , as he believe , set down by the senior there as rather a dangerous character . 
 Don Dismallo be a staunch young Jacobite , like the rest of his family ; give himself many absurd air of loyalty ; use to invite young friend to Burgundy , and give the King 's health on King James 's birthday ; wear black on the day of his abdication ; fast on the anniversary of King William 's coronation ; and perform a thousand absurd antic , of which he smile now to think . 
 these folly cause many remonstrance on Tom Tusher 's part , who be always a friend to the power that be , as Esmond be always in opposition to they . Tom be a Whig , while Esmond be a tory . Tom never miss a lecture , and cap the proctor with the profound of bow . no wonder he sigh over Harry 's insubordinate course , and be angry when the other laugh at he . but that Harry be know to have my Lord Viscount 's protection , Tom no doubt would have break with he altogether . but honest Tom never give up a comrade as long as he be the friend of a great man . this be not out of scheme on Tom 's part , but a natural inclination towards the great . ' twa no hypocrisy in he to flat , but the bent of his mind , which be always perfectly good - humor , obliging , and servile . 
 Harry have very liberal allowance , for his dear mistress of Castlewood not only regularly supply he , but the Dowager of Chelsey make her donation annual , and receive Esmond at her house near London every Christmas ; but , in spite of these benefaction , Esmond be constantly poor ; whilst ' twa a wonder with how small a stipend from his father Tom Tusher contrive to make a good figure . ' tis true that Harry both spend , give , and lend his money very freely , which Thomas never do . I think he be like the famous Duke of Marlborough in this instance , who , get a present of fifty piece , when a young man , from some foolish woman who fall in love with his good look , show the money to Cadogan in a drawer score of year after , where it have lain ever since he have sell his beardless honor to procure it . I do not mean to say that Tom ever let out his good look so profitably , for nature have not endow he with any particular charm of person , and he ever be a pattern of moral behavior , lose no opportunity of give the very good advice to his young comrade ; with which article , to do he justice , he part very freely . not but that he be a merry fellow , too , in his way ; he love a joke , if by good fortune he understand it , and take his share generously of a bottle if another pay for it , and especially if there be a young lord in company to drink it . in these case there be not a hard drinker in the University than Mr. Tusher could be ; and it be edify to behold he , fresh shave and with smug face , sing out " amen ! " at early chapel in the morning . in his reading , poor Harry permit himself to go a - gad after all the Nine Muses , and so very likely have but little favor from any one of they ; whereas Tom Tusher , who have no more turn for poetry than a ploughboy , nevertheless , by a dogged perseverance and obsequiousness in court the divine Calliope , get himself a prize , and some credit in the University , and a fellowship at his college , as a reward for his scholarship . in this time of Mr. Esmond 's life , he get the little reading which he ever could boast of , and pass a good part of his day greedily devour all the book on which he could lay hand . in this desultory way the work of most of the English , French , and italian poet come under his eye , and he have a smattering of the spanish tongue likewise , besides the ancient language , of which , at least of Latin , he be a tolerable master . 
 then , about midway in his University career , he fall to read for the profession to which worldly prudence rather than inclination call he , and be perfectly bewildered in theological controversy . in the course of his reading   which be neither pursue with that seriousness or that devout mind which such a study require   the youth find himself at the end of one month a Papist , and be about to proclaim his faith ; the next month a protestant , with Chillingworth ; and the third a sceptic , with Hobbes and Bayle . whereas honest Tom Tusher never permit his mind to stray out of the prescribed University path , accept the thirty - nine Articles with all his heart , and would have sign and swear to other nine - and - thirty with entire obedience . Harry 's wilfulness in this matter , and disorderly thought and conversation , so shocked and afflict his senior , that there grow up a coldness and estrangement between they , so that they become scarce more than mere acquaintance , from have be intimate friend when they come to college first . politic run high , too , at the University ; and here , also , the young man be at variance . Tom profess himself , albeit a high - churchman , a strong King William's - man ; whereas Harry bring his family Tory politic to college with he , to which he must add a dangerous admiration for Oliver Cromwell , whose side , or King James 's by turn , he often choose to take in the dispute which the young gentleman use to hold in each other 's room , where they debate on the state of the nation , crown and depose king , and toast past and present hero and beauty in flagon of college ale . 
 thus , either from the circumstance of his birth , or the natural melancholy of his disposition , Esmond come to live very much by himself during his stay at the University , have neither ambition enough to distinguish himself in the college career , nor care to mingle with the mere pleasure and boyish frolic of the student , who be , for the most part , two or three year young than he . he fancy that the gentleman of the common - room of his college slight he on account of his birth , and hence keep aloof from their society . it may be that he make the ill will , which he imagine come from they , by his own behavior , which , as he look back on it in after life , he now see be morose and haughty . at any rate , he be as tenderly grateful for kindness as he be susceptible of slight and wrong ; and , lonely as he be generally , yet have one or two very warm friendship for his companion of those day . 
 one of these be a queer gentleman that reside in the University , though he be no member of it , and be the professor of a science scarce recognize in the common course of college education . this be a french refugee - officer , who have be drive out of his native country at the time of the protestant persecution there , and who come to Cambridge , where he teach the science of the small - sword , and set up a saloon - of - arm . though he declare himself a protestant , ' twa say Mr. Moreau be a Jesuit in disguise ; indeed , he bring very strong recommendation to the Tory party , which be pretty strong in that University , and very likely be one of the many agent whom King James have in this country . esmond find this gentleman 's conversation very much more agreeable and to his taste than the talk of the college divine in the common - room ; he never weary of Moreau 's story of the war of Turenne and Conde , in which he have bear a part ; and be familiar with the french tongue from his youth , and in a place where but few speak it , his company become very agreeable to the brave old professor of arm , whose favorite pupil he be , and who make Mr. Esmond a very tolerable proficient in the noble science of escrime . 
 at the next term Esmond be to take his degree of Bachelor of Arts , and afterwards , in proper season , to assume the cassock and band which his fond mistress would have he wear . Tom Tusher himself be a parson and a fellow of his college by this time ; and Harry feel that he would very gladly cede his right to the living of Castlewood to Tom , and that his own calling be in no way to the pulpit . but as he be bind , before all thing in the world , to his dear mistress at home , and know that a refusal on his part would grieve she , he determine to give she no hint of his unwillingness to the clerical office : and it be in this unsatisfactory mood of mind that he go to spend the last vacation he should have at Castlewood before he take order . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 I come home for a HOLIDAY to castlewood , and FIND a skeleton in the HOUSE . 
 at his third long vacation , Esmond come as usual to Castlewood , always feel an eager thrill of pleasure when he find himself once more in the house where he have pass so many year , and behold the kind familiar eye of his mistress look upon he . she and her child   out of whose company she scarce ever see he   come to greet he . Miss Beatrix be grow so tall that Harry do not quite know whether he might kiss she or no ; and she blush and hold back when he offer that salutation , though she take it , and even court it , when they be alone . the young lord be shoot up to be like his gallant father in look , though with his mother 's kind eye : the lady of Castlewood herself seem grown , too , since Harry see she in her look more stately , in her person full , in her face still as ever most tender and friendly , a great air of command and decision than have appear in that guileless sweet countenance which Harry remember so gratefully . the tone of her voice be so much deep and sad when she speak and welcome he , that it quite startled Esmond , who look up at her surprised as she speak , when she withdraw her eye from he ; nor do she ever look at he afterwards when his own eye be gaze upon she . a something hint at grief and secret , and fill his mind with alarm undefinable , seem to speak with that low thrilling voice of her , and look out of those clear sad eye . her greeting to Esmond be so cold that it almost pain the lad ,   who would have like to fall on his knee , and kiss the skirt of her robe , so fond and ardent be his respect and regard for she ,   and he falter in answer the question which she , hesitate on her side , begin to put to he . be he happy at Cambridge ? do he study too hard ? she hop not . he have grow very tall , and look very well . 
 " he have get a moustache ! " cry out Master Esmond . 
 " why do he not wear a peruke like my Lord Mohun ? " ask Miss Beatrix . " my lord say that nobody wear their own hair . " 
 " I believe you will have to occupy your old chamber , " say my lady . " I hope the housekeeper have get it ready . " 
 " why , mamma , you have be there ten time these three day yourself ! " exclaim Frank . 
 " and she cut some flower which you plant in my garden do you remember , ever so many year ago ? when I be quite a little girl , " cry out Miss Beatrix , on tiptoe . " and mamma put they in your window . " 
 " I remember when you grow well after you be ill that you use to like rose , " say the lady , blush like one of they . they all conduct Harry Esmond to his chamber ; the child run before , Harry walk by his mistress hand - in - hand . 
 the old room have be ornament and beautify not a little to receive he . the flower be in the window in a china vase ; and there be a fine new counterpane on the bed , which chatterbox Beatrix say mamma have make too . a fire be crackle on the hearth , although it be June . my lady think the room want warming ; everything be do to make he happy and welcome : " and you be not to be a page any long , but a gentleman and kinsman , and to walk with papa and mamma , " say the child . and as soon as his dear mistress and child have leave he to himself , it be with a heart overflow with love and gratefulness that he fling himself down on his knee by the side of the little bed , and ask a blessing upon those who be so kind to he . 
 the child , who be always house tell - tale , soon make he acquaint with the little history of the house and family . Papa have be to London twice . Papa often go away now . Papa have take beatrix to Westlands , where she be tall than Sir George Harper 's second daughter , though she be two year old . Papa have take Beatrix and Frank both to Bellminster , where Frank have get the well of Lord Bellminster 's son in a boxing - match my lord , laughing , tell Harry afterwards . many gentleman come to stop with papa , and papa have get a new game from London , a french game , call a billiard that the french king play it very well : and the Dowager Lady Castlewood have send Miss Beatrix a present ; and papa have get a new chaise , with two little horse , which he drive himself , beside the coach , which mamma go in ; and Dr. Tusher be a cross old plague , and they do not like to learn from he at all ; and papa do not care about they learn , and laugh when they be at their book , but mamma like they to learn , and teach they ; and " I do not   think papa be fond of mamma , " say Miss Beatrix , with her great eye . she have come quite close up to Harry Esmond by the time this prattle take place , and be on his knee , and have examine all the point of his dress , and all the good or bad feature of his homely face . 
 " you should not   say that papa be not fond of mamma , " say the boy , at this confession . " Mamma never say so ; and mamma forbid you to say it , Miss Beatrix . " 
 ' twas this , no doubt , that account for the sadness in Lady Castlewood 's eye , and the plaintive vibration of her voice . who do not know of eye , light by love once , where the flame shin no more ? of lamp extinguish , once properly trim and tend ? every man have such in his house . such memento make our splendidest chamber look blank and sad ; such face see in a day cast a gloom upon our sunshine . so oath mutually swear , and invocation of heaven , and priestly ceremony , and fond belief , and love , so fond and faithful that it never doubt but that it should live for ever , be all of no avail towards make love eternal : it die , in spite of the bann and the priest ; and I have often think there should be a visitation of the sick for it , and a funeral service , and an extreme unction , and an abi in pace . it have its course , like all mortal thing its beginning , progress , and decay . it bud and it bloom out into sunshine , and it wither and end . Strephon and Chloe languish apart ; join in a rapture : and presently you hear that Chloe be cry , and Strephon have break his crook across her back . can you mend it so as to show no mark of rupture ? not all the priest of Hymen , not all the incantation to the god , can make it whole ! 
 wake up from dream , book , and vision of college honor , in which for two year , Harry Esmond have be immerse , he find himself , instantly , on his return home , in the midst of this actual tragedy of life , which absorb and interest he more than all his tutor have teach he . the person whom he love well in the world , and to whom he owe most , be live unhappily together . the gentle and kind of woman be suffer ill usage and shed tear in secret : the man who make she wretche by neglect , if not by violence , be Harry 's benefactor and patron . in house where , in place of that sacred , inmost flame of love , there be discord at the centre , the whole household become hypocritical , and each lie to his neighbor . the husband   or it may be the wife   lie when the visitor come in , and wear a grin of reconciliation or politeness before he . the wife lie   indeed , her business be to do that , and to smile , however much she be beat , swallow her tear , and lie to her lord and master ; lie in bid little Jackey respect dear papa ; lie in assure grandpapa that she be perfectly happy . the servant lie , wear grave face behind their master 's chair , and pretend to be unconscious of the fighting ; and so , from morning till bedtime , life be pass in falsehood . and wiseacre call this a proper regard of moral , and point out Baucis and Philemon as example of a good life . 
 if my lady do not speak of her grief to Harry Esmond , my lord be by no mean reserve when in his cup , and speak his mind very freely , bid Harry in his coarse way , and with his blunt language , beware of all woman as cheat , jade , jilt , and use other unmistakable monosyllable in speak of they . indeed , ' twa the fashion of the day , as I must own ; and there be not a writer of my time of any note , with the exception of poor Dick Steele , that do not speak of a woman as of a slave , and scorn and use she as such . Mr. Pope , Mr. Congreve , Mr. Addison , Mr. Gay , every one of them , sing in this key , each accord to his nature and politeness , and loud and fouler than all in abuse be Dr. Swift , who speak of they as he treat they , bad of all . 
 much of the quarrel and hatred which arise between married people come in my mind from the husband 's rage and revolt at discover that his slave and bedfellow , who be to minister to all his wish , and be church - swear to honor and obey he be his superior ; and that he , and not she , ought to be the subordinate of the twain ; and in these controversy , I think , lie the cause of my lord 's anger against his lady . when he leave she , she begin to think for herself , and her thought be not in his favor . after the illumination , when the love - lamp be put out that anon we speak of , and by the common daylight we look at the picture , what a daub it look ! what a clumsy effigy ! how many man and wife come to this knowledge , think you ? and if it be painful to a woman to find herself mat for life to a boor , and order to love and honor a dullard ; it be bad still for the man himself perhaps , whenever in his dim comprehension the idea dawn that his slave and drudge yonder be , in truth , his superior ; that the woman who do his bidding , and submit to his humor , should be his lord ; that she can think a thousand thing beyond the power of his muddled brain ; and that in yonder head , on the pillow opposite to he , lie a thousand feeling , mystery of thought , latent scorn and rebellion , whereof he only dimly perceive the existence as they look out furtively from her eye : treasure of love doom to perish without a hand to gather they ; sweet fancy and image of beauty that would grow and unfold themselves into flower ; bright wit that would shine like diamond could it be bring into the sun : and the tyrant in possession crush the outbreak of all these , drive they back like slave into the dungeon and darkness , and chafe without that his prisoner be rebellious , and his sworn subject undutiful and refractory . so the lamp be out in Castlewood Hall , and the lord and lady there see each other as they be . with her illness and alter beauty my lord 's fire for his wife disappear ; with his selfishness and faithlessness her foolish fiction of love and reverence be rent away . love ! who be to love what be base and unlovely ? respect ! who be to respect what be gross and sensual ? not all the marriage oath swear before all the parson , cardinal , minister , muftis , and rabbin in the world , can bind to that monstrous allegiance . this couple be live apart then ; the woman happy to be allow to love and tend her child   who be never of her own good - will away from she , and thankful to have save such treasure as these out of the wreck in which the well part of her heart go down . 
 these young one have have no instructor save their mother , and Doctor Tusher for their theology occasionally , and have make more progress than might have be expect under a tutor so indulgent and fond as Lady Castlewood . beatrix could sing and dance like a nymph . her voice be her father 's delight after dinner . she rule over the house with little imperial way , which her parent coax and laugh at . she have long learn the value of her bright eye , and try experiment in coquetry , in corpore vili , upon rustic and country squire , until she should prepare to conquer the world and the fashion . she put on a new ribbon to welcome Harry Esmond , make eye at he , and direct her young smile at he , not a little to the amusement of the young man , and the joy of her father , who laugh his great laugh , and encourage she in her thousand antic . Lady Castlewood watch the child gravely and sadly : the little one be pert in her reply to her mother , yet eager in her protestation of love and promise of amendment ; and as ready to cry   after a little quarrel bring on by her own giddiness   until she have win back her mamma 's favor , as she be to risk the kind lady 's displeasure by fresh outbreak of restless vanity . from her mother 's sad look she flee to her father 's chair and boozy laughter . she already set the one against the other : and the little rogue delight in the mischief which she know how to make so early . 
 the young heir of Castlewood be spoil by father and mother both . he take their caress as man do , and as if they be his right . he have his hawk and his spaniel dog , his little horse and his beagle . he have learn to ride , and to drink , and to shoot fly : and he have a small court , the son of the huntsman and woodman , as become the heir - apparent , take after the example of my lord his father . if he have a headache , his mother be as much frightened as if the plague be in the house : my lord laugh and jeered in his abrupt way   indeed , ' twa on the day after New Year 's day , and an excess of mince - pie   and say with some of his usual oath " D n it , Harry Esmond you see how my lady take on about Frank 's megrim . she use to be sorry about I , my boy   pass the tankard , Harry , and to be frightened if I have a headache once . she do not   care about my head now . they be like that woman be all the same , Harry , all jilt in their heart . Stick to college stick to punch and buttery ale : and never see a woman that be handsomer than an old cinder - face bed - maker . that be my counsel . " 
 it be my lord 's custom to fle out many joke of this nature , in presence of his wife and child , at meal clumsy sarcasm which my lady turn many a time , or which , sometimes , she affect not to hear , or which now and again would hit their mark and make the poor victim wince   as you could see by her flush face and eye fill with tear , or which again work she up to anger and retort , when , in answer to one of these heavy bolt , she would flash back with a quivering reply . the pair be not happy ; nor indeed be it happy to be with they . alas that youthful love and truth should end in bitterness and bankruptcy ! to see a young couple love each other be no wonder ; but to see an old couple love each other be the good sight of all . Harry Esmond become the confidant of one and the other that be , my lord tell the lad all his grief and wrong   which be indeed of Lord Castlewood 's own making , and Harry divine my lady 's ; his affection lead he easily to penetrate the hypocrisy under which Lady Castlewood generally choose to go disguised , and see her heart ache whilst her face wear a smile . ' tis a hard task for woman in life , that mask which the world bid they wear . but there be no great crime than for a woman who be ill used and unhappy to show that she be so . the world be quite relentless about bid she to keep a cheerful face ; and our woman , like the Malabar wife , be force to go smile and paint to sacrifice themselves with their husband ; their relation be the most eager to push they on to their duty , and , under their shout and applause , to smother and hush their cry of pain . 
 so , into the sad secret of his patron 's household , Harry Esmond become initiate , he scarce know how . it have pass under his eye two year before , when he could not understand it ; but read , and think , and experience of man , have oldene he ; and one of the deep sorrow of a life which have never , in truth , be very happy , come upon he now , when he be compel to understand and pity a grief which he stand quite powerless to relieve . 
 it hath be say my lord would never take the oath of allegiance , nor his seat as a peer of the kingdom of Ireland , where , indeed , he have but a nominal estate ; and refuse an english peerage which King William 's government offer he as a bribe to secure his loyalty . 
 he might have accept this , and would doubtless , but for the earnest remonstrance of his wife , who rule her husband 's opinion well than she could govern his conduct , and who be a simple - hearted woman , with but one rule of faith and right , never think of swerve from her fidelity to the exiled family , or of recognize any other sovereign but King James ; and though she acquiesce in the doctrine of obedience to the reign power , no temptation , she think , could induce she to acknowledge the Prince of Orange as rightful monarch , nor to let she lord so acknowledge he . so my Lord Castlewood remain a nonjuror all his life nearly , though his self - denial cause he many a pang , and leave he sulky and out of humor . 
 the year after the Revolution , and all through King William 's life , ' tis know there be constant intrigue for the restoration of the exile family ; but if my Lord Castlewood take any share of these , as be probable , ' twa only for a short time , and when Harry Esmond be too young to be introduce into such important secret . 
 but in the year 1695 , when that conspiracy of Sir John Fenwick , Colonel Lowick , and other , be set on foot , for waylay King William as he come from Hampton Court to London , and a secret plot be form , in which a vast number of the nobility and people of honor be engage , Father Holt appear at Castlewood , and bring a young friend with he , a gentleman whom ' twa easy to see that both my lord and the Father treat with uncommon deference . Harry Esmond see this gentleman , and know and recognize he in after life , as shall be show in its place ; and he have little doubt now that my Lord Viscount be implicate somewhat in the transaction which always keep Father Holt employ and travel hither and thither under a dozen of different name and disguise . the Father 's companion go by the name of Captain James ; and it be under a very different name and appearance that Harry Esmond afterwards see he . 
 it be the next year that the Fenwick conspiracy blow up , which be a matter of public history now , and which end in the execution of Sir John and many more , who suffer manfully for their treason , and who be attend to Tyburn by my lady 's father Dean Armstrong , Mr. Collier , and other stout nonjure clergyman , who absolve they at the gallow - foot . 
 ' tis know that when Sir John be apprehend , discovery be make of a great number of name of gentleman engage in the conspiracy ; when , with a noble wisdom and clemency , the Prince burn the list of conspirator furnish to he , and say he would know no more . now it be after this that Lord Castlewood swear his great oath , that he would never , so help he heaven , be engage in any transaction against that brave and merciful man ; and so he tell Holt when the indefatigable priest visit he , and would have have he engage in a farth conspiracy . after this my lord ever speak of King William as he be as one of the wise , the brave , and the great of man . my Lady Esmond   for her part   say she could never pardon the king , first , for oust his father - in - law from his throne , and secondly , for not be constant to his wife , the Princess Mary . indeed , I think if Nero be to rise again , and be king of England , and a good family man , the lady would pardon he . my lord laugh at his wife 's objection the standard of virtue do not fit he much . 
 the last conference which Mr. Holt have with his lordship take place when Harry be come home for his first vacation from college   Harry see his old tutor but for a half - hour , and exchange no private word with he , and their talk , whatever it might be , leave my Lord Viscount very much disturb in mind so much so , that his wife , and his young kinsman , Henry Esmond , could not but observe his disquiet . after Holt be go , my lord rebuff Esmond , and again treat he with the great deference ; he shun his wife 's question and company , and look at his child with such a face of gloom and anxiety , muttering , " poor child poor child ! " in a way that could not but fill those whose life it be to watch he and obey he with great alarm . for which gloom , each person interested in the Lord Castlewood , frame in his or her own mind an interpretation . 
 my lady , with a laugh of cruel bitterness say , " I suppose the person at Hexton have be ill , or have scold he "   for my lord 's infatuation about Mrs. Marwood be know only too well . Young Esmond fear for his money affair , into the condition of which he have be initiate ; and that the expense , always great than his revenue , have cause Lord Castlewood disquiet . 
 one of the cause why my Lord Viscount have take young Esmond into his special favor be a trivial one , that hath not before be mention , though it be a very lucky accident in Henry Esmond 's life . a very few month after my lord 's come to Castlewood , in the winter time the little boy , be a child in a petticoat , trot about it happen that little Frank be with his father after dinner , who fall asleep over his wine , heedless of the child , who crawl to the fire ; and , as good fortune would have it , Esmond be send by his mistress for the boy just as the poor little scream urchin 's coat be set on fire by a log ; when Esmond , rush forward , tear the dress off the infant , so that his own hand be burn more than the child 's , who be frighten rather than hurt by this accident . but certainly ' twa providential that a resolute person should have come in at that instant , or the child have be burn to death probably , my lord sleep very heavily after drinking , and not wake so cool as a man should who have a danger to face . 
 ever after this the father , loud in his expression of remorse and humility for be a tipsy good - for - nothing , and of admiration for Harry Esmond , whom his lordship would style a hero for do a very trifling service , have the tender regard for his son 's preserver , and Harry become quite as one of the family . his burn be tend with the great care by his kind mistress , who say that heaven have send he to be the guardian of her child , and that she would love he all her life . 
 and it be after this , and from the very great love and tenderness which have grow up in this little household , rather than from the exhortation of Dean Armstrong   though these have no small weight with he , that Harry come to be quite of the religion of his house and his dear mistress , of which he have ever since be a professing member . as for Dr. Tusher 's boast that he be the cause of this conversion even in these young day Mr. Esmond have such a contempt for the Doctor , that have Tusher bade he believe anything   which he do not never meddle at all , Harry would that instant have question the truth on't . 
 my lady seldom drink wine ; but on certain day of the year , such as birthday   poor Harry have never a one   and anniversary , she take a little ; and this day , the 29th December , be one . at the end , then , of this year , ' 96 , it might have be a fortnight after Mr. Holt 's last visit , Lord Castlewood be still very gloomy in mind , and sit at table my lady bid a servant bring she a glass of wine , and look at her husband with one of her sweet smile , say 
 " my lord , will you not fill a bumper too , and let I call a toast ? " 
 " what be it , Rachel ? " say he , hold out his empty glass to be fill . 
 " ' tis the 29th of December , " say my lady , with her fond look of gratitude : " and my toast be , ' Harry and God bless he , who save my boy 's life ! ' " 
 my lord look at Harry hard , and drink the glass , but clap it down on the table in a moment , and , with a sort of groan , rise up , and go out of the room . what be the matter ? we all know that some great grief be over he . 
 whether my lord 's prudence have make he rich , or legacy have fall to he , which enable he to support a great establishment than that frugal one which have be too much for his small mean , Harry Esmond know not ; but the house of Castlewood be now on a scale much more costly than it have be during the first year of his lordship 's come to the title . there be more horse in the stable and more servant in the hall , and many more guest come and go now than formerly , when it be find difficult enough by the strict economy to keep the house as befit one of his lordship 's rank , and the estate out of debt . and it do not require very much penetration to find that many of the new acquaintance at Castlewood be not agreeable to the lady there : not that she ever treat they or any mortal with anything but courtesy ; but they be person who could not be welcome to she ; and whose society a lady so refined and reserved could scarce desire for her child . there come fuddle squire from the country round , who bawl their song under her window and drink themselves tipsy with my lord 's punch and ale : there come officer from Hexton , in whose company our little lord be make to hear talk and to drink , and swear too , in a way that make the delicate lady tremble for her son . esmond try to console she by say what he know of his College experience ; that with this sort of company and conversation a man must fall in soon or later in his course through the world : and it matter very little whether he hear it at twelve year old or twenty the youth who quit mother 's apron - string the late be not uncommonly the wild rake . but it be about her daughter that Lady Castlewood be the most anxious , and the danger which she think menace the little beatrix from the indulgence which her father give she ,   it must be own that my lord , since these unhappy domestic difference especially , be at once violent in his language to the child when angry , as he be too familiar , not to say coarse , when he be in a good humor ,   and from the company into which the careless lord bring the child . 
 not very far off from Castlewood be Sark Castle , where the Marchioness of Sark live , who be know to have be a mistress of the late King Charles and to this house , whither indeed a great part of the country gentry go , my lord insist upon go , not only himself , but on take his little daughter and son , to play with the child there . the child be nothing loth , for the house be splendid , and the welcome kind enough . but my lady , justly no doubt , think that the child of such a mother as that note Lady Sark have be , could be no good company for her two ; and speak her mind to her lord . his own language when he be thwart be not indeed of the gentle : to be brief , there be a family dispute on this , as there have be on many other point and the lady be not only force to give in , for the other 's will be law nor could she , on account of their tender age , tell her child what be the nature of her objection to their visit of pleasure , or indeed mention to they any objection at all but she have the additional secret mortification to find they return delighted with their new friend , load with present from they , and eager to be allow to go back to a place of such delight as Sark Castle . every year she think the company there would be more dangerous to her daughter , as from a child beatrix grow to a woman , and her daily increase beauty , and many fault of character too , expand . 
 it be Harry Esmond 's lot to see one of the visit which the old Lady of Sark pay to the Lady of Castlewood Hall : whither she come in state with six chestnut horse and blue ribbon , a page on each carriage step , a gentleman of the horse , and armed servant rid before and behind she . and , but that it be unpleasant to see Lady Castlewood 's face , it be amusing to watch the behavior of the two enemy : the frigid patience of the young lady , and the unconquerable good - humor of the elder who would see no offence whatever her rival intend , and who never cease to smile and to laugh , and to coax the child , and to pay compliment to every man , woman , child , nay dog , or chair and table , in Castlewood , so bent be she upon admire everything there . she laud the child , and wish as indeed she well might that her own family have be bring up as well as those cherub . she have never see such a complexion as dear Beatrix 's though to be sure she have a right to it from father and mother Lady Castlewood 's be indeed a wonder of freshness , and Lady Sark sigh to think she have not be bear a fair woman ; and remark Harry Esmond , with a fascinating superannuated smile , she compliment he on his wit , which she say she could see from his eye and forehead ; and vow that she would never have HIM at Sark until her daughter be out of the way . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 MY LORD MOHUN come among US for no good . 

 there have ride along with this old Princess 's cavalcade , two gentleman : her son , my Lord Firebrace , and his friend , my Lord Mohun , who both be greet with a great deal of cordiality by the hospitable Lord of Castlewood . my Lord Firebrace be but a feeble - minded and weak - limbed young nobleman , small in stature and limit in understanding to judge from the talk young Esmond have with he ; but the other be a person of a handsome presence , with the bel air , and a bright daring warlike aspect , which , accord to the chronicle of those day , have already achieve for he the conquest of several beauty and toast . he have fight and conquer in France , as well as in Flanders ; he have serve a couple of campaign with the Prince of Baden on the Danube , and witness the rescue of Vienna from the Turk . and he speak of his military exploit pleasantly , and with the manly freedom of a soldier , so as to delight all his hearer at Castlewood , who be little accustomed to meet a companion so agreeable . 
 on the first day this noble company come , my lord would not hear of their departure before dinner , and carry away the gentleman to amuse they , whilst his wife be leave to do the honor of her house to the old Marchioness and her daughter within . they look at the stable where my Lord Mohun praise the horse , though there be but a poor show there : they walk over the old house and garden , and fight the siege of Oliver 's time over again : they play a game of racket in the old court , where my Lord Castlewood beat my Lord Mohun , who say he love ball of all thing , and would quickly come back to Castlewood for his revenge . after dinner they play bowl and drink punch in the green alley ; and when they part they be swear friend , my Lord Castlewood kiss the other lord before he mount on horseback , and pronounce he the good companion he have meet for many a long day . all night long , over his tobacco - pipe , Castlewood do not cease to talk to Harry Esmond in praise of his new friend , and in fact do not leave off speak of he until his lordship be so tipsy that he could not speak plainly any more . 
 at breakfast next day it be the same talk renew ; and when my lady say there be something free in the Lord Mohun 's look and manner of speech which cause she to mistrust he , her lord burst out with one of his laugh and oath ; say that he never like man , woman , or beast , but what she be sure to be jealous of it ; that Mohun be the prettiest fellow in England ; that he hop to see more of he whilst in the country ; and that he would let Mohun know what my Lady Prude say of he . 
 " indeed , " Lady Castlewood say , " I like his conversation well enough . ' tis more amusing than that of most people I know . I think it , I own , too free ; not from what he say , as rather from what he imply . " 
 " Psha ! your ladyship do not know the world , " say her husband ; " and you have always be as squeamish as when you be a miss of fifteen . " 
 " you find no fault when I be a miss at fifteen . " 
 " Begad , madam , you be grow too old for a pinafore now ; and I hold that ' tis for I to judge what company my wife shall see , " say my lord , slap the table . 
 " indeed , Francis , I never think otherwise , " answer my lady , rise and drop he a curtsy , in which stately action , if there be obedience , there be defiance too ; and in which a bystander , deeply interested in the happiness of that pair as Harry Esmond be , might see how hopelessly separate they be ; what a great gulf of difference and discord have run between they . 
 " by G - d ! Mohun be the good fellow in England ; and I will invite he here , just to plague that woman . do you ever see such a frigid insolence as it be , Harry ? that be the way she treat I , " he break out , storm , and his face grow red as he clench his fist and go on . " I be nobody in my own house . I be to be the humble servant of that parson 's daughter . by Jove ! I would rather she should fling the dish at my head than sneer at I as she do . she put I to shame before the child with her d d air ; and , I will swear , tell Frank and Beaty that papa be a reprobate , and that they ought to despise I . " 
 " indeed and indeed , sir , I never hear she say a word but of respect regard you , " Harry Esmond interpose . 
 " no , curse it ! I wish she would speak . but she never do . she scorn I , and hold her tongue . she keep off from I , as if I be a pestilence . by George ! she be fond enough of her pestilence once . and when I come a - courting , you would see miss blush blush red , by George ! for joy . why , what do you think she say to I , Harry ? she say herself , when I joke with she about her d d smile red cheek : " tis as they do at St. James 's ; I put up my red flag when my king come . ' I be the king , you see , she mean . but now , sir , look at she ! I believe she would be glad if I be dead ; and dead I have   be to she these five year ever since you all of you have the small - pox : and she never forgave I for go away . " 
 " indeed , my lord , though ' twa hard to forgive , I think my mistress forgave it , " Harry Esmond say ; " and remember how eagerly she watch your lordship 's return , and how sadly she turn away when she see your cold look . " 
 " Damme ! " cry out my lord ; " would you have have I wait and catch the small - pox ? where the deuce have be the good of that ? I will bear danger with any man but not useless danger no , no . thank you for nothing . and you nod your head , and I know very well , Parson Harry , what you mean . there be the the other affair to make she angry . but be a woman never to forgive a husband who go a - tripping ? do you take I for a saint ? " 
 " indeed , sir , I do not , " say Harry , with a smile . 
 " since that time my wife 's as cold as the statue at Charing Cross . I tell thee she have no forgiveness in she , Henry . her coldness blight my whole life , and send I to the punch - bowl , or drive about the country . my child be not mine , but her , when we be together . ' tis only when she be out of sight with her abominable cold glance , that run through I , that they will come to I , and that I dare to give they so much as a kiss ; and that be why I take them and love them in other people 's house , Harry . I be kill by the very virtue of that proud woman . Virtue ! give I the virtue that can forgive ; give I the virtue that think not of preserve itself , but of make other folk happy . Damme , what matter a scar or two if ' tis get in help a friend in ill fortune ? " 
 and my lord again slap the table , and take a great draught from the tankard . Harry Esmond admire as he listen to he , and think how the poor preacher of this self - sacrifice have flee from the small - pox , which the lady have bear so cheerfully , and which have be the cause of so much disunion in the life of all in this house . " how well man preach , " think the young man , " and each be the example in his own sermon . how each have a story in a dispute , and a true one , too , and both be right or wrong as you will ! " Harry 's heart be pain within he , to watch the struggle and pang that tear the breast of this kind , manly friend and protector . 
 " indeed , sir , " say he , " I wish to God that my mistress could hear you speak as I have hear you ; she would know much that would make her life the happy , could she hear it . " but my lord fling away with one of his oath , and a jeer ; he say that Parson Harry be a good fellow ; but that as for woman , all woman be alike all jade and heartless . so a man dash a fine vase down , and despise it for be break . it may be worthless true : but who have the keeping of it , and who shatter it ? 
 Harry , who would have give his life to make his benefactress and her husband happy , bethink he , now that he see what my lord 's state of mind be , and that he really have a great deal of that love leave in his heart , and ready for his wife 's acceptance if she would take it , whether he could not be a mean of reconciliation between these two person , whom he revere the most in the world . and he cast about how he should break a part of his mind to his mistress , and warn she that in his , Harry 's opinion , at least , her husband be still her admirer , and even her lover . 
 but he find the subject a very difficult one to handle , when he venture to remonstrate , which he do in the very grave tone ,   for long confidence and reiterate proof of devotion and loyalty have give he a sort of authority in the house , which he resume as soon as ever he return to it ,   and with a speech that should have some effect , as , indeed , it be utter with the speaker 's own heart , he venture most gently to hint to his adore mistress that she be do her husband harm by her ill opinion of he , and that the happiness of all the family depend upon set she right . 
 she , who be ordinarily calm and most gentle , and full of smile and soft attention , flush up when young Esmond so speak to she , and rise from her chair , look at he with a haughtiness and indignation that he have never before know she to display . she be quite an altered be for that moment ; and look an angry princess insult by a vassal . 
 " have you ever hear I utter a word in my lord 's disparagement ? " she ask hastily , hiss out her word , and stamp her foot . 
 " indeed , no , " Esmond say , look down . 
 " be you come to I as his ambassador you ? " she continue . 
 " I would soon see peace between you than anything else in the world , " Harry answer , " and would go of any embassy that have that end . " 
 " so you be my lord 's go - between ? " she go on , not regard this speech . " you be send to bid I back into slavery again , and inform I that my lord 's favor be graciously restore to his handmaid ? he be weary of Covent Garden , be he , that he come home and would have the fat calf kill ? " 
 " there be good authority for it , surely , " say Esmond . 
 " for a son , yes ; but my lord be not my son . it be he who cast I away from he . it be he who break our happiness down , and he bid I to repair it . it be he who show himself to I at last , as he be , not as I have think he . it be he who come before my child stupid and senseless with wine who leave our company for that of frequenter of tavern and bagnio who go from his home to the City yonder and his friend there , and when he be tired of they return hither , and expect that I shall kneel and welcome he . and he send you as his chamberlain ! what a proud embassy ! Monsieur , I make you my compliment of the new place . " 
 " it would be a proud embassy , and a happy embassy too , could I bring you and my lord together , " Esmond reply . 
 " I presume you have fulfil your mission now , sir . ' twas a pretty one for you to undertake . I do not   know whether ' tis your Cambridge philosophy , or time , that have alter your way of thinking , " Lady Castlewood continue , still in a sarcastic tone . " perhaps you too have learn to love drink , and to hiccup over your wine or punch ; which be your worship 's favorite liquor ? perhaps you too put up at the ' rose ' on your way to London , and have your acquaintance in Covent Garden . my service to you , sir , to principal and ambassador , to master and and lackey . " 
 " Great heavens ! madam , " cry Harry . " what have I do that thus , for a second time , you insult I ? do you wish I to blush for what I use to be proud of , that I live on your bounty ? next to do you a service   which my life would pay for , you know that to receive one from you be my high pleasure . what wrong have I do you that you should wound I so , cruel woman ? " 
 " what wrong ? " she say , look at Esmond with wild eye . " well , none none that you know of , Harry , or could help . why do you bring back the small - pox , " she add , after a pause , " from Castlewood village ? you could not help it , could you ? which of we know whither fate lead we ? but we be all happy , Henry , till then . " and Harry go away from this colloquy , think still that the estrangement between his patron and his beloved mistress be remediable , and that each have at heart a strong attachment to the other . 
 the intimacy between the Lords Mohun and Castlewood appear to increase as long as the former remain in the country ; and my Lord of Castlewood especially seem never to be happy out of his new comrade 's sight . they sport together , they drank , they play bowl and tennis : my Lord Castlewood would go for three day to Sark , and bring back my Lord Mohun to Castlewood where indeed his lordship make himself very welcome to all person , have a joke or a new game at romp for the child , all the talk of the town for my lord , and music and gallantry and plenty of the beau langage for my lady , and for Harry Esmond , who be never tired of hear his story of his campaign and his life at Vienna , Venice , Paris , and the famous city of Europe which he have visit both in peace and war . and he sing at my lady 's harpsichord , and play card or backgammon , or his new game of billiard with my lord   of whom he invariably get the well   always have a consummate good - humor , and bear himself with a certain manly grace , that might exhibit somewhat of the camp and Alsatia perhaps , but that have its charm , and stamp he a gentleman : and his manner to Lady Castlewood be so devoted and respectful , that she soon recover from the first feeling of dislike which she have conceive against he nay , before long , begin to be interested in his spiritual welfare , and hopeful of his conversion , lend he book of piety , which he promise dutifully to study . with she my lord talk of reform , of settle into quiet life , quit the court and town , and buy some land in the neighborhood though it must be own that , when the two lord be together over their Burgundy after dinner , their talk be very different , and there be very little question of conversion on my Lord Mohun 's part . when they get to their second bottle , Harry Esmond use commonly to leave these two noble toper , who , though they talk freely enough , heaven know , in his presence   Good Lord , what a set of story , of Alsatia and Spring Garden , of the tavern and gaming - house , of the lady of the court , and madame of the theatre , he can recall out of their godly conversation !   although , I say , they talk before Esmond freely , yet they seem pleased when he go away , and then they have another bottle , and then they fall to card , and then my Lord Mohun come to her ladyship 's drawing - room ; leave his boon companion to sleep off his wine . 
 ' twas a point of honor with the fine gentleman of those day to lose or win magnificently at their horse - match , or game of card and dice and you could never tell , from the demeanor of these two lord afterwards , which have be successful and which the loser at their game . and when my lady hint to my lord that he play more than she like , he dismiss she with a " pish , " and swear that nothing be more equal than play betwixt gentleman , if they do but keep it up long enough . and these keep it up long enough , you may be sure . a man of fashion of that time often pass a quarter of his day at card , and another quarter at drink : I have know many a pretty fellow , who be a wit too , ready of repartee , and possess of a thousand grace , who would be puzzle if he have to write more than his name . 
 there be scarce any thoughtful man or woman , I suppose , but can look back upon his course of past life , and remember some point , trifle as it may have seem at the time of occurrence , which have nevertheless turn and alter his whole career . ' tis with almost all of we , as in M. Massillon 's magnificent image regard King William , a grain de sable that pervert or perhaps overthrow we ; and so it be but a light word fling in the air , a mere freak of perverse child 's temper , that bring down a whole heap of crush woe upon that family whereof Harry Esmond form a part . 
 come home to his dear Castlewood in the third year of his academical course ,   wherein he have now obtain some distinction , his Latin Poem on the death of the Duke of Gloucester , Princess Anne of Denmark 's son , have gain he a medal , and introduce he to the society of the University wit ,   Esmond find his little friend and pupil Beatrix grow to be tall than her mother , a slim and lovely young girl , with cheek mantle with health and rose : with eye like star shin out of azure , with wave bronze hair cluster about the fair young forehead ever see : and a mien and shape haughty and beautiful , such as that of the famous antique statue of the huntress Diana at one time haughty , rapid , imperious , with eye and arrow that dart and kill . Harry watch and wonder at this young creature , and liken she in his mind to Artemis with the ringing bow and shaft flash death upon the child of Niobe ; at another time she be coy and melt as Luna shin tenderly upon endymion . this fair creature , this lustrous Phoebe , be only young as yet , nor have nearly reach her full splendor : but crescent and brilliant , our young gentleman of the University , his head full of poetical fancy , his heart perhaps throb with desire undefined , admire this rise young divinity ; and gaze at she   though only as at some " bright particular star , " far above his earth   with endless delight and wonder . she have be a coquette from the early time almost , try her freak and jealousy , her wayward frolic and win caress , upon all that come within her reach ; she set her woman quarrel in the nursery , and practise her eye on the groom as she ride behind he on the pillion . 
 she be the darling and torment of father and mother . she intrigue with each secretly ; and bestow her fondness and withdraw it , ply they with tear , smile , kiss , cajolement ; when the mother be angry , as happen often , fly to the father , and shelter behind he , pursue her victim ; when both be displease , transfer her caress to the domestic , or watch until she could win back her parent ' good grace , either by surprise they into laughter and good - humor , or appease they by submission and artful humility . she be saevo laeta negotio , like that fickle goddess Horace describe , and of whose " malicious joy " a great poet of our own have write so nobly who , famous and heroic as he be , be not strong enough to resist the torture of woman . 
 it be but three year before that the child , then but ten year old , have nearly manage to make a quarrel between Harry Esmond and his comrade , good - nature , phlegmatic Thomas Tusher , who never of his own seeking quarrel with anybody : by quote to the latter some silly joke which Harry have make regard he   it be the mere idle jest , though it near drive two old friend to blow , and I think such a battle would have please she   and from that day Tom keep at a distance from she ; and she respect he , and coax he sedulously whenever they meet . but Harry be much more easily appease , because he be fonder of the child : and when she make mischief , use cut speech , or cause her friend pain , she excuse herself for her fault , not by admit and deplore it , but by plead not guilty , and assert innocence so constantly , and with such seeming artlessness , that it be impossible to question her plea . in her childhood , they be but mischief then which she do ; but her power become more fatal as she grow old as a kitten first play with a ball , and then pounce on a bird and kill it . ' tis not to be imagine that Harry Esmond have all this experience at this early stage of his life , whereof he be now write the history many thing here note be but know to he in later day . almost everything Beatrix do or undo seem good , or at least pardonable , to he then , and year afterwards . 
 it happen , then , that Harry Esmond come home to Castlewood for his last vacation , with good hope of a fellowship at his college , and a contented resolve to advance his fortune that way . ' twa in the first year of the present century , Mr. Esmond   as far as he know the period of his birth   be then twenty - two year old . he find his quondam pupil shoot up into this beauty of which we have speak , and promise yet more : her brother , my lord 's son , a handsome high - spirited brave lad , generous and frank , and kind to everybody , save perhaps his sister , with whom Frank be at war   and not from his but her fault   adore his mother , whose joy he be : and take her side in the unhappy matrimonial difference which be now permanent , while of course Mistress Beatrix range with her father . when head of family fall out , it must naturally be that their dependant wear the one or the other party 's color ; and even in the parliament in the servant ' hall or the stable , Harry , who have an early observant turn , could see which be my lord 's adherent and which my lady 's , and conjecture pretty shrewdly how their unlucky quarrel be debate . our lackey sit in judgment on we . my lord 's intrigue may be ever so stealthily conduct , but his valet know they ; and my lady 's woman carry her mistress 's private history to the servant ' scandal market , and exchange it against the secret of other abigail . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 MY LORD LEAVES US and his evil behind HIM . 

 my Lord Mohun   of whose exploit and fame some of the gentleman of the University have bring down but ugly report   be once more a guest at Castlewood , and seemingly more intimately ally with my lord even than before . once in the spring those two nobleman have ride to Cambridge from Newmarket , whither they have go for the horse - racing , and have honor Harry Esmond with a visit at his room ; after which Doctor Montague , the master of the College , who have treat Harry somewhat haughtily , see his familiarity with these great folk , and that my Lord Castlewood laugh and walk with his hand on Harry 's shoulder , relent to Mr. Esmond , and condescend to be very civil to he ; and some day after his arrival , Harry , laughing , tell this story to Lady Esmond , remark how strange it be that man famous for learn and renowned over Europe , should , nevertheless , so bow down to a title , and cringe to a nobleman ever so poor . at this Mistress Beatrix fling up her head , and say it become those of low origin to respect their better ; that the parson make themselves a great deal too proud , she think ; and that she like the way at Lady Sark 's good , where the chaplain , though he love pudding , as all parson do , always go away before the custard . 
 " and when I be a parson , " say Mr. Esmond , " will you give I no custard , beatrix ? " 
 " you you be different , " beatrix answer . " you be of our blood . " 
 " my father be a parson , as you call he , " say my lady . 
 " but mine be a peer of Ireland , " say Mistress Beatrix , toss her head . " let people know their place . I suppose you will have I go down on my knee and ask a blessing of Mr. Thomas Tusher , that have just be make a curate and whose mother be a waiting - maid . " 
 and she toss out of the room , be in one of her flighty humor then . 
 when she be go , my lady look so sad and grave , that Harry ask the cause of her disquietude . she say it be not merely what he say of Newmarket , but what she have remark , with great anxiety and terror , that my lord , ever since his acquaintance with the Lord Mohun especially , have recur to his fondness for play , which he have renounce since his marriage . 
 " but man promise more than they be able to perform in marriage , " say my lady , with a sigh . " I fear he have lose large sum ; and our property , always small , be dwindle away under this reckless dissipation . I hear of he in London with very wild company . since his return , letter and lawyer be constantly come and go : he seem to I to have a constant anxiety , though he hide it under boisterousness and laughter . I look through through the door last night , and and before , " say my lady , " and see they at card after midnight ; no estate will bear that extravagance , much less our , which will be so diminish that my son will have nothing at all , and my poor beatrix no portion ! " 
 " I wish I could help you , madam , " say Harry Esmond , sighing , and wish that unavailingly , and for the thousandth time in his life . 
 " who can ? only God , " say Lady Esmond " only God , in whose hand we be . " and so it be , and for his rule over his family , and for his conduct to wife and child subject over whom his power be monarchical any one who watch the world must think with trembling sometimes of the account which many a man will have to render . for in our society there be no law to control the King of the Fireside . he be master of property , happiness life almost . he be free to punish , to make happy or unhappy to ruin or to torture . he may kill a wife gradually , and be no more question than the Grand seignior who drown a slave at midnight . he may make slave and hypocrite of his child ; or friend and freeman ; or drive they into revolt and enmity against the natural law of love . I have hear politician and coffee - house wiseacre talk over the newspaper , and rail at the tyranny of the french king , and the Emperor , and wonder how these   who be monarchs , too , in their way   govern their own dominion at home , where each man rule absolute . when the annal of each little reign be show to the Supreme Master , under whom we hold sovereignty , history will be lay bare of household tyrant as cruel as Amurath , and as savage as Nero , and as reckless and dissolute as Charles . 
 if Harry Esmond 's patron err , ' twa in the latter way , from a disposition rather self - indulgent than cruel ; and he might have be bring back to much well feeling , have time be give to he to bring his repentance to a last reform . 
 as my lord and his friend Lord Mohun be such close companion , Mistress Beatrix choose to be jealous of the latter ; and the two gentleman often entertain each other by laugh , in their rude boisterous way , at the child 's freak of anger and show of dislike . " when thou art old enough , thou shalt marry Lord Mohun , " Beatrix 's father would say : on which the girl would pout and say , " I would rather marry Tom Tusher . " and because the Lord Mohun always show an extreme gallantry to my Lady Castlewood , whom he profess to admire devotedly , one day , in answer to this old joke of her father 's , Beatrix say , " I think my lord would rather marry mamma than marry I ; and be wait till you die to ask she . " 
 the word be say lightly and pertly by the girl one night before supper , as the family party be assemble near the great fire . the two lord , who be at card , both give a start ; my lady turn as red as scarlet , and bade Mistress Beatrix go to her own chamber ; whereupon the girl , put on , as she will not be , the most innocent air , say , " I be sure I mean no wrong ; I be sure mamma talk a great deal more to Harry Esmond than she do to papa and she cry when Harry go away , and she never do when papa go away ! and last night she talk to Lord Mohun for ever so long , and send we out of the room , and cry when we come back , and " 
 " D n ! " cry out my Lord Castlewood , out of all patience . " go out of the room , you little viper ! " and he start up and fling down his card . 
 " ask Lord Mohun what I say to he , Francis , " her ladyship say , rise up with a scared face , but yet with a great and touching dignity and candor in her look and voice . " come away with I , beatrix . " beatrix spring up too ; she be in tear now . 
 " Dearest mamma , what have I do ? " she ask . " sure I mean no harm . " and she cling to her mother , and the pair go out sob together . 
 " I will tell you what your wife say to I , Frank , " my Lord Mohun cry . " Parson Harry may hear it ; and , as I hope for heaven , every word I say be true . last night , with tear in her eye , your wife implore I to play no more with you at dice or at card , and you know good whether what she ask be not for your good . " 
 " of course , it be , Mohun , " say my lord in a dry hard voice . " of course you be a model of a man : and the world know what a saint you be . " 
 my Lord Mohun be separate from his wife , and have have many affair of honor : of which woman as usual have be the cause . 
 " I be no saint , though your wife be and I can answer for my action as other people must for their word , " say my Lord Mohun . 
 " by G , my lord , you shall , " cry the other , start up . 
 " we have another little account to settle first , my lord , " say Lord Mohun . Whereupon Harry Esmond , fill with alarm for the consequence to which this disastrous dispute might lead , break out into the most vehement expostulation with his patron and his adversary . " gracious heaven ! " he say , " my lord , be you go to draw a sword upon your friend in your own house ? can you doubt the honor of a lady who be as pure as heaven , and would die a thousand time rather than do you a wrong ? be the idle word of a jealous child to set friend at variance ? have not my mistress , as much as she dare do , besought your lordship , as the truth must be tell , to break your intimacy with my Lord Mohun ; and to give up the habit which may bring ruin on your family ? but for my Lord Mohun 's illness , have he not leave you ? " 
 " ' Faith , Frank , a man with a gouty toe can not   run after other man 's wife , " break out my Lord Mohun , who indeed be in that way , and with a laugh and a look at his swathe limb so frank and comical , that the other dash his fist across his forehead be catch by that infectious good - humor , and say with his oath , " it , Harry , I believe thee , " and so this quarrel be over , and the two gentleman , at sword draw but just now , drop their point , and shake hand . 
 Beati pacifici . " go , bring my lady back , " say Harry 's patron . esmond go away only too glad to be the bearer of such good news . he find she at the door ; she have be listen there , but go back as he come . she take both his hand , her be marble cold . she seem as if she would fall on his shoulder . " thank you , and God bless you , my dear brother Harry , " she say . she kiss his hand , Esmond feel her tear upon it : and lead she into the room , and up to my lord , the Lord Castlewood , with an outbreak of feeling and affection such as he have not exhibit for many a long day , take his wife to his heart , and bend over and kiss she and ask her pardon . 
 " ' tis time for I to go to roost . I will have my gruel a - bed , " say my Lord Mohun : and limp off comically on Harry Esmond 's arm . " by George , that woman be a pearl ! " he say ; " and ' tis only a pig that would not   value she . have you see the vulgar traipse orange - girl whom esmond " but here Mr. Esmond interrupt he , say , that these be not affair for he to know . 
 my lord 's gentleman come in to wait upon his master , who be no soon in his nightcap and dressing - gown than he have another visitor whom his host insist on send to he : and this be no other than the Lady Castlewood herself with the toast and gruel , which her husband bid her make and carry with her own hand in to her guest . 
 Lord Castlewood stand look after his wife as she go on this errand , and as he look , Harry Esmond could not but gaze on he , and remark in his patron 's face an expression of love , and grief , and care , which very much move and touch the young man . Lord Castlewood 's hand fall down at his side , and his head on his breast , and presently he say , 
 " you hear what Mohun say , parson ? " 
 " that my lady be a saint ? " 
 " that there be two account to settle . I have be go wrong these five year , Harry Esmond . ever since you bring that damn small - pox into the house , there have be a fate pursue I , and I have well have die of it , and not run away from it like a coward . I leave beatrix with her relation , and go to London ; and I fall among thief , Harry , and I get back to confound card and dice , which I have not   touch since my marriage no , not since I be in the Duke 's guard , with those wild mohock . and I have be play bad and bad , and go deep and deep into it ; and I owe Mohun two thousand pound now ; and when it be pay I be little well than a beggar . I do not   like to look my boy in the face ; he hat I , I know he do . and I have spend Beaty 's little portion : and the Lord know what will come if I live ; the good thing I can do be to die , and release what portion of the estate be redeemable for the boy . " 
 Mohun be as much master at Castlewood as the owner of the Hall itself ; and his equipage fill the stable , where , indeed , there be room and plenty for many more horse than Harry Esmond 's impoverished patron could afford to keep . he have arrive on horseback with his people ; but when his gout break out my Lord Mohun send to London for a light chaise he have , draw by a pair of small horse , and run as swift , wherever road be good , as a Laplander 's sledge . when this carriage come , his lordship be eager to drive the Lady Castlewood abroad in it , and do so many time , and at a rapid pace , greatly to his companion 's enjoyment , who love the swift motion and the healthy breeze over the down which lie hard upon Castlewood , and stretch thence towards the sea . as this amusement be very pleasant to she , and her lord , far from show any mistrust of her intimacy with Lord Mohun , encourage she to be his companion as if willing by his present extreme confidence to make up for any past mistrust which his jealousy have show the Lady Castlewood enjoy herself freely in this harmless diversion , which , it must be own , her guest be very eager to give she ; and it seem that she grow the more free with Lord Mohun , and please with his company , because of some sacrifice which his gallantry be pleased to make in her favor . 
 see the two gentleman constantly at card still of evening , Harry Esmond one day deplore to his mistress that this fatal infatuation of her lord should continue ; and now they seem reconcile together , beg his lady to hint to her husband that he should play no more . 
 but Lady Castlewood , smile archly and gayly , say she would speak to he presently , and that , for a few night more at least , he might be let to have his amusement . 
 " indeed , madam , " say Harry , " you know not what it cost you ; and ' tis easy for any observer who know the game , to see that Lord Mohun be by far the strong of the two . " 
 " I know he be , " say my lady , still with exceed good - humor ; " he be not only the good player , but the kind player in the world . " 
 " Madam , madam ! " Esmond cry , transport and provoke . " debt of honor must be pay some time or other ; and my master will be ruin if he go on . " 
 " Harry , shall I tell you a secret ? " my lady reply , with kindness and pleasure still in her eye . " Francis will not be ruin if he go on ; he will be rescue if he go on . I repent of have speak and think unkindly of the Lord Mohun when he be here in the past year . he be full of much kindness and good ; and ' tis my belief that we shall bring he to well thing . I have lend he ' Tillotson ' and your favorite ' Bishop Taylor , ' and he be much touch , he say ; and as a proof of his repentance   and herein lie my secret   what do you think he be do with Francis ? he be let poor Frank win his money back again . he hath win already at the last four night ; and my Lord Mohun say that he will not be the mean of injure poor Frank and my dear child . " 
 " and in God 's name , what do you return he for the sacrifice ? " ask Esmond , aghast ; who know enough of man , and of this one in particular , to be aware that such a finished rake give nothing for nothing . " how , in heaven 's name , be you to pay he ? " 
 " pay he ! with a mother 's blessing and a wife 's prayer ! " cry my lady , clasp her hand together . Harry Esmond do not know whether to laugh , to be angry , or to love his dear mistress more than ever for the obstinate innocency with which she choose to regard the conduct of a man of the world , whose design he know well how to interpret . he tell the lady , guardedly , but so as to make his meaning quite clear to she , what he know in respect of the former life and conduct of this nobleman ; of other woman against whom he have plot , and whom he have overcome ; of the conversation which he , Harry himself , have have with Lord Mohun , wherein the lord make a boast of his libertinism , and frequently avow that he hold all woman to be fair game   as his lordship style this pretty sport , and that they be all , without exception , to be win . and the return Harry have for his entreaty and remonstrance be a fit of anger on Lady Castlewood 's part , who would not listen to his accusation ; she say and retort that he himself must be very wicked and pervert to suppose evil design where she be sure none be mean . " and this be the good meddler get of interfere , " Harry think to himself with much bitterness ; and his perplexity and annoyance be only the great , because he could not speak to my Lord Castlewood himself upon a subject of this nature , or venture to advise or warn he regard a matter so very sacred as his own honor , of which my lord be naturally the good guardian . 
 but though Lady Castlewood would listen to no advice from her young dependant , and appear indignantly to refuse it when offer , Harry have the satisfaction to find that she adopt the counsel which she profess to reject ; for the next day she plead a headache , when my Lord Mohun would have have her drive out , and the next day the headache continue ; and next day , in a laugh gay way , she propose that the child should take her place in his lordship 's car , for they would be charm with a ride of all thing ; and she must not have all the pleasure for herself . my lord give they a drive with a very good grace , though , I dare say , with rage and disappointment inwardly not that his heart be very seriously engage in his design upon this simple lady : but the life of such man be often one of intrigue , and they can no more go through the day without a woman to pursue , than a fox - hunter without his sport after breakfast . 
 under an affected carelessness of demeanor , and though there be no outward demonstration of doubt upon his patron 's part since the quarrel between the two lord , Harry yet see that Lord Castlewood be watch his guest very narrowly ; and catch sight of distrust and smother rage   as Harry think   which forebode no good . on the point of honor Esmond know how touchy his patron be ; and watch he almost as a physician watch a patient , and it seem to he that this one be slow to take the disease , though he could not throw off the poison when once it have mingle with his blood . we read in Shakspeare   whom the writer for his part consider to be far beyond Mr. Congreve , Mr. Dryden , or any of the wit of the present period ,   that when jealousy be once declare , nor poppy , nor mandragora , nor all the drowsy syrup of the East , will ever soothe it or medicine it away . 
 in fine , the symptom seem to be so alarming to this young physician   who , indeed , young as he be , have feel the kind pulse of all those dear kinsman , that Harry think it would be his duty to warn my Lord Mohun , and let he know that his design be suspect and watch . so one day , when in rather a pettish humor his lordship have send to Lady Castlewood , who have promise to drive with he , and now refuse to come , Harry say " my lord , if you will kindly give I a place by your side I will thank you ; I have much to say to you , and would like to speak to you alone . " 
 " you honor I by give I your confidence , Mr. Henry Esmond , " say the other , with a very grand bow . my lord be always a fine gentleman , and young as he be there be that in Esmond 's manner which show that he be a gentleman too , and that none might take a liberty with he so the pair go out , and mount the little carriage , which be in wait for they in the court , with its two little cream - color hanoverian horse cover with splendid furniture and champ at the bit . 
 " my lord , " say Harry Esmond , after they be get into the country , and point to my Lord Mohun 's foot , which be swathe in flannel , and put up rather ostentatiously on a cushion " my lord , I study medicine at Cambridge . " 
 " indeed , Parson Harry , " say he ; " and be you go to take out a diploma : and cure your fellow - student of the " 
 " of the gout , " say Harry , interrupt he , and look he hard in the face ; " I know a good deal about the gout . " 
 " I hope you may never have it . ' tis an infernal disease , " say my lord , " and its twinge be diabolical . ah ! " and he make a dreadful wry face , as if he just feel a twinge . 
 " your lordship would be much well if you take off all that flannel it only serve to inflame the toe , " Harry continue , look his man full in the face . 
 " oh ! it only serve to inflame the toe , do it ? " say the other , with an innocent air . 
 " if you take off that flannel , and fling that absurd slipper away , and wear a boot , " continue Harry . 
 " you recommend I boot , Mr. Esmond ? " ask my lord . 
 " yes , boot and spur . I see your lordship three day ago run down the gallery fast enough , " Harry go on . " I be sure that take gruel at night be not so pleasant as claret to your lordship ; and besides it keep your lordship 's head cool for play , whilst my patron 's be hot and fluster with drink . " 
 " ' Sdeath , sir , you dare not say that I do not   play fair ? " cry my lord , whip his horse , which go away at a gallop . 
 " you be cool when my lord be drunk , " Harry continue ; " your lordship get the well of my patron . I have watch you as I look up from my book . " 
 " you young Argus ! " say Lord Mohun , who like Harry Esmond and for whose company and wit , and a certain daring manner , Harry have a great liking too " you young Argus ! you may look with all your hundred eye and see we play fair . I have   play away an estate of a night , and I have   play my shirt off my back ; and I have   play away my periwig and go home in a nightcap . but no man can say I ever take an advantage of he beyond the advantage of the game . I play a dice - cog scoundrel in Alsatia for his ear and win them , and have one of them in my lodging in Bow Street in a bottle of spirit . Harry Mohun will play any man for anything always would . " 
 " you be play awful stake , my lord , in my patron 's house , " Harry say , " and more game than be on the card . " 
 " what do you mean , sir ? " cry my lord , turn round , with a flush on his face . 
 " I mean , " answer Harry , in a sarcastic tone , " that your gout be well if ever you have it . " 
 " Sir ! " cry my lord , get hot . 
 " and to tell the truth I believe your lordship have no more gout than I have . at any rate , change of air will do you good , my Lord Mohun . and I mean fairly that you have well go from Castlewood . " 
 " and be you appoint to give I this message ? " cry the Lord Mohun . " do Frank Esmond commission you ? " 
 " no one do . ' twas the honor of my family that commission I . " 
 " and you be prepared to answer this ? " cry the other , furiously lash his horse . 
 " quite , my lord : your lordship will upset the carriage if you whip so hotly . " 
 " by George , you have a brave spirit ! " my lord cry out , burst into a laugh . " I suppose ' tis that infernal botte de Jesuite that make you so bold , " he add . 
 " ' tis the peace of the family I love well in the world , " Harry Esmond say warmly " ' tis the honor of a noble benefactor the happiness of my dear mistress and her child . I owe they everything in life , my lord ; and would lay it down for any one of they . what bring you here to disturb this quiet household ? what keep you linger month after month in the country ? what make you feign illness , and invent pretext for delay ? be it to win my poor patron 's money ? be generous , my lord , and spare his weakness for the sake of his wife and child . be it to practise upon the simple heart of a virtuous lady ? you might as well storm the Tower single - handed . but you may blemish her name by light comment on it , or by lawless pursuit and I do not   deny that ' tis in your power to make her unhappy . spare these innocent people , and leave they . " 
 " by the Lord , I believe thou hast an eye to the pretty Puritan thyself , Master Harry , " say my lord , with his reckless , good - humor laugh , and as if he have be listen with interest to the passionate appeal of the young man . " Whisper , Harry . art thou in love with she thyself ? Hath tipsy Frank Esmond come by the way of all flesh ? " 
 " my lord , my lord , " cry Harry , his face flush and his eye fill as he speak , " I never have a mother , but I love this lady as one . I worship she as a devotee worship a saint . to hear her name speak lightly seem blasphemy to I . would you dare think of your own mother so , or suffer any one so to speak of she ? it be a horror to I to fancy that any man should think of she impurely . I implore you , I beseech you , to leave she . danger will come out of it . " 
 " Danger , psha ! " say my lord , give a cut to the horse , which at this minute for we be get on to the Downs fairly run off into a gallop that no pulling could stop . the rein break in Lord Mohun 's hand , and the furious beast scamper madly forwards , the carriage sway to and fro , and the person within it hold on to the side as well they might , until see a great ravine before they , where an upset be inevitable , the two gentleman leapt for their life , each out of his side of the chaise . Harry Esmond be quit for a fall on the grass , which be so severe that it stun he for a minute ; but he get up presently very sick , and bleed at the nose , but with no other hurt . the Lord Mohun be not so fortunate ; he fall on his head against a stone , and lie on the ground , dead to all appearance . 
 this misadventure happen as the gentleman be on their return homeward ; and my Lord Castlewood , with his son and daughter , who be go out for a ride , meet the pony as they be gallop with the car behind , the broken trace entangle their heel , and my lord 's people turn and stop they . it be young Frank who spy out Lord Mohun 's scarlet coat as he lie on the ground , and the party make up to that unfortunate gentleman and Esmond , who be now stand over he . his large periwig and feather hat have fall off , and he be bleed profusely from a wound on the forehead , and look , and be , indeed , a corpse . 
 " Great God ! he be dead ! " say my lord . " Ride , some one : fetch a doctor stay . I will go home and bring back Tusher ; he know surgery , " and my lord , with his son after he , gallop away . 
 they be scarce go when Harry Esmond , who be indeed but just come to himself , bethink he of a similar accident which he have see on a ride from Newmarket to Cambridge , and take off a sleeve of my lord 's coat , Harry , with a penknife , open a vein of his arm , and be greatly relieve , after a moment , to see the blood flow . he be near half an hour before he come to himself , by which time Doctor Tusher and little Frank arrive , and find my lord not a corpse indeed , but as pale as one . 
 after a time , when he be able to bear motion , they put my lord upon a groom 's horse , and give the other to Esmond , the man walk on each side of my lord , to support he , if need be , and worthy Doctor Tusher with they . Little Frank and Harry ride together at a foot pace . 
 when we ride together home , the boy say : " we meet mamma , who be walk on the terrace with the doctor , and papa frighten she , and tell she you be dead . . . " 
 " that I be dead ! " ask Harry . 
 " yes . Papa say : ' here 's poor Harry kill , my dear ; ' on which mamma give a great scream ; and oh , Harry ! she drop down ; and I think she be dead too . and you never see such a way as papa be in : he swear one of his great oath : and he turn quite pale ; and then he begin to laugh somehow , and he tell the Doctor to take his horse , and I to follow he ; and we leave he . and I look back , and see he dash water out of the fountain on to mamma . oh , she be so frightened ! " 
 Musing upon this curious history for my Lord Mohun 's name be Henry too , and they call each other Frank and Harry often and not a little disturbed and anxious , Esmond ride home . his dear lady be on the terrace still , one of her woman with she , and my lord no long there . there be step and a little door thence down into the road . my lord pass , look very ghastly , with a handkerchief over his head , and without his hat and periwig , which a groom carry , but his politeness do not desert he , and he make a bow to the lady above . 
 " thank heaven , you be safe , " she say . 
 " and so be Harry too , mamma , " say little Frank , " huzzay ! " 
 Harry Esmond get off the horse to run to his mistress , as do little Frank , and one of the groom take charge of the two beast , while the other , hat and periwig in hand , walk by my lord 's bridle to the front gate , which lie half a mile away . 
 " oh , my boy ! what a fright you have give I ! " Lady Castlewood say , when Harry Esmond come up , greet he with one of her shin look , and a voice of tender welcome ; and she be so kind as to kiss the young man   ' twas the second time she have so honor he , and she walk into the house between he and her son , hold a hand of each . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 we RIDE after HIM to LONDON . 

 after a repose of a couple of day , the Lord Mohun be so far recover of his hurt as to be able to announce his departure for the next morning ; when , accordingly , he take leave of Castlewood , propose to ride to London by easy stage , and lie two night upon the road . his host treat he with a studied and ceremonious courtesy , certainly different from my lord 's usual frank and careless demeanor ; but there be no reason to suppose that the two lord part otherwise than good friend , though Harry Esmond remark that my Lord Viscount only see his guest in company with other person , and seem to avoid be alone with he . nor do he ride any distance with Lord Mohun , as his custom be with most of his friend , whom he be always eager to welcome and unwilling to lose ; but content himself , when his lordship 's horse be announce , and their owner appear , boot for his journey , to take a courteous leave of the lady of Castlewood , by follow the Lord Mohun down stair to his horse , and by bow and wish he a good - day , in the court - yard . " I shall see you in London before very long , Mohun , " my lord say , with a smile , " when we will settle our account together . " 
 " do not let they trouble you , Frank , " say the other good - naturedly , and hold out his hand , look rather surprised at the grim and stately manner in which his host receive his parting salutation ; and so , follow by his people , he ride away . 
 Harry Esmond be witness of the departure . it be very different to my lord 's come , for which great preparation have be make   the old house put on its good appearance to welcome its guest , and there be a sadness and constraint about all person that day , which fill Mr. Esmond with gloomy foreboding , and sad indefinite apprehension . Lord Castlewood stand at the door watch his guest and his people as they go out under the arch of the outer gate . when he be there , Lord Mohun turn once more , my Lord Viscount slowly raise his beaver and bow . his face wear a peculiar livid look , Harry think . he curse and kick away his dog , which come jump about he then he walk up to the fountain in the centre of the court , and lean against a pillar and look into the basin . as Esmond cross over to his own room , late the chaplain 's , on the other side of the court , and turn to enter in at the low door , he see Lady Castlewood look through the curtain of the great window of the drawing - room overhead , at my lord as he stand regard the fountain . there be in the court a peculiar silence somehow ; and the scene remain long in Esmond 's memory : the sky bright overhead ; the buttress of the building and the sun - dial cast shadow over the gilt memento mori inscribe underneath ; the two dog , a black greyhound and a spaniel nearly white , the one with his face up to the sun , and the other snuffing amongst the grass and stone , and my lord lean over the fountain , which be bubble audibly . ' tis strange how that scene , and the sound of that fountain , remain fixed on the memory of a man who have behold a hundred sight of splendor , and danger too , of which he have keep no account . 
 it be Lady Castlewood she have be laugh all the morning , and especially gay and lively before her husband and his guest who as soon as the two gentleman go together from her room , run to Harry , the expression of her countenance quite change now , and with a face and eye full of care , and say , " follow they , Harry , I be sure something have go wrong . " and so it be that Esmond be make an eavesdropper at this lady 's order and retire to his own chamber , to give himself time in truth to try and compose a story which would soothe his mistress , for he could not but have his own apprehension that some serious quarrel be pende between the two gentleman . 
 and now for several day the little company at Castlewood sit at table as of evening : this care , though unnamed and invisible , be nevertheless present alway , in the mind of at least three person there . my lord be exceed gentle and kind . whenever he quit the room , his wife 's eye follow he . he behave to she with a kind of mournful courtesy and kindness remarkable in one of his blunt way and ordinary rough manner . he call she by her christian name often and fondly , be very soft and gentle with the child , especially with the boy , whom he do not love , and be lax about church generally , he go thither and perform all the office   down even to listen to Dr. Tusher 's sermon   with great devotion . 
 " he pace his room all night ; what be it ? Henry , find out what it be , " Lady Castlewood say constantly to her young dependant . " he have send three letter to London , " she say , another day . 
 " indeed , madam , they be to a lawyer , " Harry answer , who know of these letter , and have see a part of the correspondence , which relate to a new loan my lord be raise ; and when the young man remonstrate with his patron , my lord say , " he be only raise money to pay off an old debt on the property , which must be discharge . " 
 regard the money , Lady Castlewood be not in the least anxious . few fond woman feel money - distressed ; indeed you can hardly give a woman a great pleasure than to bid her pawn her diamond for the man she love ; and I remember hear Mr. Congreve say of my Lord Marlborough , that the reason why my lord be so successful with woman as a young man , be because he take money of they . " there be few man who will make such a sacrifice for they , " say Mr. Congreve , who know a part of the sex pretty well . 
 Harry Esmond 's vacation be just over , and , as hath be say , he be prepare to return to the University for his last term before take his degree and enter into the Church . he have make up his mind for this office , not indeed with that reverence which become a man about to enter upon a duty so holy , but with a worldly spirit of acquiescence in the prudence of adopt that profession for his calling . but his reasoning be that he owe all to the family of Castlewood , and love well to be near they than anywhere else in the world ; that he might be useful to his benefactor , who have the utmost confidence in he and affection for he in return ; that he might aid in bring up the young heir of the house and act as his governor ; that he might continue to be his dear patron 's and mistress 's friend and adviser , who both be pleased to say that they should ever look upon he as such ; and so , by make himself useful to those he love well , he propose to console himself for give up of any scheme of ambition which he might have have in his own bosom . indeed , his mistress have tell he that she would not have he leave she ; and whatever she command be will to he . 
 the Lady Castlewood 's mind be greatly relieve in the last few day of this well - remember holiday time , by my lord 's announce one morning , after the post have bring he letter from London , in a careless tone , that the Lord Mohun be go to Paris , and be about to make a great journey in Europe ; and though Lord Castlewood 's own gloom do not wear off , or his behavior alter , yet this cause of anxiety be remove from his lady 's mind , she begin to be more hopeful and easy in her spirit , strive too , with all her heart , and by all the mean of soothe in her power , to call back my lord 's cheerfulness and dissipate his moody humor . 
 he account for it himself , by say that he be out of health ; that he want to see his physician ; that he would go to London , and consult Doctor Cheyne . it be agree that his lordship and Harry Esmond should make the journey as far as London together ; and of a Monday morning , the 11th of October , in the year 1700 , they set forwards towards London on horseback . the day before be Sunday , and the rain pour down , the family do not visit church ; and at night my lord read the service to his family very finely , and with a peculiar sweetness and gravity speak the parting benediction , Harry think , as solemn as ever he hear it . and he kiss and embrace his wife and child before they go to their own chamber with more fondness than he be ordinarily will not to show , and with a solemnity and feeling of which they think in after day with no small comfort . 
 they take horse the next morning   after adieux from the family as tender as on the night previous , lie that night on the road , and enter London at nightfall ; my lord go to the " Trumpet , " in the Cockpit , Whitehall , a house use by the military in his time as a young man , and accustom by his lordship ever since . 
 an hour after my lord 's arrival   which show that his visit have be arrange beforehand , my lord 's man of business arrive from Gray 's Inn ; and think that his patron might wish to be private with the lawyer , Esmond be for leave they : but my lord say his business be short ; introduce Mr. Esmond particularly to the lawyer , who have be engage for the family in the old lord 's time ; who say that he have pay the money , as desire that day , to my Lord Mohun himself , at his lodging in Bow Street ; that his lordship have express some surprise , as it be not customary to employ lawyer , he say , in such transaction between man of honor ; but nevertheless , he have return my Lord Viscount 's note of hand , which he hold at his client 's disposition . 
 " I think the Lord Mohun have be in Paris ! " cry Mr. Esmond , in great alarm and astonishment . 
 " he be come back at my invitation , " say my Lord Viscount . " we have account to settle together . " 
 " I pray heaven they be over , sir , " say Esmond . 
 " oh , quite , " reply the other , look hard at the young man . " he be rather troublesome about that money which I tell you I have lose to he at play . and now ' tis pay , and we be quit on that score , and we shall meet good friend again . " 
 " my lord , " cry out Esmond , " I be sure you be deceive I , and that there be a quarrel between the Lord Mohun and you . " 
 " quarrel pish ! we shall sup together this very night , and drink a bottle . every man be ill - humor who lose such a sum as I have lose . but now ' tis pay , and my anger be go with it . " 
 " where shall we sup , sir ? " say Harry . 
 " we ! let some gentleman wait till they be ask , " say my Lord Viscount with a laugh . " you go to Duke Street , and see Mr. Betterton . you love the play , I know . leave I to follow my own device : and in the morning we will breakfast together , with what appetite we may , as the play say . " 
 " by G ! my lord , I will not leave you this night , " say Harry Esmond . " I think I know the cause of your dispute . I swear to you ' tis nothing . on the very day the accident befell Lord Mohun , I be speak to he about it . I know that nothing have pass but idle gallantry on his part . " 
 " you know that nothing have pass but idle gallantry between Lord Mohun and my wife , " say my lord , in a thunder voice " you know of this and do not tell I ? " 
 " I know more of it than my dear mistress do herself , sir a thousand time more . how be she , who be as innocent as a child , to know what be the meaning of the covert address of a villain ? " 
 " a villain he be , you allow , and would have take my wife away from I . " 
 " Sir , she be as pure as an angel , " cry young Esmond . 
 " have I say a word against she ? " shriek out my lord . " do I ever doubt that she be pure ? it would have be the last day of her life when I do . do you fancy I think that she would go astray ? no , she have not   passion enough for that . she neither sin nor forgive . I know her temper and now I have   lose she , by heaven I love her ten thousand time more than ever I do yes , when she be as young and as beautiful as an angel when she smile at I in her old father 's house , and use to lie in wait for I there as I come from hunting when I use to fle my head down on her little knee and cry like a child on her lap and swear I would reform , and drink no more and play no more , and follow woman no more ; when all the man of the Court use to be follow she when she use to look with her child more beautiful , by George , than the Madonna in the Queen 's Chapel . I be not good like she , I know it . who be by heaven , who be ? I tired and weary she , I know that very well . I could not talk to she . you man of wit and book could do that , and I could not   I feel I could not . why , when you be but a boy of fifteen I could hear you two together talk your poetry and your book till I be in such a rage that I be fit to strangle you . but you be always a good lad , Harry , and I love you , you know I do . and I feel she do not   belong to I : and the child do not . and I besotte myself , and gamble and drank , and take to all sort of deviltry out of despair and fury . and now come this Mohun , and she like he , I know she like he . " 
 " indeed , and on my soul , you be wrong , sir , " Esmond cry . 
 " she take letter from he , " cry my lord " look here , Harry , " and he pull out a paper with a brown stain of blood upon it . " it fall from he that day he be not   kill . one of the groom pick it up from the ground and give it I . here it be in their d d comedy jargon . ' divine Gloriana why look so coldly on your slave who adore you ? have you no compassion on the torture you have see I suffer ? do you vouchsafe no reply to billet that be write with the blood of my heart . ' she have more letter from he . " 
 " but she answer none , " cry Esmond . 
 " that be not Mohun 's fault , " say my lord , " and I will be revenge on he , as God 's in heaven , I will . " 
 " for a light word or two , will you risk your lady 's honor and your family 's happiness , my lord ? " Esmond interpose beseechingly . 
 " Psha there shall be no question of my wife 's honor , " say my lord ; " we can quarrel on plenty of ground beside . if I live , that villain will be punish ; if I fall , my family will be only the well : there will only be a spendthrift the less to keep in the world : and Frank have well teaching than his father . my mind be make up , Harry Esmond , and whatever the event be , I be easy about it . I leave my wife and you as guardian to the child . " 
 see that my lord be bent upon pursue this quarrel , and that no entreaty would draw he from it , Harry Esmond   then of a hotter and more impetuous nature than now , when care , and reflection , and gray hair have calm he   think it be his duty to stand by his kind , generous patron , and say , " my lord , if you be determine upon war , you must not go into it alone . ' tis the duty of our house to stand by its chief ; and I should neither forgive myself nor you if you do not call I , or I should be absent from you at a moment of danger . " 
 " why , Harry , my poor boy , you be breed for a parson , " say my lord , take Esmond by the hand very kindly ; " and it be a great pity that you should meddle in the matter . " 
 " your lordship think of be a churchman once , " Harry answer , " and your father 's order do not prevent he fight at Castlewood against the roundhead . your enemy be mine , sir ; I can use the foil , as you have see , indifferently well , and do not   think I shall be afraid when the button be take off them . " and then Harry explain , with some blush and hesitation   for the matter be delicate , and he fear lest , by have put himself forward in the quarrel , he might have offend his patron , how he have himself expostulate with the Lord Mohun , and propose to measure sword with he if need be , and he could not be get to withdraw peaceably in this dispute . " and I should have beat he , sir , " say Harry , laugh . " he never could parry that botte I bring from Cambridge . let we have half an hour of it , and rehearse I can teach it your lordship : ' tis the most delicate point in the world , and if you miss it , your adversary 's sword be through you . " 
 " by George , Harry , you ought to be the head of the house , " say my lord , gloomily . " you have be a well Lord Castlewood than a lazy sot like I , " he add , draw his hand across his eye , and survey his kinsman with very kind and affectionate glance . 
 " let we take our coat off and have half an hour 's practice before nightfall , " say Harry , after thankfully grasp his patron 's manly hand . 
 " you be but a little bit of a lad , " say my lord , good - humoredly ; " but , in faith , I believe you could do for that fellow . no , my boy , " he continue , " I will have none of your feint and trick of stab : I can use my sword pretty well too , and will fight my own quarrel my own way . " 
 " but I shall be by to see fair play ? " cry Harry . 
 " yes , God bless you you shall be by . " 
 " when be it , sir ? " say Harry , for he see that the matter have be arrange privately and beforehand by my lord . 
 " ' tis arrange thus : I send off a courier to Jack Westbury to say that I want he specially . he know for what , and will be here presently , and drink part of that bottle of sack . then we shall go to the theatre in Duke Street , where we shall meet Mohun ; and then we shall all go sup at the ' Rose ' or the ' Greyhound . ' then we shall call for card , and there will be probably a difference over the card and then , God help we ! either a wicked villain and traitor shall go out of the world , or a poor worthless devil , that do not   care to remain in it . I be well away , hal my wife will be all the happy when I be go , " say my lord , with a groan , that tear the heart of Harry Esmond , so that he fairly break into a sob over his patron 's kind hand . 
 " the business be talk over with Mohun before he leave home Castlewood I mean " my lord go on . " I take the letter in to he , which I have read , and I charge he with his villainy , and he could make no denial of it , only he say that my wife be innocent . " 
 " and so she be ; before heaven , my lord , she be ! " cry Harry . 
 " no doubt , no doubt . they always be , " say my lord . " no doubt , when she hear he be kill , she faint from accident . " 
 " but , my lord , MY name be Harry , " cry out Esmond , burn red . " you tell my lady , ' Harry be kill ! ' " 
 " damnation ! shall I fight you too ? " shout my lord in a fury . " be you , you little serpent , warm by my fire , go to ste you ? no , my boy , you be an honest boy ; you be a good boy . "   and here he break from rage into tear even more cruel to see .   " you be an honest boy , and I love you ; and , by heaven , I be so wretched that I do not   care what sword it be that end I . stop , here 's Jack Westbury . well , Jack ! welcome , old boy ! this be my kinsman , Harry Esmond . " 
 " who bring your bowl for you at Castlewood , sir ? " say Harry , bow ; and the three gentleman sit down and drink of that bottle of sack which be prepare for they . 
 " Harry be number three , " say my lord . " you need not   be afraid of he , Jack . " and the Colonel give a look , as much as to say , " indeed , he do not   look as if I need . " and then my lord explain what he have only tell by hint before . when he quarrel with Lord Mohun he be indebted to his lordship in a sum of sixteen hundred pound , for which Lord Mohun say he propose to wait until my Lord Viscount should pay he . my lord have raise the sixteen hundred pound and send they to Lord Mohun that morning , and before quit home have put his affair into order , and be now quite ready to abide the issue of the quarrel . 
 when we have drink a couple of bottle of sack , a coach be call , and the three gentleman go to the Duke 's Playhouse , as agree . the play be one of Mr. Wycherley 's " love in a wood . " 
 Harry Esmond have think of that play ever since with a kind of terror , and of Mrs. Bracegirdle , the actress who perform the girl 's part in the comedy . she be disguise as a page , and come and stand before the gentleman as they sit on the stage , and look over her shoulder with a pair of arch black eye , and laugh at my lord , and ask what ail the gentleman from the country , and have he have bad news from Bullock fair ? 
 between the act of the play the gentleman cross over and converse freely . there be two of Lord Mohun 's party , Captain Macartney , in a military habit , and a gentleman in a suit of blue velvet and silver in a fair periwig , with a rich fall of point of Venice lace my Lord the Earl of Warwick and Holland . my lord have a paper of orange , which he eat and offer to the actress , joke with they . and Mrs. Bracegirdle , when my Lord Mohun say something rude , turn on he , and ask he what he do there , and whether he and his friend have come to stab anybody else , as they do poor Will Mountford ? my lord 's dark face grow dark at this taunt , and wear a mischievous , fatal look . they that see it remember it , and say so afterward . 
 when the play be end the two party join company ; and my Lord Castlewood then propose that they should go to a tavern and sup . Lockit 's , the " Greyhound , " in Charing Cross , be the house select . all six march together that way ; the three lord go a - head , Lord Mohun 's captain , and Colonel Westbury , and Harry Esmond , walk behind they . as they walk , Westbury tell Harry Esmond about his old friend Dick the Scholar , who have get promotion , and be Cornet of the Guards , and have write a book call the " Christian Hero , " and have all the Guards to laugh at he for his pain , for the Christian Hero be break the commandment constantly , Westbury say , and have fight one or two duel already . and , in a low tone , Westbury beseech young Mr. Esmond to take no part in the quarrel . " there be no need for more second than one , " say the Colonel , " and the Captain or Lord Warwick might easily withdraw . " but Harry say no ; he be bent on go through with the business . indeed , he have a plan in his head , which , he think , might prevent my Lord Viscount from engage . 
 they go in at the bar of the tavern , and desire a private room and wine and card , and when the drawer have bring these , they begin to drink and call health , and as long as the servant be in the room appear very friendly . 
 Harry Esmond 's plan be no other than to engage in talk with Lord Mohun , to insult he , and so get the first of the quarrel . so when card be propose he offer to play . " Psha ! " say my Lord Mohun   whether wish to save Harry , or not choose , to try the botte de Jesuite , it be not to be know   " young gentleman from college should not play these stake . you be too young . " 
 " who dare say I be too young ? " break out Harry . " be your lordship afraid ? " 
 " Afraid ! " cry out Mohun . 
 but my good Lord Viscount see the move " I will play you for ten moidore , Mohun , " say he . " you silly boy , we do not   play for groat here as you do at Cambridge . " and Harry , who have no such sum in his pocket   for his half - year 's salary be always pretty well spend before it be due , fall back with rage and vexation in his heart that he have not money enough to stake . 
 " I will stake the young gentleman a crown , " say the Lord Mohun 's captain . 
 " I think crown be rather scarce with the gentleman of the army , " say Harry . 
 " do they birch at College ? " say the Captain . 
 " they birch fool , " say Harry , " and they cane bully , and they fling puppy into the water . " 
 " Faith , then , there be some escape drown , " say the Captain , who be an Irishman ; and all the gentleman begin to laugh , and make poor Harry only more angry . 
 my Lord Mohun presently snuff a candle . it be when the drawer bring in fresh bottle and glass and be in the room on which my Lord Viscount say " the Deuce take you , Mohun , how damned awkward you be . light the candle , you drawer . " 
 " damned awkward be a damned awkward expression , my lord , " say the other . " town gentleman do not   use such word or ask pardon if they do . " 
 " I be a country gentleman , " say my Lord Viscount . 
 " I see it by your manner , " say my Lord Mohun . " no man shall say damned awkward to I . " 
 " I fle the word in your face , my lord , " say the other ; ' shall I send the card too ? " 
 " gentleman , gentleman ! before the servant ? " cry out Colonel Westbury and my Lord Warwick in a breath . the drawer go out of the room hastily . they tell the people below of the quarrel up stair . 
 " enough have be say , " say Colonel Westbury . " will your lordship meet to - morrow morning ? " 
 " will my Lord Castlewood withdraw his word ? " ask the Earl of Warwick . 
 " my Lord Castlewood will be first , " say Colonel Westbury . 
 " then we have nothing for it . take notice , gentleman , there have be outrageous word reparation ask and refuse . " 
 " and refuse , " say my Lord Castlewood , put on his hat . " where shall the meeting be ? and when ? " 
 " since my Lord refuse I satisfaction , which I deeply regret , there be no time so good as now , " say my Lord Mohun . " let we have chair and go to Leicester Field . " 
 " be your lordship and I to have the honor of exchange a pass or two ? " say Colonel Westbury , with a low bow to my Lord of Warwick and Holland . 
 " it be an honor for I , " say my lord , with a profound congee , " to be match with a gentleman who have be at Mons and Namur . " 
 " will your Reverence permit I to give you a lesson ? " say the Captain . 
 " Nay , nay , gentleman , two on a side be plenty , " say Harry 's patron . " spare the boy , Captain Macartney , " and he shake Harry 's hand for the last time , save one , in his life . 
 at the bar of the tavern all the gentleman stop , and my Lord Viscount say , laugh , to the barwoman , that those card set people sadly a - quarrelling ; but that the dispute be over now , and the party be all go away to my Lord Mohun 's house , in Bow Street , to drink a bottle more before go to bed . 
 a half - dozen of chair be now call , and the six gentleman step into they , the word be privately give to the chairman to go to Leicester Field , where the gentleman be set down opposite the " Standard Tavern . " it be midnight , and the town be abe by this time , and only a few light in the window of the house ; but the night be bright enough for the unhappy purpose which the disputant come about ; and so all six enter into that fatal square , the chairman stand without the railing and keep the gate , lest any person should disturb the meeting . 
 all that happen there hath be matter of public notoriety , and be record , for warn to lawless man , in the annal of our country . after be engage for not more than a couple of minute , as Harry Esmond think   though be occupy at the time with his own adversary 's point , which be active , he may not have take a good note of time , a cry from the chairman without , who be smoke their pipe , and lean over the railing of the field as they watch the dim combat within , announce that some catastrophe have happen , which cause Esmond to drop his sword and look round , at which moment his enemy wound he in the right hand . but the young man do not heed this hurt much , and run up to the place where he see his dear master be down . 
 my Lord Mohun be stand over he . 
 " be you much hurt , Frank ? " he ask in a hollow voice . 
 " I believe I be a dead man , " my lord say from the ground . 
 " no , no , not so , " say the other ; " and I call God to witness , Frank Esmond , that I would have ask your pardon , have you but give I a chance . in in the first cause of our fall out , I swear that no one be to blame but I , and and that my lady " 
 " hush ! " say my poor Lord Viscount , lift himself on his elbow and speak faintly . " ' twas a dispute about the card the curse card . Harry my boy , be you wound , too ? God help thee ! I love thee , Harry , and thou must watch over my little Frank and and carry this little heart to my wife . " 
 and here my dear lord feel in his breast for a locket he wear there , and , in the act , fall back faint . 
 we be all at this terrified , think he dead ; but Esmond and Colonel Westbury bade the chairman come into the field ; and so my lord be carry to one Mr. Aimes , a surgeon , in Long Acre , who keep a bath , and there the house be waken up , and the victim of this quarrel carry in . 
 my Lord Viscount be put to bed , and his wound look to by the surgeon , who seem both kind and skilful . when he have look to my lord , he bandage up Harry Esmond 's hand   who , from loss of blood , have faint too , in the house , and may have be some time unconscious ; and when the young man come to himself , you may be sure he eagerly ask what news there be of his dear patron ; on which the surgeon carry he to the room where the Lord Castlewood lay ; who have already send for a priest ; and desire earnestly , they say , to speak with his kinsman . he be lie on a bed , very pale and ghastly , with that fix , fatal look in his eye , which betoken death ; and faintly beckon all the other person away from he with his hand , and cry out " only Harry Esmond , " the hand fall powerless down on the coverlet , as Harry come forward , and kneel down and kiss it . 
 " thou art all but a priest , Harry , " my Lord Viscount gasp out , with a faint smile , and pressure of his cold hand . " be they all go ? let I make thee a death - bed confession . " 
 and with sacred Death wait , as it be , at the bed - foot , as an awful witness of his word , the poor die soul gasp out his last wish in respect of his family ; his humble profession of contrition for his fault ; and his charity towards the world he be leave . some thing he say concern Harry Esmond as much as they astonish he . and my Lord Viscount , sink visibly , be in the midst of these strange confession , when the ecclesiastic for whom my lord have send , Mr. Atterbury , arrive . 
 this gentleman have reach to no great church dignity as yet , but be only preacher at St. Bride 's , draw all the town thither by his eloquent sermon . he be godson to my lord , who have be pupil to his father ; have pay a visit to Castlewood from Oxford more than once ; and it be by his advice , I think , that Harry Esmond be send to Cambridge , rather than to Oxford , of which place Mr. Atterbury , though a distinguished member , speak but ill . 
 our messenger find the good priest already at his book at five o'clock in the morning , and he follow the man eagerly to the house where my poor Lord Viscount lie Esmond watch he , and take his die word from his mouth . 
 my lord , hear of Mr. Atterbury 's arrival , and squeeze Esmond 's hand , ask to be alone with the priest ; and Esmond leave they there for this solemn interview . you may be sure that his own prayer and grief accompany that die benefactor . my lord have say to he that which confound the young man inform he of a secret which greatly concern he . indeed , after hear it , he have have good cause for doubt and dismay ; for mental anguish as well as resolution . while the colloquy between Mr. Atterbury and his die penitent take place within , an immense contest of perplexity be agitate Lord Castlewood 's young companion . 
 at the end of an hour it may be more Mr. Atterbury come out of the room , look very hard at Esmond , and hold a paper . 
 " he be on the brink of God 's awful judgment , " the priest whisper . " he have make his breast clean to I . he forgive and believe , and make restitution . shall it be in public ? shall we call a witness to sign it ? " 
 " God know , " sob out the young man , " my dear lord have only do I kindness all his life . " 
 the priest put the paper into Esmond 's hand . he look at it . it swam before his eye . 
 " ' tis a confession , " he say . 
 " ' tis as you please , " say Mr. Atterbury . 
 there be a fire in the room where the cloth be dry for the bath , and there lie a heap in a corner saturate with the blood of my dear lord 's body . esmond go to the fire , and throw the paper into it . ' twas a great chimney with glaze dutch tile . how we remember such trifle at such awful moment ! the scrap of the book that we have read in a great grief the taste of that last dish that we have eat before a duel , or some such supreme meeting or parting . on the dutch tile at the Bagnio be a rude picture represent Jacob in hairy glove , cheat Isaac of Esau 's birthright . the burn paper light it up . 
 " ' tis only a confession , Mr. Atterbury , " say the young man . he lean his head against the mantel - piece : a burst of tear come to his eye . they be the first he have shed as he sit by his lord , scar by this calamity , and more yet by what the poor die gentleman have tell he , and shock to think that he should be the agent of bring this double misfortune on those he love well . 
 " let we go to he , " say Mr. Esmond . and accordingly they go into the next chamber , where by this time , the dawn have break , which show my lord 's poor pale face and wild appeal eye , that wear that awful fatal look of come dissolution . the surgeon be with he . he go into the chamber as Atterbury come out thence . my Lord Viscount turn round his sick eye towards Esmond . it choke the other to hear that rattle in his throat . 
 " my Lord Viscount , " say Mr. Atterbury , " Mr. Esmond want no witness , and hath burn the paper . " 
 " my dear master ! " Esmond say , kneel down , and take his hand and kiss it . 
 my Lord Viscount spring up in his bed , and fling his arm round Esmond . " God bl bless " be all he say . the blood rush from his mouth , deluge the young man . my dear lord be no more . he be go with a blessing on his lip , and love and repentance and kindness in his manly heart . 
 " Benedicti benedicente , " say Mr. Atterbury , and the young man , kneel at the bedside , groan out an " amen . " 
 " who shall take the news to she ? " be Mr. Esmond 's next thought . and on this he beseech Mr. Atterbury to bear the tiding to Castlewood . he could not face his mistress himself with those dreadful news . Mr. Atterbury comply kindly , Esmond writ a hasty note on his table - book to my lord 's man , bid he get the horse for Mr. Atterbury , and ride with he , and send Esmond 's own valise to the Gatehouse prison , whither he resolve to go and give himself up . 




 BOOK II . 

 contain MR . ESMOND 'S MILITARY life , and other matter appertain to the ESMOND FAMILY . 




 CHAPTER I. 

 I be in prison , and visit , but not console there . 

 those may imagine , who have see death untimely strike down person revere and beloved , and know how unavaile consolation be , what be Harry Esmond 's anguish after be an actor in that ghastly midnight scene of blood and homicide . he could not , he feel , have face his dear mistress , and tell she that story . he be thankful that kind Atterbury consent to break the sad news to she ; but , besides his grief , which he take into prison with he , he have that in his heart which secretly cheer and console he . 
 a great secret have be tell to Esmond by his unhappy stricken kinsman , lie on his death - bed . be he to disclose it , as in equity and honor he might do , the discovery would but bring great grief upon those whom he love well in the world , and who be sad enough already . should he bring down shame and perplexity upon all those being to whom he be attach by so many tender tie of affection and gratitude ? degrade his father 's widow ? impeach and sully his father 's and kinsman 's honor ? and for what ? for a barren title , to be wear at the expense of an innocent boy , the son of his dear benefactress . he have debate this matter in his conscience , whilst his poor lord be make his die confession . on one side be ambition , temptation , justice even ; but love , gratitude , and fidelity , plead on the other . and when the struggle be over in Harry 's mind , a glow of righteous happiness fill it ; and it be with grateful tear in his eye that he return thank to God for that decision which he have be enable to make . 
 " when I be deny by my own blood , " think he , " these dear friend receive and cherish I . when I be a nameless orphan myself , and need a protector , I find one in yonder kind soul , who have go to his account repenting of the innocent wrong he have do . " 
 and with this consoling think he go away to give himself up at the prison , after kiss the cold lip of his benefactor . 
 it be on the third day after he have come to the Gatehouse prison ,   where he lie in no small pain from his wound , which inflame and ache severely ,   and with those thought and resolution that have be just speak of , to depress , and yet to console he , that H. Esmond 's keeper come and tell he that a visitor be ask for he , and though he could not see her face , which be envelop in a black hood , her whole figure , too , be veil and cover with the deep mourning , Esmond know at once that his visitor be his dear mistress . 
 he get up from his bed , where he be lie , be very weak ; and advance towards she as the retire keeper shut the door upon he and his guest in that sad place , he put forward his left hand   for the right be wound and bandage , and he would have take that kind one of his mistress , which have do so many office of friendship for he for so many year . 
 but the Lady Castlewood go back from he , put back her hood , and lean against the great stanchioned door which the gaoler have just close upon they . her face be ghastly white , as Esmond see it , look from the hood ; and her eye , ordinarily so sweet and tender , be fix on he with such a tragic glance of woe and anger , as cause the young man , unaccustomed to unkindness from that person , to avert his own glance from her face . 
 " and this , Mr. Esmond , " she say , " be where I see you ; and ' tis to this you have bring I ! " 
 " you have come to console I in my calamity , madam , " say he   though , in truth , he scarce know how to address she , his emotion at behold she so overpower he . 
 she advance a little , but stand silent and tremble , look out at he from her black drapery , with her small white hand clasp together , and quiver lip and hollow eye . 
 " not to reproach I , " he continue after a pause . " my grief be sufficient as it be . " 
 " take back your hand do not touch I with it ! " she cry . " look ! there be blood on it ! " 
 " I wish they have take it all , " say Esmond ; " if you be unkind to I . " 
 " where be my husband ? " she break out . " give I back my husband , Henry . why do you stand by at midnight and see he murder ? why do the traitor escape who do it ? you , the champion of your house , who offer to die for we ! you that he love and trust , and to whom I confide he you that vow devotion and gratitude , and I believe you yes , I believe you why be you here , and my noble Francis go ? why do you come among we ? you have only bring we grief and sorrow ; and repentance , bitter , bitter repentance , as a return for our love and kindness . do I ever do you a wrong , Henry ? you be but an orphan child when I first see you when he first see you , who be so good , and noble , and trust . he would have have you send away , but , like a foolish woman , I besought he to let you stay . and you pretend to love we , and we believe you and you make our house wretche , and my husband 's heart go from I : and I lose he through you I lose he the husband of my youth , I say . I worship he : you know I worship he and he be change to I . he be no more my Francis of old my dear , dear soldier . he love I before he see you ; and I love he . oh , God be my witness how I love he ! why do he not send you from among we ? ' twas only his kindness , that could refuse I nothing then . and , young as you be yes , and weak and alone there be evil , I know there be evil in keep you . I read it in your face and eye . I see that they bode harm to we and it come , I know it would . why do you not die when you have the small - pox and I come myself and watch you , and you do not   know I in your delirium and you call out for I , though I be there at your side ? all that have happen since , be a just judgment on my wicked heart my wicked jealous heart . oh , I be punish awfully punish ! my husband lie in his blood murder for defend I , my kind , kind , generous lord and you be by , and you let he die , Henry ! " 
 these word , utter in the wildness of her grief , by one who be ordinarily quiet , and speak seldom except with a gentle smile and a soothe tone , ring in Esmond 's ear ; and ' tis say that he repeat many of they in the fever into which he now fall from his wound , and perhaps from the emotion which such passionate , undeserved upbraiding cause he . it seem as if his very sacrifice and love for this lady and her family be to turn to evil and reproach : as if his presence amongst they be indeed a cause of grief , and the continuance of his life but woe and bitterness to theirs . as the Lady Castlewood speak bitterly , rapidly , without a tear , he never offer a word of appeal or remonstrance : but sit at the foot of his prison - bed , stricken only with the more pain at think it be that soft and beloved hand which should stab he so cruelly , and powerless against her fatal sorrow . her word as she speak strike the chord of all his memory , and the whole of his boyhood and youth pass within he ; whilst this lady , so fond and gentle but yesterday this good angel whom he have love and worship stand before he , pursue he with keen word and aspect malign . 
 " I wish I be in my lord 's place , " he groan out . " it be not my fault that I be not there , madam . but Fate be strong than all of we , and will what have come to pass . it have be well for I to have die when I have the illness . " 
 " yes , Henry , " say she and as she speak she look at he with a glance that be at once so fond and so sad , that the young man , toss up his arm , wildly fall back , hide his head in the coverlet of the bed . as he turn he strike against the wall with his wounded hand , displace the ligature ; and he feel the blood rush again from the wound . he remember feel a secret pleasure at the accident and thinking , " suppose I be to end now , who would grieve for I ? " 
 this hemorrhage , or the grief and despair in which the luckless young man be at the time of the accident , must have bring on a deliquium presently ; for he have scarce any recollection afterwards , save of some one , his mistress probably , seize his hand and then of the buzzing noise in his ear as he awake , with two or three person of the prison around his bed , whereon he lie in a pool of blood from his arm . 
 it be now bandage up again by the prison surgeon , who happen to be in the place ; and the governor 's wife and servant , kind people both , be with the patient . esmond see his mistress still in the room when he awake from his trance ; but she go away without a word ; though the governor 's wife tell he that she sit in her room for some time afterward , and do not leave the prison until she hear that Esmond be likely to do well . 
 day afterwards , when Esmond be bring out of a fever which he have , and which attack he that night pretty sharply , the honest keeper 's wife bring her patient a handkerchief fresh washed and iron , and at the corner of which he recognize his mistress 's well - know cipher and viscountess 's crown . " the lady have bind it round his arm when he faint , and before she call for help , " the keeper 's wife say . " poor lady ! she take on sadly about her husband . he have be bury to - day , and a many of the coach of the nobility go with he my Lord Marlborough 's and my Lord Sunderland 's , and many of the officer of the Guards , in which he serve in the old King 's time ; and my lady have be with her two child to the King at Kensington , and ask for justice against my Lord Mohun , who be in hiding , and my Lord the Earl of Warwick and Holland , who be ready to give himself up and take his trial . " 
 such be the news , couple with assertion about her own honesty and that of molly her maid , who would never have steal a certain trumpery gold sleeve - button of Mr. Esmond 's that be miss after his fainting fit , that the keeper 's wife bring to her lodger . his thought follow to that untimely grave , the brave heart , the kind friend , the gallant gentleman , honest of word and generous of thought ,   if feeble of purpose , but be his better much strong than he ?   who have give he bread and shelter when he have none ; home and love when he need they ; and who , if he have keep one vital secret from he , have do that of which he repent ere die a wrong indeed , but one follow by remorse , and occasion by almost irresistible temptation . 
 Esmond take his handkerchief when his nurse leave he , and very likely kiss it , and look at the bauble embroider in the corner . " it have cost thee grief enough , " he think , " dear lady , so loving and so tender . shall I take it from thee and thy child ? no , never ! keep it , and wear it , my little Frank , my pretty boy . if I can not make a name for myself , I can die without one . some day , when my dear mistress see my heart , I shall be right ; or if not here or now , why , elsewhere ; where Honor doth not follow we , but where Love reign perpetual . " 
 ' tis needless to relate here , as the report of the lawyer already have chronicle they , the particular or issue of that trial which ensue upon my Lord Castlewood 's melancholy homicide . of the two lord engage in that sad matter , the second , my Lord the Earl of Warwick and Holland , who have be engage with Colonel Westbury , and wound by he , be find not guilty by his peer , before whom he be try   under the presidence of the Lord Steward , Lord Somers ; and the principal , the Lord Mohun , be find guilty of the manslaughter ,   which , indeed , be force upon he , and of which he repent most sincerely ,   plead his clergy , and so be discharge without any penalty . the widow of the slain nobleman , as it be tell we in prison , show an extraordinary spirit ; and , though she have to wait for ten year before her son be old enough to compass it , declare she would have revenge of her husband 's murderer . so much and suddenly have grief , anger , and misfortune appear to change she . but fortune , good or ill , as I take it , do not change man and woman . it but develop their character . as there be a thousand thought lie within a man that he do not know till he take up the pen to write , so the heart be a secret even to he   or she   who have it in his own breast . who hath not find himself surprised into revenge , or action , or passion , for good or evil , whereof the seed lie within he , latent and unsuspected , until the occasion call they forth ? with the death of her lord , a change seem to come over the whole conduct and mind of Lady Castlewood ; but of this we shall speak in the right season and anon . 
 the lord be try then before their peer at Westminster , accord to their privilege , be bring from the Tower with state procession and barge , and accompany by lieutenant and axe - man , the commoner engage in that melancholy fray take their trial at Newgate , as become they ; and , be all find guilty , plead likewise their benefit of clergy . the sentence , as we all know in these case , be , that the culprit lie a year in prison , or during the King 's pleasure , and be burn in the hand , or only stamp with a cold iron ; or this part of the punishment be altogether remit at the grace of the Sovereign . so Harry Esmond find himself a criminal and a prisoner at two - and - twenty year old ; as for the two colonel , his comrade , they take the matter very lightly . duelling be a part of their business ; and they could not in honor refuse any invitation of that sort . 
 but the case be different with Mr. Esmond . his life be change by that stroke of the sword which destroy his kind patron 's . as he lie in prison , old Dr. Tusher fall ill and die ; and Lady Castlewood appoint Thomas Tusher to the vacant living ; about the filling of which she have a thousand time fondly talk to Harry Esmond : how they never should part ; how he should educate her boy ; how to be a country clergyman , like saintly George Herbert or pious Dr. Ken , be the happy and great lot in life ; how   if he be obstinately bent on it , though , for her part , she own rather to hold Queen Bess 's opinion , that a bishop should have no wife , and if not a bishop why a clergyman ?   she would find a good wife for Harry Esmond : and so on , with a hundred pretty prospect tell by fireside evening , in fond prattle , as the child play about the hall . all these plan be overthrow now . Thomas Tusher write to Esmond , as he lie in prison , announce that his patroness have confer upon he the live his reverend father have hold for many year ; that she never , after the tragical event which have occur   whereof Tom speak with a very edify horror , could see in the revere Tusher 's pulpit , or at her son 's table , the man who be answerable for the father 's life ; that her ladyship bid he to say that she pray for her kinsman 's repentance and his worldly happiness ; that he be free to command her aid for any scheme of life which he might propose to himself ; but that on this side of the grave she would see he no more . and Tusher , for his own part , add that Harry should have his prayer as a friend of his youth , and commend he whilst he be in prison to read certain work of theology , which his reverence pronounce to be very wholesome for sinner in his lamentable condition . 
 and this be the return for a life of devotion this the end of year of affectionate intercourse and passionate fidelity ! Harry would have die for his patron , and be hold as little well than his murderer : he have sacrifice , she do not know how much , for his mistress , and she throw he aside ; he have endow her family with all they have , and she talk about give he alm as to a menial ! the grief for his patron 's loss ; the pain of his own present position , and doubt as to the future : all these be forget under the sense of the consummate outrage which he have to endure , and overpower by the superior pang of that torture . 
 he writ back a letter to Mr. Tusher from his prison , congratulate his reverence upon his appointment to the living of Castlewood : sarcastically bid he to follow in the footstep of his admirable father , whose gown have descend upon he ; thank her ladyship for her offer of alm , which he say he should trust not to need ; and beseech she to remember that , if ever her determination should change towards he , he would be ready to give her proof of a fidelity which have never waver , and which ought never to have be question by that house . " and if we meet no more , or only as stranger in this world , " Mr. Esmond conclude , " a sentence against the cruelty and injustice of which I disdain to appeal ; hereafter she will know who be faithful to she , and whether she have any cause to suspect the love and devotion of her kinsman and servant . " 
 after the sending of this letter , the poor young fellow 's mind be more at ease than it have be previously . the blow have be strike , and he have bear it . his cruel goddess have shake her wing and flee : and leave he alone and friendless , but virtute sua . and he have to bear he up , at once the sense of his right and the feeling of his wrong , his honor and his misfortune . as I have see man wake and run to arm at a sudden trumpet , before emergency a manly heart leap up resolute ; meet the threatening danger with undaunted countenance ; and , whether conquered or conquering , face it always . ah ! no man know his strength or his weakness , till occasion prove they . if there be some thought and action of his life from the memory of which a man shrink with shame , sure there be some which he may be proud to own and remember ; forgive injury , conquer temptation   now and then   and difficulty vanquish by endurance . 
 it be these thought regard the living , far more than any great poignancy of grief respect the dead , which affect Harry Esmond whilst in prison after his trial : but it may be imagine that he could take no comrade of misfortune into the confidence of his feeling , and they think it be remorse and sorrow for his patron 's loss which affect the young man , in error of which opinion he choose to leave they . as a companion he be so moody and silent that the two officer , his fellow - sufferer , leave he to himself mostly , like little very likely what they know of he , console themselves with dice , card , and the bottle , and while away their own captivity in their own way . it seem to Esmond as if he live year in that prison : and be change and age when he come out of it . at certain period of life we live year of emotion in a few week and look back on those time , as on great gap between the old life and the new . you do not know how much you suffer in those critical malady of the heart , until the disease be over and you look back on it afterwards . during the time , the suffering be at least sufferable . the day pass in more or less of pain , and the night wear away somehow . ' tis only in after day that we see what the danger have be as a man out a - hunting or rid for his life look at a leap , and wonder how he should have survive the taking of it . o dark month of grief and rage ! of wrong and cruel endurance ! he be old now who recall you . long ago he have forgive and bl the soft hand that wound he : but the mark be there , and the wound be cicatrize only no time , tear , caress , or repentance , can obliterate the scar . we be indocile to put up with grief , however . Reficimus rate quassas : we tempt the ocean again and again , and try upon new venture . esmond think of his early time as a novitiate , and of this past trial as an initiation before enter into life as our young Indians undergo torture silently before they pass to the rank of warrior in the tribe . 
 the officer , meanwhile , who be not let into the secret of the grief which be gnaw at the side of their silent young friend , and be accustom to such transaction , in which one comrade or another be daily pay the forfeit of the sword , do not , of course , bemoan themselves very inconsolably about the fate of their late companion in arm . this one tell story of former adventure of love , or war , or pleasure , in which poor Frank Esmond have be engage ; t'other recollect how a constable have be bilk , or a tavern - bully beat : whilst my lord 's poor widow be sit at his tomb worship he as an actual saint and spotless hero so the visitor say who have news of Lady Castlewood ; and Westbury and Macartney have pretty nearly have all the town to come and see they . 
 the duel , its fatal termination , the trial of the two peer and the three commoner concern , have cause the great excitement in the town . the print and News Letters be full of they . the three gentleman in Newgate be almost as much crowded as the bishop in the Tower , or a highwayman before execution . we be allow to live in the Governor 's house , as hath be say , both before trial and after condemnation , wait the King 's pleasure ; nor be the real cause of the fatal quarrel know , so closely have my lord and the two other person who know it keep the secret , but every one imagine that the origin of the meeting be a gambling dispute . except fresh air , the prisoner have , upon payment , most thing they could desire . interest be make that they should not mix with the vulgar convict , whose ribald chorus and loud laughter and curse could be hear from their own part of the prison , where they and the miserable debtor be confine pell - mell . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 I come to the END of MY CAPTIVITY , but not of MY TROUBLE . 

 among the company which come to visit the two officer be an old acquaintance of Harry Esmond ; that gentleman of the Guards , namely , who have be so kind to Harry when Captain Westbury 's troop have be quarter at Castlewood more than seven year before . Dick the Scholar be no long Dick the Trooper now , but Captain Steele of Lucas 's Fusiliers , and secretary to my Lord Cutts , that famous officer of King William 's , the brave and most beloved man of the english army . the two jolly prisoner have be drink with a party of friend   for our cellar and that of the keeper of Newgate , too , be supply with endless hamper of Burgundy and Champagne that the friend of the Colonels send in ; and Harry , have no wish for their drink or their conversation , be too feeble in health for the one and too sad in spirit for the other , be sit apart in his little room , read such book as he have , one evening , when honest Colonel Westbury , flush with liquor , and always good - humor in and out of his cup , come laugh into Harry 's closet and say , " Ho , young Killjoy ! here be a friend come to see thee ; he will pray with thee , or he will drink with thee ; or he will drink and pray turn about . Dick , my christian hero , here be the little scholar of Castlewood . " 
 Dick come up and kiss Esmond on both cheek , impart a strong perfume of burn sack along with his caress to the young man . 
 " what ! be this the little man that use to talk Latin and fetch our bowl ? how tall thou art grow ! I protest I should have know thee anywhere . and so you have turn ruffian and fighter ; and want to measure sword with Mohun , do you ? I protest that Mohun say at the Guard dinner yesterday , where there be a pretty company of we , that the young fellow want to fight he , and be the well man of the two . " 
 " I wish we could have try and prove it , Mr. Steele , " say Esmond , think of his dead benefactor , and his eye fill with tear . 
 with the exception of that one cruel letter which he have from his mistress , Mr. Esmond hear nothing from she , and she seem determined to execute her resolve of part from he and disown he . but he have news of she , such as it be , which Mr. Steele assiduously bring he from the Prince 's and Princess 's Court , where our honest Captain have be advance to the post of gentleman waiter . when off duty there , Captain Dick often come to console his friend in captivity ; a good nature and a friendly disposition towards all who be in ill - fortune no doubt prompt he to make his visit , and good - fellowship and good wine to prolong they . 
 " faith , " say Westbury , " the little scholar be the first to begin the quarrel I mind I of it now at Lockit 's . I always hat that fellow Mohun . what be the real cause , of the quarrel betwixt he and poor Frank ? I would wager ' twas a woman . " 
 " ' twas a quarrel about play on my word , about play , " Harry say . " my poor lord lose great sum to his guest at Castlewood . angry word pass between they ; and , though Lord Castlewood be the kind and most pliable soul alive , his spirit be very high ; and hence that meeting which have bring we all here , " say Mr. Esmond , resolve never to acknowledge that there have ever be any other cause but card for the duel . 
 " I do not like to use bad word of a nobleman , " say Westbury ; " but if my Lord Mohun be a commoner , I would say , ' twas a pity he be not hang . he be familiar with dice and woman at a time other boy be at school be birch ; he be as wicked as the old rake , year ere he have do grow ; and handle a sword and a foil , and a bloody one , too , before he ever use a razor . he hold poor Will Mountford in talk that night , when bloody Dick Hill run he through . he will come to a bad end , will that young lord ; and no end be bad enough for he , " say honest Mr. Westbury : whose prophecy be fulfil twelve year after , upon that fatal day when Mohun fall , drag down one of the brave and great gentleman in England in his fall . 
 from Mr. Steele , then , who bring the public rumor , as well as his own private intelligence , Esmond learn the movement of his unfortunate mistress . Steele 's heart be of very inflammable composition ; and the gentleman usher speak in term of boundless admiration both of the widow   that most beautiful woman , as he say   and of her daughter , who , in the Captain 's eye , be a still great paragon . if the pale widow , whom Captain Richard , in his poetic rapture compare to a Niobe in tear to a Sigismunda to a weep Belvidera , be an object the most lovely and pathetic which his eye have ever behold , or for which his heart have melt , even her ripened perfection and beauty be as nothing compare to the promise of that extreme loveliness which the good Captain see in her daughter . it be matre pulcra filia pulcrior . Steele compose sonnet whilst he be on duty in his Prince 's ante - chamber , to the maternal and filial charm . he would speak for hour about they to Harry Esmond ; and , indeed , he could have choose few subject more likely to interest the unhappy young man , whose heart be now as always devoted to these lady ; and who be thankful to all who love they , or praise they , or wish they well . 
 not that his fidelity be recompense by any answer kindness , or show of relent even , on the part of a mistress obdurate now after ten year of love and benefaction . the poor young man get no answer , save Tusher 's , to that letter which he have write , and be too proud to write more , open a part of his heart to Steele , than whom no man , when unhappy , could find a kind hearer , or more friendly emissary ; describe   in word which be no doubt pathetic , for they come imo pectore , and cause honest Dick to weep plentifully   his youth , his constancy , his fond devotion to that household which have rear he ; his affection , how earn , and how tenderly requite until but yesterday , and   as far as he might   the circumstance and cause for which that sad quarrel have make of Esmond a prisoner under sentence , a widow and orphan of those whom in life he hold dearest . in term that might well move a hard - hearted man than young Esmond 's confidant for , indeed , the speaker 's own heart be half broke as he utter they he describe a part of what have take place in that only sad interview which his mistress have grant he ; how she have leave he with anger and almost imprecation , whose word and thought until then have be only blessing and kindness ; how she have accuse he of the guilt of that blood , in exchange for which he would cheerfully have sacrifice his own   indeed , in this the Lord Mohun , the Lord Warwick , and all the gentleman engage , as well as the common rumor out of door Steele tell he bear out the luckless young man ; and with all his heart , and tear , he beseech Mr. Steele to inform his mistress of her kinsman 's unhappiness , and to deprecate that cruel anger she show he . half frantic with grief at the injustice do he , and contrast it with a thousand soft recollection of love and confidence go by , that make his present misery inexpressibly more bitter , the poor wretch pass many a lonely day and wakeful night in a kind of powerless despair and rage against his iniquitous fortune . it be the soft hand that strike he , the gentle and most compassionate nature that persecute he . " I would as lief , " he say , " have plead guilty to the murder , and have suffer for it like any other felon , as have to endure the torture to which my mistress subject I . " 
 although the recital of Esmond 's story , and his passionate appeal and remonstrance , draw so many tear from Dick who hear they , they have no effect upon the person whom they be design to move . Esmond 's ambassador come back from the mission with which the poor young gentleman have charge he , with a sad blank face and a shake of the head , which tell that there be no hope for the prisoner ; and scarce a wretched culprit in that prison of Newgate order for execution , and tremble for a reprieve , feel more cast down than Mr. Esmond , innocent and condemn . 
 as have be arrange between the prisoner and his counsel in their consultation , Mr. Steele have go to the dowager 's house in Chelsey , where it have be say the widow and her orphan be , have see my Lady Viscountess , and plead the cause of her unfortunate kinsman . " and I think I speak well , my poor boy , " say Mr. Steele ; " for who would not speak well in such a cause , and before so beautiful a judge ? I do not see the lovely beatrix   sure her famous namesake of Florence be never half so beautiful , only the young Viscount be in the room with the Lord Churchill , my Lord of Marlborough 's eld son . but these young gentleman go off to the garden ; I could see they from the window tilting at each other with pole in a mimic tournament   grief touch the young but lightly , and I remember that I beat a drum at the coffin of my own father . my Lady Viscountess look out at the two boy at their game and say ' you see , sir , child be teach to use weapon of death as toy , and to make a sport of murder ; ' and as she speak she look so lovely , and stand there in herself so sad and beautiful , an instance of that doctrine whereof I be a humble preacher , that have I not dedicate my little volume of the ' Christian Hero '   I perceive , Harry , thou hast not cut the leaf of it . the sermon be good , believe I , though the preacher 's life may not answer it   I say , have not   I dedicate the volume to Lord Cutts , I would have ask permission to place her ladyship 's name on the first page . I think I never see such a beautiful violet as that of her eye , Harry . her complexion be of the pink of the blush - rose , she hath an exquisite turn wrist and dimpled hand , and I make no doubt " 
 " do you come to tell I about the dimple on my lady 's hand ? " break out Mr. Esmond , sadly . 
 " a lovely creature in affliction seem always doubly beautiful to I , " say the poor Captain , who indeed be but too often in a state to see double , and so check he resume the interrupted thread of his story . " as I speak my business , " Mr. Steele say , " and narrate to your mistress what all the world know , and the other side hath be eager to acknowledge that you have try to put yourself between the two lord , and to take your patron 's quarrel on your own point ; I recount the general praise of your gallantry , besides my Lord Mohun 's particular testimony to it ; I think the widow listen with some interest , and her eye I have never see such a violet , Harry look up at mine once or twice . but after I have speak on this theme for a while she suddenly break away with a cry of grief . ' I would to God , sir , ' she say , ' I have never hear that word gallantry which you use , or know the meaning of it . my lord might have be here but for that ; my home might be happy ; my poor boy have a father . it be what you gentleman call gallantry come into my home , and drive my husband on to the cruel sword that kill he . you should not speak the word to a christian woman , sir , a poor widow mother of orphan , whose home be happy until the world come into it the wicked godless world , that take the blood of the innocent , and let the guilty go free . ' 
 " as the afflict lady speak in this strain , sir , " Mr. Steele continue , " it seem as if indignation move she , even more than grief . ' Compensation ! ' she go on passionately , her cheek and eye kindling ; ' what compensation do your world give the widow for her husband , and the child for the murderer of their father ? the wretch who do the deed have not even a punishment . Conscience ! what conscience have he , who can enter the house of a friend , whisper falsehood and insult to a woman that never harm he , and stab the kind heart that trust he ? my Lord my Lord Wretch 's , my Lord Villain 's , my Lord Murderer 's peer meet to try he , and they dismiss he with a word or two of reproof and send he into the world again , to pursue woman with lust and falsehood , and to murder unsuspecting guest that harbor he . that day , my Lord my Lord Murderer   I will never name he   be let loose , a woman be execute at Tyburn for steal in a shop . but a man may rob another of his life , or a lady of her honor , and shall pay no penalty ! I take my child , run to the throne , and on my knee ask for justice , and the King refuse I . the King ! he be no king of mine he never shall be . he , too , rob the throne from the king his father the true king and he have go unpunished , as the great do . ' 
 " I then think to speak for you , " Mr. Steele continue , " and I interpose by say , ' there be one , madam , who , at least , would have put his own breast between your husband 's and my Lord Mohun 's sword . your poor young kinsman , Harry Esmond , hath tell I that he try to draw the quarrel on himself . ' 
 " ' be you come from HIM ? ' ask the lady   so Mr. Steele go on   rise up with a great severity and stateliness . ' I think you have come from the Princess . I see Mr. Esmond in his prison , and bid he farewell . he bring misery into my house . he never should have enter it . ' 
 " ' Madam , madam , he be not to blame , ' I interpose , " continue Mr. Steele . 
 " ' do I blame he to you , sir ? ' ask the widow . ' if ' tis he who send you , say that I have take counsel , where ' she speak with a very pallid cheek now , and a break in her voice ' where all who ask may have it ; and that it bid I to part from he , and to see he no more . we meet in the prison for the last time at least for year to come . it may be , in year hence , when when our knee and our tear and our contrition have change our sinful heart , sir , and work our pardon , we may meet again but not now . after what have pass , I could not bear to see he . I wish he well , sir ; but I wish he farewell , too ; and if he have that that regard towards we which he speak of , I beseech he to prove it by obey I in this . ' 
 " ' I shall break the young man 's heart , madam , by this hard sentence , ' " Mr. Steele say . 
 " the lady shake her head , " continue my kind scholar . " ' the heart of young man , Mr. Steele , be not so make , ' she say . ' Mr. Esmond will find other other friend . the mistress of this house have relent very much towards the late lord 's son , ' she add , with a blush , ' and have promise I , that is , have promise that she will care for his fortune . whilst I live in it , after the horrid horrid deed which have pass , Castlewood must never be a home to he never . nor would I have he write to I except no I would have he never write to I , nor see he more . give he , if you will , my part Hush ! not a word of this before my daughter . ' 
 " here the fair beatrix enter from the river , with her cheek flush with health , and look only the more lovely and fresh for the mourning habiliment which she wear . and my Lady Viscountess say 
 " ' beatrix , this be Mr. Steele , gentleman - usher to the Prince 's Highness . when do your new comedy appear , Mr. Steele ? ' I hope thou wilt be out of prison for the first night , Harry . " 
 the sentimental Captain conclude his sad tale , say , " Faith , the beauty of Filia pulcrior drive pulcram matrem out of my head ; and yet as I come down the river , and think about the pair , the pallid dignity and exquisite grace of the matron have the uppermost , and I think she even more noble than the virgin ! " 
 the party of prisoner live very well in Newgate , and with comfort very different to those which be award to the poor wretch there   his insensibility to their misery , their gayety still more frightful , their curse and blasphemy , hath strike with a kind of shame since as prove how selfish , during his imprisonment , his own particular grief be , and how entirely the thought of it absorb he : if the three gentleman live well under the care of the Warden of Newgate , it be because they pay well : and indeed the cost at the dear ordinary or the grand tavern in London could not have furnish a long reckoning , than our host of the " Handcuff Inn " as Colonel Westbury call it . our room be the three in the gate over Newgate on the second story look up Newgate Street towards Cheapside and Paul 's Church . and we have leave to walk on the roof , and could see thence Smithfield and the Bluecoat Boys ' School , Gardens , and the Chartreux , where , as Harry Esmond remember , Dick the Scholar , and his friend Tom Tusher , have have their schooling . 
 Harry could never have pay his share of that prodigious heavy reckoning which my landlord bring to his guest once a week : for he have but three piece in his pocket that fatal night before the duel , when the gentleman be at card , and offer to play five . but whilst he be yet ill at the Gatehouse , after Lady Castlewood have visit he there , and before his trial , there come one in an orange - tawny coat and blue lace , the livery which the esmond always wear , and bring a sealed packet for Mr. Esmond , which contain twenty guineas , and a note say that a counsel have be appoint for he , and that more money would be forthcoming whenever he need it . 
 ' twas a queer letter from the scholar as she be , or as she call herself : the Dowager Viscountess Castlewood , write in the strange barbarous french which she and many other fine lady of that time witness her Grace of Portsmouth employ . indeed , spelling be not an article of general commodity in the world then , and my Lord Marlborough 's letter can show that he , for one , have but a little share of this part of grammar : 
 " MONG COUSSIN , " my Lady Viscountess Dowager write , " je scay que vous vous ete bravement batew et grievement blessay du coste de feu M. le Vicomte . M. le Compte de Varique ne se playt qua parlay de vous : M. de Moon aucy . Il di que vous avay voulew vous bastre avecque luy que vous este plus fort que luy fur l'ayscrimme quil'y a surtout certaine Botte que vous scavay quil n'a jammay sceu pariay : et que c'en eut ete fay de luy si vouseluy vous vous fussiay battew ansamb . Aincy ce pauv Vicompte est mort . Mort et pontayt Mon coussin , mon coussin ! jay dans la tayste que vous n'este quung pety Monst angcy que les esmond ong tousjour este . La veuve est chay moy . J'ay recuilly cet ' pauve famme . Elle est furieuse cont vous , allan tous les jours chercher ley Roy   d'icy   demandant a gran cri revanche pour son Mary . Elle ne veux voyre ni entende parlay de vous : pourtant elle ne fay qu'en parlay milfoy par jour . quand vous seray hor prison venay I voyre . j'auray soe de vous . si cette petite Prude veut se defaire de song pety Monste   Helas je crae quil ne soy trotar !   je m'on chargeray . J'ay encor quelqu interay et quelques escus de costay . 
 " La Veuve se raccommode avec Miladi Marlboro qui est tout puicante avecque la Reine Anne . Cet dam senteraysent pour la petite prude ; qui pourctant a un fi du mesme asge que vous savay . 
 " En sortant de prisong venez icy . Je ne puy vous recevoir chaymoy a cause des mechansete du monde , may pre du moy vous aurez logement . 
 " ISABELLE VICOMTESSE D'ESMOND " 
 Marchioness of Esmond this lady sometimes call herself , in virtue of that patent which have be give by the late King James to Harry Esmond 's father ; and in this state she have her train carry by a knight 's wife , a cup and cover of assay to drink from , and fringed cloth . 
 he who be of the same age as little Francis , whom we shall henceforth call Viscount Castlewood here , be H. R. H. the Prince of Wales , bear in the same year and month with Frank , and just proclaim at Saint Germains , King of Great Britain , France , and Ireland . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 I take the queen 's pay in QUIN 's REGIMENT . 

 the fellow in the orange - tawny livery with blue lace and facing be in wait when Esmond come out of prison , and , take the young gentleman 's slender baggage , lead the way out of that odious newgate , and by Fleet Conduit , down to the Thames , where a pair of oar be call , and they go up the river to Chelsey . esmond think the sun have never shine so bright ; nor the air feel so fresh and exhilarating . Temple Garden , as they row by , look like the garden of Eden to he , and the aspect of the quay , wharf , and building by the river , Somerset House , and Westminster   where the splendid new bridge be just begin , Lambeth tower and palace , and that busy shin scene of the Thames swarm with boat and barge , fill his heart with pleasure and cheerfulness as well such a beautiful scene might to one who have be a prisoner so long , and with so many dark thought deepen the gloom of his captivity . they row up at length to the pretty village of Chelsey , where the nobility have many handsome country - house ; and so come to my Lady Viscountess 's house , a cheerful new house in the row face the river , with a handsome garden behind it , and a pleasant look - out both towards Surrey and Kensington , where stand the noble ancient palace of the Lord Warwick , Harry 's reconciled adversary . 
 here in her ladyship 's saloon , the young man see again some of those picture which have be at Castlewood , and which she have remove thence on the death of her lord , Harry 's father . specially , and in the place of honor , be Sir Peter Lely 's picture of the honorable Mistress Isabella Esmond as Diana , in yellow satin , with a bow in her hand and a crescent in her forehead ; and dog frisk about she . ' twa paint about the time when royal Endymions be say to find favor with this virgin huntress ; and , as goddess have youth perpetual , this one believe to the day of her death that she never grow old : and always persist in suppose the picture be still like she . 
 after he have be show to her room by the groom of the chamber , who fill many office besides in her ladyship 's modest household , and after a proper interval , his elderly goddess Diana vouchsafe to appear to the young man . a blackamoor in a turkish habit , with red boot and a silver collar , on which the Viscountess 's arm be engraven , precede she and bear her cushion ; then come her gentlewoman ; a little pack of spaniel bark and frisk about precede the austere huntress then , behold , the Viscountess herself " dropping odor . " esmond recollect from his childhood that rich aroma of musk which his mother - in - law   for she may be call so   exhale . as the sky grow red and redder towards sunset , so , in the decline of her year , the cheek of my Lady Dowager blush more deeply . her face be illuminate with vermilion , which appear the brighter from the white paint employ to set it off . she wear the ringlet which have be in fashion in King Charles 's time ; whereas the lady of King William 's have head - dress like the tower of Cybele . her eye gleam out from the midst of this queer structure of paint , dye , and pomatum . such be my Lady Viscountess , Mr. Esmond 's father 's widow . 
 he make she such a profound bow as her dignity and relationship merit , and advance with the great gravity , and once more kiss that hand , upon the trembling knuckle of which glitter a score of ring remember old time when that trembling hand make he tremble . " Marchioness , " say he , bow , and on one knee , " be it only the hand I may have the honor of salute ? " for , accompany that inward laughter , which the sight of such an astonishing old figure might well produce in the young man , there be good will too , and the kindness of consanguinity . she have be his father 's wife , and be his grandfather 's daughter . she have suffer he in old day , and be kind to he now after her fashion . and now that bar - sinister be remove from Esmond 's thought , and that secret opprobrium no long cast upon his mind , he be pleased to feel family tie and own they perhaps secretly vain of the sacrifice he have make , and to think that he , Esmond , be really the chief of his house , and only prevent by his own magnanimity from advance his claim . 
 at least , ever since he have learn that secret from his poor patron on his die bed , actually as he be stand beside it , he have feel an independency which he have never know before , and which since do not desert he . so he call his old aunt Marchioness , but with an air as if he be the Marquis of Esmond who so address she . 
 do she read in the young gentleman 's eye , which have now no fear of hers or their superannuated authority , that he know or suspect the truth about his birth ? she give a start of surprise at his altered manner : indeed , it be quite a different bearing to that of the Cambridge student who have pay she a visit two year since , and whom she have dismiss with five piece send by the groom of the chamber . she eye he , then tremble a little more than be she will not , perhaps , and say , " welcome , cousin , " in a frightened voice . 
 his resolution , as have be say before , have be quite different , namely , so to bear himself through life as if the secret of his birth be not know to he ; but he suddenly and rightly determine on a different course . he ask that her ladyship 's attendant should be dismiss , and when they be private " welcome , nephew , at least , madam , it should be , " he say . " a great wrong have be do to I and to you , and to my poor mother , who be no more . " 
 " I declare before heaven that I be guiltless of it , " she cry out , give up her cause at once . " it be your wicked father who " 
 " who bring this dishonor on our family , " say Mr. Esmond . " I know it full well . I want to disturb no one . those who be in present possession have be my dearest benefactor , and be quite innocent of intentional wrong to I . the late lord , my dear patron , know not the truth until a few month before his death , when Father Holt bring the news to he . " 
 " the wretch ! he have it in confession ! he have it in confession ! " cry out the Dowager Lady . 
 " not so . he learn it elsewhere as well as in confession , " Mr. Esmond answer . " my father , when wound at the Boyne , tell the truth to a french priest , who be in hiding after the battle , as well as to the priest there , at whose house he die . this gentleman do not think fit to divulge the story till he meet with Mr. Holt at Saint Omer 's . and the latter keep it back for his own purpose , and until he have learn whether my mother be alive or no . she be dead year since , my poor patron tell I with his die breath , and I doubt he not . I do not know even whether I could prove a marriage . I would not if I could . I do not care to bring shame on our name , or grief upon those whom I love , however hardly they may use I . my father 's son , madam , will not   aggravate the wrong my father do you . continue to be his widow , and give I your kindness . ' tis all I ask from you ; and I shall never speak of this matter again . " 
 " Mais vous ete un noble jeune homme ! " break out my lady , speak , as usual with she when she be agitate , in the french language . 
 " Noblesse oblige , " say Mr. Esmond , make she a low bow . " there be those alive to whom , in return for their love to I , I often fondly say I would give my life away . shall I be their enemy now , and quarrel about a title ? what matter who have it ? ' tis with the family still . " 
 " what can there be in that little prude of a woman that make man so raffoler about she ? " cry out my Lady Dowager . " she be here for a month petition the king . she be pretty , and well conserve ; but she have not the bel air . in his late Majesty 's Court all the man pretend to admire she , and she be no well than a little wax doll . she be well now , and look the sister of her daughter ; but what mean you all by bepraise she ? Mr. Steele , who be in wait on Prince George , see she with her two child go to Kensington , writ a poem about she , and say he shall wear her color , and dress in black for the future . Mr. Congreve say he will write a ' Mourning Widow , ' that shall be well than his ' Mourning Bride . ' though their husband quarrel and fight when that wretch Churchill desert the king   for which he deserve to be hang , Lady Marlborough have again go wild about the little widow ; insult I in my own drawing - room , by say ' twa not the old widow , but the young Viscountess , she have come to see . little Castlewood and little Lord Churchill be to be swear friend , and have box each other twice or thrice like brother already . ' twas that wicked young Mohun who , come back from the province last year , where he have disinter she , rave about she all the winter ; say she be a pearl set before swine ; and kill poor stupid Frank . the quarrel be all about his wife . I know ' twa all about she . be there anything between she and Mohun , nephew ? tell I now be there anything ? about yourself , I do not ask you to answer question . " 
 Mr. Esmond blush up . " my lady 's virtue be like that of a saint in heaven , madam , " he cry out . 
 " Eh ! mon neveu . many saint get to heaven after have a deal to repent of . I believe you be like all the rest of the fool , and madly in love with she . " 
 " indeed , I love and honor she before all the world , " Esmond answer . " I take no shame in that . " 
 " and she have shut her door on you give the living to that horrid young cub , son of that horrid old bear , Tusher , and say she will never see you more . Monsieur mon neveu we be all like that . when I be a young woman , I be positive that a thousand duel be fight about I . and when poor Monsieur de Souchy drown himself in the canal at bruge because I dance with Count Springbock , I could not   squeeze out a single tear , but dance till five o'clock the next morning . ' twas the Count no , ' twa my Lord Ormond that play the fiddle , and his Majesty do I the honor of dance all night with I . how you be grow ! you have get the bel air . you be a black man . our esmond be all black . the little prude 's son be fair ; so be his father fair and stupid . you be an ugly little wretch when you come to Castlewood you be all eye , like a young crow . we intend you should be a priest . that awful Father Holt how he use to frighten I when I be ill ! I have a comfortable director now the Abbe Douillette a dear man . we make meagre on Fridays always . my cook be a devout pious man . you , of course , be of the right way of thinking . they say the Prince of Orange be very ill indeed . " 
 in this way the old Dowager rattle on remorselessly to Mr. Esmond , who be quite astounded with her present volubility , contrast it with her former haughty behavior to he . but she have take he into favor for the moment , and choose not only to like he , as far as her nature permit , but to be afraid of he ; and he find himself to be as familiar with she now as a young man , as , when a boy , he have be timorous and silent . she be as good as her word respect he . she introduce he to her company , of which she entertain a good deal of the adherent of King James of course and a great deal of loud intriguing take place over her card - table . she present Mr. Esmond as her kinsman to many person of honor ; she supply he not illiberally with money , which he have no scruple in accept from she , consider the relationship which he bear to she , and the sacrifice which he himself be make in behalf of the family . but he have make up his mind to continue at no woman 's apron - string long ; and perhaps have cast about how he should distinguish himself , and make himself a name , which his singular fortune have deny he . a discontent with his former bookish life and quietude , a bitter feeling of revolt at that slavery in which he have choose to confine himself for the sake of those whose hardness towards he make his heart bleed , a restless wish to see man and the world , lead he to think of the military profession : at any rate , to desire to see a few campaign , and accordingly he press his new patroness to get he a pair of color ; and one day have the honor of find himself appoint an ensign in Colonel Quin 's regiment of Fusileers on the irish establishment . 
 Mr. Esmond 's commission be scarce three week old when that accident befell King William which end the life of the great , the wise , the brave , and most clement sovereign whom England ever know . ' twas the fashion of the hostile party to assail this great prince 's reputation during his life ; but the joy which they and all his enemy in Europe show at his death , be a proof of the terror in which they hold he . young as Esmond be , he be wise enough   and generous enough too , let it be say   to scorn that indecency of gratulation which break out amongst the follower of King James in London , upon the death of this illustrious prince , this invincible warrior , this wise and moderate statesman . loyalty to the exile king 's family be traditional , as have be say , in that house to which Mr. Esmond belong . his father 's widow have all her hope , sympathy , recollection , prejudice , engage on King James 's side ; and be certainly as noisy a conspirator as ever assert the King 's right , or abuse his opponent 's , over a quadrille table or a dish of bohea . her ladyship 's house swarm with ecclesiastic , in disguise and out ; with tale - bearer from St. Germains ; and quidnunc that know the last news from Versailles ; nay , the exact force and number of the next expedition which the french king be to send from Dunkirk , and which be to swallow up the Prince of Orange , his army and his court . she have receive the Duke of Berwick when he land here in ' 96 . she keep the glass he drink from , vow she never would use it till she drink King James the Third 's health in it on his Majesty 's return ; she have token from the Queen , and relic of the saint who , if the story be true , have not always be a saint as far as she and many other be concern . she believe in the miracle work at his tomb , and have a hundred authentic story of wondrous cure effect by the blessed king 's rosary , the medal which he wear , the lock of his hair , or what not . esmond remember a score of marvellous tale which the credulous old woman tell he . there be the Bishop of Autun , that be heal of a malady he have for forty year , and which leave he after he say mass for the repose of the king 's soul . there be M. Marais , a surgeon in Auvergne , who have a palsy in both his leg , which be cure through the king 's intercession . there be Philip Pitet , of the Benedictines , who have a suffocating cough , which wellnigh kill he , but he besought relief of heaven through the merit and intercession of the blessed king , and he straightway feel a profuse sweat break out all over he , and be recover perfectly . and there be the wife of Mons . Lepervier , dancing - master to the Duke of Saxe - Gotha , who be entirely ease of a rheumatism by the king 's intercession , of which miracle there could be no doubt , for her surgeon and his apprentice have give their testimony , under oath , that they do not in any way contribute to the cure . of these tale , and a thousand like they , Mr. Esmond believe as much as he choose . his kinswoman 's great faith have swallow for they all . 
 the English High Church party do not adopt these legend . but truth and honor , as they think , bind they to the exile king 's side ; nor have the banish family any warm supporter than that kind lady of Castlewood , in whose house Esmond be bring up . she influence her husband , very much more perhaps than my lord know , who admire his wife prodigiously though he might be inconstant to she , and who , adverse to the trouble of think himself , gladly enough adopt the opinion which she choose for he . to one of her simple and faithful heart , allegiance to any sovereign but the one be impossible . to serve King William for interest 's sake would have be a monstrous hypocrisy and treason . her pure conscience could no more have consent to it than to a theft , a forgery , or any other base action . Lord Castlewood might have be win over , no doubt , but his wife never could : and he submit his conscience to hers in this case as he do in most other , when he be not tempt too sorely . and it be from his affection and gratitude most likely , and from that eager devotion for his mistress , which characterize all Esmond 's youth , that the young man subscribe to this , and other article of faith , which his fond benefactress set he . have she be a Whig , he have be one ; have she follow Mr. Fox , and turn Quaker , no doubt he would have abjure ruffle and a periwig , and have forswear sword , lace - coat , and clocked stocking . in the scholar ' boyish dispute at the University , where party run very high , Esmond be note as a Jacobite , and very likely from vanity as much as affection take the side of his family . 
 almost the whole of the clergy of the country and more than a half of the nation be on this side . ours be the most loyal people in the world surely ; we admire our king , and be faithful to they long after they have cease to be true to we . ' tis a wonder to any one who look back at the history of the Stuart family to think how they kick their crown away from they ; how they fling away chance after chance ; what treasure of loyalty they dissipate , and how fatally they be bent on consummate their own ruin . if ever man have fidelity , ' twa they ; if ever man squander opportunity , ' twa they ; and , of all the enemy they have , they themselves be the most fatal . 
 when the Princess Anne succeed , the weary nation be glad enough to cry a truce from all these war , controversy , and conspiracy , and to accept in the person of a Princess of the blood royal a compromise between the party into which the country be divide . the Tories could serve under she with easy conscience ; though a Tory herself , she represent the triumph of the Whig opinion . the people of England , always like that their Princes should be attach to their own family , be pleased to think the Princess be faithful to her ; and up to the very last day and hour of her reign , and but for that fatality which he inherit from his father along with their claim to the english crown , King James the Third might have wear it . but he neither know how to wait an opportunity , nor to use it when he have it ; he be venturesome when he ought to have be cautious , and cautious when he ought to have dare everything . ' tis with a sort of rage at his inaptitude that one think of his melancholy story . do the Fates deal more specially with king than with common man ? one be apt to imagine so , in consider the history of that royal race , in whose behalf so much fidelity , so much valor , so much blood be desperately and bootlessly expended . 
 the King dead then , the Princess Anne   ugly Anne Hyde 's daughter , our Dowager at Chelsey call she   be proclaim by trumpet herald all over the town from Westminster to Ludgate Hill , amidst immense jubilation of the people . 
 next week my Lord Marlborough be promote to the Garter , and to be Captain - General of her Majesty 's force at home and abroad . this appointment only inflame the Dowager 's rage , or , as she think it , her fidelity to her rightful sovereign . " the Princess be but a puppet in the hand of that fury of a woman , who come into my drawing - room and insult I to my face . what can come to a country that be give over to such a woman ? " say the Dowager : " as for that double - faced traitor , my Lord Marlborough , he have betray every man and every woman with whom he have have to deal , except his horrid wife , who make he tremble . ' tis all over with the country when it have get into the clutch of such wretch as these . " 
 Esmond 's old kinswoman salute the new power in this way ; but some good fortune at last occur to a family which stand in great need of it , by the advancement of these famous personage who benefit humbler people that have the luck of be in their favor . before Mr. Esmond leave England in the month of August , and be then at Portsmouth , where he have join his regiment , and be busy at drill , learn the practice and mystery of the musket and pike , he hear that a pension on the Stamp Office have be get for his late beloved mistress , and that the young Mistress Beatrix be also to be take into court . so much good , at least , have come of the poor widow 's visit to London , not revenge upon her husband 's enemy , but reconcilement to old friend , who pity , and seem inclined to serve she . as for the comrade in prison and the late misfortune , Colonel Westbury be with the Captain - General go to Holland ; Captain Macartney be now at Portsmouth , with his regiment of Fusileers and the force under command of his grace the Duke of Ormond , bind for Spain it be say ; my Lord Warwick be return home ; and Lord Mohun , so far from be punish for the homicide which have bring so much grief and change into the Esmond family , be go in company of my Lord Macclesfield 's splendid embassy to the Elector of Hanover , carry the Garter to his Highness , and a complimentary letter from the Queen . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 recapitulation . 

 from such fitful light as could be cast upon his dark history by the broken narrative of his poor patron , tear by remorse and struggle in the last pang of dissolution , Mr. Esmond have be make to understand so far , that his mother be long since dead ; and so there could be no question as regard she or her honor , tarnish by her husband 's desertion and injury , to influence her son in any step which he might take either for prosecute or relinquish his own just claim . it appear from my poor lord 's hurried confession , that he have be make acquainted with the real fact of the case only two year since , when Mr. Holt visit he , and would have implicate he in one of those many conspiracy by which the secret leader of King James 's party in this country be ever endeavor to destroy the Prince of Orange 's life or power : conspiracy so like murder , so cowardly in the mean use , so wicked in the end , that our nation have sure do well in throw off all allegiance and fidelity to the unhappy family that could not vindicate its right except by such treachery by such dark intrigue and base agent . there be design against King William that be no more honorable than the ambush of cut - throat and footpad . ' tis humiliating to think that a great Prince , possessor of a great and sacred right , and upholder of a great cause , should have stoop to such baseness of assassination and treason as be prove by the unfortunate King James 's own warrant and sign manual give to his supporter in this country . what he and they call levy war be , in truth , no well than instigate murder . the noble Prince of Orange burst magnanimously through those feeble mesh of conspiracy in which his enemy try to envelop he : it seem as if their cowardly dagger break upon the breast of his undaunted resolution . after King James 's death , the Queen and her people at St. Germains priest and woman for the most part continue their intrigue in behalf of the young Prince , James the Third , as he be call in France and by his party here   this Prince , or Chevalier de St. George , be bear in the same year with Esmond 's young pupil Frank , my Lord Viscount 's son ; and the Prince 's affair , be in the hand of priest and woman , be conduct as priest and woman will conduct they , artfully , cruelly , feebly , and to a certain bad issue . the moral of the jesuit ' story I think as wholesome a one as ever be writ : the artfullest , the wise , the most toilsome , and dexterous plot - builder in the world there always come a day when the rouse public indignation kick their flimsy edifice down , and send its cowardly enemy a - flying . Mr. Swift hath finely describe that passion for intrigue , that love of secrecy , slander , and lying , which belong to weak people , hanger - on of weak court . ' tis the nature of such to hate and envy the strong , and conspire their ruin ; and the conspiracy succeed very well , and everything presage the satisfactory overthrow of the great victim ; until one day Gulliver rouse himself , shake off the little vermin of an enemy , and walk away unmoleste . ah ! the irish soldier might well say after the Boyne , " change king with we and we will fight it over again . " indeed , the fight be not fair between the two . ' twas a weak , priest - ride , woman - ride man , with such puny ally and weapon as his own poor nature lead he to choose , contend against the scheme , the generalship , the wisdom , and the heart of a hero . 
 on one of these many coward 's errand then ,   for , as I view they now , I can call they no less ,   Mr. Holt have come to my lord at Castlewood , propose some infallible plan for the Prince of Orange 's destruction , in which my Lord Viscount , loyalist as he be , have indignantly refuse to join . as far as Mr. Esmond could gather from his die word , Holt come to my lord with a plan of insurrection , and offer of the renewal , in his person , of that marquis 's title which King James have confer on the precede viscount ; and on refusal of this bribe , a threat be make , on Holt 's part , to upset my Lord Viscount 's claim to his estate and title of Castlewood altogether . to back this astounding piece of intelligence , of which Henry Esmond 's patron now have the first light , Holt come armed with the late lord 's die declaration , after the affair of the Boyne , at Trim , in Ireland , make both to the irish priest and a french ecclesiastic of Holt 's order , that be with King James 's army . Holt show , or pretend to show , the marriage certificate of the late Viscount Esmond with my mother , in the city of Brussels , in the year 1677 , when the viscount , then Thomas Esmond , be serve with the english army in Flanders ; he could show , he say , that this Gertrude , desert by her husband long since , be alive , and a profess nun in the year 1685 , at Brussels , in which year Thomas Esmond marry his uncle 's daughter , Isabella , now call Viscountess Dowager of Castlewood ; and leave he , for twelve hour , to consider this astounding news   so the poor die lord say , disappear with his paper in the mysterious way in which he come . Esmond know how , well enough : by that window from which he have see the Father issue : but there be no need to explain to my poor lord , only to gather from his parting lip the word which he would soon be able to utter no more . 
 Ere the twelve hour be over , Holt himself be a prisoner , implicate in Sir John Fenwick 's conspiracy , and lock up at Hexton first , whence he be transfer to the Tower ; leave the poor Lord Viscount , who be not aware of the other be take , in daily apprehension of his return , when   as my Lord Castlewood declare , call God to witness , and with tear in his die eye   it have be his intention at once to give up his estate and his title to their proper owner , and to retire to his own house at Walcote with his family . " and would to God I have do it , " the poor lord say . " I would not be here now , wound to death , a miserable , stricken man ! " 
 my lord wait day after day , and , as may be suppose , no messenger come ; but at a month 's end Holt get mean to convey to he a message out of the Tower , which be to this effect : that he should consider all unsaid that have be say , and that thing be as they be . 
 " I have a sore temptation , " say my poor lord . " since I have come into this cursed title of Castlewood , which hath never prosper with I , I have spend far more than the income of that estate , and my paternal one , too . I calculate all my mean down to the last shilling , and find I never could pay you back , my poor Harry , whose fortune I have have for twelve year . my wife and child must have go out of the house dishonor , and beggar . God know , it hath be a miserable one for I and mine . like a coward , I cling to that respite which Holt give I . I keep the truth from Rachel and you . I try to win money of Mohun , and only plunge deeply into debt ; I scarce dare look thee in the face when I see thee . this sword hath be hang over my head these two year . I swear I feel happy when Mohun 's blade enter my side . " 
 after lie ten month in the Tower , Holt , against whom nothing could be find except that he be a Jesuit priest , know to be in King James 's interest , be put on shipboard by the incorrigible forgiveness of King William , who promise he , however , a hanging if ever he should again set foot on English shore . More than once , whilst he be in prison himself , Esmond have think where those paper could be , which the Jesuit have show to his patron , and which have such an interest for himself . they be not find on Mr. Holt 's person when that Father be apprehend , for have such be the case my Lords of the Council have see they , and this family history have long since be make public . however , Esmond care not to seek the paper . his resolution be take ; his poor mother dead ; what matter to he that document exist prove his right to a title which he be determined not to claim , and of which he vow never to deprive that family which he love well in the world ? perhaps he take a great pride out of his sacrifice than he would have have in those honor which he be resolve to forego . again , as long as these title be not forthcoming , Esmond 's kinsman , dear young Francis , be the honorable and undisputed owner of the Castlewood estate and title . the mere word of a Jesuit could not overset Frank 's right of occupancy , and so Esmond 's mind feel actually at ease to think the paper be miss , and in their absence his dear mistress and her son the lawful Lady and Lord of Castlewood . 
 very soon after his liberation , Mr. Esmond make it his business to ride to that village of Ealing where he have pass his early year in this country , and to see if his old guardian be still alive and inhabitant of that place . but the only relique which he find of old M. Pastoureau be a stone in the churchyard , which tell that Athanasius Pastoureau , a native of Flanders , lie there bury , age 87 year . the old man 's cottage , which esmond perfectly recollect , and the garden   where in his childhood he have pass many hour of play and reverie , and have many a beating from his termagant of a foster - mother , be now in the occupation of quite a different family ; and it be with difficulty that he could learn in the village what have come of Pastoureau 's widow and child . the clerk of the parish recollect she the old man be scarce alter in the fourteen year that have pass since last Esmond set eye on he . it appear she have pretty soon console herself after the death of her old husband , whom she rule over , by take a new one young than herself , who spend her money and ill - treat she and her child . the girl die ; one of the boy ' list ; the other have go apprentice . old Mr. Rogers , the clerk , say he have hear that Mrs. Pastoureau be dead too . she and her husband have leave eale this seven year ; and so Mr. Esmond 's hope of gain any information regard his parentage from this family be bring to an end . he give the old clerk a crown - piece for his news , smile to think of the time when he and his little playfellow have slink out of the churchyard or hide behind the gravestone , at the approach of this awful authority . 
 who be his mother ? what have her name be ? when do she die ? esmond long to find some one who could answer these question to he , and think even of put they to his aunt the Viscountess , who have innocently take the name which belong of right to Henry 's mother . but she know nothing , or choose to know nothing , on this subject , nor , indeed , could Mr. Esmond press she much to speak on it . Father Holt be the only man who could enlighten he , and Esmond feel he must wait until some fresh chance or new intrigue might put he face to face with his old friend , or bring that restless indefatigable spirit back to England again . 
 the appointment to his ensigncy , and the preparation necessary for the campaign , presently give the young gentleman other matter to think of . his new patroness treat he very kindly and liberally ; she promise to make interest and pay money , too , to get he a company speedily ; she bid he procure a handsome outfit , both of clothe and of arm , and be pleased to admire he when he make his first appearance in his laced scarlet coat , and to permit he to salute she on the occasion of this interesting investiture . " Red , " say she , toss up her old head , " hath always be the color wear by the Esmonds . " and so her ladyship wear it on her own cheek very faithfully to the last . she would have he be dress , she say , as become his father 's son , and pay cheerfully for his five - pound beaver , his black buckle periwig , and his fine holland shirt , and his sword , and his pistol , mount with silver . since the day he be bear , poor Harry have never look such a fine gentleman : his liberal step - mother fill his purse with guineas , too , some of which Captain Steele and a few choice spirit help Harry to spend in an entertainment which Dick order   and , indeed , would have pay for , but that he have no money when the reckoning be call for ; nor would the landlord give he any more credit   at the " Garter , " over against the gate of the Palace , in Pall Mall . 
 the old Viscountess , indeed , if she have do Esmond any wrong formerly , seem inclined to repair it by the present kindness of her behavior : she embrace he copiously at parting , weep plentifully , bid he write by every packet , and give he an inestimable relic , which she besought he to wear round his neck a medal , bless by I know not what pope , and wear by his late sacred Majesty King James . so Esmond arrive at his regiment with a well equipage than most young officer could afford . he be old than most of his senior , and have a further advantage which belong but to very few of the army gentleman in his day many of whom could do little more than write their name that he have read much , both at home and at the University , be master of two or three language , and have that further education which neither book nor year will give , but which some man get from the silent teaching of adversity . she be a great schoolmistress , as many a poor fellow know , that hath hold his hand out to her ferule , and whimper over his lesson before her awful chair . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 I go on the VIGO BAY EXPEDITION , TASTE SALT - WATER and SMELL POWDER . 

 the first expedition in which Mr. Esmond have the honor to be engage , rather resemble one of the invasion project by the redoubte Captain Avory or Captain Kidd , than a war between crown head , carry on by general of rank and honor . on the 1st day of July , 1702 , a great fleet , of a hundred and fifty sail , set sail from Spithead , under the command of Admiral Shovell , have on board 12,000 troop , with his grace the Duke of Ormond as the Capt.-General of the expedition . one of these 12,000 hero have never be to sea before , or , at least , only once in his infancy , when he make the voyage to England from that unknown country where he be bear one of those 12,000 the junior ensign of Colonel Quin 's regiment of Fusileers be in a quite unheroic state of corporal prostration a few hour after sailing ; and an enemy , have he board the ship , would have have easy work of he . from Portsmouth we put into Plymouth , and take in fresh reinforcement . we be off Finisterre on the 31st of July , so Esmond 's table - book inform he : and on the 8th of August make the rock of Lisbon . by this time the ensign be grow as bold as an admiral , and a week afterwards have the fortune to be under fire for the first time and under water , too , his boat be swamp in the surf in Toros Bay , where the troop land . the ducking of his new coat be all the harm the young soldier get in this expedition , for , indeed , the Spaniards make no stand before our troop , and be not in strength to do so . 
 but the campaign , if not very glorious , be very pleasant . new sight of nature , by sea and land a life of action , begin now for the first time occupy and excite the young man . the many accident , and the routine of shipboard the military duty the new acquaintance , both of his comrade in arm , and of the officer of the fleet serve to cheer and occupy his mind , and waken it out of that selfish depression into which his late unhappy fortune have plunge he . he feel as if the ocean separate he from his past care , and welcome the new era of life which be dawn for he . wound heal rapidly in a heart of two - and - twenty ; hope revive daily ; and courage rally in spite of a man . perhaps , as Esmond think of his late despondency and melancholy , and how irremediable it have seem to he , as he lie in his prison a few month back , he be almost mortified in his secret mind at find himself so cheerful . 
 to see with one 's own eye man and country , be well than read all the book of travel in the world : and it be with extreme delight and exultation that the young man find himself actually on his grand tour , and in the view of people and city which he have read about as a boy . he behold war for the first time the pride , pomp , and circumstance of it , at least , if not much of the danger . he see actually , and with his own eye , those spanish cavalier and lady whom he have behold in imagination in that immortal story of Cervantes , which have be the delight of his youthful leisure . ' tis forty year since Mr. Esmond witness those scene , but they remain as fresh in his memory as on the day when first he see they as a young man . a cloud , as of grief , that have lower over he , and have wrap the last year of his life in gloom , seem to clear away from Esmond during this fortunate voyage and campaign . his energy seem to awaken and to expand under a cheerful sense of freedom . be his heart secretly glad to have escape from that fond but ignoble bondage at home ? be it that the inferiority to which the idea of his base birth have compel he , vanish with the knowledge of that secret , which though , perforce , keep to himself , be yet enough to cheer and console he ? at any rate , young Esmond of the army be quite a different being to the sad little dependant of the kind Castlewood household , and the melancholy student of Trinity Walks ; discontent with his fate , and with the vocation into which that drive he , and think , with a secret indignation , that the cassock and band , and the very sacred office with which he have once propose to invest himself , be , in fact , but mark of a servitude which be to continue all his life long . for , disguise it as he might to himself , he have all along feel that to be Castlewood 's chaplain be to be Castlewood 's inferior still , and that his life be but to be a long , hopeless servitude . so , indeed , he be far from grudge his old friend Tom Tusher 's good fortune   as Tom , no doubt , think it . have it be a mitre and Lambeth which his friend offer he , and not a small living and a country parsonage , he would have feel as much a slave in one case as in the other , and be quite happy and thankful to be free . 
 the brave man I ever know in the army , and who have be present in most of King William 's action , as well as in the campaign of the great Duke of Marlborough , could never be get to tell we of any achievement of his , except that once Prince Eugene order he up a tree to reconnoitre the enemy , which feat he could not achieve on account of the horseman 's boot he wear ; and on another day that he be very nearly take prisoner because of these jack - boot , which prevent he from run away . the present narrator shall imitate this laudable reserve , and doth not intend to dwell upon his military exploit , which be in truth not very different from those of a thousand other gentleman . this first campaign of Mr. Esmond 's lasted but a few day ; and as a score of book have be write concern it , it may be dismiss very briefly here . 
 when our fleet come within view of Cadiz , our commander send a boat with a white flag and a couple of officer to the Governor of Cadiz , Don Scipio de Brancaccio , with a letter from his grace , in which he hop that as Don Scipio have formerly serve with the Austrians against the French , ' twa to be hop that his Excellency would now declare himself against the french king , and for the Austrian in the war between King Philip and King Charles . but his Excellency , Don Scipio , prepare a reply , in which he announce that , have serve his former king with honor and fidelity , he hop to exhibit the same loyalty and devotion towards his present sovereign , King Philip V. ; and by the time this letter be ready , the two officer have be take to see the town , and the alameda , and the theatre , where bull - fight be fight , and the convent , where the admirable work of Don Bartholomew Murillo inspire one of they with a great wonder and delight such as he have never feel before concern this divine art of painting ; and these sight over , and a handsome refection and chocolate be serve to the english gentleman , they be accompany back to their shallop with every courtesy , and be the only two officer of the english army that see at that time that famous city . 
 the general try the power of another proclamation on the Spaniards , in which he announce that we only come in the interest of Spain and King Charles , and for ourselves want to make no conquest nor settlement in Spain at all . but all this eloquence be lose upon the Spaniards , it would seem : the Captain - General of Andalusia would no more listen to we than the Governor of Cadiz ; and in reply to his grace 's proclamation , the Marquis of Villadarias fire off another , which those who know the spanish thought rather the good of the two ; and of this number be Harry Esmond , whose kind Jesuit in old day have instruct he , and now have the honor of translate for his grace these harmless document of war . there be a hard touch for his grace , and , indeed , for other general in her Majesty 's service , in the conclude sentence of the Don : " that he and his council have the generous example of their ancestor to follow , who have never yet seek their elevation in the blood or in the flight of their king . ' mori pro patria ' be his device , which the Duke might communicate to the Princess who govern England . " 
 whether the troop be angry at this repartee or no , ' tis certain something put they in a fury ; for , not be able to get possession of Cadiz , our people seize upon Port Saint Mary 's and sack it , burn down the merchant ' storehouse , get drunk with the famous wine there , pillaging and rob quiet house and convent , murder and do bad . and the only blood which Mr. Esmond draw in this shameful campaign , be the knock down an english sentinel with a half - pike , who be offer insult to a poor trembling nun . be she go to turn out a beauty ? or a princess ? or perhaps Esmond 's mother that he have lose and never see ? alas no , it be but a poor wheezy old dropsical woman , with a wart upon her nose . but have be early teach a part of the roman religion , he never have the horror of it that some protestant have show , and seem to think to be a part of our . 
 after the pillage and plunder of St. Mary 's and an assault upon a fort or two , the troop all take shipping , and finish their expedition , at any rate , more brilliantly than it have begin . hear that the french fleet with a great treasure be in Vigo Bay , our Admirals , Rooke and Hopson , pursue the enemy thither ; the troop land and carry the fort that protect the bay , Hopson pass the boom first on board his ship the " Torbay , " and the rest of the ship , English and Dutch , follow he . twenty ship be burn or take in the Port of Redondilla , and a vast deal more plunder than be ever account for ; but poor man before that expedition be rich afterwards , and so often be it find and remark that the Vigo officer come home with pocket full of money , that the notorious Jack Shafto , who make such a figure at the coffeehouse and gaming - table in London , and give out that he have be a soldier at Vigo , own , when he be about to be hang , that Bagshot Heath have be his Vigo , and that he only speak of La Redondilla to turn away people 's eye from the real place where the booty lie . indeed , Hounslow or Vigo which matter much ? the latter be a bad business , though Mr. Addison do sing its praise in Latin . that honest gentleman 's muse have an eye to the main chance ; and I doubt whether she see much inspiration in the lose side . 
 but though Esmond , for his part , get no share of this fabulous booty , one great prize which he have out of the campaign be , that excitement of action and change of scene , which shake off a great deal of his previous melancholy . he learn at any rate to bear his fate cheerfully . he bring back a brown face , a heart resolute enough , and a little pleasant store of knowledge and observation , from that expedition , which be over with the autumn , when the troop be back in England again ; and esmond give up his post of secretary to General Lumley , whose command be over , and part with that officer with many kind expression of good will on the General 's side , have leave to go to London , to see if he could push his fortune any way far , and find himself once more in his dowager aunt 's comfortable quarter at Chelsey , and in great favor than ever with the old lady . he propitiate she with a present of a comb , a fan , and a black mantle , such as the lady of Cadiz wear , and which my Lady Viscountess pronounce become her style of beauty mightily . and she be greatily edify at hearing of that story of his rescue of the nun , and feel very little doubt but that her King James 's relic , which he have always dutifully wear in his desk , have keep he out of danger , and avert the shot of the enemy . my lady make feast for he , introduce he to more company , and push his fortune with such enthusiasm and success , that she get a promise of a company for he through the Lady Marlborough 's interest , who be graciously pleased to accept of a diamond worth a couple of hundred guinea , which Mr. Esmond be enable to present to her ladyship through his aunt 's bounty , and who promise that she would take charge of Esmond 's fortune . he have the honor to make his appearance at the Queen 's drawing - room occasionally , and to frequent my Lord Marlborough 's levee . that great man receive the young one with very especial favor , so Esmond 's comrade say , and deign to say that he have receive the good report of Mr. Esmond , both for courage and ability , whereon you may be sure the young gentleman make a profound bow , and express himself eager to serve under the most distinguished captain in the world . 
 whilst his business be go on thus prosperously , Esmond have his share of pleasure too , and make his appearance along with other young gentleman at the coffee - house , the theatre , and the Mall . he long to hear of his dear mistress and her family : many a time , in the midst of the gayetie and pleasure of the town , his heart fondly revert to they ; and often as the young fellow of his society be make merry at the tavern , and call toast   as the fashion of that day be   over their wine , Esmond think of person of two fair woman , whom he have be use to adore almost , and empty his glass with a sigh . 
 by this time the eld Viscountess have grow tired again of the young , and whenever she speak of my lord 's widow , ' twa in term by no mean complimentary towards that poor lady : the young woman not need her protection any long , the elder abuse she . Most of the family quarrel that I have see in life   save always those arise from money dispute , when a division of twopence halfpenny will often drive the dear relative into war and estrangement ,   spring out of jealousy and envy . Jack and Tom , bear of the same family and to the same fortune , live very cordially together , not until Jack be ruin when Tom desert he , but until Tom make a sudden rise in prosperity , which Jack can not   forgive . ten time to one ' tis the unprosperous man that be angry , not the other who be in fault . ' Tis Mrs. Jack , who can only afford a chair , that sicken at Mrs. Tom 's new coach - and - sick , cry out against her sister 's air , and set her husband against his brother . ' tis Jack who see his brother shake hand with a lord   with whom Jack would like to exchange snuff - box himself , that go home and tell his wife how poor Tom be spoil , he fear , and no well than a sneak , parasite , and beggar on horse back . I remember how furious the coffee - house wit be with Dick Steele when he set up his coach and fine house in Bloomsbury : they begin to forgive he when the bailiff be after he , and abuse Mr. Addison for sell Dick 's country - house . and yet Dick in the sponge - house , or Dick in the Park , with his four mare and plat harness , be exactly the same gentle , kindly , improvident , jovial Dick Steele : and yet Mr. Addison be perfectly right in get the money which be his , and not give up the amount of his just claim , to be spend by Dick upon champagne and fiddler , laced clothe , fine furniture , and parasite , Jew and Christian , male and female , who cling to he . as , accord to the famous maxim of Monsieur de Rochefoucault , " in our friend ' misfortune there be something secretly pleasant to we ; " so , on the other hand , their good fortune be disagreeable . if ' tis hard for a man to bear his own good luck , ' tis hard still for his friend to bear it for he and but few of they ordinarily can stand that trial : whereas one of the " precious us " of adversity be , that it be a great reconciler ; that it bring back avert kindness , disarm animosity , and cause yesterday 's enemy to fle his hatred aside , and hold out a hand to the fall friend of old day . there 's pity and love , as well as envy , in the same heart and towards the same person . the rivalry stop when the competitor tumble ; and , as I view it , we should look at these agreeable and disagreeable quality of our humanity humbly alike . they be consequent and natural , and our kindness and meanness both manly . 
 so you may either read the sentence , that the elder of Esmond 's two kinswoman pardon the young her beauty , when that have lose somewhat of its freshness , perhaps ; and forget most her grievance against the other , when the subject of they be no long prosperous and enviable ; or we may say more benevolently   but the sum come to the same figure , work either way ,   that Isabella repent of her unkindness towards Rachel , when Rachel be unhappy ; and , bestir herself in behalf of the poor widow and her child , give they shelter and friendship . the lady be quite good friend as long as the weak one need a protector . before Esmond go away on his first campaign , his mistress be still on term of friendship   though a poor little chit , a woman that have evidently no spirit in she ,   c.   with the eld Lady Castlewood ; and Mistress Beatrix be allow to be a beauty . 
 but between the first year of Queen Anne 's reign , and the second , sad change for the bad have take place in the two young lady , at least in the elder 's description of they . Rachel , Viscountess Castlewood , have no more face than a dumpling , and Mrs. Beatrix be grow quite coarse , and be lose all her beauty . little Lord Blandford   she never would call he Lord Blandford ; his father be Lord Churchill the King , whom he betray , have make he Lord Churchill , and he be Lord Churchill still   might be make eye at she ; but his mother , that vixen of a Sarah Jennings , would never hear of such a folly . Lady Marlborough have get she to be a maid of honor at Court to the Princess , but she would repent of it . the widow Francis   she be but Mrs. Francis Esmond   be a scheming , artful , heartless hussy . she be spoil her brat of a boy , and she would end by marry her chaplain . 
 " what , Tusher ! " cry Mr. Esmond , feel a strange pang of rage and astonishment . 
 " yes Tusher , my maid 's son ; and who have get all the quality of his father the lackey in black , and his accomplished mamma the waiting - woman , " cry my lady . " what do you suppose that a sentimental widow , who will live down in that dingy dungeon of a Castlewood , where she spoil her boy , kill the poor with her drug , have prayer twice a day and see nobody but the chaplain what do you suppose she can do , mon Cousin , but let the horrid parson , with his great square toe and hideous little green eye , make love to she ? Cela c'est vu , mon Cousin . when I be a girl at Castlewood , all the chaplain fall in love with I they have   nothing else to do . " 
 my lady go on with more talk of this kind , though , in truth , Esmond have no idea of what she say far , so entirely do her first word occupy his thought . be they true ? not all , nor half , nor a tenth part of what the garrulous old woman say , be true . could this be so ? no ear have Esmond for anything else , though his patroness chat on for an hour . 
 some young gentleman of the town , with whom Esmond have make acquaintance , have promise to present he to that most charming of actress , and lively and agreeable of woman , Mrs. Bracegirdle , about whom Harry 's old adversary Mohun have draw sword , a few year before my poor lord and he fall out . the famous Mr. Congreve have stamp with his high approval , to the which there be no gainsaying , this delightful person : and she be act in Dick Steele 's comedy , and finally , and for twenty - four hour after behold she , Mr. Esmond feel himself , or think himself , to be as violently enamored of this lovely brunette , as be a thousand other young fellow about the city . to have once see she be to long to behold she again ; and to be offer the delightful privilege of her acquaintance , be a pleasure the very idea of which set the young lieutenant 's heart on fire . a man can not live with comrade under the tent without find out that he too be five - and - twenty . a young fellow can not be cast down by grief and misfortune ever so severe but some night he begin to sleep sound , and some day when dinner - time come to feel hungry for a beefsteak . time , youth and good health , new scene and the excitement of action and a campaign , have pretty well bring Esmond 's mourning to an end ; and his comrade say that Don Dismal , as they call he , be Don Dismal no more . so when a party be make to dine at the " Rose , " and go to the playhouse afterward , Esmond be as pleased as another to take his share of the bottle and the play . 
 how be it that the old aunt 's news , or it might be scandal , about Tom Tusher , cause such a strange and sudden excitement in Tom 's old playfellow ? had not   he swear a thousand time in his own mind that the Lady of Castlewood , who have treat he with such kindness once , and then have leave he so cruelly , be , and be to remain henceforth , indifferent to he for ever ? have his pride and his sense of justice not long since help he to cure the pain of that desertion be it even a pain to he now ? why , but last night as he walk across the field and meadow to Chelsey from Pall Mall , have he not compose two or three stanzas of a song , celebrate Bracegirdle 's brown eye , and declare they a thousand time more beautiful than the bright blue one that ever languish under the lash of an insipid fair beauty ! but Tom Tusher ! Tom Tusher , the waiting - woman 's son , raise up his little eye to his mistress ! Tom Tusher presume to think of Castlewood 's widow ! rage and contempt fill Mr. Harry 's heart at the very notion ; the honor of the family , of which he be the chief , make it his duty to prevent so monstrous an alliance , and to chastise the upstart who could dare to think of such an insult to their house . ' tis true Mr. Esmond often boast of republican principle , and could remember many fine speech he have make at college and elsewhere , with WORTH and not birth for a text : but Tom Tusher to take the place of the noble Castlewood faugh ! ' twa as monstrous as King Hamlet 's widow take off her weed for Claudius . esmond laugh at all widow , all wife , all woman ; and be the bann about to be publish , as no doubt they be , that very next Sunday at Walcote Church , Esmond swear that he would be present to shout no ! in the face of the congregation , and to take a private revenge upon the ear of the bridegroom . 
 instead of go to dinner then at the " Rose " that night , Mr. Esmond bid his servant pack a portmanteau and get horse , and be at Farnham , half - way on the road to Walcote , thirty mile off , before his comrade have get to their supper after the play . he bid his man give no hint to my Lady Dowager 's household of the expedition on which he be go ; and as Chelsey be distant from London , the road bad , and infest by footpad , and esmond often in the habit , when engage in a party of pleasure , of lie at a friend 's lodging in town , there be no need that his old aunt should be disturb at his absence indeed , nothing more delight the old lady than to fancy that mon cousin , the incorrigible young sinner , be abroad box the watch , or scour St. Giles 's . when she be not at her book of devotion , she think Etheridge and Sedley very good reading . she have a hundred pretty story about Rochester , Harry Jermyn , and Hamilton ; and if Esmond would but have run away with the wife even of a citizen , ' tis my belief she would have pawn her diamond   the good of they go to our Lady of Chaillot   to pay his damage . 
 my lord 's little house of Walcote which he inhabit before he take his title and occupy the house of Castlewood lie about a mile from Winchester , and his widow have return to Walcote after my lord 's death as a place always dear to she , and where her early and happy day have be spend , cheerfuller than Castlewood , which be too large for her straiten mean , and give she , too , the protection of the ex - dean , her father . the young Viscount have a year 's schooling at the famous college there , with Mr. Tusher as his governor . so much news of they Mr. Esmond have have during the past year from the old Viscountess , his own father 's widow ; from the young one there have never be a word . 
 twice or thrice in his benefactor 's lifetime , Esmond have be to Walcote ; and now , take but a couple of hour ' rest only at the inn on the road , he be up again long before daybreak , and make such good speed that he be at Walcote by two o'clock of the day . he rid to the end of the village , where he alight and send a man thence to Mr. Tusher , with a message that a gentleman from London would speak with he on urgent business . the messenger come back to say the Doctor be in town , most likely at prayer in the Cathedral . my Lady Viscountess be there , too ; she always go to cathedral prayer every day . 
 the horse belong to the post - house at Winchester . esmond mount again and ride on to the " George ; " whence he walk , leave his grumbling domestic at last happy with a dinner , straight to the Cathedral . the organ be play : the winter 's day be already grow gray : as he pass under the street - arch into the Cathedral yard , and make his way into the ancient solemn edifice . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 the 29TH DECEMBER . 

 there be scarce a score of person in the Cathedral beside the Dean and some of his clergy , and the chorister , young and old , that perform the beautiful evening prayer . but Mr. Tusher be one of the officiant , and read from the eagle in an authoritative voice , and a great black periwig ; and in the stall , still in her black widow 's hood , sit Esmond 's dear mistress , her son by her side , very much grown , and indeed a noble - look youth , with his mother 's eye , and his father 's curl brown hair , that fall over his point de Venise a pretty picture such as Van Dyck might have paint . mon . Rigaud 's portrait of my Lord Viscount , do at Paris afterwards , give but a french version of his manly , frank , english face . when he look up there be two sapphire beam out of his eye such as no painter 's palette have the color to match , I think . on this day there be not much chance of see that particular beauty of my young lord 's countenance ; for the truth be , he keep his eye shut for the most part , and , the anthem be rather long , be asleep . 
 but the music cease , my lord wake up , look about he , and his eye light on Mr. Esmond , who be sit opposite he , gaze with no small tenderness and melancholy upon two person who have so much of his heart for so many year , Lord Castlewood , with a start , pull at his mother 's sleeve   her face have scarce be lift from her book , and say , " look , mother ! " so loud , that Esmond could hear on the other side of the church , and the old Dean on his throned stall . Lady Castlewood look for an instant as her son bid she , and hold up a warning finger to Frank ; Esmond feel his whole face flush , and his heart throbbing , as that dear lady behold he once more . the rest of the prayer be speedily over ; Mr. Esmond do not hear they ; nor do his mistress , very likely , whose hood go more closely over her face , and who never lift her head again until the service be over , the blessing give , and Mr. Dean , and his procession of ecclesiastic , out of the inner chapel . 
 Young Castlewood come clamber over the stall before the clergy be fairly go , and run up to Esmond , eagerly embrace he . " my dear , dear old Harry ! " he say , " be you come back ? have you be to the war ? you will take I with you when you go again ? why do not   you write to we ? come to mother . " 
 Mr. Esmond could hardly say more than a " God bless you , my boy , " for his heart be very full and grateful at all this tenderness on the lad 's part ; and he be as much move at see Frank as he be fearful about that other interview which be now to take place : for he know not if the widow would reject he as she have do so cruelly a year ago . 
 " it be kind of you to come back to we , Henry , " Lady Esmond say . " I think you might come . " 
 " we read of the fleet come to Portsmouth . why do you not come from Portsmouth ? " Frank ask , or my Lord Viscount , as he now must be call . 
 Esmond have think of that too . he would have give one of his eye so that he might see his dear friend again once more ; but believe that his mistress have forbid he her house , he have obey she , and remain at a distance . 
 " you have but to ask , and you know I would be here , " he say . 
 she give he her hand , her little fair hand ; there be only her marriage ring on it . the quarrel be all over . the year of grief and estrangement be pass . they never have be separate . his mistress have never be out of his mind all that time . no , not once . no , not in the prison ; nor in the camp ; nor on shore before the enemy ; nor at sea under the star of solemn midnight ; nor as he watch the glorious rise of the dawn : not even at the table , where he sit carouse with friend , or at the theatre yonder , where he try to fancy that other eye be bright than her . bright eye there might be , and face more beautiful , but none so dear no voice so sweet as that of his beloved mistress , who have be sister , mother , goddess to he during his youth goddess now no more , for he know of her weakness ; and by thought , by suffer , and that experience it bring , be old now than she ; but more fondly cherish as woman perhaps than ever she have be adore as divinity . what be it ? where lie it ? the secret which make one little hand the dearest of all ? whoever can unriddle that mystery ? here she be , her son by his side , his dear boy . here she be , weep and happy . she take his hand in both her ; he feel her tear . it be a rapture of reconciliation . 
 " here come Squaretoes , " say Frank . " here be Tusher . " 
 Tusher , indeed , now appear , creak on his great heel . Mr. Tom have divest himself of his alb or surplice , and come forward habit in his cassock and great black periwig . how have Esmond ever be for a moment jealous of this fellow ? 
 " give we thy hand , Tom Tusher , " he say . the chaplain make he a very low and stately bow . " I be charm to see Captain Esmond , " say he . " my lord and I have read the Reddas incolumem precor , and apply it , I be sure , to you . you come back with gaditanian laurel ; when I hear you be bind thither , I wish , I be sure , I be another Septimius . my Lord Viscount , your lordship remember Septimi , Gades aditure mecum ? " 
 " there be an angle of earth that I love well than Gades , Tusher , " say Mr. Esmond . " ' tis that one where your reverence hath a parsonage , and where our youth be bring up . " 
 " a house that have so many sacred recollection to I , " say Mr. Tusher   and Harry remember how Tom 's father use to flog he there   " a house near to that of my respected patron , my most honor patroness , must ever be a dear abode to I . but , madam , the verger wait to close the gate on your ladyship . " 
 " and Harry 's come home to supper . Huzzay ! huzzay ! " cry my lord . " Mother , I shall run home and bid beatrix put her ribbon on . beatrix be a maid of honor , Harry . such a fine set - up minx ! " 
 " your heart be never in the Church , Harry , " the widow say , in her sweet low tone , as they walk away together .   now , it seem they never have be part , and again , as if they have be age asunder .   " I always think you have no vocation that way ; and that ' twas a pity to shut you out from the world . you would but have pin and chafe at Castlewood : and ' tis well you should make a name for yourself . I often say so to my dear lord . how he love you ! ' twas my lord that make you stay with we . " 
 " I ask no well than to stay near you always , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " but to go be good , Harry . when the world can not give peace , you will know where to find it ; but one of your strong imagination and eager desire must try the world first before he tire of it . ' twa not to be think of , or if it once be , it be only by my selfishness , that you should remain as chaplain to a country gentleman and tutor to a little boy . you be of the blood of the Esmonds , kinsman ; and that be always wild in youth . look at Francis . he be but fifteen , and I scarce can keep he in my nest . his talk be all of war and pleasure , and he long to serve in the next campaign . perhaps he and the young Lord Churchill shall go the next . Lord Marlborough have be good to we . you know how kind they be in my misfortune . and so be your your father 's widow . no one know how good the world be , till grief come to try we . ' tis through my Lady Marlborough 's goodness that beatrix hath her place at Court ; and Frank be under my Lord Chamberlain . and the dowager lady , your father 's widow , have promise to provide for you have she not ? " 
 Esmond say , " yes . as far as present favor go , Lady Castlewood be very good to he . and should her mind change , " he add gayly , " as lady ' mind will , I be strong enough to bear my own burden , and make my way somehow . not by the sword very likely . thousand have a well genius for that than I , but there be many way in which a young man of good part and education can get on in the world ; and I be pretty sure , one way or other , of promotion ! " indeed , he have find patron already in the army , and amongst person very able to serve he , too ; and tell his mistress of the flattering aspect of fortune . they walk as though they have never be part , slowly , with the gray twilight closing round they . 
 " and now we be draw near to home , " she continue , " I know you would come , Harry , if if it be but to forgive I for have speak unjustly to you after that horrid horrid misfortune . I be half frantic with grief then when I see you . and I know now they have tell I . that wretch , whose name I can never mention , even have say it : how you try to avert the quarrel , and would have take it on yourself , my poor child : but it be God 's will that I should be punish , and that my dear lord should fall . " 
 " he give I his blessing on his death - bed , " Esmond say . " thank God for that legacy ! " 
 " amen , amen ! dear Henry , " say the lady , press his arm . " I know it . Mr. Atterbury , of St. Bride 's , who be call to he , tell I so . and I thank God , too , and in my prayer ever since remember it . " 
 " you have spar I many a bitter night , have you tell I soon , " Mr. Esmond say . 
 " I know it , I know it , " she answer , in a tone of such sweet humility , as make Esmond repent that he should ever have dare to reproach she . " I know how wicked my heart have be ; and I have suffer too , my dear . I confess to Mr. Atterbury I must not tell any more . he I say I would not write to you or go to you and it be well even that have part , we should part . but I know you would come back I own that . that be no one 's fault . and to - day , Henry , in the anthem , when they sing it , ' when the Lord turn the captivity of Zion , we be like they that dream , ' I think , yes , like they that dream they that dream . and then it go , ' they that sow in tear shall reap in joy ; and he that goeth forth and weepeth , shall doubtless come again with rejoice , bring his sheaf with he ; ' I look up from the book , and see you . I be not surprised when I see you . I know you would come , my dear , and see the gold sunshine round your head . " 
 she smile an almost wild smile as she look up at he . the moon be up by this time , glitter keen in the frosty sky . he could see , for the first time now clearly , her sweet careworn face . 
 " do you know what day it be ? " she continue . " it be the 29th of December it be your birthday ! but last year we do not drink it no , no . my lord be cold , and my Harry be likely to die : and my brain be in a fever ; and we have no wine . but now now you be come again , bring your sheaf with you , my dear . " she burst into a wild flood of weeping as she speak ; she laugh and sob on the young man 's heart , cry out wildly , " bring your sheaf with you your sheaf with you ! " 
 as he have sometimes feel , gaze up from the deck at midnight into the boundless starlit depth overhead , in a rapture of devout wonder at that endless brightness and beauty in some such a way now , the depth of this pure devotion   which be , for the first time , reveal to he   quite smite upon he , and fill his heart with thanksgiving . gracious God , who be he , weak and friendless creature , that such a love should be pour out upon he ? not in vain not in vain have he live hard and thankless should he be to think so that have such a treasure give he . what be ambition compare to that , but selfish vanity ? to be rich , to be famous ? what do these profit a year hence , when other name sound loud than your , when you lie hide away under the ground , along with idle title engraven on your coffin ? but only true love live after you follow your memory with secret blessing or precede you , and intercede for you . non omni moriar if die , I yet live in a tender heart or two ; nor be lose and hopeless living , if a sainted depart soul still love and pray for I . 
 " if if ' tis so , dear lady , " Mr. Esmond say , " why should I ever leave you ? if God hath give I this great boon and near or far from I , as I know now , the heart of my dear mistress follow I , let I have that blessing near I , nor ever part with it till death separate we . come away leave this Europe , this place which have so many sad recollection for you . begin a new life in a new world . my good lord often talk of visit that land in Virginia which King Charles give we give his ancestor . Frank will give we that . no man there will ask if there be a blot on my name , or inquire in the wood what my title be . " 
 " and my child and my duty and my good father , Henry ? " she break out . " he have none but I now ! for soon my sister will leave he , and the old man will be alone . he have conform since the new Queen 's reign ; and here in Winchester , where they love he , they have find a church for he . when the child leave I , I will stay with he . I can not follow they into the great world , where their way lie it scar I . they will come and visit I ; and you will , sometimes , Henry yes , sometimes , as now , in the Holy Advent season , when I have see and bless you once more . " 
 " I would leave all to follow you , " say Mr. Esmond ; " and can you not be as generous for I , dear lady ? " 
 " hush , boy ! " she say , and it be with a mother 's sweet plaintive tone and look that she speak . " the world be begin for you . for I , I have be so weak and sinful that I must leave it , and pray out an expiation , dear Henry . have we house of religion as there be once , and many divine of our Church would have they again , I often think I would retire to one and pass my life in penance . but I would love you still yes , there be no sin in such a love as mine now ; and my dear lord in heaven may see my heart ; and know the tear that have wash my sin away and now now my duty be here , by my child whilst they need I , and by my poor old father , and " 
 " and not by I ? " Henry say . 
 " hush ! " she say again , and raise her hand up to his lip . " I have be your nurse . you could not see I , Harry , when you be in the small - pox , and I come and sit by you . ah ! I pray that I might die , but it would have be in sin , Henry . oh , it be horrid to look back to that time . it be over now and past , and it have be forgive I . when you need I again , I will come ever so far . when your heart be wound , then come to I , my dear . be silent ! let I say all . you never love I , dear Henry no , you do not now , and I thank heaven for it . I use to watch you , and know by a thousand sign that it be so . do you remember how glad you be to go away to college ? ' twa I send you . I tell my papa that , and Mr. Atterbury too , when I speak to he in London . and they both give I absolution both and they be godly man , have authority to bind and to loose . and they forgave I , as my dear lord forgave I before he go to heaven . " 
 " I think the angel be not all in heaven , " Mr. Esmond say . and as a brother fold a sister to his heart ; and as a mother cleave to her son 's breast so for a few moment Esmond 's beloved mistress come to he and bless he . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 I be make welcome at WALCOTE . 

 as they come up to the house at Walcote , the window from within be light up with friendly welcome ; the supper - table be spread in the oak - parlor ; it seem as if forgiveness and love be await the return prodigal . two or three familiar face of domestic be on the look - out at the porch the old housekeeper be there , and young Lockwood from Castlewood in my lord 's livery of tawny and blue . his dear mistress press his arm as they pass into the hall . her eye beam out on he with affection indescribable . " welcome , " be all she say , as she look up , put back her fair curl and black hood . a sweet rosy smile blush on her face ; Harry think he have never see she look so charming . her face be light with a joy that be bright than beauty she take a hand of her son who be in the hall wait his mother she do not quit Esmond 's arm . 
 " welcome , Harry ! " my young lord echo after she . " here , we be all come to say so . here be old Pincot , have not   she grow handsome ? " and Pincot , who be old , and no handsomer than usual , make a curtsy to the Captain , as she call Esmond , and tell my lord to " have do , now . " 
 " and here be Jack Lockwood . he will make a famous grenadier , Jack ; and so shall I ; we will both ' list under you , Cousin . as soon as I be seventeen , I go to the army every gentleman go to the army . look ! who come here ho , ho ! " he burst into a laugh . " ' Tis Mistress Trix , with a new ribbon ; I know she would put one on as soon as she hear a captain be come to supper . " 
 this laugh colloquy take place in the hall of Walcote House : in the midst of which be a staircase that lead from an open gallery , where be the door of the sleep chamber : and from one of these , a wax candle in her hand , and illuminate she , come Mistress Beatrix the light fall indeed upon the scarlet ribbon which she wear , and upon the most brilliant white neck in the world . 
 Esmond have leave a child and find a woman , grow beyond the common height ; and arrive at such a dazzling completeness of beauty , that his eye might well show surprise and delight at behold she . in hers there be a brightness so lustrous and melt , that I have see a whole assembly follow she as if by an attraction irresistible : and that night the great Duke be at the playhouse after ramillie , every soul turn and look   she chance to enter at the opposite side of the theatre at the same moment   at she , and not at he . she be a brown beauty : that is , her eye , hair , and eyebrow and eyelash be dark : her hair curl with rich undulation , and wave over her shoulder ; but her complexion be as dazzle white as snow in sunshine ; except her cheek , which be a bright red , and her lip , which be of a still deep crimson . her mouth and chin , they say , be too large and full , and so they might be for a goddess in marble , but not for a woman whose eye be fire , whose look be love , whose voice be the sweetest low song , whose shape be perfect symmetry , health , decision , activity , whose foot as it plant itself on the ground be firm but flexible , and whose motion , whether rapid or slow , be always perfect grace agile as a nymph , lofty as a queen , now melt , now imperious , now sarcastic there be no single movement of hers but be beautiful . as he think of she , he who write feel young again , and remember a paragon . 
 so she come hold her dress with one fair rounded arm , and her taper before she , trip down the stair to greet Esmond . 
 " she hath put on her scarlet stocking and white shoe , " say my lord , still laugh . " oh , my fine mistress ! be this the way you set your cap at the Captain ? " she approach , shin smile upon Esmond , who could look at nothing but her eye . she advance hold forward her head , as if she would have he kiss she as he use to do when she be a child . 
 " stop , " she say , " I be grow too big ! welcome , cousin Harry , " and she make he an arch curtsy , sweep down to the ground almost , with the most gracious bend , look up the while with the bright eye and sweetest smile . Love seem to radiate from she . Harry eye she with such a rapture as the first lover be describe as have by Milton . 
 " N'est - ce pas ? " say my lady , in a low , sweet voice , still hang on his arm . 
 Esmond turn round with a start and a blush , as he meet his mistress 's clear eye . he have forget she , rapt in admiration of the filia pulcrior . 
 " right foot forward , toe turn out , so : now drop the curtsy , and show the red stocking , Trix . they have   silver clock , Harry . the Dowager send them . she go to put them on , " cry my lord . 
 " hush , you stupid child ! " say Miss , smother her brother with kiss ; and then she must come and kiss her mamma , look all the while at Harry , over his mistress 's shoulder . and if she do not kiss he , she give he both her hand , and then take one of his in both hand , and say , " oh , Harry , we be so , so glad you be come ! " 
 " there be woodcock for supper , " say my lord . " Huzzay ! it be such a hungry sermon . " 
 " and it be the 29th of December ; and our Harry have come home . " 
 " Huzzay , old Pincot ! " again say my lord ; and my dear lady 's lip look as if they be tremble with a prayer . she would have Harry lead in Beatrix to the supper - room , go herself with my young Lord Viscount ; and to this party come Tom Tusher directly , whom four at least out of the company of five wish away . away he go , however , as soon as the sweetmeat be put down , and then , by the great crackling fire , his mistress or beatrix , with her blushing grace , fill his glass for he , Harry tell the story of his campaign , and pass the most delightful night his life have ever know . the sun be up long ere he be , so deep , sweet , and refreshing be his slumber . he wake as if angel have be watch at his bed all night . I dare say one that be as pure and loving as an angel have bless his sleep with her prayer . 
 next morning the chaplain read prayer to the little household at Walcote , as the custom be ; esmond think Mistress Beatrix do not listen to Tusher 's exhortation much : her eye be wander everywhere during the service , at least whenever he look up he meet they . perhaps he also be not very attentive to his Reverence the Chaplain . " this might have be my life , " he be think ; " this might have be my duty from now till old age . well , be it not a pleasant one to be with these dear friend and part from them no more ? until until the destine lover come and take away pretty beatrix " and the good part of Tom Tusher 's exposition , which may have be very learn and eloquent , be quite lose to poor Harry by this vision of the destine lover , who put the preacher out . 
 all the while of the prayer , beatrix knelt a little way before Harry Esmond . the red stocking be change for a pair of gray , and black shoe , in which her foot look to the full as pretty . all the rose of spring could not vie with the brightness of her complexion ; Esmond think he have never see anything like the sunny lustre of her eye . my Lady Viscountess look fatigued , as if with watching , and her face be pale . 
 Miss Beatrix remark these sign of indisposition in her mother and deplore they . " I be an old woman , " say my lady , with a kind smile ; " I can not hope to look as young as you do , my dear . " 
 " she will never look as good as you do if she live till she be a hundred , " say my lord , take his mother by the waist , and kiss her hand . 
 " do I look very wicked , cousin ? " say beatrix , turn full round on Esmond , with her pretty face so close under his chin , that the soft perfume hair touch it . she lay her finger - tip on his sleeve as she speak ; and he put his other hand over her . 
 " I be like your look - glass , " say he , " and that can not   flatter you . " 
 " he mean that you be always look at he , my dear , " say her mother , archly . beatrix run away from Esmond at this , and fly to her mamma , whom she kiss , stop my lady 's mouth with her pretty hand . 
 " and Harry be very good to look at , " say my lady , with her fond eye regard the young man . 
 " if ' tis good to see a happy face , " say he , " you see that . " my lady say , " amen , " with a sigh ; and Harry think the memory of her dear lord rise up and rebuke she back again into sadness ; for her face lose the smile , and resume its look of melancholy . 
 " why , Harry , how fine we look in our scarlet and silver , and our black periwig , " cry my lord . " Mother , I be tired of my own hair . when shall I have a peruke ? where do you get your steenkirk , Harry ? " 
 " it be some of my Lady Dowager 's lace , " say Harry ; ' she give I this and a number of other fine thing . " 
 " my Lady Dowager be not   such a bad woman , " my lord continue . 
 " she be not so so red as she be paint , " say Miss Beatrix . 
 her brother break into a laugh . " I will tell she you say so ; by the Lord , Trix , I will , " he cry out . 
 " she will know that you have not   the wit to say it , my lord , " say Miss Beatrix . 
 " we will not   quarrel the first day Harry be here , will we , mother ? " say the young lord . " we will see if we can get on to the new year without a fight . have some of this Christmas pie . and here come the tankard ; no , it be Pincot with the tea . " 
 " will the Captain choose a dish ? " ask Mistress Beatrix . 
 " I say , Harry , " my lord go on , " I will show thee my horse after breakfast ; and we will go a bird - net to - night , and on Monday there be a cock - match at Winchester do you love cock - fighting , Harry ? between the gentleman of Sussex and the gentleman of Hampshire , at ten pound the battle , and fifty pound the odd battle to show one - and - twenty cock . " 
 " and what will you do , beatrix , to amuse our kinsman ? " ask my lady . 
 " I will listen to he , " say beatrix . " I be sure he have a hundred thing to tell we . and I be jealous already of the spanish lady . be that a beautiful nun at Cadiz that you rescue from the soldier ? your man talk of it last night in the kitchen , and Mrs. Betty tell I this morning as she comb my hair . and he say you must be in love , for you sit on deck all night , and scribble verses all day in your tablebook . " Harry think if he have want a subject for verse yesterday , to - day he have find one : and not all the Lindamiras and Ardelias of the poet be half so beautiful as this young creature ; but he do not say so , though some one do for he . 
 this be his dear lady , who , after the meal be over , and the young people be go , begin talk of her child with Mr. Esmond , and of the character of one and the other , and of her hope and fear for both of they . " ' tis not while they be at home , " she say , " and in their mother 's nest , I fear for they ' tis when they be go into the world , whither I shall not be able to follow they . beatrix will begin her service next year . you may have hear a rumor about about my Lord Blandford . they be both child ; and it be but idle talk . I know my kinswoman would never let he make such a poor marriage as our beatrix would be . there be scarce a princess in Europe that she think be good enough for he or for her ambition . " 
 " there be not a princess in Europe to compare with she , " say Esmond . 
 " in beauty ? no , perhaps not , " answer my lady . " she be most beautiful , be not   she ? ' tis not a mother 's partiality that deceive I . I mark you yesterday when she come down the stair : and read it in your face . we look when you do not   fancy we look , and see well than you think , dear Harry : and just now when they speak about your poem you writ pretty line when you be but a boy you think beatrix be a pretty subject for verse , do not you , Harry ? "   the gentleman could only blush for a reply .   " and so she be nor be you the first her pretty face have captivate . ' tis quickly do . such a pair of bright eye as hers learn their power very soon , and use it very early . " and , look at he keenly with her , the fair widow leave he . 
 and so it be a pair of bright eye with a dozen glance suffice to subdue a man ; to enslave he , and inflame he ; to make he even forget ; they dazzle he so that the past become straightway dim to he ; and he so prize they that he would give all his life to possess them . what be the fond love of dear friend compare to this treasure ? be memory as strong as expectancy ? fruition , as hunger ? gratitude , as desire ? I have look at royal diamond in the jewel - room in Europe , and think how war have be make about them ; Mogul sovereign depose and strangle for they , or ransom with they ; million expend to buy they ; and dare life lose in dig out the little shin toy that I value no more than the button in my hat . and so there be other glitter bauble   of rare water too   for which man have be set to kill and quarrel ever since mankind begin ; and which last but for a score of year , when their sparkle be over . where be those jewel now that beam under Cleopatra 's forehead , or shine in the socket of Helen ? 
 the second day after Esmond 's come to Walcote , Tom Tusher have leave to take a holiday , and go off in his very good gown and band to court the young woman whom his Reverence desire to marry , and who be not a viscount 's widow , as it turn out , but a brewer 's relict at Southampton , with a couple of thousand pound to her fortune : for honest Tom 's heart be under such excellent control , that Venus herself without a portion would never have cause it to flutter . so he ride away on his heavy - pace gelding to pursue his jog - trot love , leave Esmond to the society of his dear mistress and her daughter , and with his young lord for a companion , who be charm , not only to see an old friend , but to have the tutor and his latin book put out of the way . 
 the boy talk of thing and people , and not a little about himself , in his frank artless way . ' twa easy to see that he and his sister have the well of their fond mother , for the first place in whose affection , though they fight constantly , and though the kind lady persist that she love both equally , ' twa not difficult to understand that Frank be his mother 's darling and favorite . he rule the whole household   always except rebellious beatrix   not less now than when he be a child marshal the village boy in play at soldier , and can they lustily too , like the sturdy corporal . as for Tom Tusher , his Reverence treat the young lord with that politeness and deference which he always show for a great man , whatever his age or his stature be . indeed , with respect to this young one , it be impossible not to love he , so frank and win be his manner , his beauty , his gayety , the ring of his laughter , and the delightful tone of his voice . wherever he go , he charm and domineer . I think his old grandfather the Dean , and the grim old housekeeper , Mrs. Pincot , be as much his slave as his mother be : and as for Esmond , he find himself presently submit to a certain fascination the boy have , and slave it like the rest of the family . the pleasure which he have in Frank 's mere company and converse exceed that which he ever enjoy in the society of any other man , however delightful in talk , or famous for wit . his presence bring sunshine into a room , his laugh , his prattle , his noble beauty and brightness of look cheer and charm indescribably . at the least tale of sorrow , his hand be in his purse , and he be eager with sympathy and bounty . the way in which woman love and pet he , when , a year or two afterwards , he come upon the world , yet a mere boy , and the folly which they do for he   as indeed he for they , recall the career of Rochester , and outdo the success of Grammont . his very creditor love he ; and the hard usurer , and some of the rigid prude of the other sex too , could deny he nothing . he be no more witty than another man , but what he say , he say and look as no man else could say or look it . I have see the woman at the comedy at Bruxelles crowd round he in the lobby : and as he sit on the stage more people look at he than at the actor , and watch he ; and I remember at ramillie , when he be hit and fall , a great big red - haired Scotch sergeant fling his halbert down , burst out a - cry like a woman , seize he up as if he have be an infant , and carry he out of the fire . this brother and sister be the most beautiful couple ever see ; though after he wing away from the maternal nest this pair be seldom together . 
 sit at dinner two day after Esmond 's arrival   it be the last day of the year , and so happy a one to Harry Esmond , that to enjoy it be quite worth all the previous pain which he have endure and forget , my young lord , fill a bumper , and bid Harry take another , drink to his sister , salute she under the title of " Marchioness . " 
 " Marchioness ! " say Harry , not without a pang of wonder , for he be curious and jealous already . 
 " Nonsense , my lord , " say beatrix , with a toss of her head . my Lady Viscountess look up for a moment at Esmond , and cast her eye down . 
 " the Marchioness of Blandford , " say Frank . " do not   you know hath not Rouge Dragon tell you ? "   my lord use to call the Dowager of Chelsey by this and other name .   " Blandford have a lock of her hair : the Duchess find he on his knee to Mistress Trix , and box his ear , and say Dr. Hare should whip he . " 
 " I wish Mr. Tusher would whip you too , " say Beatrix . 
 my lady only say : " I hope you will tell none of these silly story elsewhere than at home , Francis . " 
 " ' tis true , on my word , " continue Frank : " look at Harry scowling , mother , and see how beatrix blush as red as the silver - clock stocking . " 
 " I think we have well leave the gentleman to their wine and their talk , " say Mistress Beatrix , rise up with the air of a young queen , toss her rustle flow drapery about she , and quit the room , follow by her mother . 
 Lady Castlewood again look at Esmond , as she stoop down and kiss Frank . " do not tell those silly story , child , " she say : " do not drink much wine , sir ; Harry never love to drink wine . " and she go away , too , in her black robe , look back on the young man with her fair , fond face . 
 " egad ! it be true , " say Frank , sip his wine with the air of a lord . " what think you of this Lisbon real collare ? ' tis well than your heady port : we get it out of one of the spanish ship that come from Vigo last year : my mother buy it at Southampton , as the ship be lie there the ' rose , ' Captain Hawkins . " 
 " why , I come home in that ship , " say Harry . 
 " and it bring home a good fellow and good wine , " say my lord . " I say , Harry , I wish thou hadst not that curse bar sinister . " 
 " and why not the bar sinister ? " ask the other . 
 " suppose I go to the army and be kill every gentleman go to the army who be to take care of the woman ? trix will never stop at home ; mother 's in love with you , yes , I think mother 's in love with you . she be always praise you , and always talk about you ; and when she go to Southampton , to see the ship , I find she out . but you see it be impossible : we be of the old blood in England ; we come in with the conqueror ; we be only baronet , but what then ? we be force into that . James the First force our great grandfather . we be above title ; we old english gentry do not   want them ; the Queen can make a duke any day . look at Blandford 's father , Duke Churchill , and Duchess Jennings , what be they , Harry ? damn it , sir , what be they , to turn up their nose at we ? where be they when our ancestor ride with King Henry at Agincourt , and fill up the french King 's cup after poictier ? ' Fore George , sir , why should not   Blandford marry beatrix ? by G ! he shall marry beatrix , or tell I the reason why . we will marry with the good blood of England , and none but the good blood of England . you be an Esmond , and you can not   help your birth , my boy . let us have another bottle . what ! no more ? I have   drunk three part of this myself . I have many a night with my father ; you stand to he like a man , Harry . you back your blood ; you can not   help your misfortune , you know , no man can help that . " 
 the elder say he would go in to his mistress 's tea - table . the young lad , with a heighten color and voice , begin sing a snatch of a song , and march out of the room . esmond hear he presently call his dog about he , and cheer and talk to they ; and by a hundred of his look and gesture , trick of voice and gait , be remind of the dead lord , Frank 's father . 
 and so , the sylvest night pass away ; the family part long before midnight , Lady Castlewood remembering , no doubt , former New Years ' eve , when health be drunk , and laughter go round in the company of he , to whom year , past , and present , and future , be to be as one ; and so care not to sit with her child and hear the cathedral bell ring the birth of the year 1703 . esmond hear the chime as he sit in his own chamber , ruminate by the blaze fire there , and listen to the last note of they , look out from his window towards the city , and the great gray tower of the Cathedral lie under the frosty sky , with the keen star shin above . 
 the sight of these brilliant orb no doubt make he think of other luminary . " and so her eye have already do execution , " think Esmond " on whom ? who can tell I ? " luckily his kinsman be by , and Esmond know he would have no difficulty in find out Mistress beatrix 's history from the simple talk of the boy . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 FAMILY TALK . 

 what Harry admire and submit to in the pretty lad his kinsman be   for why should he resist it ?   the calmness of patronage which my young lord assume , as if to command be his undoubted right , and all the world   below his degree   ought to bow down to Viscount Castlewood . 
 " I know my place , Harry , " he say . " I be not proud the boy at Winchester College say I be proud : but I be not proud . I be simply Francis James Viscount Castlewood in the peerage of Ireland . I might have be   do you know that ?   Francis James Marquis and Earl of Esmond in that of England . the late lord refuse the title which be offer to he by my godfather , his late Majesty . you should know that you be of our family , you know you can not help your bar sinister , Harry , my dear fellow ; and you belong to one of the good family in England , in spite of that ; and you stand by my father , and by G ! I will stand by you . you shall never want a friend , Harry , while Francis James Viscount Castlewood have a shilling . it be now 1703 I shall come of age in 1709 . I shall go back to Castlewood ; I shall live at Castlewood ; I shall build up the house . my property will be pretty well restore by then . the late viscount mismanage my property , and leave it in a very bad state . my mother be live close , as you see , and keep I in a way hardly befit a peer of these realm ; for I have but a pair of horse , a governor , and a man that be valet and groom . but when I be of age , these thing will be set right , Harry . our house will be as it should be . you will always come to Castlewood , will not   you ? you shall always have your two room in the court keep for you ; and if anybody slight you , d - they ! let they have a care of ME . I shall marry early Trix will be a duchess by that time , most likely ; for a cannon ball may knock over his grace any day , you know . " 
 " how ? " say Harry . 
 " Hush , my dear ! " say my Lord Viscount . " you be of the family you be faithful to we , by George , and I tell you everything . Blandford will marry she or " and here he put his little hand on his sword " you understand the rest . Blandford know which of we two be the good weapon . at small - sword , or back - sword , or sword and dagger if he like ; I can beat he . I have try he , Harry ; and begad he know I be a man not to be trifle with . " 
 " but you do not mean , " say Harry , conceal his laughter , but not his wonder , " that you can force my Lord Blandford , the son of the first man of this kingdom , to marry your sister at sword 's point ? " 
 " I mean to say that we be cousin by the mother 's side , though that be nothing to boast of . I mean to say that an Esmond be as good as a Churchill ; and when the King come back , the Marquis of Esmond 's sister may be a match for any nobleman 's daughter in the kingdom . there be but two marquis in all England , William Herbert Marquis of Powis , and Francis James Marquis of Esmond ; and hark you , Harry , now swear you will never mention this . give I your honor as a gentleman , for you be a gentleman , though you be a " 
 " well , well ? " say Harry , a little impatient . 
 " well , then , when after my late viscount 's misfortune , my mother go up with we to London , to ask for justice against you all   as for Mohun , I will have his blood , as sure as my name be Francis Viscount Esmond   we go to stay with our cousin my Lady Marlborough , with whom we have quarrel for ever so long . but when misfortune come , she stand by her blood : so do the Dowager Viscountess stand by her blood , so do you . well , sir , whilst my mother be petition the late Prince of Orange for I will never call he king and while you be in prison , we live at my Lord Marlborough 's house , who be only a little there , be away with the army in Holland . and then . . . I say , Harry , you will not   tell , now ? " 
 Harry again make a vow of secrecy . 
 " well , there use to be all sort of fun , you know : my Lady Marlborough be very fond of we , and she say I be to be her page ; and she get Trix to be a maid of honor , and while she be up in her room cry , we use to be always have fun , you know ; and the Duchess use to kiss I , and so do her daughter , and Blandford fall tremendous in love with Trix , and she like he ; and one day he he kiss she behind a door he do though , and the Duchess catch he , and she bang such a box of the ear both at Trix and Blandford you should have see it ! and then she say that we must leave directly , and abuse my mamma who be cognizant of the business ; but she be not   never think about anything but father . and so we come down to Walcote . Blandford be lock up , and not allow to see Trix . but I get at he . I climb along the gutter , and in through the window , where he be cry . 
 " ' Marquis , ' say I , when he have open it and help I in , ' you know I wear a sword , ' for I have bring it . 
 " ' oh , viscount , ' say he ' oh , my dearest Frank ! ' and he throw himself into my arm and burst out a - crying . ' I do love Mistress Beatrix so , that I shall die if I do not   have she . ' 
 " ' my dear Blandford , ' say I , ' you be young to think of marrying ; ' for he be but fifteen , and a young fellow of that age can scarce do so , you know . 
 " ' but I will wait twenty year , if she will have I , ' say he . ' I will never marry no , never , never , never , marry anybody but she . no , not a princess , though they would have I do it ever so . if beatrix will wait for I , her Blandford swear he will be faithful . ' and he write a paper   it be not   spelt right , for he write ' I be ready to sine with MY BLODE , ' which , you know , Harry , be not   the way of spell it , and vow that he would marry none other but the Honorable Mistress Gertrude Beatrix Esmond , only sister of his dear friend Francis James , fourth Viscount Esmond . and so I give he a locket of her hair . " 
 " a locket of her hair ? " cry Esmond . 
 " yes . Trix give I one after the fight with the Duchess that very day . I be sure I do not   want it ; and so I give it he , and we kiss at parting , and say ' good - by , brother . ' and I get back through the gutter ; and we set off home that very evening . and he go to King 's College , in Cambridge , and I'M go to Cambridge soon ; and if he do not   stand to his promise   for he be only write once , he know I wear a sword , Harry . come along , and let us go see the cocking - match at Winchester . 
 " . . . . but I say , " he add , laugh , after a pause , " I do not   think Trix will break her heart about he . La bless you ! whenever she see a man , she make eye at he ; and young Sir Wilmot Crawley of Queen 's Crawley , and Anthony Henley of Airesford , be at sword draw about she , at the Winchester Assembly , a month ago . " 
 that night Mr. Harry 's sleep be by no mean so pleasant or sweet as it have be on the first two evening after his arrival at Walcote . " so the bright eye have be already shin on another , " think he , " and the pretty lip , or the cheek at any rate , have begin the work which they be make for . here be a girl not sixteen , and one young gentleman be already whimper over a lock of her hair , and two country squire be ready to cut each other 's throat that they may have the honor of a dance with she . what a fool be I to be dally about this passion , and singe my wing in this foolish flame . wing ! why not say crutch ? ' there be but eight year ' difference between we , to be sure ; but in life I be thirty year old . how could I ever hope to please such a sweet creature as that , with my rough way and glum face ? say that I have merit ever so much , and win myself a name , could she ever listen to I ? she must be my Lady Marchioness , and I remain a nameless bastard . oh ! my master , my master ! "   here he fall to think with a passionate grief of the vow which he have make to his poor die lord .   " oh ! my mistress , dear and kind , will you be content with the sacrifice which the poor orphan make for you , whom you love , and who so love you ? " 
 and then come a fiercer pang of temptation . " a word from I , " Harry think , " a syllable of explanation , and all this might be change ; but no , I swear it over the die bed of my benefactor . for the sake of he and his ; for the sacred love and kindness of old day ; I give my promise to he , and may kind heaven enable I to keep my vow ! " 
 the next day , although Esmond give no sign of what be go on in his mind , but strove to be more than ordinarily gay and cheerful when he meet his friend at the morning meal , his dear mistress , whose clear eye it seem no emotion of his could escape , perceive that something trouble he , for she look anxiously towards he more than once during the breakfast , and when he go up to his chamber afterwards she presently follow he , and knock at his door . 
 as she enter , no doubt the whole story be clear to she at once , for she find our young gentleman pack his valise , pursuant to the resolution which he have come to over - night of make a brisk retreat out of this temptation . 
 she close the door very carefully behind she , and then leant against it , very pale , her hand fold before she , look at the young man , who be kneel over his work of packing . " be you go so soon ? " she say . 
 he rise up from his knee , blushing , perhaps , to be so discover , in the very act , as it be , and take one of her fair little hand it be that which have her marriage ring on and kiss it . 
 " it be good that it should be so , dear lady , " he say . 
 " I know you be go , at breakfast . I I think you might stay . what have happen ? why can not   you remain long with we ? what have Frank tell you you be talk together late last night ? " 
 " I have but three day ' leave from Chelsey , " Esmond say , as gayly as he could . " my aunt she let I call her aunt be my mistress now ! I owe she my lieutenancy and my laced coat . she have take I into high favor ; and my new General be to dine at Chelsey to - morrow General Lumley , madam who have appoint I his aide - de - camp , and on whom I must have the honor of wait . see , here be a letter from the Dowager ; the post bring it last night ; and I would not speak of it , for fear of disturb our last merry meeting . " 
 my lady glance at the letter , and put it down with a smile that be somewhat contemptuous . " I have no need to read the letter , " say she   indeed , ' twas as well she do not ; for the Chelsey missive , in the poor Dowager 's usual french jargon , permit he a long holiday than he say . " Je vous donne , " quoth her ladyship , " oui jour , pour vous fatigay parfaictement de vos parens fatigans "   " I have no need to read the letter , " say she . " what be it Frank tell you last night ? " 
 " he tell I little I do not know , " Mr. Esmond answer . " but I have think of that little , and here be the result : I have no right to the name I bear , dear lady ; and it be only by your sufferance that I be allow to keep it . if I think for an hour of what have perhaps cross your mind too " 
 " yes , I do , Harry , " say she ; " I think of it ; and think of it . I would soon call you my son than the great prince in Europe yes , than the great prince . for who be there so good and so brave , and who would love she as you would ? but there be reason a mother can not   tell . " 
 " I know they , " say Mr. Esmond , interrupt she with a smile . " I know there be Sir Wilmot Crawley of Queen 's Crawley , and Mr. Anthony Henley of the Grange , and my Lord Marquis of Blandford , that seem to be the favor suitor . you shall ask I to wear my Lady Marchioness 's favor and to dance at her ladyship 's wedding . " 
 " oh ! Harry , Harry , it be none of these folly that frighten I , " cry out Lady Castlewood . " Lord Churchill be but a child , his outbreak about Beatrix be a mere boyish folly . his parent would rather see he bury than marry to one below he in rank . and do you think that I would stoop to sue for a husband for Francis Esmond 's daughter ; or submit to have my girl smuggle into that proud family to cause a quarrel between son and parent , and to be treat only as an inferior ? I would disdain such a meanness . beatrix would scorn it . ah ! Henry , ' tis not with you the fault lie , ' tis with she . I know you both , and love you : need I be ashamed of that love now ? no , never , never , and ' tis not you , dear Harry , that be unworthy . ' tis for my poor beatrix I tremble whose headstrong will frighten I ; whose jealous temper   they say I be jealous too , but , pray God , I be cure of that sin   and whose vanity no word or prayer of mine can cure only suffer , only experience , and remorse afterwards . oh ! Henry , she will make no man happy who love she . go away , my son : leave she : love we always , and think kindly of we : and for I , my dear , you know that these wall contain all that I love in the world . " 
 in after life , do Esmond find the word true which his fond mistress speak from her sad heart ? warn he have : but I doubt other have warn before his time , and since : and he benefit by it as most man do . 
 my young Lord Viscount be exceed sorry when he hear that Harry could not come to the cock - match with he , and must go to London , but no doubt my lord console himself when the Hampshire cock win the match ; and he see every one of the battle , and crow properly over the conquered Sussex gentleman . 
 as Esmond ride towards town his servant , come up to he , inform he with a grin , that Mistress Beatrix have bring out a new gown and blue stocking for that day 's dinner , in which she intend to appear , and have fly into a rage and give she maid a slap on the face soon after she hear he be go away . Mistress beatrix 's woman , the fellow say , come down to the servant ' hall crying , and with the mark of a blow still on her cheek : but esmond peremptorily order he to fall back and be silent , and ride on with thought enough of his own to occupy he some sad one , some inexpressibly dear and pleasant . 
 his mistress , from whom he have be a year separate , be his dear mistress again . the family from which he have be part , and which he love with the fond devotion , be his family once more . if Beatrix 's beauty shine upon he , it be with a friendly lustre , and he could regard it with much such a delight as he bring away after see the beautiful picture of the smile Madonnas in the convent at Cadiz , when he be despatch thither with a flag ; and as for his mistress , ' twa difficult to say with what a feeling he regard she . ' twas happiness to have see she ; ' twa no great pang to part ; a filial tenderness , a love that be at once respect and protection , fill his mind as he think of she ; and near she or far from she , and from that day until now , and from now till death be past and beyond it , he pray that sacred flame may ever burn . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 I make the campaign of 1704 . 

 Mr. Esmond ride up to London then , where , if the Dowager have be angry at the abrupt leave of absence he take , she be mightily pleased at his speedy return . 
 he go immediately and pay his court to his new general , General Lumley , who receive he graciously , have know his father , and also , he be pleased to say , have have the very good account of Mr. Esmond from the officer whose aide - de - camp he have be at Vigo . during this winter Mr. Esmond be gazette to a lieutenancy in Brigadier Webb 's regiment of Fusileers , then with their colonel in Flanders ; but be now attach to the suite of Mr. Lumley , Esmond do not join his own regiment until more than a year afterwards , and after his return from the campaign of Blenheim , which be fight the next year . the campaign begin very early , our troop march out of their quarter before the winter be almost over , and invest the city of Bonn , on the Rhine , under the Duke 's command . his grace join the army in deep grief of mind , with crape on his sleeve , and his household in mourning ; and the very same packet which bring the Commander - in - chief over , bring letter to the force which precede he , and one from his dear mistress to Esmond , which interest he not a little . 
 the young Marquis of Blandford , his grace 's son , who have be enter in King 's College in Cambridge ,   whither my Lord Viscount have also go , to Trinity , with Mr. Tusher as his governor ,   have be seize with small - pox , and be dead at sixteen year of age , and so poor Frank 's scheme for his sister 's advancement be over , and that innocent childish passion nip in the birth . 
 Esmond 's mistress would have have he return , at least her letter hint as much ; but in the presence of the enemy this be impossible , and our young man take his humble share in the siege , which need not be describe here , and have the good luck to escape without a wound of any sort , and to drink his general 's health after the surrender . he be in constant military duty this year , and do not think of ask for a leave of absence , as one or two of his less fortunate friend do , who be cast away in that tremendous storm which happen towards the close of November , that " which of late o'er pale Britannia past "   as Mr. Addison sing of it , and in which score of our great ship and 15,000 of our seaman go down . 
 they say that our Duke be quite heart - break by the calamity which have befall his family ; but his enemy find that he could subdue they , as well as master his grief . successful as have be this great general 's operation in the past year , they be far enhance by the splendor of his victory in the ensue campaign . his Grace the Captain - General go to England after Bonn , and our army fall back into Holland , where , in April 1704 , his grace again find the troop , embark from Harwich and landing at Maesland Sluys : thence his grace come immediately to the Hague , where he receive the foreign minister , general officer , and other people of quality . the great honor be pay to his grace everywhere at the Hague , Utrecht , Ruremonde , and Maestricht ; the civil authority come to meet his coach : salvos of cannon salute he , canopy of state be erect for he where he stop , and feast prepare for the numerous gentleman follow in his suite . his grace review the troop of the States - General between Liege and Maestricht , and afterwards the english force , under the command of General Churchill , near Bois - le - Duc . every preparation be make for a long march ; and the army hear , with no small elation , that it be the Commander - in - Chief 's intention to carry the war out of the Low Countries , and to march on the Mozelle . before leave our camp at Maestricht , we hear that the French , under the Marshal Villeroy , be also bind towards the Mozelle . 
 towards the end of May , the army reach Coblentz ; and next day , his grace , and the general accompany he , go to visit the Elector of Treves at his Castle of Ehrenbreitstein , the horse and dragoon pass the Rhine whilst the Duke be entertain at a grand feast by the Elector . all as yet be novelty , festivity , and splendor a brilliant march of a great and glorious army through a friendly country , and sure through some of the most beautiful scene of nature which I ever witness . 
 the foot and artillery , follow after the horse as quick as possible , cross the Rhine under Ehrenbreitstein , and so to Castel , over against Mayntz , in which city his grace , his general , and his retinue be receive at the landing - place by the elector 's coach , carry to his Highness 's palace amidst the thunder of cannon , and then once more magnificently entertain . Gidlingen , in Bavaria , be appoint as the general rendezvous of the army , and thither , by different route , the whole force of English , Dutch , Danes , and german auxiliary take their way . the foot and artillery under General Churchill pass the Neckar , at Heidelberg ; and Esmond have an opportunity of see that city and palace , once so famous and beautiful   though shatter and batter by the French , under Turenne , in the late war , where his grandsire have serve the beautiful and unfortunate Electress - Palatine , the first King Charles 's sister . 
 at Mindelsheim , the famous Prince of Savoy come to visit our commander , all of we crowd eagerly to get a sight of that brilliant and intrepid warrior ; and our troop be draw up in battalia before the Prince , who be pleased to express his admiration of this noble english army . at length we come in sight of the enemy between Dillingen and Lawingen , the Brentz lie between the two army . the Elector , judge that Donauwort would be the point of his grace 's attack , send a strong detachment of his good troop to Count Darcos , who be post at Schellenberg , near that place , where great intrenchment be throw up , and thousand of pioneer employ to strengthen the position . 
 on the 2nd of July his grace storm the post , with what success on our part need scarce be tell . his grace advance with six thousand foot , English and Dutch , thirty squadron , and three regiment of Imperial Cuirassiers , the Duke cross the river at the head of the cavalry . although our troop make the attack with unparalleled courage and fury rush up to the very gun of the enemy , and be slaughter before their work we be drive back many time , and should not have carry they , but that the Imperialists come up under the Prince of Baden , when the enemy could make no head against we : we pursue they into the trench , make a terrible slaughter there , and into the very Danube , where a great part of his troop , follow the example of their general , Count Darcos and the elector himself , try to save themselves by swim . our army enter Donauwort , which the Bavarians evacuate ; and where ' twa say the Elector purpose to have give we a warm reception , by burn we in our bed ; the cellar of the house , when we take possession of they , be find stuff with straw . but though the link be there , the link - boy have run away . the townsman save their house , and our General take possession of the enemy 's ammunition in the arsenal , his store , and magazine . five day afterwards a great " Te Deum " be sing in Prince Lewis 's army , and a solemn day of thanksgiving hold in our own ; the Prince of Savoy 's compliment come to his grace the Captain - General during the day 's religious ceremony , and conclude , as it be , with an amen . 
 and now , have see a great military march through a friendly country ; the pomp and festivity of more than one german court ; the severe struggle of a hotly contest battle , and the triumph of victory , Mr. Esmond behold another part of military duty : our troop enter the enemy 's territory , and put all around they to fire and sword ; burn farm , waste field , shriek woman , slaughter son and father , and drunken soldiery , curse and carouse in the midst of tear , terror , and murder . why do the stately Muse of History , that delight in describe the valor of hero and the grandeur of conquest , leave out these scene , so brutal , mean , and degrading , that yet form by far the great part of the drama of war ? you , gentleman of England , who live at home at ease , and compliment yourself in the song of triumph with which our chieftain be bepraise you pretty maidens , that come tumble down the stair when the fife and drum call you , and huzzah for the british Grenadiers do you take account that these item go to make up the amount of the triumph you admire , and form part of the duty of the hero you fondle ? our chief , whom England and all Europe , save only the Frenchmen , worship almost , have this of the godlike in he , that he be impassible before victory , before danger , before defeat . before the great obstacle or the most trivial ceremony ; before a hundred thousand man draw in battalia , or a peasant slaughter at the door of his burn hovel ; before a carouse of drunken german lord , or a monarch 's court or a cottage table , where his plan be lay , or an enemy 's battery , vomit flame and death , and strew corps round about he ; he be always cold , calm , resolute , like fate . he perform a treason or a court - bow , he tell a falsehood as black as Styx , as easily as he pay a compliment or speak about the weather . he take a mistress , and leave she ; he betray his benefactor , and support he , or would have murder he , with the same calmness always , and have no more remorse than Clotho when she weave the thread , or lachesis when she cut it . in the hour of battle I have hear the Prince of Savoy 's officer say , the Prince become possess with a sort of warlike fury ; his eye light up ; he rush hither and thither , rag ; he shriek curse and encouragement , yell and hark his bloody war - dog on , and himself always at the first of the hunt . our duke be as calm at the mouth of the cannon as at the door of a drawing - room . perhaps he could not have be the great man he be , have he have a heart either for love or hatred , or pity or fear , or regret or remorse . he achieve the high deed of daring , or deep calculation of thought , as he perform the very mean action of which a man be capable ; tell a lie , or cheat a fond woman , or rob a poor beggar of a halfpenny , with a like awful serenity and equal capacity of the high and low act of our nature . 
 his quality be pretty well know in the army , where there be party of all politic , and of plenty of shrewdness and wit ; but there exist such a perfect confidence in he , as the first captain of the world , and such a faith and admiration in his prodigious genius and fortune , that the very man whom he notoriously cheat of their pay , the chief whom he use and injure   for he use all man , great and small , that come near he , as his instrument alike , and take something of theirs , either some quality or some property   the blood of a soldier , it might be , or a jewel hat , or a hundred thousand crown from a king , or a portion out of a starving sentinel 's three - farthing ; or   when he be young   a kiss from a woman , and the gold chain off her neck , take all he could from woman or man , and have , as I have say , this of the godlike in he , that he could see a hero perish or a sparrow fall , with the same amount of sympathy for either . not that he have no tear ; he could always order up this reserve at the proper moment to battle ; he could draw upon tear or smile alike , and whenever need be for use this cheap coin . he would cringe to a shoeblack , as he would flatter a minister or a monarch ; be haughty , be humble , threaten , repent , weep , grasp your hand ,   or stab you whenever he see occasion   but yet those of the army , who know he well and have suffer most from he , admire he most of all : and as he ride along the line to battle or gallop up in the nick of time to a battalion reel from before the enemy 's charge or shot , the faint man and officer get new courage as they see the splendid calm of his face , and feel that his will make they irresistible . 
 after the great victory of Blenheim the enthusiasm of the army for the Duke , even of his bitter personal enemy in it , amount to a sort of rage nay , the very officer who curse he in their heart be among the most frantic to cheer he . who could refuse his meed of admiration to such a victory and such a victor ? not he who write : a man may profess to be ever so much a philosopher ; but he who fight on that day must feel a thrill of pride as he recall it . 
 the french right be post near to the village of Blenheim , on the Danube , where the Marshal Tallard 's quarter be ; their line extend through , it may be a league and a half , before Lutzingen and up to a woody hill , round the base of which , and act against the Prince of Savoy , be forty of his squadron . 
 here be a village that the frenchman have burn , the wood being , in fact , a well shelter and easy of guard than any village . 
 before these two village and the french line run a little stream , not more than two foot broad , through a marsh   that be mostly dry up from the heat of the weather , and this stream be the only separation between the two army our come up and range themselves in line of battle before the French , at six o'clock in the morning ; so that our line be quite visible to theirs ; and the whole of this great plain be black and swarm with troop for hour before the cannonading begin . 
 on one side and the other this cannonading last many hour . the french gun be in position in front of their line , and do severe damage among our horse especially , and on our right wing of Imperialists under the Prince of Savoy , who could neither advance his artillery nor his line , the ground before he be cut up by ditch , morass , and very difficult of passage for the gun . 
 it be past mid - day when the attack begin on our left , where Lord Cutts command , the brave and most beloved officer in the english army . and now , as if to make his experience in war complete , our young aide - de - camp have see two great army face each other in line of battle , and have the honor of rid with order from one end to other of the line , come in for a not uncommon accompaniment of military glory , and be knock on the head , along with many hundred of brave fellow , almost at the very commencement of this famous day of Blenheim . a little after noon , the disposition for attack be complete with much delay and difficulty , and under a severe fire from the enemy 's gun , that be well post and more numerous than our , a body of English and Hessians , with Major - General Wilkes command at the extreme left of our line , march upon Blenheim , advance with great gallantry , the Major - General on foot , with his officer , at the head of the column , and marching , with his hat off , intrepidly in the face of the enemy , who be pour in a tremendous fire from his gun and musketry , to which our people be instruct not to reply , except with pike and bayonet when they reach the french palisade . to these Wilkes walk intrepidly , and strike the woodwork with his sword before our people charge it . he be shoot down at the instant , with his colonel , major , and several officer ; and our troop cheer and huzzaing , and come on , as they do , with immense resolution and gallantry , be nevertheless stop by the murderous fire from behind the enemy 's defence , and then attack in flank by a furious charge of french horse which sweep out of Blenheim , and cut down our man in great number . three fierce and desperate assault of our foot be make and repulse by the enemy ; so that our column of foot be quite shatter , and fall back , scramble over the little rivulet , which we have cross so resolutely an hour before , and pursue by the french cavalry , slaughter we and cut we down . 
 and now the conqueror be meet by a furious charge of english horse under Esmond 's general , General Lumley , behind whose squadron the fly foot find refuge , and form again , whilst Lumley drive back the french horse , charge up to the village of Blenheim and the palisade where Wilkes , and many hundred more gallant Englishmen , lie in slaughter heap . beyond this moment , and of this famous victory , Mr. Esmond know nothing ; for a shot bring down his horse and our young gentleman on it , who fall crush and stun under the animal , and come to his sens he know not how long after , only to lose they again from pain and loss of blood . a dim sense , as of people groan round about he , a wild incoherent thought or two for she who occupy so much of his heart now , and that here his career , and his hope , and misfortune be end , he remember in the course of these hour . when he wake up , it be with a pang of extreme pain , his breastplate be take off , his servant be hold his head up , the good and faithful lad of Hampshire   be blubber over his master , whom he find and have think dead , and a surgeon be probe a wound in the shoulder , which he must have get at the same moment when his horse be shoot and fall over he . the battle be over at this end of the field , by this time : the village be in possession of the English , its brave defender prisoner , or flee , or drown , many of they , in the neighboring water of Donau . but for honest Lockwood 's faithful search after his master , there have no doubt be an end of Esmond here , and of this his story . the marauder be out riffle the body as they lie on the field , and Jack have brain one of these gentry with the club - end of his musket , who have ease Esmond of his hat and periwig , his purse , and fine silver - mount pistol which the Dowager give he , and be fumble in his pocket for further treasure , when Jack Lockwood come up and put an end to the scoundrel 's triumph . 
    my mistress , before I go this campaign , send I John 
  Lockwood out of Walcote , who hath ever since remain with 
  I . H. E. 
 Hospitals for our wound be establish at Blenheim , and here for several week esmond lie in very great danger of his life ; the wound be not very great from which he suffer , and the ball extract by the surgeon on the spot where our young gentleman receive it ; but a fever set in next day , as he be lie in hospital , and that almost carry he away . Jack Lockwood say he talk in the wild manner during his delirium ; that he call himself the Marquis of Esmond , and seize one of the surgeon 's assistant who come to dress his wound , swear that he be Madam Beatrix , and that he would make she a duchess if she would but say yes . he be pass the day in these crazy fancy , and vana somnia , whilst the army be sing " Te Deum " for the victory , and those famous festivity be take place at which our Duke , now make a Prince of the Empire , be entertain by the King of the Romans and his nobility . his grace go home by Berlin and Hanover , and Esmond lose the festivity which take place at those city , and which his general share in company of the other general officer who travel with our great captain . when he could move , it be by the Duke of Wurtemberg 's city of Stuttgard that he make his way homeward , revisit Heidelberg again , whence he go to Manheim , and hence have a tedious but easy water journey down the river of Rhine , which he have think a delightful and beautiful voyage indeed , but that his heart be long for home , and something far more beautiful and delightful . 
 as bright and welcome as the eye almost of his mistress shine the light of harwich , as the packet come in from Holland . it be not many hour ere he , Esmond , be in London , of that you may be sure , and receive with open arm by the old Dowager of Chelsey , who vow , in her jargon of French and English , that he have the air noble , that his pallor embellish he , that he be an Amadis and deserve a Gloriana ; and oh ! flame and dart ! what be his joy at hear that his mistress be come into waiting , and be now with her Majesty at Kensington ! although Mr. Esmond have tell Jack Lockwood to get horse and they would ride for Winchester that night , when he hear this news he countermand the horse at once ; his business lie no long in hant ; all his hope and desire lie within a couple of mile of he in Kensington Park wall . Poor Harry have never look in the glass before so eagerly to see whether he have the bel air , and his paleness really do become he ; he never take such pain about the curl of his periwig , and the taste of his embroidery and point - lace , as now , before Mr. Amadis present himself to Madam Gloriana . be the fire of the french line half so murderous as the killing glance from her ladyship 's eye ? oh ! dart and rapture , how beautiful be they ! 
 and as , before the blaze sun of morning , the moon fade away in the sky almost invisible , Esmond think , with a blush perhaps , of another sweet pale face , sad and faint , and fade out of sight , with its sweet fond gaze of affection ; such a last look it seem to cast as Eurydice might have give , yearn after her lover , when Fate and Pluto summon she , and she pass away into the shade . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 an old story about a FOOL and a woman . 

 any taste for pleasure which Esmond have   and he like to desipere in loco , neither more nor less than most young man of his age   he could now gratify to the utmost extent , and in the good company which the town afford . when the army go into winter quarter abroad , those of the officer who have interest or money easily get leave of absence , and find it much pleasanter to spend their time in Pall Mall and Hyde Park , than to pass the winter away behind the fortification of the dreary old Flanders town , where the english troop be gather . yacht and packet pass daily between the dutch and flemish port and Harwich ; the road thence to London and the great inn be crowd with army gentleman ; the tavern and ordinary of the town swarm with red - coat ; and our great Duke 's levee at St. James 's be as throng as they have be at Ghent and Brussels , where we treat he , and he we , with the grandeur and ceremony of a sovereign . though Esmond have be appoint to a lieutenancy in the Fusileer regiment , of which that celebrated officer , Brigadier John Richmond Webb , be colonel , he have never join the regiment , nor be introduce to its excellent commander , though they have make the same campaign together , and be engage in the same battle . but be aide - de - camp to General Lumley , who command the division of horse , and the army marching to its point of destination on the Danube by different route , Esmond have not fall in , as yet , with his commander and future comrade of the fort ; and it be in London , in Golden Square , where Major - General Webb lodge , that Captain Esmond have the honor of first pay his respect to his friend , patron , and commander of after day . 
 those who remember this brilliant and accomplished gentleman may recollect his character , upon which he pride himself , I think , not a little , of be the handsome man in the army ; a poet who writ a dull copy of verse upon the battle of Oudenarde three year after , describe Webb , say : 
  " to noble danger Webb conduct the way , 
  his great example all his troop obey ; 
  before the front the general sternly rid , 
  with such an air as Mars to battle stride : 
  Propitious heaven must sure a hero save , 
  like Paris handsome , and like Hector brave . " 
 Mr. Webb think these verse quite as fine as Mr. Addison 's on the Blenheim Campaign , and , indeed , to be Hector a la mode de Paris , be part of this gallant gentleman 's ambition . it would have be difficult to find an officer in the whole army , or amongst the splendid courtier and cavalier of the Maison du Roy , that fight under Vendosme and Villeroy in the army oppose to ours , who be a more accomplished soldier and perfect gentleman , and either braver or well - looking . and if Mr. Webb believe of himself what the world say of he , and be deeply convinced of his own indisputable genius , beauty , and valor , who have a right to quarrel with he very much ? this self - content of his keep he in general good - humor , of which his friend and dependant get the benefit . 
 he come of a very ancient Wiltshire family , which he respect above all family in the world : he could prove a lineal descent from King Edward the First , and his first ancestor , Roaldus de Richmond , ride by William the Conqueror 's side on Hastings field . " we be gentleman , Esmond , " he use to say , " when the Churchills be horse - boy . " he be a very tall man , stand in his pump six foot three inch   in his great jack - boot , with his tall fair periwig , and hat and feather , he could not have be less than eight foot high . " I be tall than Churchill , " he would say , survey himself in the glass , " and I be a well make man ; and if the woman will not   like a man that have not   a wart on his nose , faith , I can not   help myself , and Churchill have the well of I there . " indeed , he be always measure himself with the Duke , and always ask his friend to measure they . and talk in this frank way , as he would do , over his cup , wag would laugh and encourage he ; friend would be sorry for he ; schemer and flatterer would egg he on , and tale - bearer carry the story to headquarters , and widen the difference which already exist there , between the great captain and one of the able and brave lieutenant he ever have . 
 his rancor against the Duke be so apparent , that one see it in the first half - hour 's conversation with General Webb ; and his lady , who adore her General , and think he a hundred time tall , handsomer , and braver than a prodigal nature have make he , hat the great Duke with such an intensity as it become faithful wife to feel against their husband ' enemy . not that my Lord Duke be so yet ; Mr. Webb have say a thousand thing against he , which his superior have pardon ; and his Grace , whose spy be everywhere , have hear a thousand thing more that Webb have never say . but it cost this great man no pain to pardon ; and he pass over an injury or a benefit alike easily . 
 should any child of mine take the pain to read these his ancestor 's memoir , I would not have he judge of the great Duke   by what a contemporary have write of he . no man hath be so immensely laud and decry as this great statesman and warrior ; as , indeed , no man ever deserve well the very great praise and the strong censure . if the present writer join with the latter faction , very likely a private pique of his own may be the cause of his ill - feeling . 
    this passage in the Memoirs of Esmond be write on a leaf 
  insert into the MS . book , and date 1744 , probably after 
  he have hear of the Duchess 's death . 
 on present himself at the Commander - in - Chief 's levee , his grace have not the least remembrance of General Lumley 's aide - de - camp , and though he know Esmond 's family perfectly well , have serve with both lord   my Lord Francis and the Viscount Esmond 's father   in Flanders , and in the Duke of York 's Guard , the Duke of Marlborough , who be friendly and serviceable to the   so - style   legitimate representative of the Viscount Castlewood , take no sort of notice of the poor lieutenant who bear their name . a word of kindness or acknowledgment , or a single glance of approbation , might have change Esmond 's opinion of the great man ; and instead of a satire , which his pen can not help write , who know but that the humble historian might have take the other side of panegyric ? we have but to change the point of view , and the great action look mean ; as we turn the perspective - glass , and a giant appear a pigmy . you may describe , but who can tell whether your sight be clear or not , or your mean of information accurate ? have the great man say but a word of kindness to the small one   as he would have step out of his gilt chariot to shake hand with Lazarus in rag and sore , if he think Lazarus could have be of any service to he , no doubt Esmond would have fight for he with pen and sword to the utmost of his might ; but my lord the lion do not want master mouse at this moment , and so Muscipulus go off and nibble in opposition . 
 so it be , however , that a young gentleman , who , in the eye of his family , and in his own , doubtless , be look upon as a consummate hero , find that the great hero of the day take no more notice of he than of the small drummer in his grace 's army . the Dowager at Chelsey be furious against this neglect of her family , and have a great battle with Lady Marlborough   as Lady Castlewood insist on call the Duchess . her grace be now mistress of the Robes to her Majesty , and one of the great personage in this kingdom , as her husband be in all Europe , and the battle between the two lady take place in the Queen 's drawing - room . 
 the Duchess , in reply to my aunt 's eager clamor , say haughtily , that she have do she good for the legitimate branch of the Esmonds , and could not be expect to provide for the bastard brat of the family . 
 " bastard ! " say the Viscountess , in a fury . " there be bastard among the Churchills , as your grace know , and the Duke of Berwick be provide for well enough . " 
 " Madam , " say the Duchess , " you know whose fault it be that there be no such duke in the Esmond family too , and how that little scheme of a certain lady miscarry . " 
 Esmond 's friend , Dick Steele , who be in wait on the Prince , hear the controversy between the lady at court . " and faith , " say Dick , " I think , Harry , thy kinswoman have the bad of it . " 
 he could not keep the story quiet ; ' twa all over the coffee - house ere night ; it be print in a News Letter before a month be over , and " the reply of her grace the Duchess of M - rlb - r - gh to a Popish Lady of the Court , once a favorite of the late K - J - m - s , " be print in half a dozen place , with a note state that " this duchess , when the head of this lady 's family come by his death lately in a fatal duel , never rest until she get a pension for the orphan heir , and widow , from her Majesty 's bounty . " the squabble do not advance poor Esmond 's promotion much , and indeed make he so ashamed of himself that he dare not show his face at the Commander - in - Chief 's levee again . 
 during those eighteen month which have pass since Esmond see his dear mistress , her good father , the old Dean , quit this life , firm in his principle to the very last , and enjoin his family always to remember that the Queen 's brother , King James the Third , be their rightful sovereign . he make a very edify end , as his daughter tell Esmond , and not a little to her surprise , after his death   for he have live always very poorly   my lady find that her father have leave no less a sum than 3,000L. behind he , which he bequeath to she . 
 with this little fortune Lady Castlewood be enable , when her daughter 's turn at Court come , to come to London , where she take a small genteel house at Kensington , in the neighborhood of the Court , bring her child with she , and here it be that Esmond find his friend . 
 as for the young lord , his university career have end rather abruptly . Honest Tusher , his governor , have find my young gentleman quite ungovernable . my lord worry his life away with trick ; and break out , as home - breed lad will , into a hundred youthful extravagance , so that Dr. Bentley , the new master of Trinity , think fit to write to the Viscountess Castlewood , my lord 's mother , and beg she to remove the young nobleman from a college where he decline to learn , and where he only do harm by his riotous example . indeed , I believe he nearly set fire to Nevil 's Court , that beautiful new quadrangle of our college , which Sir Christopher Wren have lately build . he knock down a proctor 's man that want to arrest he in a midnight prank ; he give a dinner - party on the Prince of Wales 's birthday , which be within a fortnight of his own , and the twenty young gentleman then present sally out after their wine , have toast King James 's health with open window , and sing cavalier song , and shout " God save the king ! " in the great court , so that the master come out of his lodge at midnight , and dissipate the riotous assembly . 
 this be my lord 's crowning freak , and the Rev. Thomas Tusher , domestic chaplain to the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Castlewood , find his prayer and sermon of no earthly avail to his lordship , give up his duty of governor ; go and marry his brewer 's widow at Southampton , and take she and her money to his parsonage house at Castlewood . 
 my lady could not be angry with her son for drink King James 's health , be herself a loyal tory , as all the Castlewood family be , and acquiesce with a sigh , know , perhaps , that her refusal would be of no avail to the young lord 's desire for a military life . she would have like he to be in Mr. Esmond 's regiment , hop that Harry might act as a guardian and adviser to his wayward young kinsman ; but my young lord would hear of nothing but the Guards , and a commission be get for he in the Duke of Ormond 's regiment ; so Esmond find my lord , ensign and lieutenant , when he return from Germany after the Blenheim campaign . 
 the effect produce by both Lady Castlewood 's child when they appear in public be extraordinary , and the whole town speedily ring with their fame : such a beautiful couple , it be declare , never have be see ; the young maid of honor be toast at every table and tavern , and as for my young lord , his good look be even more admired than his sister 's . a hundred song be write about the pair , and as the fashion of that day be , my young lord be praise in these Anacreontics as warmly as Bathyllus . you may be sure that he accept very complacently the town 's opinion of he , and acquiesce with that frankness and charming good - humor he always show in the idea that he be the prettiest fellow in all London . 
 the old Dowager at Chelsey , though she could never be get to acknowledge that Mistress Beatrix be any beauty at all ,   in which opinion , as it may be imagine , a vast number of the lady agree with she , yet , on the very first sight of young Castlewood , she own she fall in love with he : and Henry Esmond , on his return to Chelsey , find himself quite supersede in her favor by her young kinsman . the feat of drink the King 's health at Cambridge would have win her heart , she say , if nothing else do . " how have the dear young fellow get such beauty ? " she ask . " not from his father certainly not from his mother . how have he come by such noble manner , and the perfect bel air ? that countrifie walcote widow could never have teach he . " Esmond have his own opinion about the countrified Walcote widow , who have a quiet grace and serene kindness , that have always seem to he the perfection of good breeding , though he do not try to argue this point with his aunt . but he could agree in most of the praise which the enraptured old dowager bestow on my Lord Viscount , than whom he never behold a more fascinating and charming gentleman . Castlewood have not wit so much as enjoyment . " the lad look good thing , " Mr. Steele use to say ; " and his laugh light up a conversation as much as ten repartee from Mr. Congreve . I would as soon sit over a bottle with he as with Mr. Addison ; and rather listen to his talk than hear Nicolini . be ever man so gracefully drunk as my Lord Castlewood ? I would give anything to carry my wine "   though , indeed , Dick bear his very kindly , and plenty of it , too , " like this incomparable young man . when he be sober he be delightful ; and when tipsy , perfectly irresistible . " and refer to his favorite , Shakspeare   who be quite out of fashion until Steele bring he back into the mode , Dick compare Lord Castlewood to Prince Hal , and be pleased to dub Esmond as ancient Pistol . 
 the Mistress of the Robes , the great lady in England after the Queen , or even before her Majesty , as the world say , though she never could be get to say a civil word to beatrix , whom she have promote to her place as maid of honor , take her brother into instant favor . when young Castlewood , in his new uniform , and look like a prince out of a fairy tale , go to pay his duty to her grace , she look at he for a minute in silence , the young man blush and in confusion before she , then fairly burst out a - crying , and kiss he before her daughter and company . " he be my boy 's friend , " she say , through her sob . " my Blandford might have be like he . " and everybody see , after this mark of the Duchess 's favor , that my young lord 's promotion be secure , and people crowd round the favorite 's favorite , who become vainer and gayer , and more good - humor than ever . 
 meanwhile Madam Beatrix be make her conquest on her own side , and amongst they be one poor gentleman , who have be shoot by her young eye two year before , and have never be quite cure of that wound ; he know , to be sure , how hopeless any passion might be , direct in that quarter , and have take that well , though ignoble , remedium amoris , a speedy retreat from before the charmer , and a long absence from she ; and not be dangerously smite in the first instance , Esmond pretty soon get the well of his complaint , and if he have it still , do not know he have it , and bear it easily . but when he return after Blenheim , the young lady of sixteen , who have appear the most beautiful object his eye have ever look on two year back , be now advanced to a perfect ripeness and perfection of beauty , such as instantly enthral the poor devil , who have already be a fugitive from her charm . then he have see she but for two day , and flee ; now he behold her day after day , and when she be at Court watch after she ; when she be at home , make one of the family party ; when she go abroad , ride after her mother 's chariot ; when she appear in public place , be in the box near she , or in the pit look at she ; when she go to church be sure to be there , though he might not listen to the sermon , and be ready to hand she to her chair if she deign to accept of his service , and select he from a score of young man who be always hang round about she . when she go away , accompany her Majesty to Hampton Court , a darkness fall over London . god , what night have Esmond pass , think of she , rhyme about she , talk about she ! his friend Dick Steele be at this time court the young lady , Mrs. Scurlock , whom he marry ; she have a lodging in Kensington Square , hard by my Lady Castlewood 's house there . Dick and Harry , be on the same errand , use to meet constantly at Kensington . they be always prowl about that place , or dismally walk thence , or eagerly run thither . they empty score of bottle at the " King 's arm , " each man prating of his love , and allow the other to talk on condition that he might have his own turn as a listener . hence arise an intimacy between they , though to all the rest of their friend they must have be insufferable . Esmond 's verse to " Gloriana at the Harpsichord , " to " Gloriana 's Nosegay , " to " Gloriana at Court , " appear this year in the Observator . have you never read they ? they be think pretty poem , and attribute by some to Mr. Prior . 
 this passion do not escape how should it ? the clear eye of Esmond 's mistress : he tell she all ; what will a man not do when frantic with love ? to what baseness will he not demean himself ? what pang will he not make other suffer , so that he may ease his selfish heart of a part of its own pain ? day after day he would seek his dear mistress , pour insane hope , supplication , rhapsody , rapture , into her ear . she listen , smile , console , with untire pity and sweetness . esmond be the eld of her child , so she be pleased to say ; and as for her kindness , who ever have or would look for aught else from one who be an angel of goodness and pity ? after what have be say , ' tis needless almost to add that poor Esmond 's suit be unsuccessful . what be a nameless , penniless lieutenant to do , when some of the great in the land be in the field ? esmond never so much as thought of ask permission to hope so far above his reach as he know this prize be and pass his foolish , useless life in mere abject sigh and impotent longing . what night of rage , what day of torment , of passionate unfulfilled desire , of sicken jealousy can he recall ! beatrix think no more of he than of the lackey that follow her chair . his complaint do not touch she in the least ; his rapture rather fatigue she ; she care for his verse no more than for Dan Chaucer 's , who be dead these ever so many hundred year ; she do not hate he ; she rather despise he , and just suffer he . 
 one day , after talk to Beatrix 's mother , his dear , fond , constant mistress for hour for all day long pour out his flame and his passion , his despair and rage , return again and again to the theme , pace the room , tear up the flower on the table , twisting and break into bit the wax out of the stand - dish , and perform a hundred mad freak of passionate folly ; see his mistress at last quite pale and tired out with sheer weariness of compassion , and watch over his fever for the hundredth time , Esmond seize up his hat , and take his leave . as he get into Kensington Square , a sense of remorse come over he for the wearisome pain he have be inflict upon the dearest and kind friend ever man have . he go back to the house , where the servant still stand at the open door , run up the stair , and find his mistress where he have leave she in the embrasure of the window , look over the field towards Chelsey . she laugh , wipe away at the same time the tear which be in her kind eye ; he fling himself down on his knee , and bury his head in her lap . she have in her hand the stalk of one of the flower , a pink , that he have tear to piece . " oh , pardon I , pardon I , my dearest and kind , " he say ; " I be in hell , and you be the angel that bring I a drop of water . " 
 " I be your mother , you be my son , and I love you always , " she say , hold her hand over he : and he go away comfort and humble in mind , as he think of that amazing and constant love and tenderness with which this sweet lady ever bless and pursue he . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 the FAMOUS MR . JOSEPH ADDISON . 

 the gentleman usher have a table at Kensington , and the Guard a very splendid dinner daily at St. James 's , at either of which ordinarie Esmond be free to dine . Dick Steele like the guard - table well than his own at the gentleman usher ' , where there be less wine and more ceremony ; and Esmond have many a jolly afternoon in company of his friend , and a hundred time at least see Dick into his chair . if there be verity in wine , accord to the old adage , what an amiable - natured character Dick 's must have be ! in proportion as he take in wine he overflow with kindness . his talk be not witty so much as charming . he never say a word that could anger anybody , and only become the more benevolent the more tipsy he grow . many of the wag deride the poor fellow in his cup , and choose he as a butt for their satire : but there be a kindness about he , and a sweet playful fancy , that seem to Esmond far more charming than the point talk of the bright wit , with their elaborate repartee and affected severity . I think Steele shine rather than sparkle . those famous beaux - esprit of the coffee - house   Mr. William Congreve , for instance , when his gout and his grandeur permit he to come among we   would make many brilliant hit half a dozen in a night sometimes but , like sharp - shooter , when they have fire their shot , they be oblige to retire under cover till their piece be load again , and wait till they get another chance at their enemy ; whereas Dick never think that his bottle companion be a butt to aim at only a friend to shake by the hand . the poor fellow have half the town in his confidence ; everybody know everything about his love and his debt , his creditor or his mistress 's obduracy . when Esmond first come on to the town , honest Dick be all flame and rapture for a young lady , a West India fortune , whom he marry . in a couple of year the lady be dead , the fortune be all but spend , and the honest widower be as eager in pursuit of a new paragon of beauty , as if he have never court and marry and bury the last one . 
 quit the guard - table one Sunday afternoon , when by chance Dick have a sober fit upon he , he and his friend be make their way down Germain Street , and Dick all of a sudden leave his companion 's arm , and run after a gentleman who be pore over a folio volume at the book - shop near to St. James 's Church . he be a fair , tall man , in a snuff - color suit , with a plain sword , very sober , and almost shabby in appearance at least when compare to Captain Steele , who love to adorn his jolly round person with the fine of clothe , and shine in scarlet and gold lace . the Captain rush up , then , to the student of the book - stall , take he in his arm , hug he , and would have kiss he for Dick be always hug and buss his friend but the other step back with a flush on his pale face , seem to decline this public manifestation of Steele 's regard . 
 " my dear Joe , where hast thou hide thyself this age ? " cry the Captain , still hold both his friend 's hand ; " I have be languish for thee this fortnight . " 
 " a fortnight be not an age , Dick , " say the other , very good - humoredly .   he have light blue eye , extraordinary bright , and a face perfectly regular and handsome , like a tinted statue .   " and I have be hide myself where do you think ? " 
 " what ! not across the water , my dear Joe ? " say Steele , with a look of great alarm : " thou know I have always " 
 " no , " say his friend , interrupt he with a smile : " we be not come to such strait as that , Dick . I have be hide , sir , at a place where people never think of find you at my own lodging , whither I be go to smoke a pipe now and drink a glass of sack : will your honor come ? " 
 " Harry Esmond , come hither , " cry out Dick . " Thou hast hear I talk over and over again of my dear Joe , my guardian angel ? " 
 " indeed , " say Mr. Esmond , with a bow , " it be not from you only that I have learn to admire Mr. Addison . we love good poetry at Cambridge as well as at Oxford ; and I have some of your by heart , though I have put on a red coat . . . . ' o qui canoro blandius Orpheo vocale ducis carmen ; ' shall I go on , sir ? " say Mr. Esmond , who , indeed , have read and love the charming Latin poem of Mr. Addison , as every scholar of that time know and admire they . 
 " this be Captain Esmond who be at Blenheim , " say Steele . 
 " Lieutenant Esmond , " say the other , with a low bow , " at Mr. Addison 's service . 
 " I have hear of you , " say Mr. Addison , with a smile ; as , indeed , everybody about town have hear that unlucky story about Esmond 's dowager aunt and the Duchess . 
 " we be go to the ' George ' to take a bottle before the play , " say Steele : " wilt thou be one , Joe ? " 
 Mr. Addison say his own lodging be hard by , where he be still rich enough to give a good bottle of wine to his friend ; and invite the two gentleman to his apartment in the Haymarket , whither we accordingly go . 
 " I shall get credit with my landlady , " say he , with a smile , " when she see two such fine gentleman as you come up my stair . " and he politely make his visitor welcome to his apartment , which be indeed but a shabby one , though no grandee of the land could receive his guest with a more perfect and courtly grace than this gentleman . a frugal dinner , consist of a slice of meat and a penny loaf , be await the owner of the lodging . " my wine be well than my meat , " say Mr. Addison ; " my Lord Halifax send I the Burgundy . " and he set a bottle and glass before his friend , and eat his simple dinner in a very few minute , after which the three fall to , and begin to drink . " you see , " say Mr. Addison , point to his writing - table , whereon be a map of the action at Hochstedt , and several other gazette and pamphlet relate to the battle , " that I , too , be busy about your affair , Captain . I be engage as a poetical gazetteer , to say truth , and be write a poem on the campaign . " 
 so Esmond , at the request of his host , tell he what he know about the famous battle , draw the river on the table aliquo mero , and with the aid of some bit of tobacco - pipe show the advance of the left wing , where he have be engage . 
 a sheet or two of the verse lay already on the table beside our bottle and glass , and Dick have plentifully refresh himself from the latter , take up the page of manuscript , writ out with scarce a blot or correction , in the author 's slim , neat handwriting , and begin to read therefrom with great emphasis and volubility . at pause of the verse , the enthusiastic reader stop and fire off a great salvo of applause . 
 esmond smile at the enthusiasm of Addison 's friend . " you be like the german Burghers , " say he , " and the Princes on the Mozelle : when our army come to a halt , they always send a deputation to compliment the chief , and fire a salute with all their artillery from their wall . " 
 " and drunk the great chief health afterward , do not they ? " say Captain Steele , gayly fill up a bumper ; he never be tardy at that sort of acknowledgment of a friend 's merit . 
 " and the Duke , since you will have I act his grace 's part , " say Mr. Addison , with a smile , and something of a blush , " pledge his friend in return . Most Serene Elector of Covent Garden , I drink to your Highness 's health , " and he fill himself a glass . Joseph require scarce more pressing than Dick to that sort of amusement ; but the wine never seem at all to fluster Mr. Addison 's brain ; it only unloose his tongue : whereas Captain Steele 's head and speech be quite overcome by a single bottle . 
 no matter what the verse be , and , to say truth , Mr. Esmond find some of they more than indifferent , Dick 's enthusiasm for his chief never falter , and in every line from Addison 's pen , Steele find a master - stroke . by the time Dick have come to that part of the poem , wherein the bard describe as blandly as though he be record a dance at the opera , or a harmless bout of bucolic cudgelling at a village fair , that bloody and ruthless part of our campaign , with the remembrance whereof every soldier who bear a part in it must sicken with shame when we be order to ravage and lie waste the Elector 's country ; and with fire and murder , slaughter and crime , a great part of his dominion be overrun ; when Dick come to the line 
  " in vengeance rouse the soldier fill his hand 
  with sword and fire , and ravage the land , 
  in crackling flame a thousand harvest burn , 
  a thousand village to ash turn . 
  to the thick wood the woolly flock retreat , 
  and mix with bellow herd confusedly bleat . 
  their trembling lord the common shade partake , 
  and cry of infant find in every brake . 
  the listen soldier fix in sorrow stand , 
  Loth to obey his leader 's just command . 
  the leader grieve , by generous pity sway , 
  to see his just command so well obey ; " 
 by this time wine and friendship have bring poor Dick to a perfectly maudlin state , and he hiccup out the last line with a tenderness that set one of his auditor a - laughing . 
 " I admire the license of your poet , " say Esmond to Mr. Addison .   Dick , after reading of the verse , be fain to go off , insist on kiss his two dear friend before his departure , and reel away with his periwig over his eye .   " I admire your art : the murder of the campaign be do to military music , like a battle at the opera , and the virgin shriek in harmony , as our victorious grenadier march into their village . do you know what a scene it be ? "   by this time , perhaps , the wine have warm Mr. Esmond 's head too ,   " what a triumph you be celebrate ? what scene of shame and horror be enact , over which the commander 's genius preside , as calm as though he do not   belong to our sphere ? you talk of the ' listen soldier fix in sorrow , ' the ' leader 's grief sway by generous pity ; ' to my belief the leader care no more for bleat flock than he do for infant ' cry , and many of our ruffian butcher one or the other with equal alacrity . I be ashamed of my trade when I see those horror perpetrate , which come under every man 's eye . you hew out of your polished verse a stately image of smile victory ; I tell you ' tis an uncouth , distort , savage idol ; hideous , bloody , and barbarous . the rite perform before it be shocking to think of . you great poet should show it as it be ugly and horrible , not beautiful and serene . oh , sir , have you make the campaign , believe I , you never would have sing it so . " 
 during this little outbreak , Mr. Addison be listen , smoke out of his long pipe , and smile very placidly . " what would you have ? " say he . " in our polished day , and accord to the rule of art , ' tis impossible that the Muse should depict torture or begrime her hand with the horror of war . these be indicate rather than describe ; as in the greek tragedy , that , I dare say , you have read   and sure there can be no more elegant specimen of composition , Agamemnon be slain , or Medea 's child destroy , away from the scene ; the chorus occupy the stage and singing of the action to pathetic music . something of this I attempt , my dear sir , in my humble way : ' tis a panegyric I mean to write , and not a satire . be I to sing as you would have I , the town would tear the poet in piece , and burn his book by the hand of the common hangman . do you not use tobacco ? of all the weed grow on earth , sure the nicotian be the most soothing and salutary . we must paint our great Duke , " Mr. Addison go on , " not as a man , which no doubt he be , with weakness like the rest of we , but as a hero . ' tis in a triumph , not a battle , that your humble servant be rid his sleek Pegasus . we college poet trot , you know , on very easy nag ; it hath be , time out of mind , part of the poet 's profession to celebrate the action of hero in verse , and to sing the deed which you man of war perform . I must follow the rule of my art , and the composition of such a strain as this must be harmonious and majestic , not familiar , or too near the vulgar truth . Si parva licet : if Virgil could invoke the divine Augustus , a humbler poet from the bank of the Isis may celebrate a victory and a conqueror of our own nation , in whose triumph every Briton have a share , and whose glory and genius contribute to every citizen 's individual honor . when hath there be , since our Henrys ' and Edwards ' day , such a great feat of arm as that from which you yourself have bring away mark of distinction ? if ' tis in my power to sing that song worthily , I will do so , and be thankful to my Muse . if I fail as a poet , as a Briton at least I will show my loyalty , and fle up my cap and huzzah for the conqueror : 
  " ' rheni pacator et Istri 
  Omnis in hoc uno variis discordia cessit 
  Ordinibus ; laetatur eque , plauditque senator , 
  votaque patricio certant plebeia favori . ' " 
 " there be as brave man on that field , " say Mr. Esmond   who never could be make to love the Duke of Marlborough , nor to forget those story which he use to hear in his youth regard that great chiefs selfishness and treachery   " there be man at Blenheim as good as the leader , whom neither knight nor senator applaud , nor voice plebeian or patrician favor , and who lie there forget , under the clod . what poet be there to sing they ? " 
 " to sing the gallant soul of hero send to Hades ! " say Mr. Addison , with a smile . " would you celebrate they all ? if I may venture to question anything in such an admirable work , the catalogue of the ship in Homer hath always appear to I as somewhat wearisome ; what have the poem be , suppose the writer have chronicle the name of captain , lieutenant , rank and file ? one of the great of a great man 's quality be success ; ' tis the result of all the other ; ' tis a latent power in he which compel the favor of the god , and subjugate fortune . of all his gift I admire that one in the great Marlborough . to be brave ? every man be brave . but in be victorious , as he be , I fancy there be something divine . in presence of the occasion , the great soul of the leader shin out , and the god be confess . death itself respect he , and pass by he to lay other low . war and carnage flee before he to ravage other part of the field , as Hector from before the divine Achilles . you say he hath no pity ; no more have the god , who be above it , and superhuman . the fainting battle gather strength at his aspect ; and , wherever he rid , victory charge with he . " 
 a couple of day after , when Mr. Esmond revisit his poetic friend , he find this thought , strike out in the fervor of conversation , improve and shape into those famous line , which be in truth the noble in the poem of the " Campaign . " as the two gentleman sit engage in talk , Mr. Addison solace himself with his customary pipe , the little maid - servant that wait on his lodging come up , precede a gentleman in fine laced clothe , that have evidently be figure at Court or a great man 's levee . the courtier cough a little at the smoke of the pipe , and look round the room curiously , which be shabby enough , as be the owner in his worn , snuff - color suit and plain tie - wig . 
 " how go on the magnum opus , Mr. Addison ? " say the Court gentleman on look down at the paper that be on the table . 
 " we be but now over it , " say Addison   the great courtier in the land could not have a more splendid politeness , or great dignity of manner . " here be the plan , " say he , " on the table : hac ibat Simois , here run the little river Nebel : hic est Sigeia tellus , here be Tallard 's quarter , at the bowl of this pipe , at the attack of which Captain Esmond be present . I have the honor to introduce he to Mr. Boyle ; and Mr. Esmond be but now depict aliquo proelia mixta mero , when you come in . " in truth , the two gentleman have be so engaged when the visitor arrive , and Addison , in his smile way , speak of Mr. Webb , colonel of Esmond 's regiment   who command a brigade in the action , and greatly distinguish himself there , be lament that he could find never a suitable rhyme for Webb , otherwise the brigade should have have a place in the poet 's verse . " and for you , you be but a lieutenant , " say Addison , " and the Muse can not   occupy herself with any gentleman under the rank of a field officer . " 
 Mr. Boyle be all impatient to hear , say that my Lord Treasurer and my Lord Halifax be equally anxious ; and Addison , blushing , begin read of his verse , and , I suspect , know their weak part as well as the most critical hearer . when he come to the line describe the angel , that 
  " inspire repulse battalion to engage , 
  and teach the doubtful battle where to rage , " 
 he read with great animation , look at Esmond , as much as to say , " you know where that simile come from from our talk , and our bottle of Burgundy , the other day . " 
 the poet 's two hearer be catch with enthusiasm , and applaud the verse with all their might . the gentleman of the Court spring up in great delight . " not a word more , my dear sir , " say he . " trust I with the paper I will defend they with my life . let I read they over to my Lord Treasurer , whom I be appoint to see in half an hour . I venture to promise , the verse shall lose nothing by my reading , and then , sir , we shall see whether Lord Halifax have a right to complain that his friend 's pension be no long pay . " and without more ado , the courtier in lace seize the manuscript page , place they in his breast with his ruffled hand over his heart , execute a most gracious wave of the hat with the disengage hand , and smile and bow out of the room , leave an odor of pomander behind he . 
 " do not the chamber look quite dark ? " say Addison , survey it , " after the glorious appearance and disappearance of that gracious messenger ? why , he illuminate the whole room . your scarlet , Mr. Esmond , will bear any light ; but this threadbare old coat of mine , how very worn it look under the glare of that splendor ! I wonder whether they will do anything for I , " he continue . " when I come out of Oxford into the world , my patron promise I great thing ; and you see where their promise have land I , in a lodge up two pair of stair , with a sixpenny dinner from the cook 's shop . well , I suppose this promise will go after the other , and fortune will jilt I , as the jade have be do any time these seven year . ' I puff the prostitute away , ' " say he , smile , and blow a cloud out of his pipe . " there be no hardship in poverty , Esmond , that be not bearable ; no hardship even in honest dependence that an honest man may not put up with . I come out of the lap of Alma Mater , puff up with her praise of I , and think to make a figure in the world with the part and learning which have get I no small name in our college . the world be the ocean , and Isis and Charwell be but little drop , of which the sea take no account . my reputation end a mile beyond Maudlin Tower ; no one take note of I ; and I learn this at least , to bear up against evil fortune with a cheerful heart . Friend Dick hath make a figure in the world , and have pass I in the race long ago . what matter a little name or a little fortune ? there be no fortune that a philosopher can not endure . I have be not unknown as a scholar , and yet force to live by turn bear - leader , and teach a boy to spell . what then ? the life be not pleasant , but possible the bear be bearable . should this venture fail , I will go back to Oxford ; and some day , when you be a general , you shall find I a curate in a cassock and band , and I shall welcome your honor to my cottage in the country , and to a mug of penny ale . ' tis not poverty that be the hard to bear , or the least happy lot in life , " say Mr. Addison , shake the ash out of his pipe . " see , my pipe be smoke out . shall we have another bottle ? I have still a couple in the cupboard , and of the right sort . no more ? let we go abroad and take a turn on the Mall , or look in at the theatre and see Dick 's comedy . ' tis not a masterpiece of wit ; but Dick be a good fellow , though he doth not set the Thames on fire . " 
 within a month after this day , Mr. Addison 's ticket have come up a prodigious prize in the lottery of life . all the town be in an uproar of admiration of his poem , the " Campaign , " which Dick Steele be spout at every coffee - house in Whitehall and Covent Garden . the wit on the other side of Temple Bar salute he at once as the great poet the world have see for age ; the people huzza'ed for Marlborough and for Addison , and , more than this , the party in power provide for the meritorious poet , and Addison get the appointment of Commissioner of Excise , which the famous Mr. Locke vacate , and rise from this place to other dignity and honor ; his prosperity from henceforth to the end of his life be scarce ever interrupt . but I doubt whether he be not happy in his garret in the haymarket , than ever he be in his splendid palace at Kensington ; and I believe the fortune that come to he in the shape of the countess his wife be no well than a shrew and a vixen . 
 Gay as the town be , ' twas but a dreary place for Mr. Esmond , whether his charmer be in or out of it , and he be glad when his general give he notice that he be go back to his division of the army which lie in winter - quarter at Bois - le - Duc . his dear mistress bid he farewell with a cheerful face ; her blessing he know he have always , and wheresoever fate carry he . Mistress Beatrix be away in attendance on her Majesty at Hampton Court , and kiss her fair fingertip to he , by way of adieu , when he ride thither to take his leave . she receive her kinsman in a waiting - room , where there be half a dozen more lady of the Court , so that his high - fly speech , have he intend to make any   and very likely he do , be impossible ; and she announce to her friend that her cousin be go to the army , in as easy a manner as she would have say he be go to a chocolate - house . he ask with a rather rueful face , if she have any order for the army ? and she be pleased to say that she would like a mantle of Mechlin lace . she make he a saucy curtsy in reply to his own dismal bow . she deign to kiss her fingertip from the window , where she stand laugh with the other lady , and chance to see he as he make his way to the " Toy . " the Dowager at Chelsey be not sorry to part with he this time . " Mon cher , vous ete triste comme un sermon , " she do he the honor to say to he ; indeed , gentleman in his condition be by no mean amusing companion , and besides , the fickle old woman have now find a much more amiable favorite , and raffole for her darling lieutenant of the Guard . Frank remain behind for a while , and do not join the army till later , in the suite of his grace the Commander - in - chief . his dear mother , on the last day before Esmond go away , and when the three din together , make esmond promise to befriend her boy , and besought Frank to take the example of his kinsman as of a loyal gentleman and brave soldier , so she be pleased to say ; and at parting , betray not the least sign of faltering or weakness , though , God know , that fond heart be fearful enough when other be concern , though so resolute in bear its own pain . 
 Esmond 's general embark at Harwich . ' twas a grand sight to see Mr. Webb dress in scarlet on the deck , wave his hat as our yacht put off , and the gun salute from the shore . Harry do not see his viscount again , until three month after , at Bois - le - Duc , when his grace the Duke come to take the command , and Frank bring a budget of news from home : how he have sup with this actress , and get tired of that ; how he have get the well of Mr. St. John , both over the bottle , and with Mrs. Mountford , of the Haymarket Theatre   a veteran charmer of fifty , with whom the young scapegrace choose to fancy himself in love ; how his sister be always at her trick , and have jilt a young baron for an old earl . " I can not   make out beatrix , " he say ; ' she care for none of we she only think about herself ; she be never happy unless she be quarrel ; but as for my mother my mother , Harry , be an angel . " Harry try to impress on the young fellow the necessity of do everything in his power to please that angel ; not to drink too much ; not to go into debt ; not to run after the pretty flemish girl , and so forth , as become a senior speaking to a lad . " but Lord bless thee ! " the boy say ; " I may do what I like , and I know she will love I all the same ; " and so , indeed , he do what he like . everybody spoil he , and his grave kinsman as much as the rest . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 I get a company in the campaign of 1706 . 

 on Whit - Sunday , the famous 23rd of May , 1706 , my young lord first come under the fire of the enemy , whom we find post in order of battle , their line extend three mile or more , over the high ground behind the little Gheet river , and have on his left the little village of Anderkirk or autre - eglise , and on his right ramillie , which have give its name to one of the most brilliant and disastrous day of battle that history ever hath record . 
 our Duke here once more meet his old enemy of Blenheim , the Bavarian Elector and the Marechal Villeroy , over whom the Prince of Savoy have gain the famous victory of Chiari . what Englishman or Frenchman doth not know the issue of that day ? have choose his own ground , have a force superior to the English , and besides the excellent spanish and bavarian troop , the whole Maison - du - Roy with he , the most splendid body of horse in the world , in an hour   and in spite of the prodigious gallantry of the French Royal Household , who charge through the centre of our line and break it ,   this magnificent army of Villeroy be utterly rout by troop that have be march for twelve hour , and by the intrepid skill of a commander , who do , indeed , seem in the presence of the enemy to be the very Genius of Victory . 
 I think it be more from conviction than policy , though that policy be surely the most prudent in the world , that the great Duke always speak of his victory with an extraordinary modesty , and as if it be not so much his own admirable genius and courage which achieve these amazing success , but as if he be a special and fatal instrument in the hand of Providence , that will irresistibly the enemy 's overthrow . before his action he always have the church service read solemnly , and profess an undoubting belief that our Queen 's arm be bless and our victory sure . all the letter which he writ after his battle show awe rather than exultation ; and he attribute the glory of these achievement , about which I have hear mere petty officer and man brag with a pardonable vainglory , in nowise to his own bravery or skill , but to the superintend protection of heaven , which he ever seem to think be our especial ally . and our army get to believe so , and the enemy learn to think so too ; for we never enter into a battle without a perfect confidence that it be to end in a victory ; nor do the French , after the issue of Blenheim , and that astonishing triumph of ramillie , ever meet we without feel that the game be lose before it be begin to be play , and that our general 's fortune be irresistible . here , as at Blenheim , the Duke 's charger be shoot , and ' twa think for a moment he be dead . as he mount another , Binfield , his master of the horse , kneel to hold his grace 's stirrup , have his head shoot away by a cannon - ball . a french gentleman of the Royal Household , that be a prisoner with we , tell the writer that at the time of the charge of the Household , when their horse and our be mingle , an irish officer recognize the Prince - Duke , and call out " Marlborough , Marlborough ! " fire his pistol at he a bout - portant , and that a score more carbine and pistol be discharge at he . not one touch he : he ride through the French Curiassiers sword - in - hand , and entirely unhurt , and calm and smile , rally the German Horse , that be reel before the enemy , bring these and twenty squadron of Orkney 's back upon they , and drive the French across the river , again lead the charge himself , and defeat the only dangerous move the French make that day . 
 Major - General Webb command on the left of our line , and have his own regiment under the order of their beloved colonel . neither he nor they belie their character for gallantry on this occasion ; but it be about his dear young lord that Esmond be anxious , never have sight of he save once , in the whole course of the day , when he bring an order from the Commander - in - chief to Mr. Webb . when our horse , have charge round the right flank of the enemy by Overkirk , have throw he into entire confusion , a general advance be make , and our whole line of foot , cross the little river and the morass , ascend the high ground where the French be post , cheer as they go , the enemy retreat before they . ' twas a service of more glory than danger , the french battalion never wait to exchange push of pike or bayonet with our ; and the gunner fly from their piece , which our line leave behind we as they advance , and the French fall back . 
 at first it be a retreat orderly enough ; but presently the retreat become a rout , and a frightful slaughter of the French ensue on this panic : so that an army of sixty thousand man be utterly crush and destroy in the course of a couple of hour . it be as if a hurricane have seize a compact numerous fleet , fling it all to the wind , shatter , sunk , and annihilate it : afflavit Deus , et dissipati sunt . the french army of Flanders be go , their artillery , their standard , their treasure , provision , and ammunition be all leave behind they : the poor devil have even flee without their soup - kettle , which be as much the palladia of the french infantry as of the Grand Seignior 's Janissaries , and round which they rally even more than round their lily . 
 the pursuit , and a dreadful carnage which ensue   for the dreg of a battle , however brilliant , be ever a base residue of rapine , cruelty , and drunken plunder ,   be carry far beyond the field of ramillie . 
 Honest Lockwood , Esmond 's servant , no doubt want to be among the marauder himself and take his share of the booty ; for when , the action over , and the troop get to their ground for the night , the Captain bade Lockwood get a horse , he ask , with a very rueful countenance , whether his honor would have he come too ; but his honor only bid he go about his own business , and Jack hop away quite delighted as soon as he see his master mount . Esmond make his way , and not without danger and difficulty , to his grace 's headquarter , and find for himself very quickly where the aide - de - camp ' quarter be , in an out - building of a farm , where several of these gentleman be seat , drinking and singing , and at supper . if he have any anxiety about his boy , ' twa relieve at once . one of the gentleman be sing a song to a tune that Mr. Farquhar and Mr. Gay both have use in their admirable comedy , and very popular in the army of that day ; and after the song come a chorus , " over the hill and far away ; " and Esmond hear Frank 's fresh voice , soar , as it be , over the song of the rest of the young man a voice that have always a certain artless , indescribable pathos with it , and indeed which cause Mr. Esmond 's eye to fill with tear now , out of thankfulness to God the child be safe and still alive to laugh and sing . 
 when the song be over Esmond enter the room , where he know several of the gentleman present , and there sit my young lord , have take off his cuirass , his waistcoat open , his face flush , his long yellow hair hang over his shoulder , drink with the rest ; the young , gayest , handsome there . as soon as he see Esmond , he clap down his glass , and run towards his friend , put both his arm round he and embrace he . the other 's voice tremble with joy as he greet the lad ; he have think but now as he stand in the court - yard under the clear - shin moonlight : " Great God ! what a scene of murder be here within a mile of we ; what hundred and thousand have face danger to - day ; and here be these lad sing over their cup , and the same moon that be shin over yonder horrid field be look down on Walcote very likely , while my lady sit and think about her boy that be at the war . " as Esmond embrace his young pupil now , ' twa with the feeling of quite religious thankfulness and an almost paternal pleasure that he behold he . 
 round his neck be a star with a striped ribbon , that be make of small brilliant and might be worth a hundred crown . " look , " say he , " will not   that be a pretty present for mother ? " 
 " who give you the order ? " say Harry , salute the gentleman : " do you win it in battle ? " 
 " I win it , " cry the other , " with my sword and my spear . there be a mousquetaire that have it round his neck such a big mousquetaire , as big as General Webb . I call out to he to surrender , and that I would give he quarter : he call I a petit polisson and fire his pistol at I , and then send it at my head with a curse . I ride at he , sir , drive my sword right under his arm - hole , and break it in the rascal 's body . I find a purse in his holster with sixty - five Louis in it , and a bundle of love - letter , and a flask of Hungary - water . Vive la guerre ! there be the ten piece you lend I . I should like to have a fight every day ; " and he pull at his little moustache and bade a servant bring a supper to Captain Esmond . 
 Harry fall to with a very good appetite ; he have taste nothing since twenty hour ago , at early dawn . Master Grandson , who read this , do you look for the history of battle and siege ? go , find they in the proper book ; this be only the story of your grandfather and his family . far more pleasant to he than the victory , though for that too he may say meminisse juvat , it be to find that the day be over , and his dear young Castlewood be unhurt . 
 and would you , sirrah , wish to know how it be that a sedate Captain of Foot , a studious and rather solitary bachelor of eight or nine and twenty year of age , who do not care very much for the jollity which his comrade engage in , and be never know to lose his heart in any garrison - town should you wish to know why such a man have so prodigious a tenderness , and tend so fondly a boy of eighteen , wait , my good friend , until thou art in love with thy schoolfellow 's sister , and then see how mighty tender thou wilt be towards he . Esmond 's general and his grace the Prince - Duke be notoriously at variance , and the former 's friendship be in nowise likely to advance any man 's promotion of whose service Webb speak well ; but rather likely to injure he , so the army say , in the favor of the great man . however , Mr. Esmond have the good fortune to be mention very advantageously by Major - General Webb in his report after the action ; and the major of his regiment and two of the captain have be kill upon the day of Ramillies , Esmond , who be second of the lieutenant , get his company , and have the honor of serve as Captain Esmond in the next campaign . 
 my lord go home in the winter , but Esmond be afraid to follow he . his dear mistress write he letter more than once , thank he , as mother know how to thank , for his care and protection of her boy , extoll Esmond 's own merit with a great deal more praise than they deserve ; for he do his duty no well than any other officer ; and speak sometimes , though gently and cautiously , of beatrix . news come from home of at least half a dozen grand match that the beautiful maid of honor be about to make . she be engage to an earl , our gentleman of St. James 's say , and then jilt he for a duke , who , in his turn , have draw off . Earl or duke it might be who should win this Helen , Esmond know she would never bestow herself on a poor captain . her conduct , it be clear , be little satisfactory to her mother , who scarcely mention she , or else the kind lady think it be good to say nothing , and leave time to work out its cure . at any rate , Harry be well away from the fatal object which always work he so much mischief ; and so he never ask for leave to go home , but remain with his regiment that be garrison in Brussels , which city fall into our hand when the victory of ramillie drive the French out of Flanders . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 I meet an old acquaintance in flanders , and FIND MY mother 's GRAVE and my own cradle there . 
 be one day in the Church of St. Gudule , at Brussels , admire the antique splendor of the architecture   and always entertain a great tenderness and reverence for the Mother Church , that hath be as wickedly persecute in England as ever she herself persecute in the day of her prosperity , Esmond see kneeling at a side altar an officer in a green uniform coat , very deeply engage in devotion . something familiar in the figure and posture of the kneeling man strike Captain Esmond , even before he see the officer 's face . as he rise up , put away into his pocket a little black breviary , such as priest use , Esmond behold a countenance so like that of his friend and tutor of early day , Father Holt , that he break out into an exclamation of astonishment and advance a step towards the gentleman , who be make his way out of church . the german officer too look surprised when he see Esmond , and his face from be pale grow suddenly red . by this mark of recognition , the Englishman know that he could not be mistake ; and though the other do not stop , but on the contrary rather hastily walk away towards the door , Esmond pursue he and face he once more , as the officer , help himself to holy water , turn mechanically towards the altar , to bow to it ere he quit the sacred edifice . 
 " my Father ! " say Esmond in English . 
 " Silence ! I do not understand . I do not speak English , " say the other in Latin . 
 esmond smile at this sign of confusion , and reply in the same language " I should know my Father in any garment , black or white , shaven or beard ; " for the austrian officer be habit quite in the military manner , and have as warlike a mustachio as any Pandour . 
 he laugh we be on the church step by this time , pass through the crowd of beggar that usually be there hold up little trinket for sale and whine for alm . " you speak Latin , " say he , " in the english way , Harry Esmond ; you have forsake the old true roman tongue you once know . " his tone be very frank , and friendly quite ; the kind voice of fifteen year back ; he give Esmond his hand as he speak . 
 " other have change their coat too , my Father , " say Esmond , glance at his friend 's military decoration . 
 " Hush ! I be Mr. or Captain von Holtz , in the Bavarian Elector 's service , and on a mission to his Highness the Prince of Savoy . you can keep a secret I know from old time . " 
 " Captain von Holtz , " say Esmond , " I be your very humble servant . " 
 " and you , too , have change your coat , " continue the other in his laugh way ; " I have hear of you at Cambridge and afterwards : we have friend everywhere ; and I be tell that Mr. Esmond at Cambridge be as good a fencer as he be a bad theologian . "   so , think Esmond , my old maitre d'arme be a Jesuit , as they say . 
 " perhaps you be right , " say the other , read his thought quite as he use to do in old day ; " you be all but kill at Hochstedt of a wound in the left side . you be before that at Vigo , aide - de - camp to the Duke of Ormonde . you get your company the other day after ramillie ; your general and the Prince - Duke be not friend ; he be of the Webbs of Lydiard Tregoze , in the county of York , a relation of my Lord St. John . your cousin , M. de Castlewood , serve his first campaign this year in the Guard ; yes , I do know a few thing , as you see . " 
 Captain Esmond laugh in his turn . " you have indeed a curious knowledge , " he say . a foible of Mr. Holt 's , who do know more about book and man than , perhaps , almost any person Esmond have ever meet , be omniscience ; thus in every point he here profess to know , he be nearly right , but not quite . Esmond 's wound be in the right side , not the left ; his first general be General Lumley ; Mr. Webb come out of Wiltshire , not out of Yorkshire ; and so forth . esmond do not think fit to correct his old master in these trifle blunder , but they serve to give he a knowledge of the other 's character , and he smile to think that this be his oracle of early day ; only now no long infallible or divine . 
 " yes , " continue Father Holt , or Captain von Holtz , " for a man who have not be in England these eight year , I know what go on in London very well . the old Dean be dead , my Lady Castlewood 's father . do you know that your recusant bishop want to consecrate he Bishop of Southampton , and that Collier be Bishop of Thetford by the same imposition ? the Princess Anne have the gout and eat too much ; when the King return , Collier will be an archbishop . " 
 " amen ! " say Esmond , laugh ; " and I hope to see your eminence no long in jack - boot , but red stocking , at Whitehall . " 
 " you be always with we I know that I hear of that when you be at Cambridge ; so be the late lord ; so be the young viscount . " 
 " and so be my father before I , " say Mr. Esmond , look calmly at the other , who do not , however , show the least sign of intelligence in his impenetrable gray eye how well Harry remember they and their look ! only crow ' foot be wrinkle round they mark of black old Time have settle there . 
 Esmond 's face choose to show no more sign of meaning than the Father 's . there may have be on the one side and the other just the faint glitter of recognition , as you see a bayonet shin out of an ambush ; but each party fall back , when everything be again dark . 
 " and you , mon capitaine , where have you be ? " say Esmond , turn away the conversation from this dangerous ground , where neither choose to engage . 
 " I may have be in Pekin , " say he , " or I may have be in Paraguay who know where ? I be now Captain von Holtz , in the service of his Electoral Highness , come to negotiate exchange of prisoner with his Highness of Savoy . " 
 ' twa well know that very many officer in our army be well - affect towards the young king at St. Germains , whose right to the throne be undeniable , and whose accession to it , at the death of his sister , by far the great part of the english people would have prefer , to the have a petty german prince for a sovereign , about whose cruelty , rapacity , boorish manner , and odious foreign way , a thousand story be current . it wound our english pride to think that a shabby high - dutch duke , whose revenue be not a tithe as great as those of many of the prince of our ancient english nobility , who could not speak a word of our language , and whom we choose to represent as a sort of german boor , feed on train - oil and sour - crout , with a bevy of mistress in a barn , should come to reign over the proud and most polished people in the world . be we , the conqueror of the Grand Monarch , to submit to that ignoble domination ? what do the Hanoverian 's Protestantism matter to we ? be it not notorious   we be tell and lead to believe so   that one of the daughter of this protestant hero be be breed up with no religion at all , as yet , and ready to be make Lutheran or Roman , accord as the husband might be whom her parent should find for she ? this talk , very idle and abusive much of it be , go on at a hundred mess - table in the army ; there be scarce an ensign that do not hear it , or join in it , and everybody know , or affect to know , that the Commander - in - Chief himself have relation with his nephew , the Duke of Berwick   ' twa by an Englishman , thank God , that we be beat at Almanza , and that his grace be most anxious to restore the royal race of his benefactor , and to repair his former treason . 
 this be certain , that for a considerable period no officer in the Duke 's army lose favor with the Commander - in - chief for entertain or proclaim his loyalty towards the exile family . when the Chevalier de St. George , as the King of England call himself , come with the duke of the french blood royal , to join the french army under Vendosme , hundred of our see he and cheer he , and we all say he be like his father in this , who , see the action of La Hogue fight between the french ship and our , be on the side of his native country during the battle . but this , at least the Chevalier know , and every one know , that , however well our troop and their general might be incline towards the prince personally , in the face of the enemy there be no question at all . wherever my Lord Duke find a french army , he would fight and beat it , as he do at Oudenarde , two year after Ramillies , where his grace achieve another of his transcendent victory ; and the noble young prince , who charge gallantly along with the magnificent Maison - du - Roy , send to compliment his conqueror after the action . 
 in this battle , where the young Electoral Prince of Hanover behave himself very gallantly , fight on our side , Esmond 's dear General Webb distinguish himself prodigiously , exhibit consummate skill and coolness as a general , and fight with the personal bravery of a common soldier . Esmond 's good - luck again attend he ; he escape without a hurt , although more than a third of his regiment be kill , have again the honor to be favorably mention in his commander 's report , and be advanced to the rank of major . but of this action there be little need to speak , as it hath be relate in every Gazette , and talk of in every hamlet in this country . to return from it to the writer 's private affair , which here , in his old age , and at a distance , he narrate for his child who come after he . before Oudenarde , after that chance rencontre with Captain von Holtz at Brussels , a space of more than a year elapse , during which the captain of Jesuits and the captain of Webb 's Fusileers be throw very much together . esmond have no difficulty in find out   indeed , the other make no secret of it to he , be assure from old time of his pupil 's fidelity , that the negotiator of prisoner be an agent from St. Germains , and that he carry intelligence between great personage in our camp and that of the French . " my business , " say he " and I tell you , both because I can trust you and your keen eye have already discover it be between the King of England and his subject here engage in fight the french king . as between you and they , all the Jesuits in the world will not prevent your quarrelling : fight it out , gentleman . St. George for England , I say and you know who say so , wherever he may be . " 
 I think Holt love to make a parade of mystery , as it be , and would appear and disappear at our quarter as suddenly as he use to return and vanish in the old day at Castlewood . he have pass between both army , and seem to know   but with that inaccuracy which belong to the good Father 's omniscience   equally well what pass in the french camp and in our . one day he would give Esmond news of a great feste that take place in the french quarter , of a supper of Monsieur de Rohan 's , where there be play and violin , and then dance and masque ; the King drive thither in Marshal Villars ' own guinguette . another day he have the news of his Majesty 's ague : the King have not have a fit these ten day , and might be say to be well . Captain Holtz make a visit to England during this time , so eager be he about negotiate prisoner ; and ' twa on return from this voyage that he begin to open himself more to Esmond , and to make he , as occasion serve , at their various meeting , several of those confidence which be here set down all together . 
 the reason of his increase confidence be this : upon go to London , the old director of Esmond 's aunt , the dowager , pay her ladyship a visit at Chelsey , and there learn from she that Captain Esmond be acquaint with the secret of his family , and be determine never to divulge it . the knowledge of this fact raise Esmond in his old tutor 's eye , so Holt be pleased to say , and he admire Harry very much for his abnegation . 
 " the family at Castlewood have do far more for I than my own ever do , " Esmond say . " I would give my life for they . why should I grudge the only benefit that ' tis in my power to confer on they ? " the good Father 's eye fill with tear at this speech , which to the other seem very simple : he embrace Esmond , and break out into many admire expression ; he say he be a noble coeur , that he be proud of he , and fond of he as his pupil and friend regret more than ever that he have lose he , and be force to leave he in those early time , when he might have have an influence over he , have bring he into that only true church to which the Father belong , and enlist he in the noble army in which a man ever engage mean his own society of Jesus , which number   say he   in its troop the great hero the world ever know ; warrior brave enough to dare or endure anything , to encounter any odd , to die any death soldier that have win triumph a thousand time more brilliant than those of the great general ; that have bring nation on their knee to their sacred banner , the Cross ; that have achieve glory and palm incomparably bright than those award to the most splendid earthly conqueror crown of immortal light , and seat in the high place of heaven . 
 Esmond be thankful for his old friend 's good opinion , however little he might share the Jesuit - father 's enthusiasm . " I have think of that question , too , " say he , " dear Father , " and he take the other 's hand " think it out for myself , as all man must , and contrive to do the right , and trust to heaven as devoutly in my way as you in your . another six month of you as a child , and I have desire no well . I use to weep upon my pillow at Castlewood as I think of you , and I might have be a brother of your order ; and who know , " Esmond add , with a smile , " a priest in full order , and with a pair of mustachio , and a bavarian uniform ? " 
 " my son , " say Father Holt , turn red , " in the cause of religion and loyalty all disguise be fair . " 
 " yes , " break in Esmond , " all disguise be fair , you say ; and all uniform , say I , black or red , a black cockade or a white one or a laced hat , or a sombrero , with a tonsure under it . I can not believe that St. Francis Xavier sail over the sea in a cloak , or raise the dead I try , and very nearly do once , but can not . suffer I to do the right , and to hope for the good in my own way . " 
 Esmond wish to cut short the good Father 's theology , and succeed ; and the other , sigh over his pupil 's invincible ignorance , do not withdraw his affection from he , but give he his utmost confidence as much , that be to say , as a priest can give : more than most do ; for he be naturally garrulous , and too eager to speak . 
 Holt 's friendship encourage Captain Esmond to ask , what he long wish to know , and none could tell he , some history of the poor mother whom he have often imagine in his dream , and whom he never know . he describe to Holt those circumstance which be already put down in the first part of this story the promise he have make to his dear lord , and that die friend 's confession ; and he beseech Mr. Holt to tell he what he know regard the poor woman from whom he have be take . 
 " she be of this very town , " Holt say , and take Esmond to see the street where her father live , and where , as he believe , she be bear . " in 1676 , when your father come hither in the retinue of the late king , then Duke of York , and banish hither in disgrace , Captain Thomas Esmond become acquainted with your mother , pursue she , and make a victim of she ; he hath tell I in many subsequent conversation , which I feel bound to keep private then , that she be a woman of great virtue and tenderness , and in all respect a most fond , faithful creature . he call himself Captain Thomas , have good reason to be ashamed of his conduct towards she , and hath speak to I many time with sincere remorse for that , as with fond love for her many amiable quality , he own to have treat she very ill : and that at this time his life be one of profligacy , gambling , and poverty . she become with child of you ; be curse by her own parent at that discovery ; though she never upbraid , except by her involuntary tear , and the misery depict on her countenance , the author of her wretchedness and ruin . 
 " Thomas Esmond Captain Thomas , as he be call become engage in a gaming - house brawl , of which the consequence be a duel , and a wound so severe that he never his surgeon say could outlive it . think his death certain , and touch with remorse , he send for a priest of the very Church of St. Gudule where I meet you ; and on the same day , after his make submission to our Church , be married to your mother a few week before you be bear . my Lord Viscount Castlewood , Marquis of Esmond , by King James 's patent , which I myself take to your father , your lordship be christen at St. Gudule by the same cure who marry your parent , and by the name of Henry Thomas , son of E. Thomas , officier Anglois , and Gertrude Maes . you see you belong to we from your birth , and why I do not christen you when you become my dear little pupil at Castlewood . 
 " your father 's wound take a favorable turn perhaps his conscience be ease by the right he have do and to the surprise of the doctor he recover . but as his health come back , his wicked nature , too , return . he be tired of the poor girl , whom he have ruin ; and receive some remittance from his uncle , my lord the old viscount , then in England , he pretend business , promise return , and never see your poor mother more . 
 " he own to I , in confession first , but afterwards in talk before your aunt , his wife , else I never could have disclose what I now tell you , that on come to London he writ a pretended confession to poor Gertrude Maes Gertrude Esmond of his have be marry in England previously , before unite himself with she ; say that his name be not Thomas ; that he be about to quit Europe for the virginian plantation , where , indeed , your family have a grant of land from King Charles the First ; send she a supply of money , the half of the last hundred guineas he have , entreat her pardon , and bade her farewell . 
 " poor Gertrude never think that the news in this letter might be untrue as the rest of your father 's conduct to she . but though a young man of her own degree , who know her history , and whom she like before she see the english gentleman who be the cause of all her misery , offer to marry she , and to adopt you as his own child , and give you his name , she refuse he . this refusal only anger her father , who have take her home ; she never hold up her head there , be the subject of constant unkindness after her fall ; and some devout lady of her acquaintance offer to pay a little pension for she , she go into a convent , and you be put out to nurse . 
 " a sister of the young fellow who would have adopt you as his son be the person who take charge of you . your mother and this person be cousin . she have just lose a child of her own , which you replace , your own mother be too sick and feeble to feed you ; and presently your nurse grow so fond of you , that she even grudge let you visit the convent where your mother be , and where the nun pet the little infant , as they pity and love its unhappy parent . her vocation become strong every day , and at the end of two year she be receive as a sister of the house . 
 " your nurse 's family be silk - weaver out of France , whither they return to Arras in french Flanders , shortly before your mother take her vow , carry you with they , then a child of three year old . ' twas a town , before the late vigorous measure of the french king , full of Protestants , and here your nurse 's father , old Pastoureau , he with whom you afterwards live at Ealing , adopt the reform doctrine , pervert all his house with he . they be expel thence by the edict of his most christian Majesty , and come to London , and set up their loom in Spittlefields . the old man bring a little money with he , and carry on his trade , but in a poor way . he be a widower ; by this time his daughter , a widow too , keep house for he , and his son and he labor together at their vocation . meanwhile your father have publicly own his conversion just before King Charles 's death   in whom our Church have much such another convert , be reconcile to my Lord Viscount Castlewood , and marry , as you know , to his daughter . 
 " it chance that the young Pastoureau , go with a piece of brocade to the mercer who employ he , on Ludgate Hill , meet his old rival come out of an ordinary there . Pastoureau know your father at once , seize he by the collar , and upbraid he as a villain , who have seduce his mistress , and afterwards desert she and her son . Mr. Thomas Esmond also recognize Pastoureau at once , besought he to calm his indignation , and not to bring a crowd round about they ; and bid he to enter into the tavern , out of which he have just step , when he would give he any explanation . Pastoureau enter , and hear the landlord order the drawer to show Captain Thomas to a room ; it be by his christian name that your father be familiarly call at his tavern haunt , which , to say the truth , be none of the most reputable . 
 " I must tell you that Captain Thomas , or my Lord Viscount afterwards , be never at a loss for a story , and could cajole a woman or a dun with a volubility , and an air of simplicity at the same time , of which many a creditor of his have be the dupe . his tale use to gather verisimilitude as he go on with they . he string together fact after fact with a wonderful rapidity and coherence . it require , save your presence , a very long habit of acquaintance with your father to know when his lordship be l , tell the truth or no . 
 " he tell I with rueful remorse when he be ill for the fear of death set he instantly repent , and with shriek of laughter when he be well , his lordship have a very great sense of humor how in a half an hour 's time , and before a bottle be drunk , he have completely succeed in bite poor Pastoureau . the seduction he own to : that he could not help : he be quite ready with tear at a moment 's warning , and shed they profusely to melt his credulous listener . he weep for your mother even more than Pastoureau do , who cry very heartily , poor fellow , as my lord inform I ; he swear upon his honor that he have twice send money to Brussels , and mention the name of the merchant with whom it be lie for poor Gertrude 's use . he do not even know whether she have a child or no , or whether she be alive or dead ; but get these fact easily out of honest Pastoureau 's answer to he . when he hear that she be in a convent , he say he hop to end his day in one himself , should he survive his wife , whom he hat , and have be force by a cruel father to marry ; and when he be tell that Gertrude 's son be alive , and actually in London , ' I start , ' say he ; ' for then , damme , my wife be expect to lie in , and I think should this old Put , my father - in - law , run rusty , here would be a good chance to frighten he . ' 
 " he express the deep gratitude to the Pastoureau family for the care of the infant : you be now near six year old ; and on Pastoureau bluntly tell he , when he propose to go that instant and see the darling child , that they never wish to see his ill - omen face again within their door ; that he might have the boy , though they should all be very sorry to lose he ; and that they would take his money , they be poor , if he give it ; or bring he up , by God 's help , as they have hitherto do , without : he acquiesce in this at once , with a sigh , say , ' well , ' twa well that the dear child should remain with friend who have be so admirably kind to he ; ' and in his talk to I afterwards , honestly praise and admire the weaver 's conduct and spirit ; own that the Frenchman be a right fellow , and he , the Lord have mercy upon he , a sad villain . 
 " your father , " Mr. Holt go on to say , " be good - natured with his money when he have it ; and have that day receive a supply from his uncle , give the weaver ten piece with perfect freedom , and promise he further remittance . he take down eagerly Pastoureau 's name and place of abode in his table - book , and when the other ask he for his own , give , with the utmost readiness , his name as Captain Thomas , New Lodge , Penzance , Cornwall ; he say he be in London for a few day only on business connect with his wife 's property ; describe she as a shrew , though a woman of kind disposition ; and depict his father as a cornish squire , in an infirm state of health , at whose death he hop for something handsome , when he promise richly to reward the admirable protector of his child , and to provide for the boy . ' and by Gad , sir , ' he say to I in his strange laugh way , ' I order a piece of brocade of the very same pattern as that which the fellow be carry , and present it to my wife for a morning wrapper , to receive company after she lie in of our little boy . ' 
 " your little pension be pay regularly enough ; and when your father become Viscount Castlewood on his uncle 's demise , I be employ to keep a watch over you , and ' twa at my instance that you be bring home . your foster - mother be dead ; her father make acquaintance with a woman whom he marry , who quarrel with his son . the faithful creature come back to Brussels to be near the woman he love , and die , too , a few month before she . will you see her cross in the convent cemetery ? the Superior be an old penitent of mine , and remember Soeur Marie Madeleine fondly still . " 
 Esmond come to this spot in one sunny evening of spring , and see , amidst a thousand black cross , cast their shadow across the grassy mound , that particular one which mark his mother 's resting - place . many more of those poor creature that lie there have adopt that same name , with which sorrow have rebaptize she , and which fondly seem to hint their individual story of love and grief . he fancy she in tear and darkness , kneel at the foot of her cross , under which her care be bury . surely he kneel down , and say his own prayer there , not in sorrow so much as in awe   for even his memory have no recollection of she , and in pity for the pang which the gentle soul in life have be make to suffer . to this cross she bring they ; for this heavenly bridegroom she exchange the husband who have woo she , the traitor who have leave she . a thousand such hillock lie round about , the gentle daisy spring out of the grass over they , and each bear its cross and requiescat . a nun , veil in black , be kneel hard by , at a sleep sister 's bedside   so fresh make , that the spring have scarce have time to spin a coverlid for it ; beyond the cemetery wall you have glimpse of life and the world , and the spire and gable of the city . a bird come down from a roof opposite , and light first on a cross , and then on the grass below it , whence it fly away presently with a leaf in its mouth : then come a sound as of chant , from the chapel of the sister hard by ; other have long since fill the place which poor Mary Magdeleine once have there , be kneel at the same stall , and hear the same hymn and prayer in which her stricken heart have find consolation . might she sleep in peace might she sleep in peace ; and we , too , when our struggle and pain be over ! but the earth be the Lord 's as the heaven be ; we be alike his creature here and yonder . I take a little flower off the hillock and kiss it , and go my way , like the bird that have just light on the cross by I , back into the world again . silent receptacle of death ; tranquil depth of calm , out of reach of tempest and trouble ! I feel as one who have be walk below the sea , and treading amidst the bone of shipwreck . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 the campaign of 1707 , 1708 . 

 during the whole of the year which succeed that in which the glorious battle of Ramillies have be fight , our army make no movement of importance , much to the disgust of very many of our officer remain inactive in Flanders , who say that his grace the Captain - General have have fight enough , and be all for money now , and the enjoyment of his five thousand a year and his splendid palace at Woodstock , which be now be build . and his grace have sufficient occupation fight his enemy at home this year , where it begin to be whisper that his favor be decrease , and his duchess lose her hold on the Queen , who be transfer her royal affection to the famous Mrs. Masham , and Mrs. Masham 's humble servant , Mr. Harley . against their intrigue , our Duke pass a great part of his time intriguing . Mr. Harley be get out of office , and his grace , in so far , have a victory . but her Majesty , convince against her will , be of that opinion still , of which the poet say people be when so convinced , and Mr. Harley before long have his revenge . 
 meanwhile the business of fighting do not go on any way to the satisfaction of Marlborough 's gallant lieutenant . during all 1707 , with the French before we , we have never so much as a battle ; our army in Spain be utterly rout at Almanza by the gallant Duke of Berwick ; and we of Webb 's , which regiment the young Duke have command before his father 's abdication , be a little proud to think that it be our colonel who have achieve this victory . " I think if I have have Galway 's place , and my Fusileers , " say our General , " we would not have lay down our arm , even to our old colonel , as Galway do ; " and Webb 's officer swear if we have have Webb , at least we would not have be take prisoner . our dear old general talk incautiously of himself and of other ; a braver or a more brilliant soldier never live than he ; but he blow his honest trumpet rather more loudly than become a commander of his station , and , mighty man of valor as he be , shake his great spear and bluster before the army too fiercely . 
 Mysterious Mr. Holtz go off on a secret expedition in the early part of 1708 , with great elation of spirit and a prophecy to Esmond that a wonderful something be about to take place . this secret come out on my friend 's return to the army , whither he bring a most rueful and dejected countenance , and own that the great something he have be engage upon have fail utterly . he have be indeed with that luckless expedition of the Chevalier de St. George , who be send by the french king with ship and an army from Dunkirk , and be to have invade and conquer Scotland . but that ill wind which ever oppose all the project upon which the Prince ever embark , prevent the Chevalier 's invasion of Scotland , as ' tis know , and blow poor Monsieur von Holtz back into our camp again , to scheme and foretell , and to pry about as usual . the Chevalier   the king of England , as some of we hold he   go from Dunkirk to the french army to make the campaign against we . the Duke of Burgundy have the command this year , have the Duke of Berry with he , and the famous Mareschal Vendosme and the Duke of Matignon to aid he in the campaign . Holtz , who know everything that be pass in Flanders and France   and the Indies for what I know , insist that there would be no more fighting in 1708 than there have be in the previous year , and that our commander have reason for keep he quiet . indeed , Esmond 's general , who be know as a grumbler , and to have a hearty mistrust of the great Duke , and hundred more officer besides , do not scruple to say that these private reason come to the Duke in the shape of crown - piece from the french king , by whom the Generalissimo be bribe to avoid a battle . there be plenty of man in our line , quidnunc , to whom Mr. Webb listen only too willingly , who could specify the exact sum the Duke get , how much fall to Cadogan 's share , and what be the precise fee give to Doctor Hare . 
 and the success with which the French begin the campaign of 1708 serve to give strength to these report of treason , which be in everybody 's mouth . our general allow the enemy to get between we and Ghent , and decline to attack he , though for eight and forty hour the army be in presence of each other . Ghent be take , and on the same day Monsieur de la Mothe summon bruge ; and these two great city fall into the hand of the French without fire a shot . a few day afterwards La Mothe seize upon the fort of Plashendall : and it begin to be suppose that all Spanish Flanders , as well as Brabant , would fall into the hand of the french troop ; when the Prince Eugene arrive from the Mozelle , and then there be no more shilly - shallying . 
 the Prince of Savoy always signalize his arrival at the army by a great feast   my Lord Duke 's entertainment be both seldom and shabby : and I remember our general return from this dinner with the two commander - in - chief ; his honest head a little excited by wine , which be deal out much more liberally by the Austrian than by the english commander : " now , " say my general , slap the table , with an oath , " he must fight ; and when he be force to it , d - it , no man in Europe can stand up against Jack Churchill . " within a week the battle of Oudenarde be fight , when , hate each other as they might , Esmond 's general and the Commander - in - Chief be force to admire each other , so splendid be the gallantry of each upon this day . 
 the brigade command by Major - General Webb give and receive about as hard knock as any that be deliver in that action , in which Mr. Esmond have the fortune to serve at the head of his own company in his regiment , under the command of their own Colonel as Major - General ; and it be his good luck to bring the regiment out of action as commander of it , the four senior officer above he be kill in the prodigious slaughter which happen on that day . I like to think that Jack Haythorn , who sneer at I for be a bastard and a parasite of Webb 's , as he choose to call I , and with whom I have have word , shake hand with I the day before the battle begin . three day before , poor Brace , our Lieutenant - Colonel , have hear of his eld brother 's death , and be heir to a baronetcy in Norfolk , and four thousand a year . Fate , that have leave he harmless through a dozen campaign , seize on he just as the world be worth live for , and he go into action know , as he say , that the luck be go to turn against he . the Major have just join we a creature of Lord Marlborough , put in much to the dislike of the other officer , and to be a spy upon we , as it be say . I know not whether the truth be so , nor who take the tattle of our mess to headquarters , but Webb 's regiment , as its Colonel , be know to be in the Commander - in - Chief 's black book : " and if he do not dare to break it up at home , " our gallant old chief use to say , " he be determined to destroy it before the enemy ; " so that poor Major Proudfoot be put into a post of danger . 
 Esmond 's dear young Viscount , serve as aide - de - camp to my Lord Duke , receive a wound , and win an honorable name for himself in the Gazette ; and Captain Esmond 's name be send in for promotion by his General , too , whose favorite he be . it make his heart beat to think that certain eye at home , the bright in the world , might read the page on which his humble service be record ; but his mind be make up steadily to keep out of their dangerous influence , and to let time and absence conquer that passion he have still lurk about he . away from Beatrix , it do not trouble he ; but he know as certain that if he return home , his fever would break out again , and avoid Walcote as a Lincolnshire man avoid return to his fen , where he be sure that the ague be lie in wait for he . 
 we of the English party in the army , who be inclined to sneer at everything that come out of Hanover , and to treat as little well than boor and savage the elector 's court and family , be yet force to confess that , on the day of Oudenarde , the young Electoral Prince , then make his first campaign , conduct himself with the spirit and courage of an approve soldier . on this occasion his Electoral Highness have well luck than the King of England , who be with his cousin in the enemy 's camp , and have to run with they at the ignominious end of the day . with the most consummate general in the world before they , and an admirable commander on their own side , they choose to neglect the council , and to rush into a combat with the former , which would have end in the utter annihilation of their army but for the great skill and bravery of the Duke of Vendosme , who remedie , as far as courage and genius might , the disaster occasion by the squabble and folly of his kinsman , the legitimate prince of the blood royal . 
 " if the Duke of Berwick have but be in the army , the fate of the day would have be very different , " be all that poor Mr. von Holtz could say ; " and you would have see that the hero of Almanza be fit to measure sword with the conqueror of Blenheim . " 
 the business relative to the exchange of prisoner be always go on , and be at least that ostensible one which keep Mr. Holtz perpetually on the move between the force of the French and the Allies . I can answer for it , that he be once very near hang as a spy by Major - General Wayne , when he be release and send on to head - quarter by a special order of the Commander - in - chief . he come and go , always favor , wherever he be , by some high though occult protection . he carry message between the Duke of Berwick and his uncle , our Duke . he seem to know as well what be take place in the Prince 's quarter as our own : he bring the compliment of the King of England to some of our officer , the gentleman of Webb 's among the rest , for their behavior on that great day ; and after Wynendael , when our General be chafe at the neglect of our Commander - in - Chief , he say he know how that action be regard by the chief of the french army , and that the stand make before Wynendael wood be the passage by which the Allies enter Lille . 
 " ah ! " say Holtz   and some folk be very willing to listen to he , " if the king come by his own , how change the conduct of affair would be ! his Majesty 's very exile have this advantage , that he be enable to read England impartially , and to judge honestly of all the eminent man . his sister be always in the hand of one greedy favorite or another , through whose eye she see , and to whose flattery or dependant she give away everything . do you suppose that his Majesty , know England so well as he do , would neglect such a man as General Webb ? he ought to be in the House of Peers as Lord Lydiard . the enemy and all Europe know his merit ; it be that very reputation which certain great people , who hate all equality and independence , can never pardon . " it be intend that these conversation should be carry to Mr. Webb . they be welcome to he , for great as his service be , no man could value they more than John Richmond Webb do himself , and the difference between he and Marlborough be notorious , his grace 's enemy in the army and at home begin to court Webb , and set he up against the all - grasp , domineering chief . and soon after the victory of Oudenarde , a glorious opportunity fall into General Webb 's way , which that gallant warrior do not neglect , and which give he the mean of immensely increase his reputation at home . 
 after Oudenarde , and against the counsel of Marlborough , it be say , the Prince of Savoy sit down before Lille , the capital of french Flanders , and commence that siege , the most celebrated of our time , and almost as famous as the siege of Troy itself , for the feat of valor perform in the assault and the defence . the enmity of the Prince of Savoy against the french king be a furious personal hate , quite unlike the calm hostility of our great english general , who be no more move by the game of war than that of billiard , and push forward his squadron , and drive his red battalion hither and thither as calmly as he would combine a stroke or make a cannon with the ball . the game over   and he play it so as to be pretty sure to win it , not the least animosity against the other party remain in the breast of this consummate tactician . whereas between the Prince of Savoy and the French it be guerre a mort . beat off in one quarter , as he have be at Toulon in the last year , he be back again on another frontier of France , assail it with his indefatigable fury . when the Prince come to the army , the smoulder fire of war be light up and burst out into a flame . our phlegmatic dutch ally be make to advance at a quick march our calm Duke force into action . the Prince be an army in himself against the French ; the energy of his hatred , prodigious , indefatigable infectious over hundred of thousand of man . the Emperor 's general be repay , and with a vengeance , the slight the french King have put upon the fiery little abbe of Savoy . brilliant and famous as a leader himself , and beyond all measure daring and intrepid , and enable to cope with almost the good of those famous man of war who command the army of the french king , Eugene have a weapon , the equal of which could not be find in France , since the cannon - shot of Sasbach lay low the noble Turenne , and could hurl Marlborough at the head of the french host , and crush they as with a rock , under which all the gather strength of their strong captain must go down . 
 the English Duke take little part in that vast siege of Lille , which the Imperial Generalissimo pursue with all his force and vigor , far than to cover the besiege line from the Duke of Burgundy 's army , between which and the Imperialists our Duke lay . once , when Prince Eugene be wound , our Duke take his Highness 's place in the trench ; but the siege be with the Imperialists , not with we . a division under Webb and Rantzau be detach into Artois and Picardy upon the most painful and odious service that Mr. Esmond ever see in the course of his military life . the wretched town of the defenceless province , whose young man have be draft away into the french army , which year after year the insatiable war devour , be leave at our mercy ; and our order be to show they none . we find place garrison by invalid , and child and woman ; poor as they be , and as the cost of this miserable war have make they , our commission be to rob these almost starve wretch to tear the food out of their granary , and strip they of their rag . ' twas an expedition of rapine and murder we be send on : our soldier do deed such as an honest man must blush to remember . we bring back money and provision in quantity to the Duke 's camp ; there have be no one to resist we , and yet who dare to tell with what murder and violence , with what brutal cruelty , outrage , insult , that ignoble booty have be ravish from the innocent and miserable victim of the war ? 
 meanwhile , gallantly as the operation before Lille have be conduct , the Allies have make but little progress , and ' twa say when we return to the Duke of Marlborough 's camp , that the siege would never be bring to a satisfactory end , and that the Prince of Savoy would be force to raise it . my Lord Marlborough give this as his opinion openly ; those who mistrust he , and Mr. Esmond own himself to be of the number , hint that the Duke have his reason why Lille should not be take , and that he be pay to that end by the french King . if this be so , and I believe it , General Webb have now a remarkable opportunity of gratify his hatred of the Commander - in - Chief , of balk that shameful avarice , which be one of the basest and most notorious quality of the famous Duke , and of show his own consummate skill as a commander . and when I consider all the circumstance precede the event which will now be relate , that my Lord Duke be actually offer certain million of crown provide that the siege of Lille should be raise : that the imperial army before it be without provision and ammunition , and must have decamp but for the supply that they receive ; that the march of the convoy destine to relieve the siege be accurately know to the French ; and that the force cover it be shamefully inadequate to that end , and by six time inferior to Count de la Mothe 's army , which be send to intercept the convoy ; when ' tis certain that the Duke of Berwick , De la Mothe 's chief , be in constant correspondence with his uncle , the english Generalissimo : I believe on my conscience that ' twa my Lord Marlborough 's intention to prevent those supply , of which the Prince of Savoy stand in absolute need , from ever reach his highness ; that he mean to sacrifice the little army which cover this convoy , and to betray it as he have betray Tollemache at Brest ; as he have betray every friend he have , to further his own scheme of avarice or ambition . but for the miraculous victory which Esmond 's general win over an army six or seven time great than his own , the siege of Lille must have be raise ; and it must be remember that our gallant little force be under the command of a general whom Marlborough hat , that he be furious with the conqueror , and try by the most open and shameless injustice afterwards to rob he of the credit of his victory . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 GENERAL WEBB win the battle of WYNENDAEL . 

 by the besieger and besiege of Lille , some of the most brilliant feat of valor be perform that ever illustrate any war . on the french side   whose gallantry be prodigious , the skill and bravery of Marshal Boufflers actually eclipse those of his conqueror , the Prince of Savoy   may be mention that dare action of Messieurs de Luxembourg and Tournefort , who , with a body of horse and dragoon , carry powder into the town , of which the besiege be in extreme want , each soldier bring a bag with forty pound of powder behind he ; with which perilous provision they engage our own horse , face the fire of the foot bring out to meet they : and though half of the man be blow up in the dreadful errand they ride on , a part of they get into the town with the succor of which the garrison be so much in want . a french officer , Monsieur du Bois , perform an act equally daring , and perfectly successful . the Duke 's great army lie at Helchin , and cover the siege , and it be necessary for M. de Vendosme to get news of the condition of the place , Captain Dubois perform his famous exploit : not only pass through the line of the siege , but swim afterwards no less than seven moat and ditch : and come back the same way , swim with his letter in his mouth . 
 by these letter Monsieur de Boufflers say that he could undertake to hold the place till October ; and that if one of the convoy of the Allies could be intercept , they must raise the siege altogether . 
 such a convoy as hath be say be now prepare at Ostend , and about to march for the siege ; and on the 27th September we   and the French too   have news that it be on its way . it be compose of 700 wagon , contain ammunition of all sort , and be escort out of Ostend by 2,000 infantry and 300 horse . at the same time M. de la Mothe quit bruge , have with he five - and - thirty battalion , and upwards of sixty squadron and forty gun , in pursuit of the convoy . 
 Major - General Webb have meanwhile make up a force of twenty battalion and three squadron of dragoon at Turout , whence he move to cover the convoy and pursue La Mothe : with whose advanced guard our come up upon the great plain of Turout , and before the little wood and castle of Wynendael ; behind which the convoy be march . 
 as soon as they come in sight of the enemy , our advanced troop be halt , with the wood behind they , and the rest of our force bring up as quickly as possible , our little body of horse be bring forward to the opening of the plain , as our General say , to amuse the enemy . when M. de la Mothe come up , he find we post in two line in front of the wood ; and form his own army in battle face ours , in eight line , four of infantry in front , and dragoon and cavalry behind . 
 the French begin the action , as usual , with a cannonade which last three hour , when they make their attack , advance in eight line , four of foot and four of horse , upon the ally troop in the wood where we be post . their infantry behave ill ; they be order to charge with the bayonet , but , instead , begin to fire , and almost at the very first discharge from our man , break and flee . the cavalry behave well ; with these alone , who be three or four time as numerous as our whole force , Monsieur de la Mothe might have win victory : but only two of our battalion be shake in the least ; and these speedily rally : nor could the repeat attack of the french horse cause our troop to budge an inch from the position in the wood in which our General have place they . 
 after attack for two hour , the French retire at nightfall entirely foil . with all the loss we have inflict upon he , the enemy be still three time strong than we : and it could not be suppose that our General could pursue M. de la Mothe , or do much more than hold our ground about the wood , from which the Frenchman have in vain attempt to dislodge we . La Mothe retire behind his forty gun , his cavalry protect they well than it have be enable to annoy we ; and meanwhile the convoy , which be of more importance than all our little force , and the safe passage of which we would have drop to the last man to accomplish , march away in perfect safety during the action , and joyfully reach the besiege camp before Lille . 
 Major - General Cadogan , my Lord Duke 's Quarter - Master - General ,   and between whom and Mr. Webb there be no love lose , accompany the convoy , and join Mr. Webb with a couple of hundred horse just as the battle be over , and the enemy in full retreat . he offer , readily enough , to charge with his horse upon the French as they fall back ; but his force be too weak to inflict any damage upon they ; and Mr. Webb , command as Cadogan 's senior , think enough be do in hold our ground before an enemy that might still have overwhelm we have we engage he in the open territory , and in secure the safe passage of the convoy . accordingly , the horse bring up by Cadogan do not draw a sword ; and only prevent , by the good countenance they show , any disposition the French might have have to renew the attack on we . and no attack come , at nightfall General Cadogan draw off with his squadron , be bind for head - quarter , the two general at part grimly salute each other . 
 " he will be at Roncq time enough to lick my Lord Duke 's trencher at supper , " say Mr. Webb . 
 our own man lie out in the wood of Wynendael that night , and our General have his supper in the little castle there . 
 " if I be Cadogan , I would have a peerage for this day 's work , " General Webb say ; " and , Harry , thou shouldst have a regiment . thou hast be report in the last two action : thou wert near kill in the first . I shall mention thee in my despatch to his grace the Commander - in - chief , and recommend thee to poor Dick Harwood 's vacant majority . have you ever a hundred guineas to give Cardonnel ? slip they into his hand to - morrow , when you go to head - quarter with my report . " 
 in this report the Major - General be good enough to mention Captain Esmond 's name with particular favor ; and that gentleman carry the despatch to head - quarter the next day , and be not a little pleased to bring back a letter by his grace 's secretary , address to Lieutenant - General Webb . the dutch officer despatch by Count Nassau Woudenbourg , Vaelt - Mareschal Auverquerque 's son , bring back also a complimentary letter to his commander , who have second Mr. Webb in the action with great valor and skill . 
 Esmond , with a low bow and a smile face , present his despatch , and salute Mr. Webb as Lieutenant - General , as he give it in . the gentleman round about he he be rid with his suite on the road to Menin as Esmond come up with he give a cheer , and he thank they , and open the despatch with rather a flushed , eager face . 
 he slap it down on his boot in a rage after he have read it . " ' tis not even writ with his own hand . read it out , Esmond . " and Esmond read it out : 
 " SIR , Mr. Cadogan be just now come in , and have acquaint I with the success of the action you have yesterday in the afternoon against the body of troop command by M. de la Mothe , at Wynendael , which must be attribute chiefly to your good conduct and resolution . you may be sure I shall do you justice at home , and be glad on all occasion to own the service you have do in secure this convoy . your ,   c. , M. " 
 " two line by that d d Cardonnel , and no more , for the taking of Lille for beat five time our number for an action as brilliant as the good he ever fight , " say poor Mr. Webb . " Lieutenant - General ! that be not his doing . I be the old major - general . by , I believe he have be well pleased if I have be beat . " 
 the letter to the dutch officer be in French , and long and more complimentary than that to Mr. Webb . 
 " and this be the man , " he break out , " that be gorge with gold that be cover with title and honor that we win for he and that grudge even a line of praise to a comrade in arm ! have not   he enough ? do not   we fight that he may roll in rich ? well , well , wait for the Gazette , gentleman . the Queen and the country will do we justice if his grace deny it we . " there be tear of rage in the brave warrior 's eye as he speak ; and he dash they off his face on to his glove . he shake his fist in the air . " oh , by the Lord ! " say he , " I know what I have rather have than a peerage ! " 
 " and what be that , sir ? " some of they ask . 
 " I have rather have a quarter of an hour with John Churchill , on a fair green field , and only a pair of rapier between my shirt and his " 
 " Sir ! " interpose one . 
 " tell he so ! I know that be what you mean . I know every word go to he that be drop from every general officer 's mouth . I do not   say he be not brave . curse he ! he be brave enough ; but we will wait for the Gazette , gentleman . God save her Majesty ! she will do us justice . " 
 the Gazette do not come to we till a month afterwards ; when my General and his officer have the honor to dine with Prince Eugene in Lille ; his Highness be good enough to say that we have bring the provision , and ought to share in the banquet . ' twas a great banquet . his Grace of Marlborough be on his Highness 's right , and on his leave the Mareschal de Boufflers , who have so bravely defend the place . the chief officer of either army be present ; and you may be sure Esmond 's General be splendid this day : his tall noble person , and manly beauty of face , make he remarkable anywhere ; he wear , for the first time , the star of the Order of Generosity , that his prussian Majesty have send to he for his victory . his Highness the Prince of Savoy call a toast to the conqueror of Wynendael . my Lord Duke drink it with rather a sickly smile . the aide - de - camp be present : and Harry Esmond and his dear young lord be together , as they always strove to be when duty would permit : they be over against the table where the general be , and could see all that pass pretty well . Frank laugh at my Lord Duke 's glum face : the affair of Wynendael , and the Captain - General 's conduct to Webb , have be the talk of the whole army . when his Highness speak , and give " Le vainqueur de Wynendael ; son armee et sa victoire , " add , " qui nous font diner a Lille aujourd'huy " there be a great cheer through the hall ; for Mr. Webb 's bravery , generosity , and very weakness of character cause he to be belove in the army . 
 " like Hector , handsome , and like Paris , brave ! " whisper Frank Castlewood . " a Venus , an elderly Venus , could not   refuse he a pippin . stand up , Harry . see , we be drink the army of Wynendael . ramillie be nothing to it . huzzay ! huzzay ! " 
 at this very time , and just after our General have make his acknowledgment , some one bring in an English Gazette and be pass it from hand to hand down the table . officer be eager enough to read it ; mother and sister at home must have sicken over it . there scarce come out a Gazette for six year that do not tell of some heroic death or some brilliant achievement . 
 " here it be Action of Wynendael here you be , general , " say Frank , seize hold of the little dingy paper that soldier love to read so ; and , scramble over from our bench , he go to where the General sit , who know he , and have see many a time at his table his laugh , handsome face , which everybody love who see . the general in their great peruke make way for he . he hand the paper over General Dohna 's buff - coat to our General on the opposite side . 
 he come hobble back , and blush at his feat : " I think he would like it , Harry , " the young fellow whisper . " do not   I like to read my name after Ramillies , in the London Gazette ? Viscount Castlewood serve a volunteer I say , what be yonder ? " 
 Mr. Webb , read the Gazette , look very strange slap it down on the table then spring up in his place , and begin to " will your Highness please to " 
 his grace the Duke of Marlborough here jump up too " there be some mistake , my dear General Webb . " 
 " your grace have well rectify it , " say Mr. Webb , hold out the letter ; but he be five off his grace the Prince Duke , who , besides , be high than the General   be seat with the Prince of Savoy , the Electoral Prince of Hanover , and the envoy of Prussia and Denmark , under a baldaquin , and Webb could not reach he , tall as he be . 
 " stay , " say he , with a smile , as if catch at some idea , and then , with a perfect courtesy , draw his sword , he run the Gazette through with the point , and say , " permit I to hand it to your grace . " 
 the Duke look very black . " take it , " say he , to his Master of the Horse , who be wait behind he . 
 the Lieutenant - General make a very low bow , and retire and finish his glass . the Gazette in which Mr. Cardonnel , the Duke 's secretary , give an account of the victory of Wynendael , mention Mr. Webb 's name , but give the sole praise and conduct of the action to the Duke 's favorite , Mr. Cadogan . 
 there be no little talk and excitement occasion by this strange behavior of General Webb , who have almost draw a sword upon the Commander - in - Chief ; but the General , after the first outbreak of his anger , master it outwardly altogether ; and , by his subsequent behavior , have the satisfaction of even more anger the Commander - in - Chief , than he could have do by any public exhibition of resentment . 
 on return to his quarter , and consult with his chief adviser , Mr. Esmond , who be now entirely in the General 's confidence , and treat by he as a friend , and almost a son , Mr. Webb writ a letter to his grace the Commander - in - Chief , in which he say : 
 " your grace must be aware that the sudden perusal of the London Gazette , in which your grace 's secretary , Mr. Cardonnel , hath mention Major - General Cadogan 's name as the officer command in the late action of Wynendael , must have cause a feeling of anything but pleasure to the General who fight that action . 
 " your grace must be aware that Mr. Cadogan be not even present at the battle , though he arrive with squadron of horse at its close , and put himself under the command of his superior officer . and as the result of the battle of Wynendael , in which Lieutenant - General Webb have the good fortune to command , be the capture of Lille , the relief of Brussels , then invest by the enemy under the Elector of Bavaria , the restoration of the great city of Ghent and bruge , of which the enemy   by treason within the wall   have get possession in the previous year , Mr. Webb can not consent to forego the honor of such a success and service , for the benefit of Mr. Cadogan , or any other person . 
 " as soon as the military operation of the year be over , Lieutenant - General Webb will request permission to leave the army , and return to his place in Parliament , where he give notice to his grace the Commander - in Chief , that he shall lay his case before the House of Commons , the country , and her Majesty the Queen . 
 " by his eagerness to rectify that false statement of the Gazette , which have be write by his grace 's secretary , Mr. Cardonnel , Mr. Webb , not be able to reach his grace the Commander - in - chief on account of the gentleman seat between they , place the paper contain the false statement on his sword , so that it might more readily arrive in the hand of his grace the Duke of Marlborough , who surely would wish to do justice to every officer of his army . 
 " Mr. Webb know his duty too well to think of insubordination to his superior officer , or of use his sword in a campaign against any but the enemy of her Majesty . he solicit permission to return to England immediately the military duty will permit , and take with he to England Captain Esmond , of his regiment , who act as his aide - de - camp , and be present during the entire action , and note by his watch the time when Mr. Cadogan arrive at its close . " 
 the Commander - in - Chief could not but grant this permission , nor could he take notice of Webb 's letter , though it be couch in term the most insulting . half the army believe that the city of Ghent and bruge be give up by a treason , which some in our army very well understand ; that the Commander - in - Chief would not have relieve Lille if he could have help himself ; that he would not have fight that year have not the Prince of Savoy force he . when the battle once begin , then , for his own renown , my Lord Marlborough would fight as no man in the world ever fight well ; and no bribe on earth could keep he from beat the enemy . 
    our Grandfather 's hatred of the Duke of Marlborough 
  appear all through his account of these campaign . he 
  always persist that the Duke be the great traitor and 
  soldier history ever tell of : and declare that he take 
  bribe on all hand during the war . my Lord Marquis   for so 
  we may call he here , though he never go by any other name 
  than Colonel Esmond   be in the habit of tell many 
  story which he do not set down in his memoir , and which 
  he have from his friend the Jesuit , who be not always 
  correctly inform , and who persist that Marlborough be 
  look for a bribe of two million of crown before the 
  campaign of ramillie . 

  and our Grandmother use to tell we child , that on his 
  first presentation to my Lord duke , the Duke turn his back 
  upon my Grandfather ; and say to the Duchess , who tell my 
  lady dowager at Chelsey , who afterwards tell Colonel Esmond 
  " Tom Esmond 's bastard have be to my levee : he have the 
  hang - dog look of his rogue of a father " an expression which 
  my Grandfather never forgave . he be as constant in his 
  dislike as in his attachment ; and exceedingly partial to 
  Webb , whose side he take against the more celebrated 
  general . we have General Webb 's portrait now at Castlewood , 
  Va. 
 but the matter be take up by the subordinate ; and half the army might have be by the ear , if the quarrel have not be stop . General Cadogan send an intimation to General Webb to say that he be ready if Webb like , and would meet he . this be a kind of invitation our stout old general be always too ready to accept , and ' twa with great difficulty we get the General to reply that he have no quarrel with Mr. Cadogan , who have behave with perfect gallantry , but only with those at head - quarter , who have belie he . Mr. Cardonnel offer General Webb reparation ; Mr. Webb say he have a cane at the service of Mr. Cardonnel , and the only satisfaction he want from he be one he be not likely to get , namely , the truth . the officer in our staff of Webb 's , and those in the immediate suite of the General , be ready to come to blow ; and hence arise the only affair in which Mr. Esmond ever engage as principal , and that be from a revengeful wish to wipe off an old injury . 
 my Lord Mohun , who have a troop in Lord Macclesfield 's regiment of the Horse Guards , ride this campaign with the Duke . he have sink by this time to the very bad reputation ; he have have another fatal duel in Spain ; he have marry , and forsake his wife ; he be a gambler , a profligate , and debauchee . he join just before Oudenarde ; and , as Esmond fear , as soon as Frank Castlewood hear of his arrival , Frank be for seek he out , and kill he . the wound my lord get at Oudenarde prevent their meeting , but that be nearly heal , and Mr. Esmond tremble daily lest any chance should bring his boy and this know assassin together . they meet at the mess - table of Handyside 's regiment at Lille ; the officer command not know of the feud between the two nobleman . 
 Esmond have not see the hateful handsome face of Mohun for nine year , since they have meet on that fatal night in Leicester Field . it be degrade with crime and passion now ; it wear the anxious look of a man who have three death , and who know how many hidden shame , and lust , and crime on his conscience . he bow with a sickly low bow , and slunk away when our host present we round to one another . Frank Castlewood have not know he till then , so changed be he . he know the boy well enough . 
 ' twas curious to look at the two especially the young man , whose face flush up when he hear the hat name of the other ; and who say in his bad French and his brave boyish voice " he have long be anxious to meet my Lord Mohun . " the other only bow , and move away from he . I do he justice , he wish to have no quarrel with the lad . 
 Esmond put himself between they at table . " D - it , " say Frank , " why do you put yourself in the place of a man who be above you in degree ? my Lord Mohun should walk after I . I want to sit by my Lord Mohun . " 
 Esmond whisper to Lord Mohun , that Frank be hurt in the leg at Oudenarde ; and besought the other to be quiet . quiet enough he be for some time ; disregard the many taunt which young Castlewood fling at he , until after several health , when my Lord Mohun get to be rather in liquor . 
 " will you go away , my lord ? " Mr. Esmond say to he , implore he to quit the table . 
 " no , by G , " say my Lord Mohun . " I will not go away for any man ; " he be quite flushed with wine by this time . 
 the talk get round to the affair of yesterday . Webb have offer to challenge the Commander - in - chief : Webb have be ill - use : Webb be the brave , handsome , vainest man in the army . Lord Mohun do not know that Esmond be Webb 's aide - de - camp . he begin to tell some story against the General ; which , from t'other side of Esmond , young Castlewood contradict . 
 " I can not   bear any more of this , " say my Lord Mohun . 
 " nor can I , my lord , " say Mr. Esmond , start up . " the story my Lord Mohun have tell respect General Webb be false , gentleman false , I repeat , " and make a low bow to Lord Mohun , and without a single word more , Esmond get up and leave the dining - room . these affair be common enough among the military of those day . there be a garden behind the house , and all the party turn instantly into it ; and the two gentleman 's coat be off and their point engage within two minute after Esmond 's word have be speak . if Captain Esmond have put Mohun out of the world , as he might , a villain would have be punish and spar further villanie but who be one man to punish another ? I declare upon my honor that my only thought be to prevent Lord Mohun from mischief with Frank , and the end of this meeting be , that after half a dozen pass my lord go home with a hurt which prevent he from lift his right arm for three month . 
 " oh , Harry ! why do not   you kill the villain ? " young Castlewood ask . " I can not   walk without a crutch : but I could have meet he on horseback with sword and pistol . " but Harry Esmond say , " ' twa good to have no man 's life on one 's conscience , not even that villain 's . " and this affair , which do not occupy three minute , be over , the gentleman go back to their wine , and my Lord Mohun to his quarter , where he be lay up with a fever which have spar mischief have it prove fatal . and very soon after this affair Harry Esmond and his General leave the camp for London ; whither a certain reputation have precede the Captain , for my Lady Castlewood of Chelsey receive he as if he have be a conquering hero . she give a great dinner to Mr. Webb , where the General 's chair be crown with laurel ; and her ladyship call Esmond 's health in a toast , to which my kind General be graciously pleased to bear the strong testimony : and take down a mob of at least forty coach to cheer our General as he come out of the House of Commons , the day when he receive the thank of Parliament for his action . the mob huzza'd and applaud he , as well as the fine company : it be splendid to see he wave his hat , and bow , and lay his hand upon his Order of Generosity . he introduce Mr. Esmond to Mr. St. John and the right honorable Robert Harley , Esquire , as he come out of the House walk between they ; and be pleased to make many flattering observation regard Mr. Esmond 's behavior during the three last campaign . 
 Mr. St. John   who have the most winning presence of any man I ever see , except always my peerless young Frank Castlewood   say he have hear of Mr. Esmond before from Captain Steele , and how he have help Mr. Addison to write his famous poem of the " Campaign . " 
 " ' Twas as great an achievement as the victory of Blenheim itself , " Mr. Harley say , who be famous as a judge and patron of letter , and so , perhaps , it may be though for my part I think there be twenty beautiful line , but all the rest be commonplace , and Mr. Addison 's hymn worth a thousand such poem . 
 all the town be indignant at my Lord Duke 's unjust treatment of General Webb , and applaud the vote of thank which the House of Commons give to the General for his victory at Wynendael . ' tis certain that the capture of Lille be the consequence of that lucky achievement , and the humiliation of the old french King , who be say to suffer more at the loss of this great city , than from any of the former victory our troop have win over he . and , I think , no small part of Mr. Webb 's exultation at his victory arise from the idea that Marlborough have be disappoint of a great bribe the french King have promise he , should the siege be raise . the very sum of money offer to he be mention by the Duke 's enemy ; and honest Mr. Webb chuckle at the notion , not only of beat the French , but of beat Marlborough too , and intercept a convoy of three million of french crown , that be on their way to the Generalissimo 's insatiable pocket . when the General 's lady go to the Queen 's drawing - room , all the Tory woman crowd round she with congratulation , and make she a train great than the Duchess of Marlborough 's own . feast be give to the General by all the chief of the Tory party , who vaunt he as the Duke 's equal in military skill ; and perhaps use the worthy soldier as their instrument , whilst he think they be but acknowledge his merit as a commander . as the General 's aide - de - camp and favorite officer , Mr. Esmond come in for a share of his chief 's popularity , and be present to her Majesty , and advance to the rank of Lieutenant - Colonel , at the request of his grateful chief . 
 we may be sure there be one family in which any good fortune that happen to Esmond cause such a sincere pride and pleasure , that he , for his part , be thankful he could make they so happy . with these fond friend , Blenheim and Oudenarde seem to be mere trifling incident of the war ; and Wynendael be its crowning victory . Esmond 's mistress never tired to hear account of the battle ; and I think General Webb 's lady grow jealous of she , for the General be for ever at Kensington , and talk on that delightful theme . as for his aide - de - camp , though , no doubt , Esmond 's own natural vanity be pleased at the little share of reputation which his good fortune have win he , yet it be chiefly precious to he   he may say so , now that he hath long since outlive it ,   because it please his mistress , and , above all , because Beatrix value it . 
 as for the old Dowager of Chelsey , never be an old woman in all England more delighted nor more gracious than she . Esmond have his quarter in her ladyship 's house , where the domestic be instruct to consider he as their master . she bid he give entertainment , of which she defray the charge , and be charm when his guest be carry away tipsy in their coach . she must have his picture take ; and accordingly he be paint by Mr. Jervas , in his red coat , and smile upon a bomb - shell , which be burst at the corner of the piece . she vow that unless he make a great match , she should never die easy , and be for ever bring young lady to Chelsey , with pretty face and pretty fortune , at the disposal of the Colonel . he smile to think how time be alter with he , and of the early day in his father 's lifetime , when a trembling page he stand before she , with her ladyship 's basin and ewer , or crouch in her coach - step . the only fault she find with he be , that he be more sober than an Esmond ought to be ; and would neither be carry to bed by his valet , nor lose his heart to any beauty , whether of St. James 's or Covent Garden . 
 what be the meaning of fidelity in love , and whence the birth of it ? ' tis a state of mind that man fall into , and depend on the man rather than the woman . we love be in love , that be the truth on't . if we have not meet Joan , we should have meet Kate , and adore she . we know our mistress be no well than many other woman , nor no pretty , nor no wiser , nor no wittier . ' tis not for these reason we love a woman , or for any special quality or charm I know of ; we might as well demand that a lady should be the tall woman in the world , like the Shropshire giantess ,   as that she should be a paragon in any other character , before we begin to love she . Esmond 's mistress have a thousand fault beside her charm ; he know both perfectly well ! she be imperious , she be light - minded , she be flighty , she be false , she have no reverence in her character ; she be in everything , even in beauty , the contrast of her mother , who be the most devoted and the least selfish of woman . well , from the very first moment he see she on the stair at Walcote , Esmond know he love Beatrix . there might be well woman he want that one . he care for none other . be it because she be gloriously beautiful ? beautiful as she be , he have hear people say a score of time in their company that Beatrix 's mother look as young , and be the handsomer of the two . why do her voice thrill in his ear so ? she could not sing near so well as Nicolini or Mrs. Tofts ; nay , she sing out of tune , and yet he like to hear she well than St. Cecilia . she have not a fine complexion than Mrs. Steele ,   Dick 's wife , whom he have now get , and who rule poor Dick with a rod of pickle ,   and yet to see her dazzled esmond ; he would shut his eye , and the thought of she dazzle he all the same . she be brilliant and lively in talk , but not so incomparably witty as her mother , who , when she be cheerful , say the fine thing ; but yet to hear she , and to be with she , be Esmond 's great pleasure . day pass away between he and these lady , he scarce know how . he pour his heart out to they , so as he never could in any other company , where he hath generally pass for be moody , or supercilious and silent . this society    be more delightful than that of the great wit to he . may heaven pardon he the lie he tell the Dowager at Chelsey , in order to get a pretext for go away to Kensington : the business at the ordnance which he invent ; the interview with his General , the court and statesman 's levee which he DIDN'T frequent and describe ; who wear a new suit on Sunday at St. James 's or at the Queen 's birthday ; how many coach fill the street at Mr. Harley 's levee ; how many bottle he have have the honor to drink over - night with Mr. St. John at the " Cocoa - Tree , " or at the " Garter " with Mr. Walpole and Mr. Steele . 
    ' tis not thus WOMAN love : Col . E. hath own to this 
  folly for a score of WOMEN besides . R. 

     and , indeed , so be his to they , a thousand thousand 
  time more charming , for where be his equal ? R. 
 Mistress Beatrix Esmond have be a dozen time on the point of make great match , so the Court scandal say ; but for his part Esmond never would believe the story against she ; and come back , after three year ' absence from she , not so frantic as he have be perhaps , but still hunger after she and no other ; still hopeful , still kneel , with his heart in his hand for the young lady to take . we be now get to 1709 . she be near twenty - two year old , and three year at Court , and without a husband . 
 " ' tis not for want of be ask , " Lady Castlewood say , look into Esmond 's heart , as she could , with that perceptiveness affection give . " but she will make no mean match , Harry : she will not marry as I would have she ; the person whom I should like to call my son , and Henry Esmond know who that be , be well serve by my not press his claim . beatrix be so wilful , that what I would urge on she , she would be sure to resist . the man who would marry she , will not be happy with she , unless he be a great person , and can put she in a great position . beatrix love admiration more than love ; and long , beyond all thing , for command . why should a mother speak so of her child ? you be my son , too , Harry . you should know the truth about your sister . I think you might cure yourself of your passion , " my lady add , fondly . " other people can cure themselves of that folly , you know . but I see you be still as infatuate as ever . when we read your name in the Gazette , I plead for you , my poor boy . poor boy , indeed ! you be grow a grave old gentleman , now , and I be an old woman . she like your fame well enough , and she like your person . she say you have wit , and fire , and good - breeding , and be more natural than the fine gentleman of the Court . but this be not enough . she want a commander - in - chief , and not a colonel . be a duke to ask she , she would leave an earl whom she have promise . I tell you so before . I know not how my poor girl be so worldly . " 
 " well , " say Esmond , " a man can but give his good and his all . she have that from I . what little reputation I have win , I swear I care for it because I think beatrix would be pleased with it . what care I to be a colonel or a general ? think you ' twill matter a few score year hence , what our foolish honor to - day be ? I would have have a little fame , that she might wear it in her hat . if I have anything well , I would endow she with it . if she want my life , I would give it she . if she marry another , I will say God bless he . I make no boast , nor no complaint . I think my fidelity be folly , perhaps . but so it be . I can not help myself . I love she . you be a thousand time well : the fond , the fair , the dearest of woman . sure , my dear lady , I see all beatrix 's fault as well as you do . but she be my fate . ' tis endurable . I shall not die for not have she . I think I should be no happy if I win she . Que voulez - vous ? as my Lady of Chelsey would say . Je l'aime . " 
 " I wish she would have you , " say Harry 's fond mistress , give a hand to he . he kiss the fair hand   ' twa the prettiest dimple little hand in the world , and my Lady Castlewood , though now almost forty year old , do not look to be within ten year of her age . he kiss and keep she fair hand , as they talk together . 
 " why , " say he , ' should she hear I ? she know what I would say . far or near , she know I be her slave . I have sell myself for nothing , it may be . well , ' tis the price I choose to take . I be worth nothing , or I be worth all . " 
 " you be such a treasure , " Esmond 's mistress be pleased to say , " that the woman who have your love , should not   change it away against a kingdom , I think . I be a country - breed woman , and can not say but the ambition of the town seem mean to I . I never be awe - stricken by my Lady Duchess 's rank and finery , or afraid , " she add , with a sly laugh , " of anything but her temper . I hear of Court lady who pine because her Majesty look cold on they ; and great nobleman who would give a limb that they might wear a garter on the other . this worldliness , which I can not   comprehend , be bear with Beatrix , who , on the first day of she waiting , be a perfect courtier . we be like sister , and she the eld sister , somehow . she tell I I have a mean spirit . I laugh , and say she adore a coach - and - six . I can not reason she out of her ambition . ' tis natural to she , as to I to love quiet , and be indifferent about rank and rich . what be they , Harry ? and for how long do they last ? our home be not here . " she smile as she speak , and look like an angel that be only on earth on a visit . " our home be where the just be , and where our sin and sorrow enter not . my father use to rebuke I , and say that I be too hopeful about heaven . but I can not help my nature , and grow obstinate as I grow to be an old woman ; and as I love my child so , sure our Father love we with a thousand and a thousand time great love . it must be that we shall meet yonder , and be happy . yes , you and my child , and my dear lord . do you know , Harry , since his death , it have always seem to I as if his love come back to I , and that we be part no more . perhaps he be here now , Harry I think he be . forgive I be sure he be : even Mr. Atterbury absolve he , and he die forgiving . oh , what a noble heart he have ! how generous he be ! I be but fifteen and a child when he marry I . how good he be to stoop to I ! he be always good to the poor and humble . " she stop , then presently , with a peculiar expression , as if her eye be look into heaven , and see my lord there , she smile , and give a little laugh . " I laugh to see you , sir , " she say ; " when you come , it seem as if you never be away . " one may put her word down , and remember they , but how describe her sweet tone , sweet than music ! 
 my young lord do not come home at the end of the campaign , and write that he be keep at Bruxelles on military duty . indeed , I believe he be engage in lay siege to a certain lady , who be of the suite of Madame de Soissons , the Prince of Savoy 's mother , who be just dead , and who , like the flemish fortress , be take and retake a great number of time during the war , and occupy by French , English , and imperialist . of course , Mr. Esmond do not think fit to enlighten Lady Castlewood regard the young scapegrace 's doing : nor have he say a word about the affair with Lord Mohun , know how abhorrent that man 's name be to his mistress . Frank do not waste much time or money on pen and ink ; and , when Harry come home with his General , only writ two line to his mother , to say his wound in the leg be almost heal , that he would keep his coming of age next year that the duty aforesaid would keep he at Bruxelles , and that Cousin Harry would tell all the news . 
 but from Bruxelles , know how the Lady Castlewood always like to have a letter about the famous 29th of December , my lord writ she a long and full one , and in this he must have describe the affair with Mohun ; for when Mr. Esmond come to visit his mistress one day , early in the new year , to his great wonderment , she and her daughter both come up and salute he , and after they the Dowager of Chelsey , too , whose chairman have just bring her ladyship from her village to Kensington across the field . after this honor , I say , from the two lady of Castlewood , the Dowager come forward in great state , with her grand tall head - dress of King James 's reign , that , she never forsook , and say , " Cousin Henry , all our family have meet ; and we thank you , cousin , for your noble conduct towards the head of our house . " and point to her blushing cheek , she make Mr. Esmond aware that he be to enjoy the rapture of an embrace there . have salute one cheek , she turn to he the other . " Cousin Harry , " say both the other lady , in a little chorus , " we thank you for your noble conduct ; " and then Harry become aware that the story of the Lille affair have come to his kinswoman 's ear . it please he to hear they all salute he as one of their family . 
 the table of the dining - room be lay for a great entertainment ; and the lady be in gala dress my Lady of Chelsey in her high tour , my Lady Viscountess out of black , and look fair and happy a ravir ; and the Maid of Honor attire with that splendor which naturally distinguish she , and wear on her beautiful breast the french officer 's star which Frank have send home after ramillie . 
 " you see , ' tis a gala day with we , " say she , glance down to the star complacently , " and we have our order on . do not mamma look charming ? ' twa I dress she ! " indeed , Esmond 's dear mistress , blush as he look at she , with her beautiful fair hair , and an elegant dress accord to the mode , appear to have the shape and complexion of a girl of twenty . 
 on the table be a fine sword , with a red velvet scabbard , and a beautiful chase silver handle , with a blue ribbon for a sword - knot . " what be this ? " say the Captain , go up to look at this pretty piece . 
 Mrs. Beatrix advance towards it . " kneel down , " say she : " we dub you our knight with this " and she wave the sword over his head . " my Lady Dowager hath give the sword ; and I give the ribbon , and mamma hath sew on the fringe . " 
 " put the sword on he , beatrix , " say her mother . " you be our knight , Harry our true knight . take a mother 's thank and prayer for defend her son , my dear , dear friend . " she could say no more , and even the Dowager be affect , for a couple of rebellious tear make sad mark down those wrinkle old rose which Esmond have just be allow to salute . 
 " we have a letter from dear Frank , " his mother say , " three day since , whilst you be on your visit to your friend Captain Steele , at Hampton . he tell we all that you have do , and how nobly you have put yourself between he and that that wretch . " 
 " and I adopt you from this day , " say the Dowager , " and I wish I be rich , for your sake , son Esmond , " she add with a wave of her hand ; and as Mr. Esmond dutifully go down on his knee before her ladyship , she cast her eye up to the ceiling ,   the gilt chandelier , and the twelve wax - candle in it , for the party be numerous ,   and invoke a blessing from that quarter upon the newly adopt son . 
 " Dear Frank , " say the other viscountess , " how fond he be of his military profession ! he be study fortification very hard . I wish he be here . we shall keep his coming of age at Castlewood next year . " 
 " if the campaign permit we , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " I be never afraid when he be with you , " cry the boy 's mother . " I be sure my Henry will always defend he . " 
 " but there will be a peace before next year ; we know it for certain , " cry the Maid of Honor . " Lord Marlborough will be dismiss , and that horrible duchess turn out of all her place . her Majesty will not   speak to she now . do you see she at Bushy , Harry ? she be furious , and she range about the park like a lioness , and tear people 's eye out . " 
 " and the Princess Anne will send for somebody , " say my Lady of Chelsey , take out her medal and kiss it . 
 " do you see the King at Oudenarde , Harry ? " his mistress ask . she be a staunch Jacobite , and would no more have think of deny her king than her God . 
 " I see the young Hanoverian only , " Harry say . " the Chevalier de St. George " 
 " the King , sir , the king ! " say the lady and Miss Beatrix ; and she clap her pretty hand , and cry , " Vive le Roy . " 
 by this time there come a thunder knock , that drive in the door of the house almost . it be three o'clock , and the company be arrive ; and presently the servant announce Captain Steele and his lady . 
 Captain and Mrs. Steele , who be the first to arrive , have drive to Kensington from their country - house , the Hovel at Hampton Wick . " not from our mansion in Bloomsbury Square , " as Mrs. Steele take care to inform the lady . indeed Harry have ride away from Hampton that very morning , leave the couple by the ear ; for from the chamber where he lay , in a bed that be none of the clean , and keep awake by the company which he have in his own bed , and the quarrel which be go on in the next room , he could hear both night and morning the curtain lecture which Mrs. Steele be in the habit of administer to poor Dick . 
 at night it do not matter so much for the culprit ; Dick be fuddle , and when in that way no scolding could interrupt his benevolence . Mr. Esmond could hear he coax and speak in that maudlin manner , which punch and claret produce , to his beloved prue , and beseech she to remember that there be a distiwisht officer ithe rex roob , who would overhear she . she go on , nevertheless , call he a drunken wretch , and be only interrupt in her harangue by the Captain 's snoring . 
 in the morning , the unhappy victim awake to a headache , and consciousness , and the dialogue of the night be resume . " why do you bring captain home to dinner when there be not a guinea in the house ? how be I to give dinner when you leave I without a shilling ? how be I to go traipse to Kensington in my yellow satin sack before all the fine company ? I have   nothing fit to put on ; I never have : " and so the dispute go on Mr. Esmond interrupt the talk when it seem to be grow too intimate by blow his nose as loudly as ever he could , at the sound of which trumpet there come a lull . but Dick be charming , though his wife be odious , and ' twa to give Mr. Steele pleasure , that the lady of Castlewood , who be lady of no small fashion , invite Mrs. Steele . 
 besides the Captain and his lady , there be a great and notable assemblage of company : my Lady of Chelsey have send her lackey and livery to aid the modest attendance at Kensington . there be Lieutenant - General Webb , Harry 's kind patron , of whom the Dowager take possession , and who resplend in velvet and gold lace ; there be Harry 's new acquaintance , the Right Honorable Henry St. John , Esquire , the General 's kinsman , who be charm with the Lady Castlewood , even more than with her daughter ; there be one of the great nobleman in the kingdom , the Scots Duke of Hamilton , just create Duke of Brandon in England ; and two other noble lord of the Tory party , my Lord Ashburnham , and another I have forget ; and for lady , her grace the Duchess of Ormonde and her daughter , the Lady Mary and the Lady Betty , the former one of Mistress beatrix 's colleague in wait on the Queen . 
 " what a party of Tories ! " whisper Captain Steele to Esmond , as we be assemble in the parlor before dinner . indeed , all the company present , save Steele , be of that faction . 
 Mr. St. John make his special compliment to Mrs. Steele , and so charm she that she declare she would have Steele a Tory too . 
 " or will you have I a Whig ? " say Mr. St. John . " I think , madam , you could convert a man to anything . " 
 " if Mr. St. John ever come to Bloomsbury Square I will teach he what I know , " say Mrs. Steele , drop her handsome eye . " do you know Bloomsbury Square ? " 
 " do I know the mall ? do I know the Opera ? do I know the reign toast ? why , Bloomsbury be the very height of the mode , " say Mr. St. John . " ' tis rus in urbe . you have garden all the way to Hampstead , and palace round about you Southampton House and Montague House . " 
 " where you wretche go and fight duel , " cry Mrs. Steele . 
 " of which the lady be the cause ! " say her entertainer . " Madam , be Dick a good swordsman ? how charming the ' Tatler ' be ! we all recognize your portrait in the 49th number , and I have be die to know you ever since I read it . ' Aspasia must be allow to be the first of the beauteous order of love . ' Doth not the passage run so ? ' in this accomplished lady love be the constant effect , though it be never the design ; yet though her mien carry much more invitation than command , to behold she be an immediate check to loose behavior , and to love she be a liberal education . ' " 
 " oh , indeed ! " say Mrs. Steele , who do not seem to understand a word of what the gentleman be say . 
 " who could fail to be accomplish under such a mistress ? " say Mr. St. John , still gallant and bow . 
 " Mistress ! upon my word , sir ! " cry the lady . " if you mean I , sir , I would have you know that I be the Captain 's wife . " 
 " sure we all know it , " answer Mr. St. John , keep his countenance very gravely ; and Steele break in say , " ' twas not about Mrs. Steele I writ that paper though I be sure she be worthy of any compliment I can pay she but of the Lady Elizabeth Hastings . " 
 " I hear Mr. Addison be equally famous as a wit and a poet , " say Mr. St. John . " be it true that his hand be to be find in your ' Tatler , ' Mr. Steele ? " 
 " whether ' tis the sublime or the humorous , no man can come near he , " cry Steele . 
 " a fig , Dick , for your Mr. Addison ! " cry out his lady : " a gentleman who give himself such air and hold his head so high now . I hope your ladyship think as I do : I can not   bear those very fair man with white eyelash a black man for I . "   all the black man at table applaud , and make Mrs. Steele a bow for this compliment .   " as for this Mr. Addison , " she go on , " he come to dine with the Captain sometimes , never say a word to I , and then they walk up stair both tipsy , to a dish of tea . I remember your Mr. Addison when he have but one coat to his back , and that with a patch at the elbow . " 
 " indeed a patch at the elbow ! you interest I , " say Mr. St. John . " ' tis charming to hear of one man of letter from the charming wife of another . " 
 " La , I could tell you ever so much about them , " continue the voluble lady . " what do you think the Captain have get now ? a little hunchback fellow a little hop - o'-my - thumb creature that he call a poet a little popish brat ! " 
 " hush , there be two in the room , " whisper her companion . 
 " well , I call he Popish because his name be Pope , " say the lady . " ' tis only my joke way . and this little dwarf of a fellow have write a pastoral poem all about shepherd and shepherdess , you know . " 
 " a shepherd should have a little crook , " say my mistress , laugh from her end of the table : on which Mrs. Steele say , " she do not know , but the Captain bring home this queer little creature when she be in bed with her first boy , and it be a mercy he have come no soon ; and Dick rave about his genus , and be always rave about some nonsense or other . " 
 " which of the ' Tatlers ' do you prefer , Mrs. Steele ? " ask Mr. St. John . 
 " I never read but one , and think it all a pack of rubbish , sir , " say the lady . " such stuff about Bickerstaffe , and Distaff , and Quarterstaff , as it all be ! there be the Captain go on still with the Burgundy I know he will be tipsy before he stop Captain Steele ! " 
 " I drink to your eye , my dear , " say the Captain , who seem to think his wife charming , and to receive as genuine all the satiric compliment which Mr. St. John pay she . 
 all this while the Maid of Honor have be try to get Mr. Esmond to talk , and no doubt vote he a dull fellow . for , by some mistake , just as he be go to pop into the vacant place , he be place far away from beatrix 's chair , who sit between his grace and my Lord Ashburnham , and shrug her lovely white shoulder , and cast a look as if to say , " pity I , " to her cousin . my Lord Duke and his young neighbor be presently in a very animated and close conversation . Mrs. Beatrix could no more help use her eye than the sun can help shin , and set those it shin on a - burning . by the time the first course be do the dinner seem long to Esmond ; by the time the soup come he fancy they must have be hour at table : and as for the sweet and jelly he think they never would be do . 
 at length the lady rise , beatrix throw a parthian glance at her duke as she retreat ; a fresh bottle and glass be fetch , and toast be call . Mr. St. John ask his grace the Duke of Hamilton and the company to drink to the health of his grace the Duke of Brandon . another lord give General Webb 's health , " and may he get the command the brave officer in the world deserve . " Mr. Webb thank the company , compliment his aide - de - camp , and fight his famous battle over again . 
 " il est fatiguant , " whisper Mr. St. John , " avec sa trompette de Wynendael . " 
 Captain Steele , who be not of our side , loyally give the health of the Duke of Marlborough , the great general of the age . 
 " I drink to the great general with all my heart , " say Mr. Webb ; " there can be no gainsaying that character of he . my glass go to the General , and not to the Duke , Mr. Steele . " and the stout old gentleman empty his bumper ; to which Dick reply by fill and empty a pair of brimmer , one for the General and one for the Duke . 
 and now his Grace of Hamilton , rise up with flash eye   we have all be drink pretty freely , propose a toast to the lovely , to the incomparable Mrs. Beatrix Esmond ; we all drink it with cheer , and my Lord Ashburnham especially , with a shout of enthusiasm . 
 " what a pity there be a Duchess of Hamilton , " whisper St. John , who drink more wine and yet be more steady than most of the other , and we enter the drawing - room where the lady be at their tea . as for poor Dick , we be oblige to leave he alone at the dining - table , where he be hiccup out the line from the " campaign , " in which the great poet have celebrate the great general in the world ; and Harry Esmond find he , half an hour afterwards , in a more advanced stage of liquor , and weep about the treachery of Tom Boxer . 
 the drawing - room be all dark to poor Harry , in spite of the grand illumination . beatrix scarce speak to he . when my Lord Duke go away , she practise upon the next in rank , and ply my young Lord Ashburnham with all the fire of her eye and the fascination of her wit . Most of the party be set to card , and Mr. St. John , after yawn in the face of Mrs. Steele , whom he do not care to pursue any more ; and talk in his most brilliant animate way to Lady Castlewood , whom he pronounce to be beautiful , of a far high order of beauty than her daughter , presently take his leave , and go his way . the rest of the company speedily follow , my Lord Ashburnham the last , throw fiery glance at the smile young temptress , who have bewitch more heart than his in her thrall . 
 no doubt , as a kinsman of the house , Mr. Esmond think fit to be the last of all in it ; he remain after the coach have roll away after his dowager aunt 's chair and flambeaux have march off in the darkness towards Chelsey , and the town 's people have go to bed , who have be draw into the square to gape at the unusual assemblage of chair and chariot , lackey , and torchman . the poor mean wretch linger yet for a few minute , to see whether the girl would vouchsafe he a smile , or a parting word of consolation . but her enthusiasm of the morning be quite die out , or she choose to be in a different mood . she fall to joke about the dowdy appearance of Lady Betty , and mimic the vulgarity of Mrs. Steele ; and then she put up her little hand to her mouth and yawn , light a taper , and shrug her shoulder , and drop Mr. Esmond a saucy curtsy , sail off to bed . 
 " the day begin so well , Henry , that I hop it might have end well , " be all the consolation that poor Esmond 's fond mistress could give he ; and as he trudge home through the dark alone , he think with bitter rage in his heart , and a feeling of almost revolt against the sacrifice he have make : " she would have I , " think he , " have I but a name to give she . but for my promise to her father , I might have my rank and my mistress too . " 
 I suppose a man 's vanity be strong than any other passion in he ; for I blush , even now , as I recall the humiliation of those distant day , the memory of which still smart , though the fever of balk desire have pass away more than a score of year ago . when the writer 's descendant come to read this memoir , I wonder will they have live to experience a similar defeat and shame ? will they ever have kneel to a woman who have listen to they , and play with they , and laugh with they who beckon they with lur and caress , and with yes smile from her eye , have trick they on to their knee , and turn she back and leave they . all this shame Mr. Esmond have to undergo ; and he submit , and revolt , and presently come crouch back for more . 
 after this feste , my young Lord Ashburnham 's coach be for ever roll in and out of Kensington Square ; his lady - mother come to visit Esmond 's mistress , and at every assembly in the town , wherever the Maid of Honor make her appearance , you might be pretty sure to see the young gentleman in a new suit every week , and deck out in all the finery that his tailor or embroiderer could furnish for he . my lord be for ever pay Mr. Esmond compliment : bid he to dinner , offer he horse to ride , and give he a thousand uncouth mark of respect and good - will . at last , one night at the coffee - house , whither my lord come considerably flushed and excited with drink , he rush up to Mr. Esmond , and cry out " give I joy , my dear Colonel ; I be the happy of man . " 
 " the happy of man need no dear colonel to give he joy , " say Mr. Esmond . " what be the cause of this supreme felicity ? " 
 " have not   you hear ? " say he . " do not   you know ? I think the family tell you everything : the adorable Beatrix hath promise to be mine . " 
 " what ! " cry out Mr. Esmond , who have spend happy hour with beatrix that very morning have writ verse for she , that she have sing at the harpsichord . 
 " yes , " say he ; " I wait on her to - day . I see you walk towards Knightsbridge as I pass in my coach ; and she look so lovely , and speak so kind , that I could not   help go down on my knee , and and sure I be the happy of man in all the world ; and I be very young ; but she say I shall get old : and you know I shall be of age in four month ; and there be very little difference between we ; and I be so happy . I should like to treat the company to something . let we have a bottle a dozen bottle and drink the health of the fine woman in England . " 
 Esmond leave the young lord toss off bumper after bumper , and stroll away to Kensington to ask whether the news be true . ' twas only too sure : his mistress 's sad , compassionate face tell he the story ; and then she relate what particular of it she know , and how my young lord have make his offer , half an hour after Esmond go away that morning , and in the very room where the song lie yet on the harpsichord , which Esmond have writ , and they have sing together . 




 BOOK III . 

 contain the END of MR . ESMOND 's ADVENTURES in ENGLAND . 





 CHAPTER I. 

 I come to an end of MY battle and BRUISES . 

 that feverish desire to gain a little reputation which Esmond have have , leave he now perhaps that he have attain some portion of his wish , and the great motive of his ambition be over . his desire for military honor be that it might raise he in beatrix 's eye . ' twas next to nobility and wealth , the only kind of rank she value . it be the stake quickest win or lose too ; for law be a very long game that require a life to practise ; and to be distinguish in letter or the Church would not have forward the poor gentleman 's plan in the least . so he have no suit to play but the red one , and he play it ; and this , in truth , be the reason of his speedy promotion ; for he expose himself more than most gentleman do , and risk more to win more . be he the only man that hath set his life against a stake which may be not worth the winning ? another risk his life   and his honor , too , sometimes ,   against a bundle of bank - note , or a yard of blue ribbon , or a seat in Parliament ; and some for the mere pleasure and excitement of the sport ; as a field of a hundred huntsman will do , each out - bawl and out - gallop the other at the tail of a dirty fox , that be to be the prize of the foremost happy conqueror . 
 when he hear this news of Beatrix 's engagement in marriage , Colonel Esmond knock under to his fate , and resolve to surrender his sword , that could win he nothing now he care for ; and in this dismal frame of mind he determine to retire from the regiment , to the great delight of the captain next in rank to he , who happen to be a young gentleman of good fortune , who eagerly pay Mr. Esmond a thousand guineas for his majority in Webb 's regiment , and be knock on the head the next campaign . perhaps Esmond would not have be sorry to share his fate . he be more the Knight of the Woful Countenance than ever he have be . his moodiness must have make he perfectly odious to his friend under the tent , who like a jolly fellow , and laugh at a melancholy warrior always sigh after Dulcinea at home . 
 both the lady of Castlewood approve of Mr. Esmond quit the army , and his kind General coincide in his wish of retirement and help in the transfer of his commission , which bring a pretty sum into his pocket . but when the Commander - in - Chief come home , and be force , in spite of himself , to appoint Lieutenant - General Webb to the command of a division of the army in Flanders , the Lieutenant - General pray Colonel Esmond so urgently to be his aide - de - camp and military secretary , that Esmond could not resist his kind patron 's entreaty , and again take the field , not attach to any regiment , but under Webb 's order . what must have be the continued agony of fear   and apprehension which rack the gentle breast of wife and matron in those dreadful day , when every Gazette bring account of death and battle , and when the present anxiety over , and the beloved person escape , the doubt still remain that a battle might be fight , possibly , of which the next Flanders letter would bring the account ; so they , the poor tender creature , have to go on sicken and tremble through the whole campaign . whatever these terror be on the part of Esmond 's mistress ,   and that tender of woman must have feel they most keenly for both her son , as she call they , she never allow they outwardly to appear , but hide her apprehension , as she do her charity and devotion . ' twas only by chance that Esmond , wander in Kensington , find his mistress come out of a mean cottage there , and hear that she have a score of poor retainer , whom she visit and comfort in their sickness and poverty , and who bless her daily . she attend the early church daily   though of a Sunday , especially , she encourage and advance all sort of cheerfulness and innocent gayety in her little household : and by note enter into a table - book of hers at this time , and devotional composition writ with a sweet artless fervor , such as the good divine could not surpass , show how fond her heart be , how humble and pious her spirit , what pang of apprehension she endure silently , and with what a faithful reliance she commit the care of those she love to the awful Dispenser of death and life . 
    what indeed ? Psm . xci . 2 , 3 , 7 . R. E. 
 as for her ladyship at Chelsey , Esmond 's newly adopt mother , she be now of an age when the danger of any second party doth not disturb the rest much . she care for trump more than for most thing in life . she be firm enough in her own faith , but no long very bitter against ours . she have a very good - nature , easy french director , Monsieur Gauthier by name , who be a gentleman of the world , and would take a hand of card with Dean Atterbury , my lady 's neighbor at Chelsey , and be well with all the High Church party . no doubt Monsieur Gauthier know what Esmond 's peculiar position be , for he correspond with Holt , and always treat Colonel Esmond with particular respect and kindness ; but for good reason the Colonel and the Abbe never speak on this matter together , and so they remain perfect good friend . 
 all the frequenter of my Lady of Chelsey 's house be of the Tory and High Church party . Madame Beatrix be as frantic about the King as her elderly kinswoman : she wear his picture on her heart ; she have a piece of his hair ; she vow he be the most injure , and gallant , and accomplish , and unfortunate , and beautiful of prince . Steele , who quarrel with very many of his Tory friend , but never with Esmond , use to tell the Colonel that his kinswoman 's house be a rendezvous of Tory intrigue ; that Gauthier be a spy ; that Atterbury be a spy ; that letter be constantly go from that house to the Queen at St. Germains ; on which esmond , laughing , would reply , that they use to say in the army the Duke of Marlborough be a spy too , and as much in correspondence with that family as any Jesuit . and without enter very eagerly into the controversy , Esmond have frankly take the side of his family . it seem to he that King James the Third be undoubtedly King of England by right : and at his sister 's death it would be well to have he than a foreigner over we . no man admire King William more ; a hero and a conqueror , the brave , justest , wisest of man but ' twa by the sword he conquer the country , and hold and govern it by the very same right that the great Cromwell hold it , who be truly and greatly a sovereign . but that a foreign despotic Prince , out of Germany , who happen to be descend from King James the First , should take possession of this empire , seem to Mr. Esmond a monstrous injustice at least , every Englishman have a right to protest , and the English Prince , the heir - at - law , the first of all . what man of spirit with such a cause would not back it ? what man of honor with such a crown to win would not fight for it ? but that race be destine . that Prince have himself against he , an enemy he could not overcome . he never dare to draw his sword , though he have it . he let his chance slip by as he lie in the lap of opera - girl , or snivel at the knee of priest ask pardon ; and the blood of hero , and the devotedness of honest heart , and endurance , courage , fidelity , be all spend for he in vain . 
 but let we return to my Lady of Chelsey , who , when her son Esmond announce to her ladyship that he propose to make the ensue campaign , take leave of he with perfect alacrity , and be down to piquet with her gentlewoman before he have well quit the room on his last visit . " tierce to a king , " be the last word he ever hear she say : the game of life be pretty nearly over for the good lady , and three month afterwards she take to her bed , where she flicker out without any pain , so the Abbe Gauthier write over to Mr. Esmond , then with his General on the frontier of France . the Lady Castlewood be with she at her ending , and have write too , but these letter must have be take by a privateer in the packet that bring they ; for Esmond know nothing of their content until his return to England . 
 my Lady Castlewood have leave everything to Colonel Esmond , " as a reparation for the wrong do to he ; " ' twa writ in her will . but her fortune be not much , for it never have be large , and the honest viscountess have wisely sink most of the money she have upon an annuity which terminate with her life . however , there be the house and furniture , plate and picture at Chelsey , and a sum of money lie at her merchant 's , Sir Josiah Child , which altogether would realize a sum of near three hundred pound per annum , so that Mr. Esmond find himself , if not rich , at least easy for life . likewise there be the famous diamond which have be say to be worth fabulous sum , though the goldsmith pronounce they would fetch no more than four thousand pound . these diamond , however , Colonel Esmond reserve , have a special use for they : but the Chelsey house , plate , good ,   c. , with the exception of a few article which he keep back , be sell by his order ; and the sum result from the sale invest in the public security so as to realize the aforesaid annual income of three hundred pound . 
 have now something to leave , he make a will and despatch it home . the army be now in presence of the enemy ; and a great battle expect every day . ' twa know that the General - in - Chief be in disgrace , and the party at home strong against he , and there be no stroke this great and resolute player would not venture to recall his fortune when it seem desperate . Frank Castlewood be with Colonel Esmond ; his General have gladly take the young nobleman on to his staff . his study of fortification at Bruxelles be over by this time . the fort he be besiege have yield , I believe , and my lord have not only march in with fly color , but march out again . he use to tell his boyish wickedness with admirable humor , and be the most charming young scapegrace in the army . 
 ' tis needless to say that Colonel Esmond have leave every penny of his little fortune to this boy . it be the Colonel 's firm conviction that the next battle would put an end to he : for he feel aweary of the sun , and quite ready to bid that and the earth farewell . Frank would not listen to his comrade 's gloomy foreboding , but swear they would keep his birthday at Castlewood that autumn , after the campaign . he have hear of the engagement at home . " if Prince Eugene go to London , " say Frank , " and Trix can get hold of he , she will jilt Ashburnham for his Highness . I tell you , she use to make eye at the Duke of Marlborough , when she be only fourteen , and ogle poor little Blandford . I would not   marry she , Harry no , not if her eye be twice as big . I will take my fun . I will enjoy for the next three year every possible pleasure . I will sow my wild oat then , and marry some quiet , steady , modest , sensible viscountess ; hunt my harrier ; and settle down at Castlewood . perhaps I will represent the county no , damme , you shall represent the county . you have the brain of the family . by the Lord , my dear old Harry , you have the good head and the kind heart in all the army ; and every man say so and when the Queen die , and the King come back , why should not   you go to the House of Commons , and be a Minister , and be make a peer , and that sort of thing ? you be shoot in the next action ! I wager a dozen of Burgundy you be not touch . Mohun be well of his wound . he be always with Corporal John now . as soon as ever I see his ugly face I will spit in it . I take lesson of Father of Captain Holt at Bruxelles . what a man that be ! he know everything . " esmond bade Frank have a care ; that Father Holt 's knowledge be rather dangerous ; not , indeed , know as yet how far the Father have push his instruction with his young pupil . 
 the gazetteer and writer , both of the french and english side , have give account sufficient of that bloody battle of Blarignies or Malplaquet , which be the last and the hard earn of the victory of the great Duke of Marlborough . in that tremendous combat near upon two hundred and fifty thousand man be engage , more than thirty thousand of whom be slay or wound   the Allies lose twice as many man as they kill of the French , whom they conquer : and this dreadful slaughter very likely take place because a great general 's credit be shake at home , and he think to restore it by a victory . if such be the motif which induce the Duke of Marlborough to venture that prodigious stake , and desperately sacrifice thirty thousand brave life , so that he might figure once more in a Gazette , and hold his place and pension a little long , the event defeat the dreadful and selfish design , for the victory be purchase at a cost which no nation , greedy of glory as it may be , would willingly pay for any triumph . the gallantry of the French be as remarkable as the furious bravery of their assailant . we take a few score of their flag , and a few piece of their artillery ; but we leave twenty thousand of the brave soldier of the world round about the intrenched line , from which the enemy be drive . he retreat in perfect good order ; the panic - spell seem to be break , under which the French have labor ever since the disaster of Hochstedt ; and , fight now on the threshold of their country , they show an heroic ardor of resistance , such as have never meet we in the course of their aggressive war . have the battle be more successful , the conqueror might have get the price for which he wag it . as it be ,   and justly , I think ,   the party adverse to the Duke in England be indignant at the lavish extravagance of slaughter , and demand more eagerly than ever the recall of a chief whose cupidity and desperation might urge he far still . after this bloody fight of Malplaquet , I can answer for it , that in the dutch quarter and our own , and amongst the very regiment and commander whose gallantry be most conspicuous upon this frightful day of carnage , the general cry be , that there be enough of the war . the French be drive back into their own boundary , and all their conquest and booty of Flanders disgorge . as for the Prince of Savoy , with whom our Commander - in - Chief , for reason of his own , consort more closely than ever , ' twa know that he be animate not merely by a political hatred , but by personal rage against the old french king : the Imperial Generalissimo never forget the slight put by Lewis upon the Abbe de Savoie ; and in the humiliation or ruin of his most Christian Majesty , the Holy Roman Emperor find his account . but what be these quarrel to we , the free citizen of England and Holland ! despot as he be , the french monarch be yet the chief of european civilization , more venerable in his age and misfortune than at the period of his most splendid success ; whilst his opponent be but a semi - barbarous tyrant , with a pillaging , murderous horde of Croats and pandour , compose a half of his army , fill our camp with their strange figure , bearded like the miscreant Turks their neighbor , and carry into christian warfare their native heathen habit of rapine , lust , and murder . why should the good blood in England and France be shed in order that the Holy Roman and apostolic master of these ruffian should have his revenge over the christian king ? and it be to this end we be fight ; for this that every village and family in England be deplore the death of beloved son and father . we dare not speak to each other , even at table , of Malplaquet , so frightful be the gap leave in our army by the cannon of that bloody action . ' twa heartrende for an officer who have a heart to look down his line on a parade - day afterwards , and miss hundred of face of comrade humble or of high rank that have gather but yesterday full of courage and cheerfulness round the torn and blackened flag . where be our friend ? as the great Duke review we , rid along our line with his fine suite of prance aide - de - camp and general , stop here and there to thank an officer with those eager smile and bow of which his grace be always lavish , scarce a huzzah could be get for he , though Cadogan , with an oath , ride up and cry " d n you , why do not   you cheer ? " but the man have no heart for that : not one of they but be think , " where be my comrade ? where be my brother that fight by I , or my dear captain that lead I yesterday ? " ' twas the most gloomy pageant I ever look on ; and the " Te Deum " sing by our chaplain , the most woful and dreary satire . 
 Esmond 's General add one more to the many mark of honor which he have receive in the front of a score of battle , and get a wound in the groin , which lay he on his back ; and you may be sure he console himself by abuse the Commander - in - Chief , as he lie groan , " Corporal John 's as fond of I , " he use to say , " as King David be of General Uriah ; and so he always give I the post of danger . " he persist , to his die day , in believe that the Duke intend he should be beat at Wynendael , and send he purposely with a small force , hop that he might be knock on the head there . Esmond and Frank Castlewood both escape without hurt , though the division which our General command suffer even more than any other , have to sustain not only the fury of the enemy 's cannonade , which be very hot and well serve , but the furious and repeat charge of the famous Maison du Roy , which we have to receive and beat off again and again , with volley of shot and hedge of iron , and our four line of musqueteer and pikemen . they say the King of England charge we no less than twelve time that day , along with the french Household . Esmond 's late regiment , General Webb 's own Fusileers , serve in the division which their colonel command . the General be thrice in the centre of the square of the Fusileers , call the fire at the french charge , and , after the action , his grace the Duke of Berwick send his compliment to his old regiment and their Colonel for their behavior on the field . 
 we drink my Lord Castlewood 's health and majority , the 25th of September , the army be then before Mons : and here Colonel Esmond be not so fortunate as he have be in action much more dangerous , and be hit by a spend ball just above the place where his former wound be , which cause the old wound to open again , fever , spit of blood , and other ugly symptom , to ensue ; and , in a word , bring he near to death 's door . the kind lad , his kinsman , attend his eld comrade with a very praiseworthy affectionateness and care until he be pronounce out of danger by the doctor , when Frank go off , pass the winter at Bruxelles , and besiege , no doubt , some other fortress there . very few lad would have give up their pleasure so long and so gayly as Frank do ; his cheerful prattle soothe many long day of Esmond 's pain and languor . Frank be suppose to be still at his kinsman 's bedside for a month after he have leave it , for letter come from his mother at home full of thank to the young gentleman for his care of his eld brother   so it please Esmond 's mistress now affectionately to style he ; nor be Mr. Esmond in a hurry to undeceive she , when the good young fellow be go for his Christmas holiday . it be as pleasant to Esmond on his couch to watch the young man 's pleasure at the idea of be free , as to note his simple effort to disguise his satisfaction on go away . there be day when a flask of champagne at a cabaret , and a red - cheeked partner to share it , be too strong temptation for any young fellow of spirit . I be not go to play the moralist , and cry " Fie . " for age past , I know how old man preach , and what young man practise ; and that patriarch have have their weak moment too , long since Father Noah topple over after discover the vine . Frank go off , then , to his pleasure at Bruxelles , in which capital many young fellow of our army declare they find infinitely great diversion even than in London : and Mr. Henry Esmond remain in his sick - room , where he writ a fine comedy , that his mistress pronounce to be sublime , and that be act no less than three successive night in London in the next year . 
 here , as he lie nursing himself , ubiquitous Mr. Holt reappear , and stop a whole month at Mons , where he not only win over Colonel Esmond to the King 's side in politic   that side be always hold by the Esmond family ; but where he endeavor to reopen the controversial question between the church once more , and to recall Esmond to that religion in which , in his infancy , he have be baptize . Holt be a casuist , both dexterous and learn , and present the case between the english church and his own in such a way that those who grant his premise ought certainly to allow his conclusion . he touch on Esmond 's delicate state of health , chance of dissolution , and so forth ; and enlarge upon the immense benefit that the sick man be likely to forego benefit which the church of England do not deny to those of the roman communion , as how should she , be derive from that church , and only an offshoot from it ? but Mr. Esmond say that his church be the church of his country , and to that he choose to remain faithful : other people be welcome to worship and to subscribe any other set of article , whether at Rome or at Augsburg . but if the good Father mean that Esmond should join the roman communion for fear of consequence , and that all England run the risk of be damn for heresy , Esmond , for one , be perfectly willing to take his chance of the penalty along with the countless million of his fellow - countryman , who be breed in the same faith , and along with some of the noble , the true , the pure , the wise , the most pious and learn man and woman in the world . 
 as for the political question , in that Mr. Esmond could agree with the Father much more readily , and have come to the same conclusion , though , perhaps , by a different way . the right divine , about which Dr. Sacheverel and the High Church party in England be just now make a bother , they be welcome to hold as they choose . if Richard Cromwell , and his father before he have be crown and anoint   and bishop enough would have be find to do it , it seem to Mr. Esmond that they would have have the right divine just as much as any Plantagenet , or Tudor , or Stuart . but the desire of the country be unquestionably for an hereditary monarchy , Esmond think an english king out of St. Germains be well and fitter than a german prince from Herrenhausen , and that if he fail to satisfy the nation , some other Englishman might be find to take his place ; and so , though with no frantic enthusiasm , or worship of that monstrous pedigree which the Tories choose to consider divine , he be ready to say , " God save King James ! " when Queen Anne go the way of king and commoner . 
 " I fear , Colonel , you be no well than a republican at heart , " say the priest with a sigh . 
 " I be an Englishman , " say Harry , " and take my country as I find she . the will of the nation be for church and king , I be for church and king too ; but english church and english king ; and that be why your church be not   mine , though your king be . " 
 though they lose the day at Malplaquet , it be the French who be elate by that action , whilst the conqueror be dispirit , by it ; and the enemy gather together a large army than ever , and make prodigious effort for the next campaign . Marshal Berwick be with the French this year ; and we hear that Mareschal Villars be still suffer of his wound , be eager to bring our Duke to action , and vow he would fight we in his coach . Young Castlewood come fly back from Bruxelles , as soon as he hear that fighting be to begin ; and the arrival of the Chevalier de St. George be announce about May . " it be the King 's third campaign , and it be mine , " Frank like say . he be come back a great Jacobite than ever , and Esmond suspect that some fair conspirator at Bruxelles have be inflame the young man 's ardor . indeed , he own that he have a message from the Queen , Beatrix 's godmother , who have give her name to Frank 's sister the year before he and his sovereign be bear . 
 however desirous Marshal Villars might be to fight , my Lord Duke do not seem disposed to indulge he this campaign . last year his grace have be all for the Whigs and Hanoverians ; but find , on go to England , his country cold towards himself , and the people in a ferment of High Church loyalty , the Duke come back to his army cool towards the Hanoverians , cautious with the Imperialists , and particularly civil and polite towards the Chevalier de St. George . ' tis certain that messenger and letter be continually pass between his grace and his brave nephew , the Duke of Berwick , in the opposite camp . no man 's caress be more opportune than his grace 's , and no man ever utter expression of regard and affection more generously . he profess to Monsieur de Torcy , so Mr. St. John tell the writer , quite an eagerness to be cut in piece for the exiled queen and her family ; nay more , I believe , this year he part with a portion of the most precious part of himself his money which he send over to the royal exile . Mr. Tunstal , who be in the Prince 's service , be twice or thrice in and out of our camp ; the French , in theirs of Arlieu and about Arras . a little river , the Canihe I think ' twa call ,   but this be writ away from book and Europe ; and the only map the writer hath of these scene of his youth , bear no mark of this little stream ,   divide our picket from the enemy 's . our sentry talk across the stream , when they could make themselves understand to each other , and when they could not , grin , and hand each other their brandy - flask or their pouch of tobacco . and one fine day of June , rid thither with the officer who visit the outpost ,   Colonel Esmond be take an airing on horseback , be too weak for military duty ,   they come to this river , where a number of English and Scots be assemble , talk to the good - natured enemy on the other side . 
 Esmond be especially amuse with the talk of one long fellow , with a great curl red moustache , and blue eye , that be half a dozen inch tall than his swarthy little comrade on the french side of the stream , and be ask by the Colonel , salute he , and say that he belong to the Royal Cravats . 
 from his way of say " Royal Cravat , " esmond at once know that the fellow 's tongue have first wag on the bank of the Liffey , and not the Loire ; and the poor soldier a deserter probably do not like to venture very deep into french conversation , lest his unlucky brogue should peep out . he choose to restrict himself to such few expression in the french language as he think he have master easily ; and his attempt at disguise be infinitely amusing . Mr. Esmond whistle Lillibullero , at which Teague 's eye begin to twinkle , and then fling he a dollar , when the poor boy break out with a " God bless that be , Dieu benisse votre honor , " that would infallibly have send he to the provost - marshal have he be on our side of the river . 
 Whilst this parley be go on , three officer on horseback , on the french side , appear at some little distance , and stop as if eye we , when one of they leave the other two , and ride close up to we who be by the stream . " look , look ! " say the Royal Cravat , with great agitation , " pas lui , that be he ; not he , l'autre , " and point to the distant officer on a chestnut horse , with a cuirass shin in the sun , and over it a broad blue ribbon . 
 " please to take Mr. Hamilton 's service to my Lord Marlborough my Lord Duke , " say the gentleman in English : and , look to see that the party be not hostilely dispose , he add , with a smile , " there be a friend of your , gentleman , yonder ; he bid I to say that he see some of your face on the 11th of September last year . " 
 as the gentleman speak , the other two officer ride up , and come quite close . we know at once who it be . it be the king , then two - and - twenty year old , tall and slim , with deep brown eye , that look melancholy , though his lip wear a smile . we take off our hat and salute he . no man , sure , could see for the first time , without emotion , the youthful inheritor of so much fame and misfortune . it seem to Mr. Esmond that the Prince be not unlike young Castlewood , whose age and figure he resemble . the Chevalier de St. George acknowledge the salute , and look at we hard . even the idler on our side of the river set up a hurrah . as for the Royal Cravat , he run to the Prince 's stirrup , kneel down and kiss his boot , and bawl and look a hundred ejaculation and blessing . the prince bid the aide - de - camp give he a piece of money ; and when the party salute we have ride away , Cravat spit upon the piece of gold by way of benediction , and swagger away , pouch his coin and twirl his honest carroty moustache . 
 the officer in whose company Esmond be , the same little captain of Handyside 's regiment , Mr. Sterne , who have propose the garden at Lille , when my Lord Mohun and Esmond have their affair , be an Irishman too , and as brave a little soul as ever wear a sword . " Bedad , " say Roger Sterne , " that long fellow speak French so beautiful that I should not   have know he be not   a foreigner , till he break out with his hulla - ballooing , and only an irish calf can bellow like that . " and Roger make another remark in his wild way , in which there be sense as well as absurdity " if that young gentleman , " say he , " would but ride over to our camp , instead of Villars 's , toss up his hat and say , ' here be I , the king , who will follow I ? ' by the Lord , Esmond , the whole army would rise and carry he home again , and beat villar , and take Paris by the way . " 
 the news of the Prince 's visit be all through the camp quickly , and score of our go down in hope to see he . Major Hamilton , whom we have talk with , send back by a trumpet several silver piece for officer with we . Mr. Esmond receive one of these ; and that medal , and a recompense not uncommon amongst Princes , be the only reward he ever have from a royal person , whom he endeavor not very long after to serve . 
 Esmond quit the army almost immediately after this , follow his general home ; and , indeed , be advise to travel in the fine weather and attempt to take no further part in the campaign . but he hear from the army , that of the many who crowd to see the Chevalier de St. George , Frank Castlewood have make himself most conspicuous : my Lord Viscount rid across the little stream bareheade to where the Prince be , and dismounting and kneeling before he to do he homage . some say that the Prince have actually knight he , but my lord deny that statement , though he acknowledge the rest of the story , and say : " from have be out of favor with Corporal John , " as he call the Duke , " before his grace warn he not to commit those folly , and smile on he cordially ever after . " 
 " and he be so kind to I , " Frank writ , " that I think I would put in a good word for Master Harry , but when I mention your name he look as black as thunder , and say he have never hear of you . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 I GO home , and HARP on the old string . 

 after quit Mons and the army , and as he be wait for a packet at Ostend , Esmond have a letter from his young kinsman Castlewood at Bruxelles , convey intelligence whereof Frank beseech he to be the bearer to London , and which cause Colonel Esmond no small anxiety . 
 the young scapegrace , be one - and - twenty year old , and be anxious to sow his " wild ote , " as he write , have marry Mademoiselle de Wertheim , daughter of Count de Wertheim , Chamberlain to the Emperor , and have a post in the Household of the Governor of the Netherlands . " P.S. , " the young gentleman write : " Clotilda be old than ME , which perhaps may be object to she : but I be so old a raik that the age make no difference , and I be DETERMINED to reform . we be marry at St. Gudule , by Father Holt . she be heart and soul for the GOOD CAUSE . and here the cry be vif - le - Roy , which my mother will JOIN IN , and Trix TOO . break this news to them gently : and tell Mr. Finch , my agent , to press the people for their rent , and send I the ryno anyhow . Clotilda sing , and play on the Spinet BEAUTIFULLY . she be a fair beauty . and if it be a son , you shall stand GODFATHER . I be go to leave the army , have have ENUF of SOLDERING ; and my Lord Duke recommend I . I shall pass the winter here : and stop at least until Clo 's lie in . I call her old CLO , but nobody else shall . she be the clever woman in all Bruxelles : understand painting , music , poetry , and perfect at COOKERY and PUDDENS . I borde with the Count , that be how I come to know she . there be four count her brother . one an Abbey three with the Prince 's army . they have a lawsuit for an immence FORTUNE : but be now in a pore WAY . break this to mother , who will take anything from you . and write , and bid Finch write AMEDIATELY . Hostel de l'Aigle Noire , Bruxelles , Flanders . " 
 so Frank have marry a roman catholic lady , and an heir be expect , and Mr. Esmond be to carry this intelligence to his mistress at London . ' twas a difficult embassy ; and the Colonel feel not a little tremor as he near the capital . 
 he reach his inn late , and send a messenger to Kensington to announce his arrival and visit the next morning . the messenger bring back news that the Court be at Windsor , and the fair beatrix absent and engage in her duty there . only Esmond 's mistress remain in her house at Kensington . she appear in court but once in the year ; beatrix be quite the mistress and ruler of the little mansion , invite the company thither , and engage in every conceivable frolic of town pleasure . whilst her mother , act as the young lady 's protectress and eld sister , pursue her own path , which be quite modest and seclude . 
 as soon as ever Esmond be dress   and he have be awake long before the town , he take a coach for Kensington , and reach it so early that he meet his dear mistress come home from morning prayer . she carry her prayer - book , never allow a footman to bear it , as everybody else do : and it be by this simple sign Esmond know what her occupation have be . he call to the coachman to stop , and jump out as she look towards he . she wear her hood as usual , and she turn quite pale when she see he . to feel that kind little hand near to his heart seem to give he strength . they be soon at the door of her ladyship 's house and within it . 
 with a sweet sad smile she take his hand and kiss it . 
 " how ill you have be : how weak you look , my dear Henry , " she say . 
 ' tis certain the Colonel do look like a ghost , except that ghost do not look very happy , ' tis say . esmond always feel so on return to she after absence , indeed whenever he look in her sweet kind face . 
 " I be come back to be nurse by my family , " say he . " if Frank have not take care of I after my wound , very likely I should have go altogether . " 
 " Poor Frank , good Frank ! " say his mother . " you will always be kind to he , my lord , " she go on . " the poor child never know he be do you a wrong . " 
 " my lord ! " cry out Colonel Esmond . " what do you mean , dear lady ? " 
 " I be no lady , " say she ; " I be Rachel Esmond , Francis Esmond 's widow , my lord . I can not bear that title . would we never have take it from he who have it now . but we do all in our power , Henry : we do all in our power ; and my lord and I that be " 
 " who tell you this tale , dear lady ? " ask the Colonel . 
 " have you not have the letter I writ you ? I writ to you at mon directly I hear it , " say Lady Esmond . 
 " and from whom ? " again ask Colonel Esmond and his mistress then tell he that on her death - bed the Dowager Countess , send for she , have present she with this dismal secret as a legacy . " ' twas very malicious of the Dowager , " Lady Esmond say , " to have have it so long , and to have keep the truth from I . " " Cousin Rachel , " she say , and Esmond 's mistress could not forbear smile as she tell the story " Cousin Rachel , " cry the Dowager , " I have send for you , as the doctor say I may go off any day in this dysentery ; and to ease my conscience of a great load that have be on it . you always have be a poor creature and unfit for great honor , and what I have to say will not , therefore , affect you so much . you must know , Cousin Rachel , that I have leave my house , plate , and furniture , three thousand pound in money , and my diamond that my late revere Saint and Sovereign , King James , present I with , to my Lord Viscount Castlewood . " 
 " to my Frank ? " say Lady Castlewood ; " I be in hope " 
 to Viscount Castlewood , my dear ; Viscount Castlewood and Baron Esmond of Shandon in the Kingdom of Ireland , Earl and Marquis of Esmond under patent of his Majesty King James the Second , confer upon my husband the late Marquis for I be Marchioness of Esmond before God and man . " 
 " and have you leave poor Harry nothing , dear marchioness ? " ask Lady Castlewood   she hath tell I the story completely since with her quiet arch way ; the most charming any woman ever have : and I set down the narrative here at length , so as to have do with it . " and have you leave poor Harry nothing ? " ask my dear lady : " for you know , Henry , " she say with her sweet smile , " I use always to pity Esau and I think I be on his side though papa try very hard to convince I the other way . " 
 " Poor Harry ! " say the old lady . " so you want something leave to poor Harry : he , he !   reach I the drop , cousin . well , then , my dear , since you want poor Harry to have a fortune , you must understand that ever since the year 1691 , a week after the battle of the Boyne , where the Prince of Orange defeat his royal sovereign and father , for which crime he be now suffer in flame   ugh ! ugh !   Henry Esmond hath be Marquis of Esmond and Earl of Castlewood in the United Kingdom , and Baron and Viscount Castlewood of Shandon in Ireland , and a Baronet and his eld son will be , by courtesy , style Earl of Castlewood he ! he ! what do you think of that , my dear ? " 
 " gracious mercy ! how long have you know this ? " cry the other lady   thinking perhaps that the old Marchioness be wander in her wit . 
 " my husband , before he be convert , be a wicked wretch , " the sick sinner continue . " when he be in the Low Countries he seduce a weaver 's daughter ; and add to his wickedness by marry she . and then he come to this country and marry I a poor girl a poor innocent young thing I say , " " though she be past forty , you know , Harry , when she marry : and as for be innocent " " well , " she go on , " I know nothing of my lord 's wickedness for three year after our marriage , and after the burial of our poor little boy I have it do over again , my dear : I have myself marry by Father Holt in Castlewood chapel , as soon as ever I hear the creature be dead and have a great illness then , arise from another sad disappointment I have , the priest come and tell I that my lord have a son before our marriage , and that the child be at nurse in England ; and I consent to let the brat be bring home , and a queer little melancholy child it be when it come . 
 " our intention be to make a priest of he : and he be breed for this , until you pervert he from it , you wicked woman . and I have again hope of give an heir to my lord , when he be call away upon the King 's business , and die fight gloriously at the Boyne water . 
 " should I be disappoint I owe your husband no love , my dear , for he have jilt I in the most scandalous way and I think there would be time to declare the little weaver 's son for the true heir . but I be carry off to prison , where your husband be so kind to I urge all his friend to obtain my release , and use all his credit in my favor that I relent towards he , especially as my director counsel I to be silent ; and that it be for the good of the King 's service that the title of our family should continue with your husband the late viscount , whereby his fidelity would be always secure to the king . and a proof of this be , that a year before your husband 's death , when he think of take a place under the Prince of Orange , Mr. Holt go to he , and tell he what the state of the matter be , and oblige he to raise a large sum for his Majesty ; and engage he in the true cause so heartily , that we be sure of his support on any day when it should be consider advisable to attack the usurper . then his sudden death come ; and there be a thought of declare the truth . but ' twa determined to be good for the King 's service to let the title still go with the young branch ; and there be no sacrifice a Castlewood would not   make for that cause , my dear . 
 " as for Colonel Esmond , he know the truth already . "   " and then , Harry , " my mistress say , ' she tell I of what have happen at my dear husband 's death - bed " . " he doth not intend to take the title , though it belong to he . but it ease my conscience that you should know the truth , my dear . and your son be lawfully Viscount Castlewood so long as his cousin doth not claim the rank . " 
 this be the substance of the Dowager 's revelation . Dean Atterbury have knowledge of it , Lady Castlewood say , and Esmond very well know how : that divine be the clergyman for whom the late lord have send on his death - bed : and when Lady Castlewood would instantly have write to her son , and convey the truth to he , the Dean 's advice be that a letter should be writ to Colonel Esmond rather ; that the matter should be submit to his decision , by which alone the rest of the family be bind to abide . 
 " and can my dear lady doubt what that will be ? " say the Colonel . 
 " it rest with you , Harry , as the head of our house . " 
 " it be settle twelve year since , by my dear lord 's bedside , " say Colonel Esmond . " the child must know nothing of this . Frank and his heir after he must bear our name . ' tis his rightfully ; I have not even a proof of that marriage of my father and mother , though my poor lord , on his death - bed , tell I that Father Holt have bring such a proof to Castlewood . I would not seek it when I be abroad . I go and look at my poor mother 's grave in her convent . what matter to she now ? no court of law on earth , upon my mere word , would deprive my Lord Viscount and set I up . I be the head of the house , dear lady ; but Frank be Viscount of Castlewood still . and rather than disturb he , I would turn monk , or disappear in America . " 
 as he speak so to his dear mistress , for whom he would have be willing to give up his life , or to make any sacrifice any day , the fond creature fling herself down on her knee before he , and kiss both his hand in an outbreak of passionate love and gratitude , such as could not but melt his heart , and make he feel very proud and thankful that God have give he the power to show his love for she , and to prove it by some little sacrifice on his own part . to be able to bestow benefit or happiness on those one love be sure the great blessing confer upon a man and what wealth or name , or gratification of ambition or vanity , could compare with the pleasure Esmond now have of be able to confer some kindness upon his good and dearest friend ? 
 " Dearest saint , " say he " purest soul , that have have so much to suffer , that have bl the poor lonely orphan with such a treasure of love . ' tis for I to kneel , not for you : ' tis for I to be thankful that I can make you happy . hath my life any other aim ? blessed be God that I can serve you ! what pleasure , think you , could all the world give I compare to that ? " 
 " do not   raise I , " she say , in a wild way , to Esmond , who would have lift she . " let I kneel let I kneel , and and worship you . " 
 before such a partial judge as Esmond 's dear mistress own herself to be , any cause which he might plead be sure to be give in his favor ; and accordingly he find little difficulty in reconcile she to the news whereof he be bearer , of her son 's marriage to a foreign lady , Papist though she be . Lady Castlewood never could be bring to think so ill of that religion as other people in England think of it : she hold that our be undoubtedly a branch of the catholic church , but that the Roman be one of the main stem on which , no doubt , many error have be graft   she be , for a woman , extraordinarily well verse in this controversy , have act , as a girl , as secretary to her father , the late dean , and write many of his sermon , under his dictation ; and if Frank have choose to marry a lady of the church of south Europe , as she would call the roman communion , there be no need why she should not welcome she as a daughter - in - law : and accordingly she write to her new daughter a very pretty , touching letter   as Esmond thought , who have cognizance of it before it go , in which the only hint of reproof be a gentle remonstrance that her son have not write to herself , to ask a fond mother 's blessing for that step which he be about take . " Castlewood know very well , " so she write to her son , " that she never deny he anything in her power to give , much less would she think of oppose a marriage that be to make his happiness , as she trust , and keep he out of wild course , which have alarm she a good deal : " and she besought he to come quickly to England , to settle down in his family house of Castlewood   " it be his family house , " say she , to Colonel Esmond , " though only his own house by your forbearance "   and to receive the accompt of her stewardship during his ten year ' minority . by care and frugality , she have get the estate into a well condition than ever it have be since the parliamentary war ; and my lord be now master of a pretty , small income , not encumber of debt , as it have be , during his father 's ruinous time . " but in save my son 's fortune , " say she , " I fear I have lose a great part of my hold on he . " and , indeed , this be the case : her ladyship 's daughter complain that their mother do all for Frank , and nothing for she ; and Frank himself be dissatisfied at the narrow , simple way of his mother 's living at Walcote , where he have be bring up more like a poor parson 's son than a young nobleman that be to make a figure in the world . ' twas this mistake in his early training , very likely , that set he so eager upon pleasure when he have it in his power ; nor be he the first lad that have be spoil by the over - careful fondness of woman . no training be so useful for child , great or small , as the company of their better in rank or natural part ; in whose society they lose the overweening sense of their own importance , which stay - at - home people very commonly learn . 
 but , as a prodigal that be send in a schedule of his debt to his friend , never put all down , and , you may be sure , the rogue keep back some immense swingeing bill , that he do not   dare to own ; so the poor Frank have a very heavy piece of news to break to his mother , and which he have not   the courage to introduce into his first confession . some misgiving Esmond might have , upon receive Frank 's letter , and know into what hand the boy have fall ; but whatever these misgiving be , he keep they to himself , not care to trouble his mistress with any fear that might be groundless . 
 however , the next mail which come from Bruxelles , after Frank have receive his mother 's letter there , bring back a joint composition from himself and his wife , who could spell no well than her young scapegrace of a husband , full of expression of thank , love , and duty to the Dowager Viscountess , as my poor lady now be style ; and along with this letter   which be read in a family council , namely , the Viscountess , Mistress Beatrix , and the writer of this memoir , and which be pronounce to be vulgar by the maid of honor , and feel to be so by the other two , there come a private letter for Colonel Esmond from poor Frank , with another dismal commission for the Colonel to execute , at his good opportunity ; and this be to announce that Frank have see fit , " by the exhortation of Mr. Holt , the influence of his Clotilda , and the blessing of heaven and the saint , " say my lord , demurely , " to change his religion , and be receive into the bosom of that church of which his sovereign , many of his family , and the great part of the civilized world , be member . " and his lordship add a postscript , of which Esmond know the inspire genius very well , for it have the genuine twang of the Seminary , and be quite unlike poor Frank 's ordinary style of writing and thinking ; in which he remind Colonel Esmond that he too be , by birth , of that church ; and that his mother and sister should have his lordship 's prayer to the saint   an inestimable benefit , truly !   for their conversion . 
 if Esmond have want to keep this secret , he could not ; for a day or two after receive this letter , a notice from Bruxelles appear in the Post - boy and other print , announce that " a young irish lord , the Viscount C - stlew d , just come to his majority , and who have serve the last campaign with great credit , as aide - de - camp to his grace the Duke of Marlborough , have declare for the popish religion at Bruxelles , and have walk in a procession barefoot , with a wax - taper in his hand . " the notorious Mr. Holt , who have be employ as a Jacobite agent during the last reign , and many time pardon by King William , have be , the Post - Boy say , the agent of this conversion . 
 the Lady Castlewood be as much cast down by this news as Miss Beatrix be indignant at it . " so , " say she , " Castlewood be no long a home for we , mother . Frank 's foreign wife will bring her confessor , and there will be frog for dinner ; and all Tusher 's and my grandfather 's sermon be fling away upon my brother . I use to tell you that you kill he with the catechism , and that he would turn wicked as soon as he break from his mammy 's lead - string . oh , mother , you would not believe that the young scapegrace be play you trick , and that sneak of a Tusher be not a fit guide for he . oh , those parson , I hate them all ! " say Mistress Beatrix , clap her hand together ; " yes , whether they wear cassock and buckle , or beard and bare foot . there be a horrid irish wretch who never miss a Sunday at Court , and who pay I compliment there , the horrible man ; and if you want to know what parson be , you should see his behavior , and hear he talk of his own cloth . they be all the same , whether they be bishop , or bonze , or indian fakir . they try to domineer , and they frighten we with kingdom come ; and they wear a sanctify air in public , and expect we to go down on our knee and ask their blessing ; and they intrigue , and they grasp , and they backbite , and they slander bad than the bad courtier or the wicked old woman . I hear this Mr. Swift sneer at my Lord Duke of Marlborough 's courage the other day . he ! that Teague from Dublin ! because his grace be not in favor , dare to say this of he ; and he say this that it may get to her Majesty 's ear , and to coax and wheedle Mrs. Masham . they say the Elector of Hanover have a dozen of mistress in his court at Herrenhausen , and if he come to be king over we , I wager that the bishop and Mr. Swift , that want to be one , will coax and wheedle they . oh , those priest and their grave air ! I be sick of their square toe and their rustle cassock . I should like to go to a country where there be not one , or turn Quaker , and get rid of them ; and I would , only the dress be not become , and I have   much too pretty a figure to hide it . have not   I , cousin ? " and here she glance at her person and the look - glass , which tell she rightly that a more beautiful shape and face never be see . 
 " I make that onslaught on the priest , " say Miss Beatrix , afterwards , " in order to divert my poor dear mother 's anguish about Frank . Frank be as vain as a girl , cousin . talk of we girl be vain , what be we to you ? it be easy to see that the first woman who choose would make a fool of he , or the first robe I count a priest and a woman all the same . we be always cabal ; we be not answerable for the fib we tell ; we be always cajole and coax , or threatening ; and we be always make mischief , Colonel Esmond mark my word for that , who know the world , sir , and have to make my way in it . I see as well as possible how Frank 's marriage hath be manage . the Count , our papa - in - law , be always away at the coffee - house . the Countess , our mother , be always in the kitchen look after the dinner . the Countess , our sister , be at the spinet . when my lord come to say he be go on the campaign , the lovely Clotilda burst into tear , and faint so ; he catch she in his arm no , sir , keep your distance , cousin , if you please she cry on his shoulder , and he say , ' oh , my divine , my adore , my beloved Clotilda , be you sorry to part with I ? ' ' oh , my Francisco , ' say she , ' oh my lord ! ' and at this very instant mamma and a couple of young brother , with moustache and long rapier , come in from the kitchen , where they have be eat bread and onion . mark my word , you will have all this woman 's relation at Castlewood three month after she have arrive there . the old count and countess , and the young count and all the little countesse her sister . count ! every one of these wretch say he be a count . Guiscard , that stab Mr. Harvey , say he be a count ; and I believe he be a barber . all frenchman be barber Fiddledee ! do not   contradict I or else dancing - masters , or else priest . " and so she rattle on . 
 " who be it teach you to dance , Cousin Beatrix ? " say the Colonel . 
 she laugh out the air of a minuet , and sweep a low curtsy , come up to the recover with the prettiest little foot in the world point out . her mother come in as she be in this attitude ; my lady have be in her closet , have take poor Frank 's conversion in a very serious way ; the madcap girl run up to her mother , put her arm round her waist , kiss she , try to make her dance , and say : " do not   be silly , you kind little mamma , and cry about Frank turn Papist . what a figure he must be , with a white sheet and a candle , walk in a procession barefoot ! " and she kick off her little slipper   the wonderfull little shoe with wonderful tall red heel : Esmond pounce upon one as it fall close beside he , and she put on the droll little moue , and march up and down the room hold Esmond 's cane by way of taper . serious as her mood be , Lady Castlewood could not refrain from laugh ; and as for Esmond he look on with that delight with which the sight of this fair creature always inspire he : never have he see any woman so arch , so brilliant , and so beautiful . 
 have finish her march , she put out her foot for her slipper . the Colonel kneel down : " if you will be Pope I will turn Papist , " say he ; and her Holiness give he gracious leave to kiss the little stockinged foot before he put the slipper on . 
 Mamma 's foot begin to pat on the floor during this operation , and beatrix , whose bright eye nothing escape , see that little mark of impatience . she run up and embrace her mother , with her usual cry of , " oh , you silly little mamma : your foot be quite as pretty as mine , " say she : " they be , cousin , though she hide them ; but the shoemaker will tell you that he make for both off the same last . " 
 " you be tall than I be , dearest , " say her mother , blush over her whole sweet face " and and it be your hand , my dear , and not your foot he want you to give he ; " and she say it with a hysteric laugh , that have more of tear than laughter in it ; lay her head on her daughter 's fair shoulder , and hide it there . they make a very pretty picture together , and look like a pair of sister the sweet simple matron seem young than her year , and her daughter , if not old , yet somehow , from a commanding manner and grace which she possess above most woman , her mother 's superior and protectress . 
 " but oh ! " cry my mistress , recover herself after this scene , and return to her usual sad tone , " ' tis a shame that we should laugh and be make merry on a day when we ought to be down on our knee and ask pardon . " 
 " ask pardon for what ? " say saucy Mrs. Beatrix " because Frank take it into his head to fast on Fridays and worship image ? you know if you have be bear a Papist , mother , a Papist you would have remain to the end of your day . ' tis the religion of the King and of some of the good quality . for my part , I be no enemy to it , and think Queen Bess be not a penny well than Queen Mary . " 
 " Hush , beatrix ! do not jest with sacred thing , and remember of what parentage you come , " cry my lady . beatrix be order her ribbon , and adjust her tucker , and perform a dozen provokingly pretty ceremony , before the glass . the girl be no hypocrite at least . she never at that time could be bring to think but of the world and her beauty ; and seem to have no more sense of devotion than some people have of music , that can not distinguish one air from another . esmond see this fault in she , as he see many other a bad wife would beatrix Esmond make , he think , for any man under the degree of a Prince . she be bear to shine in great assembly , and to adorn palace , and to command everywhere to conduct an intrigue of politic , or to glitter in a queen 's train . but to sit at a homely table , and mend the stocking of a poor man 's child ! that be no fitting duty for she , or at least one that she would not   have break her heart in try to do . she be a princess , though she have scarce a shilling to her fortune ; and one of her subject the most abject and devoted wretch , sure , that ever drivel at a woman 's knee be this unlucky gentleman ; who bind his good sense , and reason , and independence , hand and foot , and submit they to she . 
 and who do not know how ruthlessly woman will tyrannize when they be let to domineer ? and who do not know how useless advice be ? I could give good counsel to my descendant , but I know they will follow their own way , for all their grandfather 's sermon . a man get his own experience about woman , and will take nobody 's hearsay ; nor , indeed , be the young fellow worth a fig that would . ' tis I that be in love with my mistress , not my old grandmother that counsel I : ' tis I that have fix the value of the thing I would have , and know the price I would pay for it . it may be worthless to you , but ' tis all my life to I . have Esmond possess the Great Mogul 's crown and all his diamond , or all the Duke of Marlborough 's money , or all the ingot sink at Vigo , he would have give they all for this woman . a fool he be , if you will ; but so be a sovereign a fool , that will give half a principality for a little crystal as big as a pigeon 's egg , and call a diamond : so be a wealthy nobleman a fool , that will face danger or death , and spend half his life , and all his tranquillity , cabal for a blue ribbon ; so be a dutch merchant a fool , that hath be know to pay ten thousand crown for a tulip . there be some particular prize we all of we value , and that every man of spirit will venture his life for . with this , it may be to achieve a great reputation for learn ; with that , to be a man of fashion , and the admiration of the town ; with another , to consummate a great work of art or poetry , and go to immortality that way ; and with another , for a certain time of his life , the sole object and aim be a woman . 
 Whilst Esmond be under the domination of this passion , he remember many a talk he have with his intimate , who use to rally our Knight of the Rueful Countenance at his devotion , whereof he make no disguise , to beatrix ; and it be with reply such as the above he meet his friend ' satire . " grant , I be a fool , " say he , " and no well than you ; but you be no well than I. you have your folly you labor for ; give I the charity of mine . what flattery do you , Mr. St. John , stoop to whisper in the ear of a queen 's favorite ? what night of labor doth not the lazy man in the world endure , forego his bottle , and his boon companion , forego Lais , in whose lap he would like to be yawn , that he may prepare a speech full of lie , to cajole three hundred stupid country - gentleman in the House of Commons , and get the hiccupping cheer of the October Club ! what day will you spend in your jolting chariot . "   Mr. Esmond often ride to Windsor , and especially , of later day , with the secretary .   " what hour will you pass on your gouty foot and how humbly will you kneel down to present a despatch you , the proud man in the world , that have not kneel to God since you be a boy , and in that posture whisper , flatter , adore almost , a stupid woman , that be often boozy with too much meat and drink , when Mr. Secretary go for his audience ! if my pursuit be vanity , sure yours be too . " and then the Secretary , would fly out in such a rich flow of eloquence , as this pen can not pretend to recall ; advocate his scheme of ambition , show the great good he would do for his country when he be the undisputed chief of it ; back his opinion with a score of pat sentence from greek and roman authority   of which kind of learn he make rather an ostentatious display , and scornfully vaunt the very art and meanness by which fool be to be make to follow he , opponent to be bribe or silence , doubter convert , and enemy overawe . 
 " I be diogene , " say Esmond , laugh , " that be take up for a ride in Alexander 's chariot . I have no desire to vanquish Darius or to tame Bucephalus . I do not want what you want , a great name or a high place : to have they would bring I no pleasure . but my moderation be taste , not virtue ; and I know that what I do want be as vain as that which you long after . do not grudge I my vanity , if I allow your ; or rather , let we laugh at both indifferently , and at ourselves , and at each other . " 
 " if your charmer hold out , " say St. John , " at this rate she may keep you twenty year besiege she , and surrender by the time you be seventy , and she be old enough to be a grandmother . I do not say the pursuit of a particular woman be not as pleasant a pastime as any other kind of hunting , " he add ; " only , for my part , I find the game will not   run long enough . they knock under too soon that be the fault I find with them . " 
 " the game which you pursue be in the habit of be catch , and use to be pull down , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " but Dulcinea del Toboso be peerless , eh ? " say the other . " well , honest Harry , go and attack windmill perhaps thou art not more mad than other people , " St. John add , with a sigh . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 a paper out of the " SPECTATOR . " 

 Doth any young gentleman of my progeny , who may read his old grandfather 's paper , chance to be presently suffer under the passion of Love ? there be a humiliating cure , but one that be easy and almost specific for the malady which be , to try an alibi . esmond go away from his mistress and be cure a half - dozen time ; he come back to her side , and instantly fall ill again of the fever . he vow that he could leave she and think no more of she , and so he could pretty well , at least , succeed in quell that rage and longing he have whenever he be with she ; but as soon as he return he be as bad as ever again . truly a ludicrous and pitiable object , at least exhaust everybody 's pity but his dear mistress 's , Lady Castlewood 's , in whose tender breast he repose all his dreary confession , and who never tired of hear he and plead for he . 
 sometimes Esmond would think there be hope . then again he would be plague with despair , at some impertinence or coquetry of his mistress . for day they would be like brother and sister , or the dear friend she , simple , fond , and charming he , happy beyond measure at her good behavior . but this would all vanish on a sudden . either he would be too pressing , and hint his love , when she would rebuff he instantly , and give his vanity a box on the ear ; or he would be jealous , and with perfect good reason , of some new admirer that have spring up , or some rich young gentleman newly arrive in the town , that this incorrigible flirt would set her net and bait to draw in . if Esmond remonstrate , the little rebel would say " who be you ? I shall go my own way , sirrah , and that way be towards a husband , and I do not   want you on the way . I be for your better , Colonel , for your better : do you hear that ? you might do if you have an estate and be young ; only eight year old than I , you say ! pish , you be a hundred year old . you be an old , old Graveairs , and I should make you miserable , that would be the only comfort I should have in marry you . but you have not money enough to keep a cat decently after you have pay your man his wage , and your landlady her bill . do you think I be go to live in a lodging , and turn the mutton at a string whilst your honor nurse the baby ? Fiddlestick , and why do you not get this nonsense knock out of your head when you be in the war ? you be come back more dismal and dreary than ever . you and mamma be fit for each other . you might be Darby and Joan , and play cribbage to the end of your life . " 
 " at least you own to your worldliness , my poor Trix , " say her mother . 
 " worldliness . oh , my pretty lady ! do you think that I be a child in the nursery , and to be frighten by Bogey ! worldliness , to be sure ; and pray , madam , where be the harm of wish to be comfortable ? when you be go , you dearest old woman , or when I be tired of you and have run away from you , where shall I go ? shall I go and be head nurse to my popish sister - in - law , take the child their physic , and whip them , and put them to bed when they be naughty ? shall I be Castlewood 's upper servant , and perhaps marry Tom Tusher ? merci ! I have be long enough Frank 's humble servant . why be I not a man ? I have ten time his brain , and have I wear the well , do not   let your ladyship be frightened have I wear a sword and periwig instead of this mantle and commode to which nature have condemn I   though ' tis a pretty stuff , too Cousin Esmond ! you will go to the Exchange to - morrow , and get the exact counterpart of this ribbon , sir ; do you hear ?   I would have make our name talk about . so would Graveairs here have make something out of our name if he have represent it . my Lord Graveairs would have do very well . yes , you have a very pretty way , and would have make a very decent , grave speaker . " and here she begin to imitate Esmond 's way of carry himself and speak to his face , and so ludicrously that his mistress burst out a - laugh , and even he himself could see there be some likeness in the fantastical malicious caricature . 
 " yes , " say she , " I solemnly vow , own , and confess , that I want a good husband . where be the harm of one ? my face be my fortune . who will come ? buy , buy , buy ! I can not toil , neither can I spin , but I can play twenty - three game on the card . I can dance the last dance , I can hunt the stag , and I think I could shoot fly . I can talk as wicked as any woman of my year , and know enough story to amuse a sulky husband for at least one thousand and one night . I have a pretty taste for dress , diamond , gambling , and old China . I love sugar - plum , Malines lace   that you bring I , cousin , be very pretty , the opera , and everything that be useless and costly . I have get a monkey and a little black boy Pompey , sir , go and give a dish of chocolate to Colonel Graveairs , and a parrot and a spaniel , and I must have a husband . Cupid , you hear ? " 
 " Iss , Missis ! " say Pompey , a little grinning negro Lord Peterborrow give she , with a bird of Paradise in his turbant , and a collar with his mistress 's name on it . 
 " Iss , Missis ! " say beatrix , imitate the child . " and if husband not come , Pompey must go fetch one . " 
 and Pompey go away grin with his chocolate tray as Miss Beatrix run up to her mother and end her sally of mischief in her common way , with a kiss no wonder that upon pay such a penalty her fond judge pardon she . 
 when Mr. Esmond come home , his health be still shatter ; and he take a lodging near to his mistress , at Kensington , glad enough to be serve by they , and to see they day after day . he be enable to see a little company and of the sort he like well . Mr. Steele and Mr. Addison both do he the honor to visit he ; and drink many a glass of good claret at his lodging , whilst their entertainer , through his wound , be keep to diet drink and gruel . these gentleman be Whigs , and great admirer of my Lord Duke of Marlborough ; and Esmond be entirely of the other party . but their different view of politic do not prevent the gentleman from agree in private , nor from allow , on one evening when Esmond 's kind old patron , Lieutenant - General Webb , with a stick and a crutch , hobble up to the Colonel 's lodging   which be prettily situate at Knightsbridge , between London and Kensington , and look over the Gardens , that the Lieutenant - General be a noble and gallant soldier and even that he have be hardly use in the Wynendael affair . he take his revenge in talk , that must be confess ; and if Mr. Addison have have a mind to write a poem about Wynendael , he might have hear from the commander 's own lip the story a hundred time over . 
 Mr. Esmond , force to be quiet , betook himself to literature for a relaxation , and compose his comedy , whereof the prompter 's copy lieth in my walnut escritoire , seal up and docket , " the Faithful Fool , a Comedy , as it be perform by her Majesty 's servant . " ' twas a very sentimental piece ; and Mr. Steele , who have more of that kind of sentiment than Mr. Addison , admire it , whilst the other rather sneered at the performance ; though he own that , here and there , it contain some pretty stroke . he be bring out his own play of " Cato " at the time , the blaze of which quite extinguish Esmond 's farthe candle ; and his name be never put to the piece , which be print as by a Person of Quality . only nine copy be sell , though Mr. Dennis , the great critic , praise it , and say ' twas a work of great merit ; and Colonel Esmond have the whole impression burn one day in a rage , by Jack Lockwood , his man . 
 all this comedy be full of bitter satiric stroke against a certain young lady . the plot of the piece be quite a new one . a young woman be represent with a great number of suitor , select a pert fribble of a peer , in place of the hero   but ill - act , I think , by Mr. Wilks , the Faithful Fool ,   who persist in admire she . in the fifth act , Teraminta be make to discover the merit of Eugenio   the F. F. , and to feel a partiality for he too late ; for he announce that he have bestow his hand and estate upon Rosaria , a country lass , endow with every virtue . but it must be own that the audience yawn through the play ; and that it perish on the third night , with only half a dozen person to behold its agony . esmond and his two mistress come to the first night , and Miss Beatrix fall asleep ; whilst her mother , who have not be to a play since King James the Second 's time , think the piece , though not brilliant , have a very pretty moral . 
 Mr. Esmond dabble in letter , and write a deal of prose and verse at this time of leisure . when displease with the conduct of Miss Beatrix , he would compose a satire , in which he relieve his mind . when smart under the faithlessness of woman , he dash off a copy of verse , in which he hold the whole sex up to scorn . one day , in one of these mood , he make a little joke , in which   swear he to secrecy   he get his friend Dick Steele to help he ; and , compose a paper , he have it print exactly like Steele 's paper , and by his printer , and lay on his mistress 's breakfast - table the follow 
  " SPECTATOR . 

  " no . 341 . " Tuesday , April 1 , 1712 . 

  Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur . HORACE . 
  thyself the morain of the fable see . CREECH . 
 " Jocasta be know as a woman of learning and fashion , and as one of the most amiable person of this court and country . she be at home two morning of the week , and all the wit and a few of the beauty of London flock to her assembly . when she go abroad to Tunbridge or the Bath , a retinue of adorer rid the journey with she ; and besides the London beaux , she have a crowd of admirer at the Wells , the polite amongst the native of Sussex and Somerset press round her tea - table , and be anxious for a nod from her chair . Jocasta 's acquaintance be thus very numerous . indeed , ' tis one smart writer 's work to keep her visit - book a strong footman be engage to carry it ; and it would require a much strong head even than Jocasta 's own to remember the name of all her dear friend . 
 " either at Epsom Wells or at Tunbridge   for of this important matter Jocasta can not be certain   it be her ladyship 's fortune to become acquainted with a young gentleman , whose conversation be so sprightly , and manner amiable , that she invite the agreeable young spark to visit she if ever he come to London , where her house in Spring Garden should be open to he . Charming as he be , and without any manner of doubt a pretty fellow , Jocasta hath such a regiment of the like continually march round her standard , that ' tis no wonder her attention be distract amongst they . and so , though this gentleman make a considerable impression upon she , and touch her heart for at least three - and - twenty minute , it must be own that she have forget his name . he be a dark man , and may be eight - and - twenty year old . his dress be sober , though of rich material . he have a mole on his forehead over his left eye ; have a blue ribbon to his cane and sword , and wear his own hair . 
 " Jocasta be much flatter by behold her admirer   for that everybody admire who see she be a point which she never can for a moment doubt   in the next pew to she at St. James 's Church last Sunday ; and the manner in which he appear to go to sleep during the sermon though from under his fringed eyelid it be evident he be cast glance of respectful rapture towards Jocasta deeply move and interested she . on come out of church , he find his way to her chair , and make she an elegant bow as she step into it . she see he at Court afterwards , where he carry himself with a most distinguished air , though none of her acquaintance know his name ; and the next night he be at the play , where her ladyship be pleased to acknowledge he from the side - box . 
 " during the whole of the comedy she rack her brain so to remember his name that she do not hear a word of the piece : and have the happiness to meet he once more in the lobby of the playhouse , she go up to he in a flutter , and bid he remember that she keep two night in the week , and that she long to see he at Spring Garden . 
 " he appear on Tuesday , in a rich suit , show a very fine taste both in the tailor and wearer ; and though a knot of we be gather round the charming Jocasta , fellow who pretend to know every face upon the town , not one could tell the gentleman 's name in reply to Jocasta 's eager inquiry , fling to the right and leave of she as he advance up the room with a bow that would become a duke . 
 " Jocasta acknowledge this salute with one of those smile and curtsy of which that lady hath the secret . she curtsy with a languish air , as if to say , ' you be come at last . I have be pin for you : ' and then she finish her victim with a kill look , which declare : ' o philander ! I have no eye but for you . ' Camilla hath as good a curtsy perhaps , and Thalestris much such another look ; but the glance and the curtsy together belong to Jocasta of all the english beauty alone . 
 " ' welcome to London , sir , ' say she . ' one can see you be from the country by your look . ' she would have say ' Epsom , ' or ' Tunbridge , ' have she remember rightly at which place she have meet the strange ; but , alas ! she have forget . 
 " the gentleman say , ' he have be in town but three day ; and one of his reason for come hither be to have the honor of pay his court to Jocasta . ' 
 " she say , ' the water have agree with she but indifferently . ' 
 " ' the water be for the sick , ' the gentleman say : ' the young and beautiful come but to make they sparkle . and as the clergyman read the service on Sunday , ' he add , ' your ladyship remind I of the angel that visit the pool . ' a murmur of approbation salute this sally . Manilio , who be a wit when he be not at card , be in such a rage that he revoke when he hear it . 
 " Jocasta be an angel visit the water ; but at which of the Bethesdas ? she be puzzle more and more ; and , as her way always be , look the more innocent and simple , the more artful her intention be . 
 " ' we be discourse , ' say she , ' about spelling of name and word when you come . why should we say goold and write gold , and call china chayney , and Cavendish Candish , and Cholmondeley Chumley ? if we call Pulteney Poltney , why should not   we call poultry pultry and ' 
 " ' such an enchantress as your ladyship , ' say he , ' be mistress of all sort of spell . ' but this be Dr. Swift 's pun , and we all know it . 
 " ' and and how do you spell your name ? ' say she , come to the point at length ; for this sprightly conversation have last much long than be here set down , and be carry on through at least three dish of tea . 
 " ' oh , madam , ' say he , ' I spell my name with the Y. ' and lay down his dish , my gentleman make another elegant bow , and be go in a moment . 
 " Jocasta hath have no sleep since this mortification , and the stranger 's disappearance . if balk in anything , she be sure to lose her health and temper ; and we , her servant , suffer , as usual , during the angry fit of our Queen . can you help we , Mr. Spectator , who know everything , to read this riddle for she , and set at rest all our mind ? we find in her list , Mr. Berty , Mr. Smith , Mr. Pike , Mr. Tyler who may be Mr. Bertie , Mr. Smyth , Mr. Pyke , Mr. Tiler , for what we know . she hath turn away the clerk of her visit - book , a poor fellow with a great family of child . read I this riddle , good Mr. Shortface , and oblige your admirer oedipus . " 
 " the TRUMPET COFFEE - HOUSE , WHITEHALL . 
 " MR . SPECTATOR , I be a gentleman but little acquainted with the town , though I have have a university education , and pass some year serve my country abroad , where my name be well know than in the coffee - house and St. James 's . 
 " two year since my uncle die , leave I a pretty estate in the county of Kent ; and be at Tunbridge Wells last summer , after my mourning be over , and on the look - out , if truth must be tell , for some young lady who would share with I the solitude of my great kentish house , and be kind to my tenantry   for whom a woman can do a great deal more good than the well - intentione man can , I be greatly fascinate by a young lady of London , who be the toast of all the company at the Wells . every one know Saccharissa 's beauty ; and I think , Mr. Spectator , no one well than herself . 
 " my table - book inform I that I dance no less than seven - and - twenty set with she at the Assembly . I treat she to the fiddle twice . I be admit on several day to her lodging , and receive by she with a great deal of distinction , and , for a time , be entirely her slave . it be only when I find , from common talk of the company at the Wells , and from narrowly watch one , who I once think of ask the most sacred question a man can put to a woman , that I become aware how unfit she be to be a country gentleman 's wife ; and that this fair creature be but a heartless worldly jilt , play with affection that she never mean to return , and , indeed , incapable of return they . ' tis admiration such woman want , not love that touch they ; and I can conceive , in her old age , no more wretched creature than this lady will be , when her beauty hath desert she , when her admirer have leave she , and she hath neither friendship nor religion to console she . 
 " business call I to London , I go to St. James 's church last Sunday , and there opposite I sit my beauty of the Wells . her behavior during the whole service be so pert , languish , and absurd ; she flirt her fan , and ogle and eye I in a manner so indecent , that I be oblige to shut my eye , so as actually not to see she , and whenever I open they beheld hers   and very bright they be   still star at I . I fall in with she afterwards at Court , and at the playhouse ; and here nothing would satisfy she but she must elbow through the crowd and speak to I , and invite I to the assembly , which she hold at her house , not very far from Ch - r - ng Cr - ss . 
 " have make she a promise to attend , of course I keep my promise ; and find the young widow in the midst of a half - dozen of card table , and a crowd of wit and admirer . I make the good bow I could , and advance towards she ; and see by a peculiar puzzled look in her face , though she try to hide her perplexity , that she have forget even my name . 
 " her talk , artful as it be , convince I that I have guess aright . she turn the conversation most ridiculously upon the spelling of name and word ; and I reply with as ridiculous fulsome compliment as I could pay she : indeed , one in which I compare she to an angel visit the sick well , go a little too far ; nor should I have employ it , but that the allusion come from the Second Lesson last Sunday , which we both have hear , and I be press to answer she . 
 " then she come to the question , which I know be await I , and ask how I spelt my name ? ' Madam , ' say I , turn on my heel , ' I spell it with a Y. ' and so I leave she , wonder at the light - heartedness of the town - people , who forget and make friend so easily , and resolve to look elsewhere for a partner for your constant reader , 
 " CYMON WYLDOATS . " 
 " you know my real name , Mr. Spectator , in which there be no such a letter as HUPSILON . but if the lady , whom I have call Saccharissa , wonder that I appear no more at the tea - table , she be hereby respectfully inform the reason Y. " 
 the above be a parable , whereof the writer will now expound the meaning . Jocasta be no other than Miss Esmond , Maid of Honor to her Majesty . she have tell Mr. Esmond this little story of have meet a gentleman somewhere , and forget his name , when the gentleman , with no such malicious intention as those of " Cymon " in the above fable , make the answer simply as above ; and we all laugh to think how little mistress Jocasta - Beatrix have profit by her artifice and precaution . 
 as for Cymon , he be intend to represent yours and her very humble servant , the writer of the apologue and of this story , which we have print on a " Spectator " paper at Mr. Steele 's office , exactly as those famous journal be print , and which be lay on the table at breakfast in place of the real newspaper . Mistress Jocasta , who have plenty of wit , could not live without her Spectator to her tea ; and this sham Spectator be intend to convey to the young woman that she herself be a flirt , and that Cymon be a gentleman of honor and resolution , see all her fault , and determine to break the chain once and for ever . 
 for though enough hath be say about this love - business already enough , at least , to prove to the writer 's heir what a silly fond fool their old grandfather be , who would like they to consider he as a very wise old gentleman ; yet not near all have be tell concern this matter , which , if it be allow to take in Esmond 's journal the space it occupy in his time , would weary his kinsman and woman of a hundred year ' time beyond all endurance ; and form such a diary of folly and drivel , rapture and rage , as no man of ordinary vanity would like to leave behind he . 
 the truth be , that , whether she laugh at he or encourage he ; whether she smile or be cold , and turn her smile on another ; worldly and ambitious , as he know she to be ; hard and careless , as she seem to grow with her court life , and a hundred admirer that come to she and leave she ; Esmond , do what he would , never could get beatrix out of his mind ; think of she constantly at home or away . if he read his name in a Gazette , or escape the shot of a cannon - ball or a great danger in the campaign , as have happen to he more than once , the instant thought after the honor achieve or the danger avoid , be , " what will she say of it ? " " will this distinction or the idea of this peril elate she or touch she , so as to be well inclined towards I ? " he could no more help this passionate fidelity of temper than he could help the eye he see with one or the other seem a part of his nature ; and know every one of her fault as well as the keenest of her detractor , and the folly of an attachment to such a woman , of which the fruition could never bring he happiness for above a week , there be yet a charm about this Circe from which the poor deluded gentleman could not free himself ; and for a much long period than Ulysses   another middle - aged officer , who have travel much , and be in the foreign war ,   Esmond feel himself enthral and besotte by the wile of this enchantress . quit she ! he could no more quit she , as the Cymon of this story be make to quit his false one , than he could lose his consciousness of yesterday . she have but to raise her finger , and he would come back from ever so far ; she have but to say I have discard such and such an adorer , and the poor infatuate wretch would be sure to come and roder about her mother 's house , willing to be put on the rank of suitor , though he know he might be cast off the next week . if he be like Ulysses in his folly , at least she be in so far like Penelope that she have a crowd of suitor , and undo day after day and night after night the handiwork of fascination and the web of coquetry with which she be will not to allure and entertain they . 
 part of her coquetry may have come from her position about the Court , where the beautiful maid of honor be the light about which a thousand beaux come and flutter ; where she be sure to have a ring of admirer round she , crowd to listen to her repartee as much as to admire her beauty ; and where she speak and listen to much free talk , such as one never would have think the lip or ear of Rachel Castlewood 's daughter would have utter or hear . when in wait at Windsor or Hampton , the Court lady and gentleman would be make rid party together ; Mrs. Beatrix in a horseman 's coat and hat , the foremost after the stag - hound and over the park fence , a crowd of young fellow at her heel . if the english country lady at this time be the most pure and modest of any lady in the world the english town and court lady permit themselves word and behavior that be neither modest nor pure ; and claim , some of they , a freedom which those who love that sex most would never wish to grant they . the gentleman of my family that follow after I   for I do not   encourage the lady to pursue any such study , may read in the work of Mr. Congreve , and Dr. Swift and other , what be the conversation and what the habit of our time . 
 the most beautiful woman in England in 1712 , when Esmond return to this country , a lady of high birth , and though of no fortune to be sure , with a thousand fascination of wit and manner , Beatrix Esmond be now six - and - twenty year old , and Beatrix Esmond still . of her hundred adorer she have not choose one for a husband ; and those who have ask have be jilt by she ; and more still have leave she . a succession of near ten year ' crop of beauty have come up since her time , and have be reap by proper HUSBANDmen , if we may make an agricultural simile , and have be house comfortably long ago . her own contemporary be sober mother by this time ; girl with not a tithe of her charm , or her wit , have make good match , and now claim precedence over the spinster who but lately have deride and outshone they . the young beauty be begin to look down on Beatrix as an old maid , and sneer , and call she one of Charles II . 's lady , and ask whether her portrait be not in the Hampton Court Gallery ? but still she reign , at least in one man 's opinion , superior over all the little miss that be the toast of the young lad ; and in Esmond 's eye be ever perfectly lovely and young . 
 who know how many be nearly make happy by possess she , or , rather , how many be fortunate in escape this siren ? ' tis a marvel to think that her mother be the pure and simple woman in the whole world , and that this girl should have be bear from she . I be inclined to fancy , my mistress , who never say a harsh word to her child   and but twice or thrice only to one person , must have be too fond and press with the maternal authority ; for her son and her daughter both revolt early ; nor after their first flight from the nest could they ever be bring back quite to the fond mother 's bosom . Lady Castlewood , and perhaps it be as well , know little of her daughter 's life and real thought . how be she to apprehend what pass in Queen 's ante - chamber and at Court table ? Mrs. Beatrix assert her own authority so resolutely that her mother quickly give in . the maid of honor have her own equipage ; go from home and come back at her own will : her mother be alike powerless to resist she or to lead she , or to command or to persuade she . 
 she have be engage once , twice , thrice , to be marry , Esmond believe . when he quit home , it hath be say , she be promise to my Lord Ashburnham , and now , on his return , behold his lordship be just married to Lady Mary Butler , the Duke of Ormonde 's daughter , and his fine house , and twelve thousand a year of fortune , for which Miss Beatrix have rather covet he , be out of her power . to her Esmond could say nothing in regard to the breaking of this match ; and , ask his mistress about it , all Lady Castlewood answer be : " do not speak to I about it , Harry . I can not tell you how or why they part , and I fear to inquire . I have tell you before , that with all her kindness , and wit , and generosity , and that sort of splendor of nature she have , I can say but little good of poor beatrix , and look with dread at the marriage she will form . her mind be fix on ambition only , and make a great figure ; and , this achieve , she will tire of it as she do of everything . Heaven help her husband , whoever he shall be ! my Lord Ashburnham be a most excellent young man , gentle and yet manly , of very good part , so they tell I , and as my little conversation would enable I to judge : and a kind temper kind and endure I be sure he must have be , from all that he have to endure . but he quit she at last , from some crown piece of caprice or tyranny of her ; and now he have marry a young woman that will make he a thousand time happy than my poor girl ever could . " 
 the rupture , whatever its cause be ,   I hear the scandal , but indeed shall not take pain to repeat at length in this diary the trumpery coffee - house story ,   cause a good deal of low talk ; and Mr. Esmond be present at my lord 's appearance at the birthday with his bride , over whom the revenge that beatrix take be to look so imperial and lovely that the modest downcast young lady could not appear beside she , and Lord Ashburnham , who have his reason for wish to avoid she , slunk away quite shamefaced , and very early . this time his grace the Duke of Hamilton , whom Esmond have see about she before , be constant at Miss Beatrix 's side : he be one of the most splendid gentleman of Europe , accomplish by book , by travel , by long command of the good company , distinguish as a statesman , have be ambassador in King Williamn 's time , and a noble speaker in the Scots ' Parliament , where he have lead the party that be against the Union , and though now five or six and forty year of age , a gentleman so high in stature , accomplish in wit , and favor in person , that he might pretend to the hand of any Princess in Europe . 
 " should you like the Duke for a cousin ? " say Mr. Secretary St. John , whisper to Colonel Esmond in French ; " it appear that the widower console himself . " 
 but to return to our little Spectator paper and the conversation which grow out of it . Miss Beatrix at first be quite bit   as the phrase of that day be   and do not ' smoke " the authorship of the story ; indeed Esmond have try to imitate as well as he could Mr. Steele 's manner   as for the other author of the Spectator , his prose style I think be altogether inimitable ; and Dick , who be the idle and good - natured of man , would have let the piece pass into his journal and go to posterity as one of his own lucubration , but that Esmond do not care to have a lady 's name whom he love send forth to the world in a light so unfavorable . beatrix pishe and psha'd over the paper ; Colonel Esmond watch with no little interest her countenance as she read it . 
 " how stupid your friend Mr. Steele become ! " cry Miss Beatrix . " Epsom and Tunbridge ! will he never have do with Epsom and Tunbridge , and with beaux at church , and Jocastas and lindamira ? why do he not call woman Nelly and Betty , as their godfather and godmother do for they in their baptism ? " 
 " beatrix . beatrix ! " say her mother , ' speak gravely of grave thing . " 
 " Mamma think the Church Catechism come from heaven , I believe , " say beatrix , with a laugh , " and be bring down by a bishop from a mountain . oh , how I use to break my heart over it ! besides , I have a popish godmother , mamma ; why do you give I one ? " 
 " I give you the Queen 's name , " say her mother blushing . " and a very pretty name it be , " say somebody else . 
 beatrix go on read " spell my name with a Y why , you wretch , " say she , turn round to Colonel Esmond , " you have be tell my story to Mr. Steele or stop you have write the paper yourself to turn I into ridicule . for shame , sir ! " 
 poor Mr. Esmond feel rather frightened , and tell a truth , which be nevertheless an entire falsehood . " upon my honor , " say he , " I have not even read the Spectator of this morning . " nor have he , for that be not the Spectator , but a sham newspaper put in its place . 
 she go on reading : her face rather flush as she read . " no , " she say , " I think you could not   have write it . I think it must have be Mr. Steele when he be drunk and afraid of his horrid vulgar wife . whenever I see an enormous compliment to a woman , and some outrageous panegyric about female virtue , I always feel sure that the Captain and his well half have fall out over - night , and that he have be bring home tipsy , or have be find out in " 
 " beatrix ! " cry the Lady Castlewood . 
 " well , mamma ! do not cry out before you be hurt . I be not go to say anything wrong . I will not   give you more annoyance than you can help , you pretty kind mamma . yes , and your little Trix be a naughty little Trix , and she leave undone those thing which she ought to have do , and do those thing which she ought not to have do , and there be well now I will not   go on . yes , I will , unless you kiss I . " and with this the young lady lay aside her paper , and run up to her mother and perform a variety of embrace with her ladyship , say as plain as eye could speak to Mr. Esmond " there , sir : would not you like to play the very same pleasant game ? " 
 " indeed , madam , I would , " say he . 
 " would what ? " ask Miss Beatrix . 
 " what you mean when you look at I in that provoking way , " answer Esmond . 
 " what a confessor ! " cry beatrix , with a laugh . 
 " what be it Henry would like , my dear ? " ask her mother , the kind soul , who be always think what we would like , and how she could please we . 
 the girl run up to her " oh , you silly kind mamma , " she say , kiss she again , " that be what Harry would like ; " and she break out into a great joyful laugh ; and Lady Castlewood blush as bashful as a maid of sixteen . 
 " look at she , Harry , " whisper Beatrix , run up , and speak in her sweet low tone . " do not   the blush become she ? be not   she pretty ? she look young than I be , and I be sure she be a hundred million thousand time well . " 
 Esmond 's kind mistress leave the room , carry she blush away with she . 
 " if we girl at Court could grow such rose as that , " continue beatrix , with her laugh , " what would not   we do to preserve them ? we would clip their stalk and put them in salt and water . but those flower do not   bloom at Hampton Court and Windsor , Henry . " she pause for a minute , and the smile fade away from her April face , give place to a menacing shower of tear ; " oh , how good she be , Harry , " beatrix go on to say . " oh , what a saint she be ! her goodness frighten I . I be not fit to live with she . I should be well I think if she be not so perfect . she have have a great sorrow in her life , and a great secret ; and repent of it . it could not have be my father 's death . she talk freely about that ; nor could she have love he very much though who know what we woman do love , and why ? " 
 " what , and why , indeed , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " no one know , " beatrix go on , without notice this interruption except by a look , " what my mother 's life be . she hath be at early prayer this morning ; she pass hour in her closet ; if you be to follow her thither , you would find she at prayer now . she tend the poor of the place the horrid dirty poor ! she sit through the curate 's sermon oh , those dreary sermon ! and you see on a beau dire ; but good as they be , people like she be not fit to commune with we of the world . there be always , as it be , a third person present , even when I and my mother be alone . she can not   be frank with I quite ; who be always think of the next world , and of her guardian angel , perhaps that be in company . oh , Harry , I be jealous of that guardian angel ! " here break out Mistress beatrix . " it be horrid , I know ; but my mother 's life be all for heaven , and mine all for earth . we can never be friend quite ; and then , she care more for Frank 's little finger than she do for I I know she do : and she love you , sir , a great deal too much ; and I hate you for it . I would have have she all to myself ; but she would not . in my childhood , it be my father she love   oh , how could she ? I remember he kind and handsome , but so stupid , and not be able to speak after drink wine . and then it be Frank ; and now , it be heaven and the clergyman . how I would have love she ! from a child I use to be in a rage that she love anybody but I ; but she love you all well all , I know she do . and now , she talk of the bless consolation of religion . dear soul ! she think she be happy for believe , as she must , that we be all of we wicked and miserable sinner ; and this world be only a pie - a - terre for the good , where they stay for a night , as we do , come from Walcote , at that great , dreary , uncomfortable Hounslow Inn , in those horrid bed oh , do you remember those horrid bed ? and the chariot come and fetch they to heaven the next morning . " 
 " hush , beatrix , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " Hush , indeed . you be a hypocrite , too , Henry , with your grave air and your glum face . we be all hypocrite . o dear I ! we be all alone , alone , alone , " say poor beatrix , her fair breast heave with a sigh . 
 " it be I that writ every line of that paper , my dear , " say Mr. Esmond . " you be not so worldly as you think yourself , beatrix , and well than we believe you . the good we have in we we doubt of ; and the happiness that be to our hand we throw away . you bend your ambition on a great marriage and establishment and why ? you will tire of they when you win they ; and be no happy with a coronet on your coach " 
 " than rid pillion with Lubin to market , " say beatrix . " thank you , Lubin ! " 
 " I be a dismal shepherd , to be sure , " answer Esmond , with a blush ; " and require a nymph that can tuck my bed - clothe up , and make I water - gruel . well , Tom Lockwood can do that . he take I out of the fire upon his shoulder , and nurse I through my illness as love will scarce ever do . only good wage , and a hope of my clothe , and the content of my portmanteau . how long be it that Jacob serve an apprenticeship for Rachel ? " 
 " for mamma ? " say beatrix . " it be mamma your honor want , and that I should have the happiness of call you papa ? " 
 Esmond blush again . " I speak of a Rachel that a shepherd court five thousand year ago ; when shepherd be long live than now . and my meaning be , that since I see you first after our separation a child you be then . . . " 
 " and I put on my good stocking to captivate you , I remember , sir . . . " 
 " you have have my heart ever since then , such as it be ; and such as you be , I care for no other woman . what little reputation I have win , it be that you might be pleased with it : and indeed , it be not much ; and I think a hundred fool in the army have get and deserve quite as much . be there something in the air of that dismal old Castlewood that make we all gloomy , and dissatisfied , and lonely under its ruin old roof ? we be all so , even when together and unite , as it seem , follow our separate scheme , each as we sit round the table . " 
 " dear , dreary old place ! " cry beatrix . " Mamma hath never have the heart to go back thither since we leave it , when never mind how many year ago . " and she fling back her curl , and look over her fair shoulder at the mirror superbly , as if she say , " Time , I defy you . " 
 " yes , " say Esmond , who have the art , as she own , of divine many of her thought . " you can afford to look in the glass still ; and only be pleased by the truth it tell you . as for I , do you know what my scheme be ? I think of ask Frank to give I the virginian estate King Charles give our grandfather .   she give a superb curtsy , as much as to say , ' our grandfather , indeed ! thank you , Mr. Bastard . '   yes , I know you be think of my bar - sinister , and so be I. a man can not get over it in this country ; unless , indeed , he wear it across a king 's arm , when ' tis a highly honorable coat ; and I be think of retire into the plantation , and build myself a wigwam in the wood , and perhaps , if I want company , suit myself with a squaw . we will send your ladyship fur over for the winter ; and , when you be old , we will provide you with tobacco . I be not quite clever enough , or not rogue enough I know not which for the Old World . I may make a place for myself in the New , which be not so full ; and find a family there . when you be a mother yourself , and a great lady , perhaps I shall send you over from the plantation some day a little barbarian that be half esmond half Mohock , and you will be kind to he for his father 's sake , who be , after all , your kinsman ; and whom you love a little . " 
 " what folly you be talk , Harry , " say Miss Beatrix , look with her great eye . 
 " ' tis sober earnest , " say Esmond . and , indeed , the scheme have be dwell a good deal in his mind for some time past , and especially since his return home , when he find how hopeless , and even degrade to himself , his passion be . " no , " say he , then : " I have try half a dozen time now . I can bear be away from you well enough ; but be with you be intolerable "   another low curtsy on Mistress Beatrix 's part , " and I will go . I have enough to buy axis and gun for my man , and bead and blanket for the savage ; and I will go and live amongst they . " 
 " Mon ami , " she say quite kindly , and take Esmond 's hand , with an air of great compassion , " you can not   think that in our position anything more than our present friendship be possible . you be our eld brother as such we view you , pity your misfortune , not rebuke you with it . why , you be old enough and grave enough to be our father . I always think you a hundred year old , Harry , with your solemn face and grave air . I feel as a sister to you , and can no more . be not   that enough , sir ? " and she put her face quite close to his who know with what intention ? 
 " it be too much , " say Esmond , turn away . " I can not   bear this life , and shall leave it . I shall stay , I think , to see you married , and then freight a ship , and call it the ' beatrix , ' and bid you all . . . " 
 here the servant , fling the door open , announce his grace the Duke of Hamilton , and Esmond start back with something like an imprecation on his lip , as the nobleman enter , look splendid in his star and green ribbon . he give Mr. Esmond just that gracious bow which he would have give to a lackey who fetch he a chair or take his hat , and seat himself by Miss Beatrix , as the poor Colonel go out of the room with a hang - dog look . 
 Esmond 's mistress be in the low room as he pass down stair . she often meet he as he be come away from Beatrix ; and she beckon he into the apartment . 
 " have she tell you , Harry ? " Lady Castlewood say . 
 " she have be very frank very , " say Esmond . 
 " but but about what be go to happen ? " 
 " what be go to happen ? " say he , his heart beat . 
 " his grace the Duke of Hamilton have propose to she , " say my lady . " he make his offer yesterday . they will marry as soon as his mourning be over ; and you have hear his grace be appoint Ambassador to Paris ; and the Ambassadress go with he . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 BEATRIX be new suitor . 

 the gentleman whom Beatrix have select be , to be sure , twenty year old than the Colonel , with whom she quarrel for be too old ; but this one be but a nameless adventurer , and the other the great duke in Scotland , with pretension even to a still high title . my Lord Duke of Hamilton have , indeed , every merit belong to a gentleman , and he have have the time to mature his accomplishment fully , be upwards of fifty year old when Madam Beatrix select he for a bridegroom . Duke Hamilton , then Earl of Arran , have be educate at the famous Scottish university of Glasgow , and , come to London , become a great favorite of Charles the Second , who make he a lord of his bedchamber , and afterwards appoint he ambassador to the french king , under whom the Earl serve two campaign as his Majesty 's aide - de - camp ; and he be absent on this service when King Charles die . 
 King James continue my lord 's promotion make he Master of the Wardrobe and Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Horse ; and his lordship adhere firmly to King James , be of the small company that never quit that unfortunate monarch till his departure out of England ; and then it be , in 1688 namely , that he make the friendship with Colonel Francis Esmond , that have always be , more or less , maintain in the two family . 
 the Earl profess a great admiration for King William always , but never could give he his allegiance ; and be engage in more than one of the plot in the late great King 's reign which always end in the plotter ' discomfiture , and generally in their pardon , by the magnanimity of the King . Lord Arran be twice prisoner in the Tower during this reign , undauntedly say , when offer his release , upon parole not to engage against King William , that he would not give his word , because " he be sure he could not keep it ; " but , nevertheless , he be both time discharge without any trial ; and the King bear this noble enemy so little malice , that when his mother , the Duchess of Hamilton , of her own right , resign her claim on her husband 's death , the Earl be , by patent sign at Loo , 1690 , create Duke of Hamilton , Marquis of Clydesdale , and Earl of Arran , with precedency from the original creation . his grace take the oath and his seat in the scottish parliament in 1700 : be famous there for his patriotism and eloquence , especially in the debate about the Union Bill , which Duke Hamilton oppose with all his strength , though he would not go the length of the scottish gentry , who be for resist it by force of arm . ' Twas say he withdraw his opposition all of a sudden , and in consequence of letter from the King at St. Germains , who entreat he on his allegiance not to thwart the Queen his sister in this measure ; and the Duke , be always bent upon effect the King 's return to his kingdom through a reconciliation between his Majesty and Queen Anne , and quite averse to his landing with arm and french troop , hold aloof , and keep out of Scotland during the time when the Chevalier de St. George 's descent from Dunkirk be project , pass his time in England in his great estate in Staffordshire . 
 when the Whigs go out of office in 1710 , the Queen begin to show his grace the very great mark of her favor . he be create Duke of Brandon and Baron of Dutton in England ; have the Thistle already originally bestow on he by King James the Second , his grace be now promote to the honor of the Garter a distinction so great and illustrious , that no subject hath ever bear they hitherto together . when this objection be make to her Majesty , she be pleased to say , " such a subject as the Duke of Hamilton have a pre - eminent claim to every mark of distinction which a crown head can confer . I will henceforth wear both order myself . " 
 at the chapter hold at Windsor in October , 1712 , the Duke and other knight , include Lord - Treasurer , the new - create Earl of Oxford and Mortimer , be instal ; and a few day afterwards his grace be appoint Ambassador - Extraordinary to France , and his equipage , plate , and livery command , of the most sumptuous kind , not only for his Excellency the Ambassador , but for her Excellency the Ambassadress , who be to accompany he . her arm be already quarter on the coach panel , and her brother be to hasten over on the appoint day to give she away . 
 his lordship be a widower , have marry , in 1698 , Elizabeth , daughter of Digby Lord Gerard , by which marriage great estate come into the Hamilton family ; and out of these estate come , in part , that tragic quarrel which end the Duke 's career . 
 from the loss of a tooth to that of a mistress there be no pang that be not bearable . the apprehension be much more cruel than the certainty ; and we make up our mind to the misfortune when ' tis irremediable , part with the tormentor , and mumble our crust on t'other side of the jaw . I think Colonel Esmond be relieve when a ducal coach and six come and whisk his charmer away out of his reach , and place she in a high sphere . as you have see the nymph in the opera - machine go up to the cloud at the end of the piece where Mars , Bacchus , Apollo , and all the divine company of Olympians be seat , and quaver out her last song as a goddess : so when this portentous elevation be accomplish in the Esmond family , I be not sure that every one of we do not treat the divine Beatrix with special honor ; at least the saucy little beauty carry her head with a toss of supreme authority , and assume a touch - I - not air , which all her friend very good - humoredly bow to . 
 an old army acquaintance of Colonel Esmond 's , honest Tom Trett , who have sell his company , marry a wife , and turn merchant in the city , be dreadfully gloomy for a long time , though live in a fine house on the river , and carry on a great trade to all appearance . at length Esmond see his friend 's name in the Gazette as a bankrupt ; and a week after this circumstance my bankrupt walk into Mr. Esmond 's lodge with a face perfectly radiant with good - humor , and as jolly and careless as when they have sail from Southampton ten year before for Vigo . " this bankruptcy , " say Tom , " have be hang over my head these three year ; the thought hath prevent my sleeping , and I have look at poor Polly 's head on t'other pillow , and then towards my razor on the table , and think to put an end to myself , and so give my woe the slip . but now we be bankrupt : Tom Trett pay as many shilling in the pound as he can ; his wife have a little cottage at Fulham , and her fortune secure to herself . I be afraid neither of bailiff nor of creditor : and for the last six night have sleep easy . " so it be that when Fortune shake her wing and leave he , honest Tom cuddle himself up in his ragged virtue , and fall asleep . 
 Esmond do not tell his friend how much his story apply to Esmond too ; but he laugh at it , and use it ; and have fairly strike his docket in this love transaction , determine to put a cheerful face on his bankruptcy . perhaps Beatrix be a little offended at his gayety . " be this the way , sir , that you receive the announcement of your misfortune , " say she , " and do you come smile before I as if you be glad to be rid of I ? " 
 Esmond would not be put off from his good - humor , but tell she the story of Tom Trett and his bankruptcy . " I have be hanker after the grape on the wall , " say he , " and lose my temper because they be beyond my reach ; be there any wonder ? they be go now , and another have they a tall man than your humble servant have win they . " and the Colonel make his cousin a low bow . 
 " a tall man , Cousin Esmond ! " say she . " a man of spirit would have seal the wall , sir , and seize they ! a man of courage would have fight for them , not gap for them . " 
 " a Duke have but to gape and they drop into his mouth , " say Esmond , with another low bow . 
 " yes , sir , " say she , " a Duke be a tall man than you . and why should I not be grateful to one such as his Grace , who give I his heart and his great name ? it be a great gift he honor I with ; I know ' tis a bargain between we ; and I accept it , and will do my utmost to perform my part of it . ' tis no question of sigh and philandering between a noble man of his grace 's age and a girl who hath little of that softness in her nature . why should I not own that I be ambitious , Harry Esmond ; and if it be no sin in a man to covet honor , why should a woman too not desire it ? shall I be frank with you , Harry , and say that if you have not be down on your knee , and so humble , you might have fare well with I ? a woman of my spirit , cousin , be to be win by gallantry , and not by sigh and rueful face . all the time you be worship and sing hymn to I , I know very well I be no goddess , and grow weary of the incense . so would you have be weary of the goddess too when she be call Mrs. Esmond , and get out of humor because she have not pin - money enough , and be force to go about in an old gown . Eh ! cousin , a goddess in a mob - cap , that have to make her husband 's gruel , cease to be divine I be sure of it . I should have be sulky and scold ; and of all the proud wretch in the world Mr. Esmond be the proud , let I tell he that . you never fall into a passion ; but you never forgive , I think . have you be a great man , you might have be good - humor ; but be nobody , sir , you be too great a man for I ; and I be afraid of you , cousin there ! and I will not   worship you , and you will never be happy except with a woman who will . why , after I belong to you , and after one of my tantrum , you would have put the pillow over my head some night , and smother I , as the black man do the woman in the play that you be so fond of . what be the creature 's name ? Desdemona . you would , you little black - dye Othello ! " 
 " I think I should , beatrix , " say the Colonel . 
 " and I want no such ending . I intend to live to be a hundred , and to go to ten thousand rout and ball , and to play card every night of my life till the year eighteen hundred . and I like to be the first of my company , sir ; and I like flattery and compliment , and you give I none ; and I like to be make to laugh , sir , and who be to laugh at your dismal face , I should like to know ? and I like a coach - and six or a coach - and - eight ; and I like diamond , and a new gown every week ; and people to say ' that be the Duchess how well her grace look make way for Madame l'Ambassadrice d'Angleterre call her Excellency 's people ' that be what I like . and as for you , you want a woman to bring your slipper and cap , and to sit at your foot , and cry , ' o caro ! o bravo ! ' whilst you read your Shakespeares and Miltons and stuff . Mamma would have be the wife for you , have you be a little old , though you look ten year old than she do you do , you glum - faced , blue - bearded little old man ! you might have sit , like Darby and Joan , and flatter each other ; and bill and coo like a pair of old pigeon on a perch . I want my wing and to use they , sir . " and she spread out her beautiful arm , as if indeed she could fly off like the pretty " Gawrie , " whom the man in the story be enamor of . 
 " and what will your Peter Wilkins say to your flight ? " say Esmond , who never admire this fair creature more than when she rebel and laugh at he . 
 " a duchess know her place , " say she , with a laugh . " why , I have a son already make for I , and thirty year old   my Lord Arran , and four daughter . how they will scold , and what a rage they will be in , when I come to take the head of the table ! but I give they only a month to be angry ; at the end of that time they shall love I every one , and so shall Lord Arran , and so shall all his grace 's Scots vassal and follower in the Highlands . I be bent on it ; and when I take a thing in my head , ' tis do . his grace be the great gentleman in Europe , and I will try and make he happy ; and , when the King come back , you may count on my protection , Cousin Esmond for come back the King will and shall ; and I will bring he back from Versailles , if he come under my hoop . " 
 " I hope the world will make you happy , beatrix , " say Esmond , with a sigh . " you will be beatrix till you be my Lady Duchess will you not ? I shall then make your grace my very low bow . " 
 " none of these sigh and this satire , cousin , " she say . " I take his grace 's great bounty thankfully yes , thankfully ; and will wear his honor becomingly . I do not say he hath touch my heart ; but he have my gratitude , obedience , admiration I have tell he that , and no more ; and with that his noble heart be content . I have tell he all even the story of that poor creature that I be engage to and that I could not love ; and I gladly give his word back to he , and jump for joy to get back my own . I be twenty - five year old . " 
 " twenty - six , my dear , " say Esmond . 
 " twenty - five , sir I choose to be twenty - five ; and in eight year no man hath ever touch my heart . yes you do once , for a little , Harry , when you come back after Lille , and engage with that murderer Mohun , and save Frank 's life . I think I could like you ; and mamma beg I hard , on her knee , and I do for a day . but the old chill come over I , Henry , and the old fear of you and your melancholy ; and I be glad when you go away , and engage with my Lord Ashburnham , that I might hear no more of you , that be the truth . you be too good for I , somehow . I could not make you happy , and should break my heart in try , and not be able to love you . but if you have ask I when we give you the sword , you might have have I , sir , and we both should have be miserable by this time . I talk with that silly lord all night just to vex you and mamma , and I succeed , do not   I ? how frankly we can talk of these thing ! it seem a thousand year ago : and , though we be here sit in the same room , there be a great wall between we . my dear , kind , faithful , gloomy old cousin ! I can like now , and admire you too , sir , and say that you be brave , and very kind , and very true , and a fine gentleman for all for all your little mishap at your birth , " say she , wag her arch head . 
 " and now , sir , " say she , with a curtsy , " we must have no more talk except when mamma be by , as his grace be with we ; for he do not half like you , cousin , and be jealous as the black man in your favorite play . " 
 though the very kindness of the word stab Mr. Esmond with the keen pang , he do not show his sense of the wound by any look of his   as Beatrix , indeed , afterwards own to he , but say , with a perfect command of himself and an easy smile , " the interview must not end yet , my dear , until I have have my last word . stay , here come your mother "   indeed she come in here with her sweet anxious face , and Esmond go up kiss her hand respectfully . " my dear lady may hear , too , the last word , which be no secret , and be only a parting benediction accompany a present for your marriage from an old gentleman your guardian ; for I feel as if I be the guardian of all the family , and an old old fellow that be fit to be the grandfather of you all ; and in this character let I make my Lady Duchess her wedding present . they be the diamond my father 's widow leave I . I have think beatrix might have have they a year ago ; but they be good enough for a duchess , though not bright enough for the handsome woman in the world . " and he take the case out of his pocket in which the jewel be , and present they to his cousin . 
 she give a cry of delight , for the stone be indeed very handsome , and of great value ; and the next minute the necklace be where Belinda 's cross be in Mr. Pope 's admirable poem , and glitter on the whitest and most perfectly - shape neck in all England . 
 the girl 's delight at receive these trinket be so great , that after rush to the look - glass and examine the effect they produce upon that fair neck which they surround , Beatrix be run back with her arm extend , and be perhaps for pay her cousin with a price , that he would have like no doubt to receive from those beautiful rosy lip of her , but at this moment the door open , and his Grace the bridegroom elect be announce . 
 he look very black upon Mr. Esmond , to whom he make a very low bow indeed , and kiss the hand of each lady in his most ceremonious manner . he have come in his chair from the palace hard by , and wear his two star of the Garter and the Thistle . 
 " look , my Lord Duke , " say Mistress Beatrix , advance to he , and show the diamond on her breast . 
 " Diamonds , " say his Grace . " Hm ! they seem pretty . " 
 " they be a present on my marriage , " say beatrix . 
 " from her Majesty ? " ask the Duke . " the Queen be very good . " 
 " from my cousin Henry from our cousin Henry " cry both the lady in a breath . 
 " I have not the honor of know the gentleman . I think that my Lord Castlewood have no brother : and that on your ladyship 's side there be no nephew . " 
 " from our cousin , Colonel Henry Esmond , my lord , " say Beatrix , take the Colonel 's hand very bravely , " who be leave guardian to we by our father , and who have a hundred time show his love and friendship for our family . " 
 " the Duchess of Hamilton receive no diamond but from her husband , madam , " say the Duke " may I pray you to restore these to Mr. Esmond ? " 
 " beatrix Esmond may receive a present from our kinsman and benefactor , my Lord Duke , " say Lady Castlewood , with an air of great dignity . " she be my daughter yet : and if her mother sanction the gift no one else hath the right to question it . " 
 " Kinsman and benefactor ! " say the Duke . " I know of no kinsman : and I do not choose that my wife should have for benefactor a " 
 " my lord ! " say Colonel Esmond . 
 " I be not here to bandy word , " say his grace : " frankly I tell you that your visit to this house be too frequent , and that I choose no present for the Duchess of Hamilton from gentleman that bear a name they have no right to . " 
 " my lord ! " break out Lady Castlewood , " Mr. Esmond hath the good right to that name of any man in the world : and ' tis as old and as honorable as your grace 's . " 
 my Lord Duke smile , and look as if Lady Castlewood be mad , that be so talk to he . 
 " if I call he benefactor , " say my mistress , " it be because he have be so to we yes , the noble , the true , the brave , the dearest of benefactor . he would have save my husband 's life from Mohun 's sword . he do save my boy 's , and defend he from that villain . be those no benefit ? " 
 " I ask Colonel Esmond 's pardon , " say his Grace , if possible more haughty than before . " I would say not a word that should give he offence , and thank he for his kindness to your ladyship 's family . my Lord Mohun and I be connect , you know , by marriage though neither by blood nor friendship ; but I must repeat what I say , that my wife can receive no present from Colonel Esmond . " 
 " my daughter may receive present from the Head of our House : my daughter may thankfully take kindness from her father 's , her mother 's , her brother 's dear friend ; and be grateful for one more benefit besides the thousand we owe he , " cry Lady Esmond . " what be a string of diamond stone compare to that affection he hath give we our dear preserver and benefactor ? we owe he not only Frank 's life , but our all yes , our all , " say my mistress , with a heighten color and a trembling voice . " the title we bear be his , if he would claim it . ' tis we who have no right to our name : not he that be too great for it . he sacrifice his name at my die lord 's bedside sacrifice it to my orphan child ; give up rank and honor because he love we so nobly . his father be Viscount of Castlewood and Marquis of Esmond before he ; and he be his father 's lawful son and true heir , and we be the recipient of his bounty , and he the chief of a house that be as old as your own . and if he be content to forego his name that my child may bear it , we love he and honor he and bless he under whatever name he bear " and here the fond and affectionate creature would have kneel to Esmond again , but that he prevent she ; and Beatrix , run up to she with a pale face and a cry of alarm , embrace she and say , " Mother , what be this ? " 
 " ' tis a family secret , my Lord Duke , " say Colonel Esmond : " poor beatrix know nothing of it ; nor do my lady till a year ago . and I have as good a right to resign my title as your grace 's mother to abdicate her to you . " 
 " I should have tell everything to the Duke of Hamilton , " say my mistress , " have his grace apply to I for my daughter 's hand , and not to beatrix . I should have speak with you this very day in private , my lord , have not your word bring about this sudden explanation and now ' tis fit beatrix should hear it ; and know , as I would have all the world know , what we owe to our kinsman and patron . " 
 and then in her touching way , and have hold of her daughter 's hand , and speak to she rather than my Lord Duke , Lady Castlewood tell the story which you know already laud up to the sky her kinsman 's behavior . on his side Mr. Esmond explain the reason that seem quite sufficiently cogent with he , why the succession in the family , as at present it stand , should not be disturb ; and he should remain as he be , Colonel Esmond . 
 " and Marquis of Esmond , my lord , " say his Grace , with a low bow . " permit I to ask your lordship 's pardon for word that be utter in ignorance ; and to beg for the favor of your friendship . to be ally to you , sir , must be an honor under whatever name you be know "   so his Grace be pleased to say ; " and in return for the splendid present you make my wife , your kinswoman , I hope you will please to command any service that James Douglas can perform . I shall never be easy until I repay you a part of my obligation at least ; and ere very long , and with the mission her Majesty hath give I , " say the Duke , " that may perhaps be in my power . I shall esteem it as a favor , my lord , if Colonel Esmond will give away the bride . " 
 " and if he will take the usual payment in advance , he be welcome , " say Beatrix , step up to he ; and , as Esmond kiss she , she whisper , " oh , why do not   I know you before ? " 
 my Lord Duke be as hot as a flame at this salute , but say never a word : beatrix make he a proud curtsy , and the two lady quit the room together . 
 " when do your Excellency go for Paris ? " ask Colonel Esmond . 
 " as soon after the ceremony as may be , " his Grace answer . " ' tis fix for the first of December : it can not be soon . the equipage will not be ready till then . the Queen intend the embassy should be very grand and I have law business to settle . that ill - omen Mohun have come , or be come , to London again : we be in a lawsuit about my late Lord Gerard 's property ; and he hath send to I to meet he . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

 MOHUN appear for the last TIME in this history . 

 besides my Lord Duke of Hamilton and Brandon , who for family reason have kindly promise his protection and patronage to Colonel Esmond , he have other great friend in power now , both able and willing to assist he , and he might , with such ally , look forward to as fortunate advancement in civil life at home as he have get rapid promotion abroad . his grace be magnanimous enough to offer to take Mr. Esmond as secretary on his Paris embassy , but no doubt he intend that proposal should be reject ; at any rate , Esmond could not bear the thought of attend his mistress far than the church - door after her marriage , and so decline that offer which his generous rival make he . 
 other gentleman in power be liberal at least of compliment and promise to Colonel Esmond . Mr. Harley , now become my Lord Oxford and Mortimer , and instal Knight of the Garter on the same day as his Grace of Hamilton have receive the same honor , send to the Colonel to say that a seat in Parliament should be at his disposal presently , and Mr. St. John hold out many flattering hope of advancement to the Colonel when he should enter the House . Esmond 's friend be all successful , and the most successful and triumphant of all be his dear old commander , General Webb , who be now appoint Lieutenant - General of the Land Forces , and receive with particular honor by the Ministry , by the Queen , and the people out of door , who huzza'd the brave chief when they use to see he in his chariot go to the House or to the Drawing - room , or hobble on foot to his coach from St. Stephen 's upon his glorious old crutch and stick , and cheer he as loud as they have ever do Marlborough . 
 that great Duke be utterly disgrace ; and honest old Webb date all his grace 's misfortune from Wynendael , and vow that Fate serve the traitor right . Duchess Sarah have also go to ruin ; she have be force to give up her key , and her place , and her pension : " ah , ah ! " say Webb , ' she would have lock up three million of french crown with her key have I but be knock on the head , but I stop that convoy at Wynendael . " our enemy Cardonnel be turn out of the House of Commons   along with Mr. Walpole   for malversation of public money . Cadogan lose his place of Lieutenant of the Tower . Marlborough 's daughter resign their post of lady of the bedchamber ; and so complete be the Duke 's disgrace , that his son - in - law , Lord Bridgewater , be absolutely oblige to give up his lodging at St. James 's , and have his half - pension , as Master of the Horse , take away . but I think the low depth of Marlborough 's fall be when he humbly send to ask General Webb when he might wait upon he ; he who have command the stout old General , who have injure he and sneer at he , who have keep he dangle in his ante - chamber , who could not even after his great service condescend to write he a letter in his own hand . the nation be as eager for peace as ever it have be hot for war . the Prince of Savoy come amongst we , have his audience of the Queen , and get his famous Sword of Honor , and strove with all his force to form a Whig party together , to bring over the young Prince of Hanover to do anything which might prolong the war , and consummate the ruin of the old sovereign whom he hat so implacably . but the nation be tired of the struggle : so completely weary of it that not even our defeat at Denain could rouse we into any anger , though such an action so lose two year before would have set all England in a fury . ' twa easy to see that the great Marlborough be not with the army . Eugene be oblige to fall back in a rage , and forego the dazzle revenge of his life . ' twa in vain the Duke 's side ask , " would we suffer our arm to be insult ? would we not send back the only champion who could repair our honor ? " the nation have have its bellyful of fighting ; nor could taunt or outcry goad up our Britons any more . 
 for a statesman that be always prate of liberty , and have the grand philosophic maxim in his mouth , it must be own that Mr. St. John sometimes rather act like a turkish than a greek philosopher , and especially fall foul of one unfortunate set of man , the man of letter , with a tyranny a little extraordinary in a man who profess to respect their calling so much . the literary controversy at this time be very bitter , the Government side be the win one , the popular one , and I think might have be the merciful one . ' twa natural that the opposition should be peevish and cry out : some man do so from their heart , admire the Duke of Marlborough 's prodigious talent , and deplore the disgrace of the great general the world ever know : ' twa the stomach that cause other patriot to grumble , and such man cry out because they be poor , and pay to do so . against these my Lord Bolingbroke never show the slight mercy , whip a dozen into prison or into the pillory without the least commiseration . 
 from have be a man of arm Mr. Esmond have now come to be a man of letter , but on a safe side than that in which the above - cite poor fellow venture their liberty and ear . there be no danger on our , which be the win side ; besides , Mr. Esmond please himself by think that he writ like a gentleman if he do not always succeed as a wit . 
 of the famous wit of that age , who have render Queen Anne 's reign illustrious , and whose work will be in all Englishmen 's hand in age yet to come , Mr. Esmond see many , but at public place chiefly ; never have a great intimacy with any of they , except with honest Dick Steele and Mr. Addison , who part company with Esmond , however , when that gentleman become a declared Tory , and live on close term with the lead person of that party . Addison keep himself to a few friend , and very rarely open himself except in their company . a man more upright and conscientious than he it be not possible to find in public life , and one whose conversation be so various , easy , and delightful . write now in my mature year , I own that I think Addison 's politic be the right , and be my time to come over again , I would be a Whig in England and not a Tory ; but with people that take a side in politic , ' tis man rather than principle that commonly bind they . a kindness or a slight put a man under one flag or the other , and he march with it to the end of the campaign . Esmond 's master in war be injure by Marlborough , and hat he : and the lieutenant fight the quarrel of his leader . Webb come to London be use as a weapon by Marlborough 's enemy   and true steel he be , that honest chief ; nor be his aide - de - camp , Mr. Esmond , an unfaithful or unworthy partisan . ' tis strange here , and on a foreign soil , and in a land that be independent in all but the name ,   for that the north american colony shall remain dependant on yonder little island for twenty year more , I never can think ,   to remember how the nation at home seem to give itself up to the domination of one or other aristocratic party , and take a hanoverian king , or a french one , accord as either prevail . and while the Tories , the October club gentleman , the High Church parson that hold by the Church of England , be for have a Papist king , for whom many of their scottish and english leader , firm churchman all , lay down their life with admirable loyalty and devotion ; they be govern by man who have notoriously no religion at all , but use it as they would use any opinion for the purpose of forward their own ambition . the Whigs , on the other hand , who profess attachment to religion and liberty too , be compel to send to Holland or Hanover for a monarch around whom they could rally . a strange series of compromise be that English history ; compromise of principle , compromise of party , compromise of worship ! the lover of English freedom and independence submit their religious conscience to an Act of Parliament ; could not consolidate their liberty without send to Zell or the Hague for a king to live under ; and could not find amongst the proud people in the world a man speak their own language , and understand their law , to govern they . the Tory and High Church patriot be ready to die in defence of a Papist family that have sell we to France ; the great Whig noble , the sturdy republican recusant who have cut off Charles Stuart 's head for treason , be fain to accept a king whose title come to he through a royal grandmother , whose own royal grandmother 's head have fall under Queen Bess 's hatchet . and our proud English noble send to a petty german town for a monarch to come and reign in London and our prelate kiss the ugly hand of his dutch mistress , and think it no dishonor . in England you can but belong to one party or t'other , and you take the house you live in with all its encumbrance , its retainer , its antique discomfort , and ruin even ; you patch up , but you never build up anew . will we of the new world submit much long , even nominally , to this ancient british superstition ? there be sign of the time which make I think that ere long we shall care as little about King George here , and peer temporal and peer spiritual , as we do for King Canute or the Druids . 
 this chapter begin about the wit , my grandson may say , and hath wander very far from their company . the pleasantest of the wit I know be the Doctors Garth and Arbuthnot , and Mr. Gay , the author of " Trivia , " the most charming kind soul that ever laugh at a joke or crack a bottle . Mr. Prior I see , and he be the earthen pot swim with the pot of brass down the stream , and always and justly frightened lest he should break in the voyage . I meet he both at London and Paris , where he be perform piteous congee to the Duke of Shrewsbury , not have courage to support the dignity which his undeniable genius and talent have win he , and write coax letter to Secretary St. John , and think about his plate and his place , and what on earth should become of he should his party go out . the famous Mr. Congreve I see a dozen of time at Button 's , a splendid wreck of a man , magnificently attire , and though gouty , and almost blind , bear a brave face against fortune . 
 the great Mr. Pope   of whose prodigious genius I have no word to express my admiration   be quite a puny lad at this time , appear seldom in public place . there be hundred of man , wit , and pretty fellow frequent the theatre and coffee - house of that day whom " nunc perscribere longum est . " indeed I think the most brilliant of that sort I ever see be not till fifteen year afterwards , when I pay my last visit in England , and meet young Harry Fielding , son of the Fielding that serve in Spain and afterwards in Flanders with we , and who for fun and humor seem to top they all . as for the famous Dr. Swift , I can say of he , " vidi tantum . " he be in London all these year up to the death of the Queen ; and in a hundred public place where I see he , but no more ; he never miss Court of a Sunday , where once or twice he be point out to your grandfather . he would have seek I out eagerly enough have I be a great man with a title to my name , or a star on my coat . at Court the Doctor have no eye but for the very great . Lord Treasurer and St. John use to call he Jonathan , and they pay he with this cheap coin for the service they take of he . he writ their lampoon , fight their enemy , flog and bully in their service , and it must be own with a consummate skill and fierceness . ' Tis say he hath lose his intellect now , and forget his wrong and his rage against mankind . I have always think of he and of Marlborough as the two great man of that age . I have read his book   who doth not know they ?   here in our calm wood , and imagine a giant to myself as I think of he , a lonely fallen Prometheus , groan as the vulture tear he . Prometheus I see , but when first I ever have any word with he , the giant step out of a sedan chair in the Poultry , whither he have come with a tipsy irish servant parade before he , who announce he , bawl out his reverence 's name , whilst his master below be as yet haggle with the chairman . I dislike this Mr. Swift , and hear many a story about he , of his conduct to man , and his word to woman . he could flatter the great as much as he could bully the weak ; and Mr. Esmond , be young and hotter in that day than now , be determine , should he ever meet this dragon , not to run away from his tooth and his fire . 
 man have all sort of motif which carry they onwards in life , and be drive into act of desperation , or it may be of distinction , from a hundred different cause . there be one comrade of Esmond 's , an honest little irish lieutenant of Handyside 's , who owe so much money to a camp sutler , that he begin to make love to the man 's daughter , intend to pay his debt that way ; and at the battle of Malplaquet , fly away from the debt and lady too , he rush so desperately on the french line , that he get his company ; and come a captain out of the action , and have to marry the sutler 's daughter after all , who bring he his cancel debt to her father as poor Roger 's fortune . to run out of the reach of bill and marriage , he run on the enemy 's pike ; and as these do not kill he he be throw back upon t'other horn of his dilemma . our great Duke at the same battle be fight , not the French , but the Tories in England ; and risk his life and the army 's , not for his country but for his pay and place ; and for fear of his wife at home , that only be in life whom he dread . I have ask about man in my own company ,   new draft of poor country boy be perpetually come over to we during the war , and bring from the ploughshare to the sword ,   and find that a half of they under the flag be drive thither on account of a woman : one fellow be jilt by his mistress and take the shilling in despair ; another jilt the girl , and flee from she and the parish to the tent where the law could not disturb he . why go on particularize ? what can the son of Adam and Eve expect , but to continue in that course of love and trouble their father and mother set out on ? oh , my grandson ! I be draw nigh to the end of that period of my history , when I be acquaint with the great world of England and Europe ; my year be past the Hebrew poet 's limit , and I say unto thee , all my trouble and joy too , for that matter , have come from a woman ; as thine will when thy destine course begin . ' twas a woman that make a soldier of I , that set I intriguing afterwards ; I believe I would have spin smock for she have she so bid I ; what strength I have in my head I would have give she ; hath not every man in his degree have his Omphale and Delilah ? Mine befool I on the bank of the Thames , and in dear old England ; thou may find thine own by Rappahannock . 
 to please that woman then I try to distinguish myself as a soldier , and afterwards as a wit and a politician ; as to please another I would have put on a black cassock and a pair of band , and have do so but that a superior fate intervene to defeat that project . and I say , I think the world be like Captain Esmond 's company I speak of anon ; and could you see every man 's career in life , you would find a woman clog he ; or cling round his march and stop he ; or cheer he and goad he : or beckon he out of her chariot , so that he go up to she , and leave the race to be run without he or bring he the apple , and say " eat ; " or fetch he the dagger and whisper " Kill ! yonder lie duncan , and a crown , and an opportunity . " 
 your grandfather fight with more effect as a politician than as a wit : and have private animosity and grievance of his own and his General 's against the great Duke in command of the army , and more information on military matter than most writer , who have never see beyond the fire of a tobacco - pipe at " will 's , " he be enable to do good service for that cause which he embark in , and for Mr. St. John and his party . but he disdain the abuse in which some of the Tory writer indulge ; for instance , Dr. Swift , who actually choose to doubt the Duke of Marlborough 's courage , and be pleased to hint that his grace 's military capacity be doubtful : nor be Esmond 's performance bad for the effect they be intend to produce ,   though no doubt they could not injure the Duke of Marlborough nearly so much in the public eye as the malignant attack of Swift do , which be carefully direct so as to blacken and degrade he ,   because they be writ openly and fairly by Mr. Esmond , who make no disguise of they , who be now out of the army , and who never attack the prodigious courage and talent , only the selfishness and rapacity , of the chief . 
 the Colonel then , have writ a paper for one of the Tory journal , call the Post - Boy ,   a letter upon Bouchain , that the town talk about for two whole day , when the appearance of an italian singer supply a fresh subject for conversation ,   and have business at the Exchange , where Mistress Beatrix want a pair of glove or a fan very likely , Esmond go to correct his paper , and be sit at the printer 's , when the famous Doctor Swift come in , his irish fellow with he that use to walk before his chair , and bawl out his master 's name with great dignity . 
 Mr. Esmond be wait for the printer too , whose wife have go to the tavern to fetch he , and be meantime engage in draw a picture of a soldier on horseback for a dirty little pretty boy of the printer 's wife , whom she have leave behind she . 
 " I presume you be the editor of the Post - Boy , sir ? " say the Doctor , in a grating voice that have an irish twang ; and he look at the Colonel from under his two bushy eyebrow with a pair of very clear blue eye . his complexion be muddy , his figure rather fat , his chin double . he wear a shabby cassock , and a shabby hat over his black wig , and he pull out a great gold watch , at which he look very fierce . 
 " I be but a contributor , Doctor Swift , " say Esmond , with the little boy still on his knee . he be sit with his back in the window , so that the doctor could not see he . 
 " who tell you I be Dr. Swift ? " say the Doctor , eye the other very haughtily . 
 " your Reverence 's valet bawl out your name , " say the Colonel . " I should judge you bring he from Ireland ? " 
 " and pray , sir , what right have you to judge whether my servant come from Ireland or no ? I want to speak with your employer , Mr. Leach . I will thank ye go fetch he . " 
 " where be your papa , Tommy ? " ask the Colonel of the child , a smutty little wretch in a frock . 
 instead of answer , the child begin to cry ; the Doctor 's appearance have no doubt frighten the poor little imp . 
 " send that squall little brat about his business , and do what I bid ye , sir , " say the Doctor . 
 " I must finish , the picture first for Tommy , " say the Colonel , laugh . " here , Tommy , will you have your Pandour with whisker or without ? " 
 " whister , " say Tommy , quite intent on the picture . 
 " who the devil be ye , sir ? " cry the doctor ; " be ye a printer 's man or be ye not ? " he pronounce it like NAUGHT . 
 " your reverence need not   raise the devil to ask who I be , " say Colonel Esmond . " do you ever hear of Doctor Faustus , little Tommy ? or Friar Bacon , who invent gunpowder , and set the Thames on fire ? " 
 Mr. Swift turn quite red , almost purple . " I do not intend any offence , sir , " say he . 
 " I dare say , sir , you offend without meaning , " say the other , dryly . 
 " who be ye , sir ? do you know who I be , sir ? you be one of the pack of Grub Street scribbler that my friend Mr. Secretary hath lay by the heel . how dare ye , sir , speak to I in this tone ? " cry the Doctor , in a great fume . 
 " I beg your honor 's humble pardon if I have offend your honor , " say Esmond in a tone of great humility . " rather than be send to the Compter , or be put in the pillory , there be nothing I would not   do . but Mrs. Leach , the printer 's lady , tell I to mind Tommy whilst she go for her husband to the tavern , and I dare not   leave the child lest he should fall into the fire ; but if your Reverence will hold he " 
 " I take the little beast ! " say the Doctor , start back . " I be engaged to your better , fellow . tell Mr. Leach that when he make an appointment with Dr. Swift he have well keep it , do ye hear ? and keep a respectful tongue in your head , sir , when you address a person like I . " 
 " I be but a poor break - down soldier , " say the Colonel , " and I have   see well day , though I be force now to turn my hand to write . we can not   help our fate , sir . " 
 " you be the person that Mr. Leach hath speak to I of , I presume . have the goodness to speak civilly when you be speak to and tell Leach to call at my lodging in Bury Street , and bring the paper with he to - night at ten o'clock . and the next time you see I , you will know I , and be civil , Mr. Kemp . " 
 Poor Kemp , who have be a lieutenant at the beginning of the war , and fall into misfortune , be the writer of the Post - Boy , and now take honest Mr. Leach 's pay in place of her Majesty 's . Esmond have see this gentleman , and a very ingenious , hardworke honest fellow he be , toil to give bread to a great family , and watch up many a long winter night to keep the wolf from his door . and Mr. St. John , who have liberty always on his tongue , have just send a dozen of the opposition writer into prison , and one actually into the pillory , for what he call libel , but libel not half so violent as those writ on our side . with regard to this very piece of tyranny , Esmond have remonstrate strongly with the Secretary , who laugh and say the rascal be serve quite right ; and tell Esmond a joke of Swift 's regard the matter . Nay , more , this Irishman , when St. John be about to pardon a poor wretch condemn to death for rape , absolutely prevent the Secretary from exercise this act of good - nature , and boast that he have have the man hang ; and great as the Doctor 's genius might be , and splendid his ability , Esmond for one would affect no love for he , and never desire to make his acquaintance . the doctor be at Court every Sunday assiduously enough , a place the Colonel frequent but rarely , though he have a great inducement to go there in the person of a fair maid of honor of her Majesty 's ; and the air and patronage Mr. Swift give himself , forget gentleman of his country whom he know perfectly , his loud talk at once insolent and servile , nay , perhaps his very intimacy with Lord Treasurer and the Secretary , who indulge all his freak and call he Jonathan , you may be sure , be remark by many a person of whom the proud priest himself take no note , during that time of his vanity and triumph . 
 ' Twas but three day after the 15th of November , 1712   esmond mind he well of the date , that he go by invitation to dine with his General , the foot of whose table he use to take on these festive occasion , as he have do at many a board , hard and plentiful , during the campaign . this be a great feast , and of the latter sort ; the honest old gentleman love to treat his friend splendidly : his Grace of Ormonde , before he join his army as generalissimo , my Lord Viscount Bolingbroke , one of her Majesty 's Secretaries of State , my Lord Orkney , that have serve with we abroad , be of the party . his Grace of Hamilton , Master of the Ordnance , and in whose honor the feast have be give , upon his approach departure as Ambassador to Paris , have send an excuse to General Webb at two o'clock , but an hour before the dinner : nothing but the most immediate business , his grace say , should have prevent he have the pleasure of drink a parting glass to the health of General Webb . his absence disappoint Esmond 's old chief , who suffer much from his wound besides ; and though the company be grand , it be rather gloomy . St. John come last , and bring a friend with he : " I be sure , " say my General , bow very politely , " my table hath always a place for Dr. Swift . " 
 Mr. Esmond go up to the Doctor with a bow and a smile : " I give Dr. Swift 's message , " say he , " to the printer : I hope he bring your pamphlet to your lodging in time . " indeed poor Leach have come to his house very soon after the doctor leave it , be bring away rather tipsy from the tavern by his thrifty wife ; and he talk of Cousin Swift in a maudlin way , though of course Mr. Esmond do not allude to this relationship . the Doctor scowl , blush , and be much confused , and say scarce a word during the whole of dinner . a very little stone will sometimes knock down these Goliaths of wit ; and this one be often discomfit when meet by a man of any spirit ; he take his place sulkily , put water in his wine that the other drink plentifully , and scarce say a word . 
 the talk be about the affair of the day , or rather about person than affair : my Lady Marlborough 's fury , her daughter in old clothe and mob - cap look out from their window and see the company pass to the Drawing - room ; the gentleman - usher 's horror when the Prince of Savoy be introduce to her Majesty in a tie - wig , no man out of a full - bottom periwig ever have kiss the Royal hand before ; about the Mohawks and the damage they be do , rush through the town , kill and murder . some one say the ill - omen face of Mohun have be see at the theatre the night before , and Macartney and Meredith with he . mean to be a feast , the meeting , in spite of drink and talk , be as dismal as a funeral . every topic start subside into gloom . his grace of Ormonde go away because the conversation get upon Denain , where we have be defeat in the last campaign . Esmond 's General be affect at the allusion to this action too , for his comrade of Wynendael , the Count of Nassau Woudenbourg , have be slay there . Mr. Swift , when Esmond pledge he , say he drink no wine , and take his hat from the peg and go away , beckon my Lord Bolingbroke to follow he ; but the other bade he take his chariot and save his coach - hire he have to speak with Colonel Esmond ; and when the rest of the company withdraw to card , these two remain behind in the dark . 
 Bolingbroke always speak freely when he have drink freely . his enemy could get any secret out of he in that condition ; woman be even employ to ply he , and take his word down . I have hear that my Lord Stair , three year after , when the Secretary flee to France and become the Pretender 's Minister , get all the information he want by put female spy over St. John in his cup . he speak freely now : " Jonathan know nothing of this for certain , though he suspect it , and by George , Webb will take an Archbishopric , and Jonathan a no , damme Jonathan will take an Arch - bishopric from James , I warrant I , gladly enough . your Duke hath the string of the whole matter in his hand , " the Secretary go on . " we have that which will force Marlborough to keep his distance , and he go out of London in a fortnight . prior hath his business ; he leave I this morning , and mark I , Harry , should fate carry off our august , our beloved , our most gouty and plethoric Queen , and Defender of the Faith , la bonne cause triomphera . a la sante de la bonne cause ! everything good come from France . Wine come from France ; give we another bumper to the bonne cause . " we drink it together . 
 " will the bonne cause turn protestant ? " ask Mr. Esmond . 
 " no , hang it , " say the other , " he will defend our Faith as in duty bind , but he will stick by his own . the Hind and the Panther shall run in the same car , by Jove . righteousness and peace shall kiss each other : and we will have Father Massillon to walk down the aisle of St. Paul 's , cheek by jowl with Dr. Sacheverel . give we more wine ; here be a health to the bonne cause , kneeling damme , let us drink it kneel . " he be quite flushed and wild with wine as he be talk . 
 " and suppose , " say Esmond , who always have this gloomy apprehension , " the bonne cause should give we up to the French , as his father and uncle do before he ? " 
 " give we up to the French ! " start up Bolingbroke ; " be there any english gentleman that fear that ? you who have see Blenheim and Ramillies , afraid of the French ! your ancestor and mine , and brave old Webb 's yonder , have meet they in a hundred field , and our child will be ready to do the like . who be he that wish for more man from England ? my Cousin Westmoreland ? give we up to the French , pshaw ! " 
 " his uncle do , " say Mr. Esmond . 
 " and what happen to his grandfather ? " break out St. John , fill out another bumper . " here be to the great monarch England ever see ; here be to the Englishman that make a kingdom of she . our great King come from Huntingdon , not Hanover ; our father do not   look for a Dutchman to rule we . let he come and we will keep he , and we will show he Whitehall . if he be a traitor let we have he here to deal with he ; and then there be spirit here as great as any that have go before . there be man here that can look at danger in the face and not be frightened at it . traitor ! treason ! what name be these to scare you and I ? be all Oliver 's man dead , or his glorious name forget in fifty year ? be there no man equal to he , think you , as good ay , as good ? God save the king ! and , if the monarchy fail we , God save the British Republic ! " 
 he fill another great bumper , and toss it up and drain it wildly , just as the noise of rapid carriage - wheel approaching be stop at our door , and after a hurried knock and a moment 's interval , Mr. Swift come into the hall , run up stair to the room we be din in , and enter it with a perturbed face . St. John , excited with drink , be make some wild quotation out of Macbeth , but Swift stop he . 
 " drink no more , my lord , for God 's sake ! " say he . " I come with the most dreadful news . " 
 " be the queen dead ? " cry out Bolingbroke , seize on a water - glass . 
 " no , Duke Hamilton be dead : he be murder an hour ago by Mohun and Macartney ; they have a quarrel this morning ; they give he not so much time as to write a letter . he go for a couple of his friend , and he be dead , and Mohun , too , the bloody villain , who be set on he . they fight in Hyde Park just before sunset ; the Duke kill Mohun , and Macartney come up and stab he , and the dog be flee . I have your chariot below ; send to every part of the country and apprehend that villain ; come to the Duke 's house and see if any life be leave in he . " 
 " oh , beatrix , beatrix , " think Esmond , " and here end my poor girl 's ambition ! " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 POOR BEATRIX . 

 there have be no need to urge upon Esmond the necessity of a separation between he and beatrix : Fate have do that completely ; and I think from the very moment poor beatrix have accept the Duke 's offer , she begin to assume the majestic air of a Duchess , nay , Queen Elect , and to carry herself as one sacred and remove from we common people . her mother and kinsman both fall into her way , the latter scornfully perhaps , and utter his usual gibe at her vanity and his own . there be a certain charm about this girl of which neither Colonel Esmond nor his fond mistress could forego the fascination ; in spite of her fault and her pride and wilfulness , they be force to love she ; and , indeed , might be set down as the two chief flatterer of the brilliant creature 's court . 
 who , in the course of his life , hath not be so bewitched , and worship some idol or another ? year after this passion hath be dead and bury , along with a thousand other worldly care and ambition , he who feel it can recall it out of its grave , and admire , almost as fondly as he do in his youth , that lovely queenly creature . I invoke that beautiful spirit from the shade and love she still ; or rather I should say such a past be always present to a man ; such a passion once feel form a part of his whole being , and can not be separate from it ; it become a portion of the man of to - day , just as any great faith or conviction , the discovery of poetry , the awakening of religion , ever afterwards influence he ; just as the wound I have at Blenheim , and of which I wear the scar , hath become part of my frame and influence my whole body , nay , spirit subsequently , though ' twa get and heal forty year ago . parting and forgetting ! what faithful heart can do these ? our great thought , our great affection , the Truths of our life , never leave we . surely , they can not separate from our consciousness ; shall follow it whithersoever that shall go ; and be of their nature divine and immortal . 
 with the horrible news of this catsstrophe , which be confirm by the weep domestic at the Duke 's own door , Esmond ride homeward as quick as his lazy coach would carry he , devise all the time how he should break the intelligence to the person most concerned in it ; and if a satire upon human vanity could be need , that poor soul afford it in the altered company and occupation in which Esmond find she . for day before , her chariot have be roll the street from mercer to toyshop from goldsmith to laceman : her taste be perfect , or at least the fond bridegroom have think so , and have give her entire authority over all tradesman , and for all the plate , furniture and equipage , with which his grace the Ambassador wish to adorn his splendid mission . she must have her picture by Kneller , a duchess not be complete without a portrait , and a noble one he make , and actually sketch in , on a cushion , a coronet which she be about to wear . she vow she would wear it at King James the Third 's coronation , and never a princess in the land would have become ermine well . esmond find the ante - chamber crowd with milliner and toyshop woman , obsequious goldsmith with jewel , salver , and tankard ; and mercer ' man with hanging , and velvet , and brocade . my Lady Duchess elect be give audience to one famous silversmith from Exeter Change , who bring with he a great chased salver , of which he be point out the beauty as Colonel Esmond enter . " come , " say she , " cousin , and admire the taste of this pretty thing . " I think Mars and Venus be lie in the golden bower , that one gilt Cupid carry off the war - god 's casque another his sword another his great buckler , upon which my Lord Duke Hamilton 's arm with our be to be engrave and a fourth be kneel down to the reclining goddess with the ducal coronet in her hand , God help we ! the next time Mr. Esmond see that piece of plate , the arm be change , the ducal coronet have be replace by a viscount 's ; it form part of the fortune of the thrifty goldsmith 's own daughter , when she marry my Lord Viscount Squanderfield two year after . 
 " be not   this a beautiful piece ? " say Beatrix , examine it , and she point out the arch grace of the cupid , and the fine carving of the languid prostrate Mars . esmond sicken as he think of the warrior dead in his chamber , his servant and child weep around he ; and of this smile creature attire herself , as it be , for that nuptial death - bed . " ' tis a pretty piece of vanity , " say he , look gloomily at the beautiful creature : there be flambeaux in the room light up the brilliant mistress of it . she lift up the great gold salver with her fair arm . 
 " Vanity ! " say she , haughtily . " what be vanity in you , sir , be propriety in I . you ask a jewish price for it , Mr. Graves ; but have it I will , if only to spite Mr. Esmond . " 
 " oh , Beatrix , lie it down ! " say Mr. Esmond . " Herodias ! you know not what you carry in the charger . " 
 she drop it with a clang ; the eager goldsmith run to seize his fallen ware . the lady 's face catch the fright from Esmond 's pale countenance , and her eye shine out like beacon of alarm : " what be it , Henry ! " say she , run to he , and seize both his hand . " what do you mean by your pale face and gloomy tone ? " 
 " come away , come away ! " say Esmond , lead she : she clung frighten to he , and he support she upon his heart , bid the scared goldsmith leave they . the man go into the next apartment , star with surprise , and hug his precious charger . 
 " oh , my beatrix , my sister ! " say Esmond , still hold in his arm the pallid and affrighted creature , " you have the great courage of any woman in the world ; prepare to show it now , for you have a dreadful trial to bear . " 
 she spring away from the friend who would have protect she : " Hath he leave I ? " say she . " we have word this morning : he be very gloomy , and I anger he : but he dare not , he dare not ! " as she speak a burn blush flush over her whole face and bosom . esmond see it reflect in the glass by which she stand , with clench hand , press her swell heart . 
 " he have leave you , " say Esmond , wonder that rage rather than sorrow be in her look . 
 " and he be alive , " cry beatrix , " and you bring I this commission ! he have leave I , and you have not   dare to avenge I ! you , that pretend to be the champion of our house , have let I suffer this insult ! where be Castlewood ? I will go to my brother . " 
 " the Duke be not alive , beatrix , " say Esmond . 
 she look at her cousin wildly , and fall back to the wall as though shoot in the breast : " and you come here , and and you kill he ? " 
 " no ; thank heaven ! " her kinsman say . " the blood of that noble heart doth not stain my sword ! in its last hour it be faithful to thee , Beatrix Esmond . vain and cruel woman ! kneel and thank the awful heaven which award life and death , and chastise pride , that the noble Hamilton die true to you ; at least that ' twa not your quarrel , or your pride , or your wicked vanity , that drive he to his fate . he die by the bloody sword which already have drink your own father 's blood . o woman , o sister ! to that sad field where two corps be lie for the murderer die too by the hand of the man he slay can you bring no mourner but your revenge and your vanity ? God help and pardon thee , Beatrix , as he bring this awful punishment to your hard and rebellious heart . " 
 Esmond have scarce do speak , when his mistress come in . the colloquy between he and Beatrix have last but a few minute , during which time Esmond 's servant have carry the disastrous news through the household . the army of Vanity Fair , wait without , gather up all their frippery and flee aghast . Tender Lady Castlewood have be in talk above with Dean Atterbury , the pious creature 's almoner and director ; and the Dean have enter with she as a physician whose place be at a sick - bed . beatrix 's mother look at Esmond and run towards her daughter , with a pale face and open heart and hand , all kindness and pity . but Beatrix pass she by , nor would she have any of the medicament of the spiritual physician . " I be good in my own room and by myself , " she say . her eye be quite dry ; nor do Esmond ever see they otherwise , save once , in respect to that grief . she give he a cold hand as she go out : " thank you , brother , " she say , in a low voice , and with a simplicity more touching than tear ; " all you have say be true and kind , and I will go away and ask pardon . " the three other remain behind , and talk over the dreadful story . it affect Dr. Atterbury more even than we , as it seem . the death of Mohun , her husband 's murderer , be more awful to my mistress than even the Duke 's unhappy end . esmond give at length what particular he know of their quarrel , and the cause of it . the two nobleman have long be at war with respect to the Lord Gerard 's property , whose two daughter my Lord Duke and Mohun have marry . they have meet by appointment that day at the lawyer 's in Lincoln 's Inn Fields ; have word which , though they appear very trifle to those who hear they , be not so to man exasperate by long and previous enmity . Mohun ask my Lord Duke where he could see his grace 's friend , and within an hour have send two of his own to arrange this deadly duel . it be pursue with such fierceness , and spring from so trifle a cause , that all man agree at the time that there be a party , of which these three notorious brawler be but agent , who desire to take Duke Hamilton 's life away . they fight three on a side , as in that tragic meeting twelve year back , which hath be recount already , and in which Mohun perform his second murder . they rush in , and close upon each other at once without any feint or crossing of sword even , and stab one at the other desperately , each receive many wound ; and Mohun have his death - wound , and my Lord Duke lie by he , Macartney come up and stab his grace as he lie on the ground , and give he the blow of which he die . Colonel Macartney deny this , of which the horror and indignation of the whole kingdom would nevertheless have he guilty , and flee the country , whither he never return . 
 what be the real cause of the Duke Hamilton 's death ? a paltry quarrel that might easily have be make up , and with a ruffian so low , base , profligate , and degrade with former crime and repeat murder , that a man of such renown and princely rank as my Lord Duke might have disdain to sully his sword with the blood of such a villain . but his spirit be so high that those who wish his death know that his courage be like his charity , and never turn any man away ; and he die by the hand of Mohun , and the other two cut - throat that be set on he . the Queen 's ambassador to Paris die , the loyal and devoted servant of the House of Stuart , and a Royal Prince of Scotland himself , and carry the confidence , the repentance of Queen Anne along with his own open devotion , and the good - will of million in the country more , to the Queen 's exiled brother and sovereign . 
 that party to which Lord Mohun belong have the benefit of his service , and now be well rid of such a ruffian . he , and Meredith , and Macartney , be the Duke of Marlborough 's man ; and the two colonel have be break but the year before for drinking perdition to the Tories . his grace be a Whig now and a Hanoverian , and as eager for war as Prince Eugene himself . I say not that he be privy to Duke Hamilton 's death , I say that his party profit by it ; and that three desperate and bloody instrument be find to effect that murder . 
 as Esmond and the Dean walk away from Kensington discourse of this tragedy , and how fatal it be to the cause which they both have at heart , the street - crier be already out with their broadside , shout through the town the full , true , and horrible account of the death of Lord Mohun and Duke Hamilton in a duel . a fellow have get to Kensington , and be cry it in the square there at very early morning , when Mr. Esmond happen to pass by . he drive the man from under Beatrix 's very window , whereof the casement have be set open . the sun be shin though ' twas November : he have see the market - cart roll into London , the guard relieve at the palace , the laborer trudge to their work in the garden between Kensington and the City the wander merchant and hawker fill the air with their cry . the world be go to its business again , although duke lie dead and lady mourn for they ; and king , very likely , lose their chance . so night and day pass away , and to - morrow come , and our place know we not . esmond think of the courier , now gallop on the North road to inform he , who be Earl of Arran yesterday , that he be Duke of Hamilton to - day , and of a thousand great scheme , hope , ambition , that be alive in the gallant heart , beat a few hour since , and now in a little dust quiescent . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 I visit castlewood once MORE . 

 thus , for a third time , Beatrix 's ambitious hope be circumvent , and she might well believe that a special malignant fate watch and pursue she , tear her prize out of her hand just as she seem to grasp it , and leave she with only rage and grief for her portion . whatever her feeling might have be of anger or of sorrow ,   and I fear I that the former emotion be that which most tear her heart ,   she would take no confidant , as people of soft nature would have do under such a calamity ; her mother and her kinsman know that she would disdain their pity , and that to offer it would be but to infuriate the cruel wound which fortune have inflict . we know that her pride be awfully humble and punish by this sudden and terrible blow ; she want no teaching of our to point out the sad moral of her story . her fond mother could give but her prayer , and her kinsman his faithful friendship and patience to the unhappy , stricken creature ; and it be only by hint , and a word or two utter month afterwards , that beatrix show she understand their silent commiseration , and on her part be secretly thankful for their forbearance . the people about the Court say there be that in her manner which frighten away scoff and condolence : she be above their triumph and their pity , and act her part in that dreadful tragedy greatly and courageously ; so that those who like she least be yet force to admire she . we , who watch she after her disaster , could not but respect the indomitable courage and majestic calm with which she bear it . " I would rather see her tear than her pride , " her mother say , who be accustom to bear her sorrow in a very different way , and to receive they as the stroke of God , with an awful submission and meekness . but beatrix 's nature be different to that tender parent 's ; she seem to accept her grief and to defy it ; nor would she allow it   I believe not even in private and in her own chamber   to extort from she the confession of even a tear of humiliation or a cry of pain . friend and child of our race , who come after I , in which way will you bear your trial ? I know one that pray God will give you love rather than pride , and that the Eye all - seeing shall find you in the humble place . not that we should judge proud spirit otherwise than charitably . ' tis nature hath fashion some for ambition and dominion , as it hath form other for obedience and gentle submission . the leopard follow his nature as the lamb do , and act after leopard law ; she can neither help her beauty , nor her courage , nor her cruelty ; nor a single spot on her shin coat ; nor the conquering spirit which impel she ; nor the shot which bring she down . 
 during that well - found panic the Whigs have , lest the Queen should forsake their Hanoverian Prince , bind by oath and treaty as she be to he , and recall her brother , who be ally to she by yet strong tie of nature and duty ; the Prince of Savoy , and the bold of that party of the Whigs , be for bring the young Duke of Cambridge over , in spite of the Queen , and the outcry of her Tory servant , argue that the Electoral Prince , a Peer and Prince of the Blood - Royal of this Realm too , and in the line of succession to the crown , have , a right to sit in the Parliament whereof he be a member , and to dwell in the country which he one day be to govern . nothing but the strong ill will express by the Queen , and the people about she , and menace of the Royal resentment , should this scheme be persist in , prevent it from be carry into effect . 
 the bold on our side be , in like manner , for have our Prince into the country . the undoubted inheritor of the right divine ; the feeling of more than half the nation , of almost all the clergy , of the gentry of England and Scotland with he ; entirely innocent of the crime for which his father suffer brave , young , handsome , unfortunate who in England would dare to molest the Prince should he come among we , and fle himself upon british generosity , hospitality , and honor ? an invader with an army of Frenchmen behind he , Englishmen of spirit would resist to the death , and drive back to the shore whence he come ; but a Prince , alone , arm with his right only , and rely on the loyalty of his people , be sure , many of his friend argue , of welcome , at least of safety , among we . the hand of his sister the Queen , of the people his subject , never could be raise to do he a wrong . but the Queen be timid by nature , and the successive Ministers she have , have private cause for their irresolution . the bold and honester man , who have at heart the illustrious young exile 's cause , have no scheme of interest of their own to prevent they from see the right do , and , provide only he come as an Englishman , be ready to venture their all to welcome and defend he . 
 St. John and Harley both have kind word in plenty for the Prince 's adherent , and give he endless promise of future support ; but hint and promise be all they could be get to give ; and some of his friend be for measure much bold , more efficacious , and more open . with a party of these , some of whom be yet alive , and some whose name Mr. Esmond have no right to mention , he find himself engage the year after that miserable death of Duke Hamilton , which deprive the Prince of his most courageous ally in this country . Dean Atterbury be one of the friend whom Esmond may mention , as the brave bishop be now beyond exile and persecution , and to he , and one or two more , the Colonel open himself of a scheme of his own , that , back by a little resolution on the Prince 's part , could not fail of bring about the accomplishment of their dearest wish . 
 my young Lord Viscount Castlewood have not come to England to keep his majority , and have now be absent from the country for several year . the year when his sister be to be marry and Duke Hamilton die , my lord be keep at Bruxelles by his wife 's lying - in . the gentle Clotilda could not bear her husband out of her sight ; perhaps she mistrust the young scapegrace should he ever get loose from her lead - string ; and she keep he by her side to nurse the baby and administer posset to the gossip . many a laugh poor beatrix have have about Frank 's uxoriousness : his mother would have go to Clotilda when her time be come , but that the mother - in - law be already in possession , and the negotiation for poor beatrix 's marriage be begin . a few month after the horrid catastrophe in Hyde Park , my mistress and her daughter retire to Castlewood , where my lord , it be expect , would soon join they . but , to say truth , their quiet household be little to his taste ; he could be get to come to Walcote but once after his first campaign ; and then the young rogue spend more than half his time in London , not appear at Court or in public under his own name and title , but frequent play , bagnio , and the very bad company , under the name of Captain Esmond   whereby his innocent kinsman get more than once into trouble ; and so under various pretext , and in pursuit of all sort of pleasure , until he plunge into the lawful one of marriage , Frank Castlewood have remain away from this country , and be unknown , save amongst the gentleman of the army , with whom he have serve abroad . the fond heart of his mother be pain by this long absence . ' twas all that Henry Esmond could do to soothe her natural mortification , and find excuse for his kinsman 's levity . 
 in the autumn of the year 1713 , Lord Castlewood think of return home . his first child have be a daughter ; Clotilda be in the way of gratify his lordship with a second , and the pious youth think that , by bring his wife to his ancestral home , by prayer to St. Philip of Castlewood , and what not , heaven might be induce to bless he with a son this time , for whose come the expectant mamma be very anxious . 
 the long - debate peace have be proclaim this year at the end of March ; and France be open to we . just as Frank 's poor mother have make all thing ready for Lord Castlewood 's reception , and be eagerly expect her son , it be by Colonel Esmond 's mean that the kind lady be disappoint of her longing , and oblige to defer once more the darling hope of her heart . 
 esmond take horse to Castlewood . he have not see its ancient gray tower and well - remember wood for nearly fourteen year , and since he ride thence with my lord , to whom his mistress with her young child by her side wave an adieu . what age seem to have pass since then , what year of action and passion , of care , love , hope , disaster ! the child be grow up now , and have story of their own . as for Esmond , he feel to be a hundred year old ; his dear mistress only seem unchanged ; she look and welcome he quite as of old . there be the fountain in the court babble its familiar music , the old hall and its furniture , the carve chair my late lord use , the very flagon he drink from . Esmond 's mistress know he would like to sleep in the little room he use to occupy ; ' twa make ready for he , and wall - flower and sweet herb set in the adjoining chamber , the chaplain 's room . 
 in tear of not unmanly emotion , with prayer of submission to the awful Dispenser of death and life , of good and evil fortune , Mr. Esmond pass a part of that first night at Castlewood , lie awake for many hour as the clock keep tolling   in tone so well remember , look back , as all man will , that revisit their home of childhood , over the great gulf of time , and survey himself on the distant bank yonder , a sad little melancholy boy with his lord still alive his dear mistress , a girl yet , her child sport around she . year ago , a boy on that very bed , when she have bless he and call he her knight , he have make a vow to be faithful and never desert her dear service . have he keep that fond boyish promise ? yes , before heaven ; yes , praise be to God ! his life have be her ; his blood , his fortune , his name , his whole heart ever since have be hers and her child 's . all night long he be dream his boyhood over again , and wake fitfully ; he half fancy he hear Father Holt call to he from the next chamber , and that he be come in and out of from the mysterious window . 
 Esmond rise up before the dawn , pass into the next room , where the air be heavy with the odor of the wall - flower ; look into the brazier where the paper have be burn , into the old press where Holt 's book and paper have be keep , and try the spring and whether the window work still . the spring have not be touch for year , but yield at length , and the whole fabric of the window sink down . he lift it and it relapse into its frame ; no one have ever pass thence since Holt use it sixteen year ago . 
 Esmond remember his poor lord say , on the last day of his life , that Holt use to come in and out of the house like a ghost , and know that the Father like these mystery , and practise such secret disguise , entrance and exit : this be the way the ghost come and go , his pupil have always conjecture . esmond close the casement up again as the dawn be rise over Castlewood village ; he could hear the clinking at the blacksmith 's forge yonder among the tree , across the green , and past the river , on which a mist still lie sleep . 
 Next Esmond open that long cupboard over the woodwork of the mantel - piece , big enough to hold a man , and in which Mr. Holt use to keep sundry secret property of his . the two sword he remember so well as a boy , lie actually there still , and Esmond take they out and wipe they , with a strange curiosity of emotion . there be a bundle of paper here , too , which no doubt have be leave at Holt 's last visit to the place , in my Lord Viscount 's life , that very day when the priest have be arrest and take to Hexham Castle . esmond make free with these paper , and find treasonable matter of King William 's reign , the name of Charnock and Perkins , Sir John Fenwick and Sir John Friend , Rookwood and Lodwick , Lords Montgomery and Allesbury , Clarendon and Yarmouth , that have all be engage in plot against the usurper ; a letter from the Duke of Berwick too , and one from the King at St. Germains , offer to confer upon his trusty and well - beloved Francis Viscount Castlewood the title of Earl and Marquis of Esmond , bestow by patent royal , and in the fourth year of his reign , upon Thomas Viscount Castlewood and the heir - male of his body , in default of which issue the rank and dignity be to pass to Francis aforesaid . 
 this be the paper , whereof my lord have speak , which Holt show he the very day he be arrest , and for an answer to which he would come back in a week 's time . I put these paper hastily into the crypt whence I have take they , be interrupt by a tapping of a light finger at the ring of the chamber - door : ' twa my kind mistress , with her face full of love and welcome . she , too , have pass the night wakefuly , no doubt ; but neither ask the other how the hour have be spend . there be thing we divine without speak , and know though they happen out of our sight . this fond lady hath tell I that she know both day when I be wound abroad . who shall say how far sympathy reach , and how truly love can prophesy ? " I look into your room , " be all she say ; " the bed be vacant , the little old bed ! I know I should find you here . " and tender and blush faintly with a benediction in her eye , the gentle creature kiss he . 
 they walk out , hand - in - hand , through the old court , and to the terrace - walk , where the grass be glisten with dew , and the bird in the green wood above be sing their delicious chorus under the blushing morning sky . how well all thing be remember ! the ancient tower and gable of the hall darkle against the east , the purple shadow on the green slope , the quaint device and carving of the dial , the forest - crown height , the fair yellow plain cheerful with crop and corn , the shin river roll through it towards the pearly hill beyond ; all these be before we , along with a thousand beautiful memory of our youth , beautiful and sad , but as real and vivid in our mind as that fair and always - remember scene our eye beheld once more . we forget nothing . the memory sleep , but waken again ; I often think how it shall be when , after the last sleep of death , the reveillee shall arouse we for ever , and the past in one flash of self - consciousness rush back , like the soul revivify . 
 the house would not be up for some hour yet ,   it be July , and the dawn be only just awake ,   and here Esmond open himself to his mistress , of the business he have in hand , and what part Frank be to play in it . he know he could confide anything to she , and that the fond soul would die rather than reveal it ; and bid she keep the secret from all , he lay it entirely before his mistress   always as staunch a little loyalist as any in the kingdom , and indeed be quite sure that any plan , of his be secure of her applause and sympathy . never be such a glorious scheme to her partial mind , never such a devoted knight to execute it . an hour or two may have pass whilst they be have their colloquy . beatrix come out to they just as their talk be over ; her tall beautiful form rob in sable   which she wear without ostentation ever since last year 's catastrophe , sweep over the green terrace , and cast its shadow before she across the grass . 
 she make we one of her grand curtsy smile , and call we " the young people . " she be old , pale , and more majestic than in the year before ; her mother seem the young of the two . she never once speak of her grief , Lady Castlewood tell Esmond , or allude , save by a quiet word or two , to the death of her hope . 
 when beatrix come back to Castlewood she take to visit all the cottage and all the sick . she set up a school of child , and teach singing to some of they . we have a pair of beautiful old organ in Castlewood Church , on which she play admirably , so that the music there become to be know in the country for many mile round , and no doubt people come to see the fair organist as well as to hear she . Parson Tusher and his wife be establish at the vicarage , but his wife have bring he no child wherewith Tom might meet his enemy at the gate . Honest Tom take care not to have many such , his great shovel - hat be in his hand for everybody . he be profuse of bow and compliment . he behave to Esmond as if the Colonel have be a Commander - in - Chief ; he din at the hall that day , be Sunday , and would not partake of pudding except under extreme pressure . he deplore my lord 's perversion , but drink his lordship 's health very devoutly ; and an hour before at church send the Colonel to sleep , with a long , learn , and refresh sermon . 
 Esmond 's visit home be but for two day ; the business he have in hand call he away and out of the country . Ere he go , he see Beatrix but once alone , and then she summon he out of the long tapestry room , where he and his mistress be sit , quite as in old time , into the adjoining chamber , that have be Viscountess Isabel 's sleep apartment , and where Esmond perfectly well remember see the old lady sit up in the bed , in her night - rail , that morning when the troop of guard come to fetch she . the most beautiful woman in England lie in that bed now , whereof the great damask hanging be scarce fade since Esmond see they last . 
 here stand Beatrix in her black robe , hold a box in her hand ; ' twa that which Esmond have give she before her marriage , stamp with a coronet which the disappointed girl be never to wear ; and contain his aunt 's legacy of diamond . 
 " you have well take these with you , Harry , " say she ; " I have no need of diamond any more . " there be not the least token of emotion in her quiet low voice . she hold out the black shagreen case with her fair arm , that do not shake in the least . esmond see she wear a black velvet bracelet on it , with my Lord Duke 's picture in enamel ; he have give it she but three day before he fall . 
 Esmond say the stone be his no long , and strove to turn off that proffer restoration with a laugh : " of what good , " say he , " be they to I ? the diamond loop to his hat do not set off Prince Eugene , and will not make my yellow face look any handsomer . " 
 " you will give they to your wife , cousin , " say she . " my cousin , your wife have a lovely complexion and shape . " 
 " beatrix , " esmond burst out , the old fire flame out as it would at time , " will you wear those trinket at your marriage ? you whisper once you do not know I : you know I well now : how I seek , what I have sigh for , for ten year , what foregone ! " 
 " a price for your constancy , my lord ! " say she ; ' such a preux chevalier want to be pay . oh fie , cousin ! " 
 " again , " Esmond speak out , " if I do something you have at heart ; something worthy of I and you ; something that shall make I a name with which to endow you ; will you take it ? there be a chance for I once , you say ; be it impossible to recall it ? never shake your head , but hear I ; say you will hear I a year hence . if I come back to you and bring you fame , will that please you ? if I do what you desire most what he who be dead desire most will that soften you ? " 
 " what be it , Henry ? " say she , her face light up ; " what mean you ? " 
 " ask no question , " he say ; " wait , and give I but time ; if I bring back that you long for , that I have a thousand time hear you pray for , will you have no reward for he who have do you that service ? put away those trinket , keep they : it shall not be at my marriage , it shall not be at your ; but if man can do it , I swear a day shall come when there shall be a feast in your house , and you shall be proud to wear they . I say no more now ; put aside these word , and lock away yonder box until the day when I shall remind you of both . all I pray of you now be , to wait and to remember . " 
 " you be go out of the country ? " say beatrix , in some agitation . 
 " yes , to - morrow , " say Esmond . 
 " To Lorraine , cousin ? " say Beatrix , lay her hand on his arm ; ' twa the hand on which she wear the Duke 's bracelet . " stay , Harry ! " continue she , with a tone that have more despondency in it than she be accustom to show . " hear a last word . I do love you . I do admire you who would not , that have know such love as yours have be for we all ? but I think I have no heart ; at least I have never see the man that could touch it ; and , have I find he , I would have follow he in rag have he be a private soldier , or to sea , like one of those buccaneer you use to read to we about when we be child . I would do anything for such a man , bear anything for he : but I never find one . you be ever too much of a slave to win my heart ; even my Lord Duke could not command it . I have not be happy have I marry he . I know that three month after our engagement and be too vain to break it . oh , Harry ! I cry once or twice , not for he , but with tear of rage because I could not be sorry for he . I be frightened to find I be glad of his death ; and be I join to you , I should have the same sense of servitude , the same longing to escape . we should both be unhappy , and you the most , who be as jealous as the Duke be himself . I try to love he ; I try , indeed I do : affect gladness when he come : submit to hear when he be by I , and try the wife 's part I think I be to play for the rest of my day . but half an hour of that complaisance weary I , and what would a lifetime be ? my thought be away when he be speak ; and I be think , oh that this man would drop my hand , and rise up from before my foot ! I know his great and noble quality , great and nobler than mine a thousand time , as yours be , cousin , I tell you , a million and a million time well . but ' twa not for these I take he . I take he to have a great place in the world , and I lose it . I lose it , and do not deplore he and I often think , as I listen to his fond vow and ardent word , oh , if I yield to this man , and meet the other , I shall hate he and leave he ! I be not good , Harry : my mother be gentle and good like an angel . I wonder how she should have have such a child . she be weak , but she would die rather than do a wrong ; I be strong than she , but I would do it out of defiance . I do not care for what the parson tell I with their droning sermon : I use to see they at court as mean and as worthless as the mean woman there . oh , I be sick and weary of the world ! I wait but for one thing , and when ' tis do , I will take Frank 's religion and your poor mother 's , and go into a nunnery , and end like she . shall I wear the diamond then ? they say the nun wear their good trinket the day they take the veil . I will put they away as you bid I ; farewell , cousin : mamma be pace the next room rack her little head to know what we have be say . she be jealous , all woman be . I sometimes think that be the only womanly quality I have . " 
 " Farewell . Farewell , brother . " she give he her cheek as a brotherly privilege . the cheek be as cold as marble . 
 Esmond 's mistress show no sign of jealousy when he return to the room where she be . she have school herself so as to look quite inscrutably , when she have a mind . amongst her other feminine quality she have that of be a perfect dissembler . 
 he ride away from Castlewood to attempt the task he be bind on , and stand or fall by it ; in truth his state of mind be such , that he be eager for some outward excitement to counteract that gnaw malady which he be inwardly endure . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 I travel to FRANCE and bring home a portrait of RIGAUD . 

 Mr. Esmond do not think fit to take leave at Court , or to inform all the world of Pall Mall and the coffee - house , that he be about to quit England ; and choose to depart in the most private manner possible . he procure a pass as for a Frenchman , through Dr. Atterbury , who do that business for he , get the signature even from Lord Bolingbroke 's office , without any personal application to the Secretary . Lockwood , his faithful servant , he take with he to Castlewood , and leave behind there : give out ere he leave London that he himself be sick , and go to Hampshire for country air , and so depart as silently as might be upon his business . 
 as Frank Castlewood 's aid be indispensable for Mr. Esmond 's scheme , his first visit be to Bruxelles   pass by way of Antwerp , where the Duke of Marlborough be in exile , and in the first - name place Harry find his dear young Benedict , the married man , who appear to be rather out of humor with his matrimonial chain , and clog with the obstinate embrace which Clotilda keep round his neck . Colonel Esmond be not present to she ; but Monsieur Simon be , a gentleman of the Royal Cravat   Esmond bethink he of the regiment of his honest Irishman , whom he have see that day after Malplaquet , when he first set eye on the young king ; and Monsieur Simon be introduce to the Viscountess Castlewood , nee Comptesse Wertheim ; to the numerous count , the Lady Clotilda 's tall brother ; to her father the chamberlain ; and to the lady his wife , Frank 's mother - in - law , a tall and majestic person of large proportion , such as become the mother of such a company of grenadier as her warlike son form . the whole race be at free quarter in the little castle nigh to Bruxelles which Frank have take ; ride his horse ; drink his wine ; and live easily at the poor lad 's charge . Mr. Esmond have always maintain a perfect fluency in the French , which be his mother tongue ; and if this family   that speak French with the twang which the Flemings use   discover any inaccuracy in Mr. Simon 's pronunciation , ' twa to be attribute to the latter 's long residence in England , where he have marry and remain ever since he be take prisoner at Blenheim . his story be perfectly pat ; there be none there to doubt it save honest Frank , and he be charm with his kinsman 's scheme , when he become acquainted with it ; and , in truth , always admire Colonel Esmond with an affectionate fidelity , and think his cousin the wise and good of all cousin and man . Frank enter heart and soul into the plan , and like it the well as it be to take he to Paris , out of reach of his brother , his father , and his mother - in - law , whose attention rather fatigue he . 
 Castlewood , I have say , be bear in the same year as the Prince of Wales ; have not a little of the Prince 's air , height , and figure ; and , especially since he have see the Chevalier de St. George on the occasion before - name , take no small pride in his resemblance to a person so illustrious ; which likeness he increase by all mean in his power , wear fair brown periwig , such as the Prince wear , and ribbon , and so forth , of the Chevalier 's color . 
 this resemblance be , in truth , the circumstance on which Mr. Esmond 's scheme be found ; and have secure Frank 's secrecy and enthusiasm , he leave he to continue his journey , and see the other personage on whom its success depend . the place whither Mr. Simon next travel be Bar , in Lorraine , where that merchant arrive with a consignment of broadcloth , valuable lace from Malines , and letter for his correspondent there . 
 would you know how a prince , heroic from misfortune , and descend from a line of king , whose race seem to be doom like the Atridae of old would you know how he be employ , when the envoy who come to he through danger and difficulty behold he for the first time ? the young king , in a flannel jacket , be at tennis with the gentleman of his suite , cry out after the ball , and swear like the mean of his subject . the next time Mr. Esmond see he , ' twa when Monsieur Simon take a packet of lace to Miss Oglethorpe : the Prince 's ante - chamber in those day , at which ignoble door man be force to knock for admission to his Majesty . the admission be give , the envoy find the King and the mistress together ; the pair be at card and his Majesty be in liquor . he care more for three honor than three kingdom ; and a half - dozen glass of ratafia make he forget all his woe and his loss , his father 's crown , and his grandfather 's head . 
 Mr. Esmond do not open himself to the Prince then . his Majesty be scarce in a condition to hear he ; and he doubt whether a King who drink so much could keep a secret in his fuddle head ; or whether a hand that shake so , be strong enough to grasp at a crown . however , at last , and after take counsel with the Prince 's adviser , amongst whom be many gentleman , honest and faithful , Esmond 's plan be lay before the king , and her actual Majesty Queen Oglethorpe , in council . the Prince like the scheme well enough ; ' twa easy and daring , and suit to his reckless gayety and lively youthful spirit . in the morning after he have sleep his wine off , he be very gay , lively , and agreeable . his manner have an extreme charm of archness , and a kind simplicity ; and , to do her justice , her Oglethorpean Majesty be kind , acute , resolute , and of good counsel ; she give the Prince much good advice that he be too weak to follow , and love he with a fidelity which he return with an ingratitude quite royal . 
 have his own foreboding regard his scheme should it ever be fulfil , and his usual sceptic doubt as to the benefit which might accrue to the country by bring a tipsy young monarch back to it , Colonel Esmond have his audience of leave and quiet . Monsieur Simon take his departure . at any rate the youth at Bar be as good as the old Pretender at Hanover ; if the bad come to the bad , the Englishman could be deal with as easy as the German . Monsieur Simon trot on that long journey from Nancy to Paris , and see that famous town , stealthily and like a spy , as in truth he be ; and where , sure , more magnificence and more misery be heap together , more rag and lace , more filth and gilding , than in any city in this world . here he be put in communication with the King 's good friend , his half brother , the famous Duke of Berwick ; Esmond recognize he as the stranger who have visit Castlewood now near twenty year ago . his grace open to he when he find that Mr. Esmond be one of Webb 's brave regiment , that have once be his grace 's own . he be the sword and buckler indeed of the Stuart cause : there be no stain on his shield except the bar across it , which Marlborough 's sister leave he . have Berwick be his father 's heir , James the Third have assuredly sit on the english throne . he could dare , endure , strike , speak , be silent . the fire and genius , perhaps , he have not   that be give to base man , but except these he have some of the good quality of a leader . his grace know Esmond 's father and history ; and hint at the latter in such a way as make the Colonel to think he be aware of the particular of that story . but Esmond do not choose to enter on it , nor do the Duke press he . Mr. Esmond say , " no doubt he should come by his name if ever great people come by theirs . " 
 what confirm Esmond in his notion that the Duke of Berwick know of his case be , that when the Colonel go to pay his duty at St. Germains , her Majesty once address he by the title of Marquis . he take the Queen the dutiful remembrance of her goddaughter , and the lady whom , in the day of her prosperity , her Majesty have befriend . the Queen remember Rachel Esmond perfectly well , have hear of my Lord Castlewood 's conversion , and be much edify by that act of heaven in his favor . she know that other of that family have be of the only true church too : " your father and your mother , M. le Marquis , " her Majesty say   that be the only time she use the phrase . Monsieur Simon bow very low , and say he have find other parent than his own , who have teach he differently ; but these have only one king : on which her Majesty be pleased to give he a medal bless by the Pope , which have be find very efficacious in case similar to his own , and to promise she would offer up prayer for his conversion and that of the family : which no doubt this pious lady do , though up to the present moment , and after twenty - seven year , Colonel Esmond be bind to say that neither the medal nor the prayer have have the slight know effect upon his religious conviction . 
 as for the splendor of Versailles , Monsieur Simon , the merchant , only behold they as a humble and distant spectator , see the old king but once , when he go to feed his carps ; and ask for no presentation at his Majesty 's Court . 
 by this time my Lord Viscount Castlewood be get to Paris , where , as the London print presently announce , her ladyship be bring to bed of a son and heir . for a long while afterwards she be in a delicate state of health , and order by the physician not to travel ; otherwise ' twa well know that the Viscount Castlewood propose return to England , and take up his residence at his own seat . 
 whilst he remain at Paris , my Lord Castlewood have his picture do by the famous french painter , Monsieur Rigaud , a present for his mother in London ; and this piece Monsieur Simon take back with he when he return to that city , which he reach about May , in the year 1714 , very soon after which time my Lady Castlewood and her daughter , and their kinsman , Colonel Esmond , who have be at Castlewood all this time , likewise return to London ; her ladyship occupy her house at Kensington , Mr. Esmond return to his lodging at Knightsbridge , nearer the town , and once more make his appearance at all public place , his health greatly improve by his long stay in the country . 
 the portrait of my lord , in a handsome gilt frame , be hang up in the place of honor in her ladyship 's drawing - room . his lordship be represent in his scarlet uniform of Captain of the Guard , with a light brown periwig , a cuirass under his coat , a blue ribbon , and a fall of Bruxelles lace . many of her ladyship 's friend admire the piece beyond measure , and flock to see it ; Bishop Atterbury , Mr. Lesly , good old Mr. Collier , and other amongst the clergy , be delighted with the performance , and many among the first quality examine and praise it ; only I must own that Doctor Tusher happen to come up to London , and see the picture ,   it be ordinarily cover by a curtain , but on this day Miss Beatrix happen to be look at it when the Doctor arrive ,   the Vicar of Castlewood vow he could not see any resemblance in the piece to his old pupil , except , perhaps , a little about the chin and the periwig ; but we all of we convince he that he have not see Frank for five year or more ; that he know no more about the Fine Arts than a ploughboy , and that he must be mistake ; and we send he home assure that the piece be an excellent likeness . as for my Lord Bolingbroke , who honor her ladyship with a visit occasionally , when Colonel Esmond show he the picture he burst out laugh , and ask what devilry he be engage on ? esmond own simply that the portrait be not that of Viscount Castlewood ; besought the Secretary on his honor to keep the secret ; say that the lady of the house be enthusiastic Jacobites , as be well know ; and confess that the picture be that of the Chevalier St. George . 
 the truth be , that Mr. Simon , wait upon Lord Castlewood one day at Monsieur Rigaud 's whilst his lordship be sit for his picture , affect to be much strike with a piece represent the Chevalier , whereof the head only be finish , and purchase it of the painter for a hundred crown . it have be intend , the artist say , for Miss Oglethorpe , the Prince 's mistress , but that young lady quit Paris , have leave the work on the artist 's hand ; and take this piece home , when my lord 's portrait arrive , Colonel Esmond , alias Monsieur Simon , have copy the uniform and other accessory from my lord 's picture to fill up Rigaud 's incomplete canvas : the Colonel all his life have be a practitioner of painting , and especially follow it during his long residence in the city of Flanders , among the masterpiece of Van Dyck and Rubens . my grandson hath the piece , such as it be , in Virginia now . 
 at the commencement of the month of June , Miss Beatrix Esmond , and my Lady Viscountess , her mother , arrive from Castlewood ; the former to resume her service at Court , which have be interrupt by the fatal catastrophe of Duke Hamilton 's death . she once more take her place , then , in her Majesty 's suite and at the Maids ' table , be always a favorite with Mrs. Masham , the Queen 's chief woman , partly perhaps on account of their bitterness against the Duchess of Marlborough , whom Miss Beatrix love no well than her rival do . the gentleman about the Court , my Lord Bolingbroke amongst other , own that the young lady have come back handsomer than ever , and that the serious and tragic air which her face now involuntarily wear become she well than her former smile and archness . 
 all the old domestic at the little house of Kensington Square be change ; the old steward that have serve the family any time these five - and - twenty year , since the birth of the child of the house , be despatch into the kingdom of Ireland to see my lord 's estate there : the housekeeper , who have be my lady 's woman time out of mind , and the attendant of the young child , be send away grumble to Walcote , to see to the new painting and prepare of that house , which my Lady Dowager intend to occupy for the future , give up Castlewood to her daughter - in - law that might be expect daily from France . another servant the Viscountess have be dismiss too with a gratuity on the pretext that her ladyship 's train of domestic must be diminish ; so , finally , there be not leave in the household a single person who have belong to it during the time my young Lord Castlewood be yet at home . 
 for the plan which Colonel Esmond have in view , and the stroke he intend , ' twa necessary that the very small number of person should be put in possession of his secret . it scarce be know , except to three or four out of his family , and it be keep to a wonder . 
 on the 10th of June , 1714 , there come by Mr. Prior 's messenger from Paris a letter from my Lord Viscount Castlewood to his mother , say that he have be foolish in regard of money matter , that he be ashamed to own he have lose at play , and by other extravagance ; and that instead of have great entertainment as he have hop at Castlewood this year , he must live as quiet as he could , and make every effort to be save . so far every word of poor Frank 's letter be true , nor be there a doubt that he and his tall brother - in - law have spend a great deal more than they ought , and engage the revenue of the Castlewood property , which the fond mother have husband and improve so carefully during the time of her guardianship . 
 his " Clotilda , " Castlewood go on to say , " be still delicate , and her physician think her lie - in have good take place at Paris . he should come without her ladyship , and be at his mother 's house about the 17th or 18th day of June , propose to take horse from Paris immediately , and bring but a single servant with he ; and he request that the lawyer of Gray 's inn might be invite to meet he with their account , and the land - steward come from Castlewood with his , so that he might settle with they speedily , raise a sum of money whereof he stand in need , and be back to his viscountess by the time of her lie - in . " then his lordship give some of the news of the town , send his remembrance to kinsfolk , and so the letter end . ' twa put in the common post , and no doubt the french police and the English there have a copy of it , to which they be exceed welcome . 
 two day after another letter be despatch by the public post of France , in the same open way , and this , after give news of the fashion at Court there , end by the following sentence , in which , but for those that have the key , ' twould be difficult for any man to find any secret lurk at all : 
 " the King will take   medicine on Thursday . his Majesty be well than he hath be of late , though incommode by indigestion from his too great appetite . Madame Maintenon continue well . they have perform a play of mon . Racine at St. Cyr . the Duke of Shrewsbury and Mr. Prior , our envoy , and all the english nobility here be present at it .   the Viscount Castlewood 's passport   be refuse to he , ' twa say ; his lordship be sue by a goldsmith for Vaisselle plate , and a pearl necklace supply to Mademoiselle Meruel of the French Comedy . ' tis a pity such news should get abroad   and travel to England   about our young nobility here . Mademoiselle Meruel have be send to the Fort l'Evesque ; they say she have order not only plate , but furniture , and a chariot and horse   under that lord 's name , of which extravagance his unfortunate Viscountess know nothing . 
 " his Majesty will be   eighty - two year of age on his next birthday . the Court prepare to celebrate it with a great feast . Mr. Prior be in a sad way about their refuse at home to send he his plate . all here admire my Lord Viscount 's portrait , and say it be a masterpiece of Rigaud . have you see it ? it be   at the Lady Castlewood 's house in Kensington Square . I think no english painter could produce such a piece . 
 " our poor friend the Abbe hath be at the Bastile , but be now transport to the Conciergerie   where his friend may visit he . they be to ask for   a remission of his sentence soon . let we hope the poor rogue will have repent in prison . 
 " the Lord Castlewood   have have the affair of the plate make up , and depart for England . 
 " be not this a dull letter ? I have a cursed headache with drink with Mat and some more over - night , and tipsy or sober am 
 " thine ever . " 
 all this letter , save some dozen of word which I have put above between bracket , be mere idle talk , though the substance of the letter be as important as any letter well could be . it tell those that have the key , that the King will take the Viscount Castlewood 's passport and travel to England under that lord 's name . his Majesty will be at the Lady Castlewood 's house in Kensington Square , where his friend may visit he ; they be to ask for the Lord Castlewood . this note may have pass under Mr. Prior 's eye , and those of our new ally the French , and teach they nothing ; though it explain sufficiently to person in London what the event be which be about to happen , as ' twill show those who read my memoir a hundred year hence , what be that errand on which Colonel Esmond of late have be busy . silently and swiftly to do that about which other be conspire , and thousand of Jacobites all over the country clumsily caballing ; alone to effect that which the leader here be only talk about ; to bring the Prince of Wales into the country openly in the face of all , under Bolingbroke 's very eye , the wall placard with the proclamation sign with the Secretary 's name , and offer five hundred pound reward for his apprehension : this be a stroke , the playing and winning of which might well give any adventurous spirit pleasure : the loss of the stake might involve a heavy penalty , but all our family be eager to risk that for the glorious chance of win the game . 
 nor shall it be call a game , save perhaps with the chief player , who be not more or less sceptical than most public man with whom he have acquaintance in that age .   be there ever a public man in England that altogether believe in his party ? be there one , however doubtful , that will not fight for it ?   Young Frank be ready to fight without much thinking , he be a Jacobite as his father before he be ; all the Esmonds be royalist . give he but the word , he would cry , " God save King James ! " before the palace guard , or at the Maypole in the Strand ; and with respect to the woman , as be usual with they , ' twa not a question of party but of faith ; their belief be a passion ; either Esmond 's mistress or her daughter would have die for it cheerfully . I have laugh often , talk of King William 's reign , and say I think Lady Castlewood be disappoint the King do not persecute the family more ; and those who know the nature of woman may fancy for themselves , what need not here be write down , the rapture with which these neophyte receive the mystery when make known to they ; the eagerness with which they look forward to its completion ; the reverence which they pay the minister who initiate they into that secret Truth , now know only to a few , but presently to reign over the world . sure there be no bound to the trustingness of woman . look at Arria worship the drunken clodpate of a husband who beat she ; look at Cornelia treasure as a jewel in her maternal heart the oaf her son ; I have know a woman preach Jesuit 's bark , and afterwards Dr. Berkeley 's tar - water , as though to swallow they be a divine decree , and to refuse they no well than blasphemy . 
 on his return from France Colonel Esmond put himself at the head of this little knot of fond conspirator . no death or torture he know would frighten they out of their constancy . when he detail his plan for bring the King back , his eld mistress think that that restoration be to be attribute under heaven to the Castlewood family and to its chief , and she worship and love Esmond , if that could be , more than ever she have do . she doubt not for one moment of the success of his scheme , to mistrust which would have seem impious in her eye . and as for beatrix , when she become acquainted with the plan , and join it , as she do with all her heart , she give Esmond one of she search bright look . " ah , Harry , " say she , " why be you not the head of our house ? you be the only one fit to raise it ; why do you give that silly boy the name and the honor ? but ' tis so in the world ; those get the prize that do not   deserve or care for it . I wish I could give you your silly prize , cousin , but I can not ; I have try , and I can not . " and she go away , shake her head mournfully , but always , it seem to Esmond , that her liking and respect for he be greatly increase , since she know what capability he have both to act and bear ; to do and to forego . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 the ORIGINAL of the portrait come to ENGLAND . 

 ' Twas announce in the family that my Lord Castlewood would arrive , have a confidential french gentleman in his suite , who act as secretary to his lordship , and who , be a Papist , and a foreigner of a good family , though now in rather a menial place , would have his meal serve in his chamber , and not with the domestic of the house . the Viscountess give up her bedchamber contiguous to her daughter 's , and have a large convenient closet attach to it , in which a bed be put up , ostensibly for Monsieur Baptiste , the Frenchman ; though , ' tis needless to say , when the door of the apartment be lock , and the two guest retire within it , the young viscount become the servant of the illustrious Prince whom he entertain , and give up gladly the more convenient and airy chamber and bed to his master . Madam Beatrix also retire to the upper region , her chamber be convert into a sitting - room for my lord . the well to carry the deceit , beatrix affect to grumble before the servant , and to be jealous that she be turn out of her chamber to make way for my lord . 
 no small preparation be make , you may be sure , and no slight tremor of expectation cause the heart of the gentle lady of Castlewood to flutter , before the arrival of the personage who be about to honor their house . the chamber be ornament with flower ; the bed cover with the very fine of linen ; the two lady insist on make it themselves , and kneel down at the bedside and kiss the sheet out of respect for the web that be to hold the sacred person of a king . the toilet be of silver and crystal ; there be a copy of " Eikon Basilike " lay on the writing - table ; a portrait of the martyr King hang always over the mantel , have a sword of my poor Lord Castlewood underneath it , and a little picture or emblem which the widow love always to have before her eye on wake , and in which the hair of her lord and her two child be work together . her book of private devotion , as they be all of the English Church , she carry away with she to the upper apartment , which she destine for herself . the lady show Mr. Esmond , when they be complete , the fond preparation they have make . ' twas then Beatrix knelt down and kiss the linen sheet . as for her mother , Lady Castlewood make a curtsy at the door , as she would have do to the altar on enter a church , and own that she consider the chamber in a manner sacred . 
 the company in the servant ' hall never for a moment suppose that these preparation be make for any other person than the young viscount , the lord of the house , whom his fond mother have be for so many year without see . both lady be perfect housewife , have the great skill in the making of confection , scented water ,   c. , and keep a notable superintendence over the kitchen . calf enough be kill to feed an army of prodigal son , Esmond think , and laugh when he come to wait on the lady , on the day when the guest be to arrive , to find two pair of the fine and roundest arm to be see in England   my Lady Castlewood be remarkable for this beauty of her person , cover with flour up above the elbow , and prepare paste , and turn rolling - pin in the housekeeper 's closet . the guest would not arrive till supper - time , and my lord would prefer have that meal in his own chamber . you may be sure the bright plate of the house be lay out there , and can understand why it be that the lady insist that they alone would wait upon the young chief of the family . 
 take horse , Colonel Esmond ride rapidly to Rochester , and there await the King in that very town where his father have last set his foot on the English shore . a room have be provide at an inn there for my Lord Castlewood and his servant ; and Colonel Esmond time his ride so well that he have scarce be half an hour in the place , and be look over the balcony into the yard of the inn , when two traveller ride in at the inn gate , and the Colonel run down , the next moment embrace his dear young lord . 
 my lord 's companion , act the part of a domestic , dismount , and be for hold the viscount 's stirrup ; but Colonel Esmond , call to his own man , who be in the court , bid he take the horse and settle with the lad who have ride the post along with the two traveller , cry out in a cavalier tone in the french language to my lord 's companion , and affect to grumble that my lord 's fellow be a Frenchman , and do not know the money or habit of the country : " my man will see to the horse , Baptiste , " say Colonel Esmond : " do you understand English ? " " very leetle ! " " so , follow my lord and wait upon he at dinner in his own room . " the landlord and his people come up presently bear the dish ; ' twa well they make a noise and stir in the gallery , or they might have find Colonel Esmond on his knee before Lord Castlewood 's servant , welcome his Majesty to his kingdom , and kiss the hand of the king . we tell the landlord that the Frenchman would wait on his master ; and Esmond 's man be order to keep sentry in the gallery without the door . the Prince din with a good appetite , laugh and talk very gayly , and condescendingly bid his two companion to sit with he at table . he be in well spirit than poor Frank Castlewood , who esmond think might be woe - begone on account of part with his divine Clotilda ; but the Prince wish to take a short siesta after dinner , and retire to an inner chamber where there be a bed , the cause of poor Frank 's discomfiture come out ; and burst into tear , with many expression of fondness , friendship , and humiliation , the faithful lad give his kinsman to understand that he now know all the truth , and the sacrifice which Colonel Esmond have make for he . 
 see no good in acquaint poor Frank with that secret , Mr. Esmond have entreat his mistress also not to reveal it to her son . the Prince have tell the poor lad all as they be rid from Dover : " I have as lief he have shoot I , cousin , " Frank say : " I know you be the good , and the brave , and the kind of all man "   so the enthusiastic young fellow go on ; " but I never think I owe you what I do , and can scarce bear the weight of the obligation . " 
 " I stand in the place of your father , " say Mr. Esmond , kindly , " and sure a father may dispossess himself in favor of his son . I abdicate the twopenny crown , and invest you with the kingdom of Brentford ; do not   be a fool and cry ; you make a much tall and handsomer viscount than ever I could . " but the fond boy , with oath and protestation , laughter and incoherent outbreak of passionate emotion , could not be get , for some little time , to put up with Esmond 's raillery ; want to kneel down to he , and kiss his hand ; ask he and implore he to order something , to bid Castlewood give his own life or take somebody else 's ; anything , so that he might show his gratitude for the generosity Esmond show he . 
 " the K - , he laugh , " Frank say , point to the door where the sleeper be , and speak in a low tone . " I do not   think he should have laugh as he tell I the story . as we ride along from Dover , talk in French , he speak about you , and your come to he at Bar ; he call you ' le grand serieux , ' Don Bellianis of Greece , and I do not   know what name ; mimic your manner "   here Castlewood laugh himself   " and he do it very well . he seem to sneer at everything . he be not like a king : somehow Harry , I fancy you be like a king . he do not seem to think what a stake we be all play . he would have stop at Canterbury to run after a barmaid there , have I not implore he to come on . he hath a house at Chaillot , where he use to go and bury himself for week away from the Queen , and with all sort of bad company , " say Frank , with a demure look ; " you may smile , but I be not the wild fellow I be ; no , no , I have be teach well , " say Castlewood devoutly , make a sign on his breast . 
 " thou art my dear brave boy , " say Colonel Esmond , touch at the young fellow 's simplicity , " and there will be a noble gentleman at Castlewood so long as my Frank be there . " 
 the impetuous young lad be for go down on his knee again , with another explosion of gratitude , but that we hear the voice from the next chamber of the august sleeper , just wake , call out : " eh , La - Fleur , un verre d'eau ! " his Majesty come out yawn : " a pest , " say he , " upon your English ale , ' tis so strong that , ma foi , it hath turn my head . " 
 the effect of the ale be like a spur upon our horse , and we ride very quickly to London , reach Kensington at nightfall . Mr. Esmond 's servant be leave behind at Rochester , to take care of the tired horse , whilst we have fresh beast provide along the road . and gallop by the Prince 's side the Colonel explain to the Prince of Wales what his movement have be ; who the friend be that know of the expedition ; whom , as Esmond conceive , the Prince should trust ; entreat he , above all , to maintain the very close secrecy until the time should come when his Royal Highness should appear . the town swarm with friend of the Prince 's cause ; there be score of correspondent with St. Germains ; jacobite know and secret ; great in station and humble ; about the Court and the Queen ; in the Parliament , Church , and among the merchant in the City . the Prince have friend numberless in the army , in the Privy Council , and the officer of State . the great object , as it seem , to the small band of person who have concert that bold stroke , who have bring the Queen 's brother into his native country , be , that his visit should remain unknown till the proper time come , when his presence should surprise friend and enemy alike ; and the latter should be find so unprepared and disunite , that they should not find time to attack he . we fear more from his friend than from his enemy . the lie and tittle - tattle send over to St. Germains by the Jacobite agent about London , have do an incalculable mischief to his cause , and wofully misguide he , and it be from these especially , that the person engage in the present venture be anxious to defend the chief actor in it . 
    the manager be the Bishop , who can not be hurt by have 
  his name mention , a very active and loyal Nonconformist 
  Divine , a lady in the high favor at Court , with whom 
  Beatrix Esmond have communication , and two nobleman of the 
  great rank , and a member of the House of Commons , who be 
  implicate in more transaction than one in behalf of the 
  Stuart family . 
 the party reach London by nightfall , leave their horse at the Posting - House over against Westminster , and be ferry over the water , where Lady Esmond 's coach be already in wait . in another hour we be all land at Kensington , and the mistress of the house have that satisfaction which her heart have yearn after for many year , once more to embrace her son , who , on his side , with all his waywardness , ever retain a most tender affection for his parent . 
 she do not refrain from this expression of her feeling , though the domestic be by , and my Lord Castlewood 's attendant stand in the hall . Esmond have to whisper to he in French to take his hat off . Monsieur Baptiste be constantly neglect his part with an inconceivable levity : more than once on the ride to London , little observation of the strange , light remark , and word betoken the great ignorance of the country the Prince come to govern , have hurt the susceptibility of the two gentleman form his escort ; nor could either help own in his secret mind that they would have have his behavior otherwise , and that the laughter and the lightness , not to say license , which characterize his talk , scarce befit such a great Prince , and such a solemn occasion . not but that he could act at proper time with spirit and dignity . he have behave , as we all know , in a very courageous manner on the field . Esmond have see a copy of the letter the Prince have writ with his own hand when urge by his friend in England to abjure his religion , and admire that manly and magnanimous reply by which he refuse to yield to the temptation . Monsieur Baptiste take off his hat , blush at the hint Colonel Esmond venture to give he , and say : " Tenez , elle est jolie , la petite mere . Foi de Chevalier ! elle est charmante ; mais l'autre , qui est cette nymphe , cet astre qui brille , cette Diane qui descend sur nous ? " and he start back , and push forward , as beatrix be descend the stair . she be in color for the first time at her own house ; she wear the diamond Esmond give she ; it have be agree between they , that she should wear these brilliant on the day when the King should enter the house , and a Queen she look , radiant in charm , and magnificent and imperial in beauty . 
 Castlewood himself be startle by that beauty and splendor ; he step back and gaze at his sister as though he have not be aware before   nor be he very likely   how perfectly lovely she be , and I think blush as he embrace she . the Prince could not keep his eye off she ; he quite forget his menial part , though he have be school to it , and a little light portmanteau prepare expressly that he should carry it . he press forward before my Lord Viscount . ' twa lucky the servant ' eye be busy in other direction , or they must have see that this be no servant , or at least a very insolent and rude one . 
 again Colonel Esmond be oblige to cry out , " baptiste , " in a loud imperious voice , " have a care to the valise ; " at which hint the wilful young man grind his tooth together with something very like a curse between they , and then give a brief look of anything but pleasure to his mentor . be remind , however , he shoulder the little portmanteau , and carry it up the stair , esmond precede he , and a servant with lighted taper . he fling down his burden sulkily in the bedchamber : " a Prince that will wear a crown must wear a mask , " say Mr. Esmond in French . 
 " ah peste ! I see how it be , " say Monsieur Baptiste , continue the talk in French . " the great Serious be seriously " " alarm for Monsieur Baptiste , " break in the Colonel . esmond neither like the tone with which the Prince speak of the lady , nor the eye with which he regard they . 
 the bedchamber and the two room adjoin it , the closet and the apartment which be to be call my lord 's parlor , be already light and await their occupier ; and the collation lay for my lord 's supper . Lord Castlewood and his mother and sister come up the stair a minute afterwards , and , so soon as the domestic have quit the apartment , Castlewood and Esmond uncover , and the two lady go down on their knee before the Prince , who graciously give a hand to each . he look his part of Prince much more naturally than that of servant , which he have just be try , and raise they both with a great deal of nobility , as well as kindness in his air . " Madam , " say he , " my mother will thank your ladyship for your hospitality to her son ; for you , madam , " turn to beatrix , " I can not bear to see so much beauty in such a posture . you will betray Monsieur Baptiste if you kneel to he ; sure ' tis his place rather to kneel to you . " 
 a light shine out of her eye ; a gleam bright enough to kindle passion in any breast . there be time when this creature be so handsome , that she seem , as it be , like Venus reveal herself a goddess in a flash of brightness . she appear so now ; radiant , and with eye bright with a wonderful lustre . a pang , as of rage and jealousy , shoot through Esmond 's heart , as he catch the look she give the Prince ; and he clench his hand involuntarily and look across to Castlewood , whose eye answer his alarm - signal , and be also on the alert . the Prince give his subject an audience of a few minute , and then the two lady and Colonel Esmond quit the chamber . Lady Castlewood press his hand as they descend the stair , and the three go down to the low room , where they wait awhile till the traveller above should be refresh and ready for their meal . 
 Esmond look at Beatrix , blaze with her jewel on her beautiful neck . " I have keep my word , " say he : " and I mine , " say beatrix , look down on the diamond . 
 " be I the Mogul Emperor , " say the Colonel , " you should have all that be dig out of Golconda . " 
 " these be a great deal too good for I , " say Beatrix , drop her head on her beautiful breast , ' so be you all , all ! " and when she look up again , as she do in a moment , and after a sigh , her eye , as they gaze at her cousin , wear that melancholy and inscrutable look which ' twa always impossible to sound . 
 when the time come for the supper , of which we be advertise by a knock overhead , Colonel Esmond and the two lady go to the upper apartment , where the Prince already be , and by his side the young Viscount , of exactly the same age , shape , and with feature not dissimilar , though Frank 's be the handsomer of the two . the Prince sit down and bade the lady sit . the gentleman remain stand : there be , indeed , but one more cover lay at the table : " which of you will take it ? " say he . 
 " the head of our house , " say Lady Castlewood , take her son 's hand , and look towards Colonel Esmond with a bow and a great tremor of the voice ; " the Marquis of Esmond will have the honor of serve the king . " 
 " I shall have the honor of wait on his Royal Highness , " say Colonel Esmond , fill a cup of wine , and , as the fashion of that day be , he present it to the King on his knee . 
 " I drink to my hostess and her family , " say the Prince , with no very well - please air ; but the cloud pass immediately off his face , and he talk to the lady in a lively , rattle strain , quite undisturbed by poor Mr. Esmond 's yellow countenance , that , I dare say , look very glum . 
 when the time come to take leave , Esmond march homeward to his lodging , and meet Mr. Addison on the road that night , walk to a cottage he have at Fulham , the moon shin on his handsome serene face : " what cheer , brother ? " say Addison , laugh : " I think it be a footpad advance in the dark , and behold ' tis an old friend . we may shake hand , Colonel , in the dark , ' tis well than fight by daylight . why should we quarrel , because I be a Whig and thou art a tory ? turn thy step and walk with I to Fulham , where there be a nightingale still sing in the garden , and a cool bottle in a cave I know of ; you shall drink to the pretender if you like , and I will drink my liquor my own way : I have have enough of good liquor ? no , never ! there be no such word as enough as a stopper for good wine . thou wilt not come ? come any day , come soon . you know I remember Simois and the Sigeia tellus , and the praelia mixta mero , mixta mero , " he repeat , with ever so slight a touch of merum in his voice , and walk back a little way on the road with Esmond , bid the other remember he be always his friend , and indebte to he for his aid in the " campaign " poem . and very likely Mr. Under - Secretary would have step in and take t'other bottle at the Colonel 's lodging , have the latter invite he , but Esmond 's mood be none of the gayest , and he bid his friend an inhospitable good - night at the door . 
 " I have do the deed , " think he , sleepless , and look out into the night ; " he be here , and I have bring he ; he and Beatrix be sleep under the same roof now . whom do I mean to serve in bring he ? be it the Prince ? be it Henry Esmond ? have I not good have join the manly creed of Addison yonder , that scout the old doctrine of right divine , that boldly declare that Parliament and people consecrate the Sovereign , not bishop , nor genealogy , nor oil , nor coronation . " the eager gaze of the young Prince , watch every movement of Beatrix , haunt Esmond and pursue he . the Prince 's figure appear before he in his feverish dream many time that night . he wish the deed undo for which he have labor so . he be not the first that have regret his own act , or bring about his own undoing . undo ? should he write that word in his late year ? no , on his knee before heaven , rather be thankful for what then he deem his misfortune , and which hath cause the whole subsequent happiness of his life . 
 Esmond 's man , honest John Lockwood , have serve his master and the family all his life , and the Colonel know that he could answer for John 's fidelity as for his own . John return with the horse from Rochester betime the next morning , and the Colonel give he to understand that on go to Kensington , where he be free of the servant ' hall , and indeed court Miss Beatrix 's maid , he be to ask no question , and betray no surprise , but to vouch stoutly that the young gentleman he should see in a red coat there be my Lord Viscount Castlewood , and that his attendant in gray be Monsieur Baptiste the Frenchman . he be to tell his friend in the kitchen such story as he remember of my Lord Viscount 's youth at Castlewood ; what a wild boy he be ; how he use to drill Jack and cane he , before ever he be a soldier ; everything , in fine , he know respect my Lord Viscount 's early day . Jack 's idea of painting have not be much cultivate during his residence in Flanders with his master ; and , before my young lord 's return , he have be easily get to believe that the picture bring over from Paris , and now hang in Lady Castlewood 's drawing - room , be a perfect likeness of her son , the young lord . and the domestic have all see the picture many time , and catch but a momentary imperfect glimpse of the two stranger on the night of their arrival , never have a reason to doubt the fidelity of the portrait ; and next day , when they see the original of the piece habit exactly as he be represent in the painting , with the same periwig , ribbon , and uniform of the guard , quite naturally address the gentleman as my Lord Castlewood , my Lady Viscountess 's son . 
 the secretary of the night previous be now the viscount ; the viscount wear the secretary 's gray frock ; and John Lockwood be instruct to hint to the world below stair that my lord be a Papist , and very devout in that religion , his attendant might be no other than his chaplain from Bruxelles ; hence , if he take his meal in my lord 's company there be little reason for surprise . Frank be far caution to speak English with a foreign accent , which task he perform indifferently well , and this caution be the more necessary because the Prince himself scarce speak our language like a native of the island : and John Lockwood laugh with the folk below stair at the manner in which my lord , after five year abroad , sometimes forget his own tongue , and speak it like a Frenchman . " I warrant , " say he , " that , with the english beef and beer , his lordship will soon get back the proper use of his mouth ; " and , to do his new lordship justice , he take to beer and beef very kindly . 
 the Prince drink so much , and be so loud and imprudent in his talk after his drink , that Esmond often tremble for he . his meal be serve as much as possible in his own chamber , though frequently he make his appearance in Lady Castlewood 's parlor and drawing - room , call beatrix ' sister , " and her ladyship " mother , " or " madam " before the servant . and , choose to act entirely up to the part of brother and son , the Prince sometimes salute Mrs. Beatrix and Lady Castlewood with a freedom which his secretary do not like , and which , for his part , set Colonel Esmond tear with rage . 
 the guest have not be three day in the house when poor Jack Lockwood come with a rueful countenance to his master , and say : " my Lord that be the gentleman have be tamper with Mrs. Lucy   Jack 's sweetheart , and give her guineas and a kiss . " I fear that Colonel Esmond 's mind be rather relieved than otherwise when he find that the ancillary beauty be the one whom the Prince have select . his royal taste be know to lie that way , and continue so in after life . the heir of one of the great name , of the great kingdom , and of the great misfortune in Europe , be often content to lay the dignity of his birth and grief at the wooden shoe of a french chambermaid , and to repent afterwards   for he be very devout   in ash take from the dust - pan . ' tis for mortal such as these that nation suffer , that party struggle , that warrior fight and bleed . a year afterwards gallant head be fall , and Nithsdale in escape , and derwentwater on the scaffold ; whilst the heedless ingrate , for whom they risk and lose all , be tipple with his seraglio of mistress in his petite maison of Chaillot . 
 blushing to be force to bear such an errand , Esmond have to go to the Prince and warn he that the girl whom his Highness be bribe be John Lockwood 's sweetheart , an honest resolute man , who have serve in six campaign , and fear nothing , and who know that the person call himself Lord Castlewood be not his young master : and the Colonel beseech the Prince to consider what the effect of a single man 's jealousy might be , and to think of other design he have in hand , more important than the seduction of a waiting - maid , and the humiliation of a brave man . 
 ten time , perhaps , in the course of as many day , Mr. Esmond have to warn the royal young adventurer of some imprudence or some freedom . he receive these remonstrance very testily , save perhaps in this affair of poor Lockwood 's , when he deign to burst out a - laugh , and say , " what ! the soubrette have peach to the amoureux , and Crispin be angry , and Crispin have serve , and Crispin have be a corporal , have he ? tell he we will reward his valor with a pair of color , and recompense his fidelity . " 
 Colonel Esmond venture to utter some other word of entreaty , but the Prince , stamp imperiously , cry out , " Assez , milord : je m'ennuye a la preche ; I be not come to London to go to the sermon . " and he complain afterwards to Castlewood , that " le petit jaune , le noir Colonel , le Marquis Misanthrope "   by which facetious name his Royal Highness be pleased to designate Colonel Esmond , " fatigue he with his grand air and virtuous homily . " 
 the Bishop of Rochester , and other gentleman engage in the transaction which have bring the Prince over , wait upon his Royal Highness , constantly ask for my Lord Castlewood on their arrival at Kensington , and be openly conduct to his Royal Highness in that character , who receive they either in my lady 's drawing - room below , or above in his own apartment ; and all implore he to quit the house as little as possible , and to wait there till the signal should be give for he to appear . the lady entertain he at card , over which amusement he spend many hour in each day and night . he pass many hour more in drinking , during which time he would rattle and talk very agreeably , and especially if the Colonel be absent , whose presence always seem to frighten he ; and the poor " Colonel Noir " take that hint as a command accordingly , and seldom intrude his black face upon the convivial hour of this august young prisoner . except for those few person of whom the porter have the list , Lord Castlewood be deny to all friend of the house who wait on his lordship . the wound he have receive have break out again from his journey on horseback , so the world and the domestic be inform . and Doctor A ,   his physician   I shall not mention his name , but he be physician to the Queen , of the Scots nation , and a man remarkable for his benevolence as well as his wit , give order that he should be keep perfectly quiet until the wound should heal . with this gentleman , who be one of the most active and influential of our party , and the other before speak of , the whole secret lay ; and it be keep with so much faithfulness , and the story we tell so simple and natural , that there be no likelihood of a discovery except from the imprudence of the Prince himself , and an adventurous levity that we have the great difficulty to control . as for Lady Castlewood , although she scarce speak a word , ' twa easy to gather from her demeanor , and one or two hint she drop , how deep her mortification be at find the hero whom she have choose to worship all her life   and whose restoration have form almost the most sacred part of her prayer , no more than a man , and not a good one . she think misfortune might have chasten he ; but that instructress have rather render he callous than humble . his devotion , which be quite real , keep he from no sin he have a mind to . his talk show good - humor , gayety , even wit enough ; but there be a levity in his act and word that he have bring from among those libertine devotee with whom he have be breed , and that shock the simplicity and purity of the English lady , whose guest he be . esmond speak his mind to beatrix pretty freely about the Prince , get her brother to put in a word of warning . beatrix be entirely of their opinion ; she think he be very light , very light and reckless ; she could not even see the good look Colonel Esmond have speak of . the Prince have bad tooth , and a decide squint . how could we say he do not squint ? his eye be fine , but there be certainly a cast in they . she rally he at table with wonderful wit ; she speak of he invariably as of a mere boy ; she be more fond of Esmond than ever , praise he to her brother , praise he to the Prince , when his Royal Highness be pleased to sneer at the Colonel , and warmly espouse his cause : " and if your Majesty do not give he the Garter his father have , when the Marquis of Esmond come to your Majesty 's court , I will hang myself in my own garter , or will cry my eye out . " " rather than lose those , " say the Prince , " he shall be make Archbishop and Colonel of the Guard "   it be Frank Castlewood who tell I of this conversation over their supper . 
    there can be very little doubt that the Doctor mention 
  by my dear father be the famous Dr. Arbuthnot . R. E. W. 
 " yes , " cry she , with one of her laugh I fancy I hear it now . thirty year afterwards I hear that delightful music . " yes , he shall be Archbishop of Esmond and Marquis of Canterbury . " 
 " and what will your ladyship be ? " say the Prince ; " you have but to choose your place . " 
 " I , " say beatrix , " will be mother of the maid to the Queen of his Majesty King James the Third Vive le Roy ! " and she make he a great curtsy , and drink a part of a glass of wine in his honor . 
 " the Prince seize hold of the glass and drink the last drop of it , " Castlewood say , " and my mother , look very anxious , rise up and ask leave to retire . but that Trix be my mother 's daughter , Harry , " Frank continue , " I do not   know what a horrid fear I should have of she . I wish I wish this business be over . you be old than I be , and wiser , and well , and I owe you everything , and would die for you before George I would ; but I wish the end of this be come . " 
 neither of we very likely pass a tranquil night ; horrible doubt and torment rack Esmond 's soul : ' twa a scheme of personal ambition , a daring stroke for a selfish end he know it . what care he , in his heart , who be king ? be not his very sympathy and secret conviction on the other side on the side of People , Parliament , Freedom ? and here be he , engage for a Prince that have scarce hear the word liberty ; that priest and woman , tyrant by nature , both make a tool of . the misanthrope be in no well humor after hear that story , and his grim face more black and yellow than ever . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 we ENTERTAIN a VERY distinguished guest AT KENSINGTON . 

 should any clue be find to the dark intrigue at the latter end of Queen Anne 's time , or any historian be inclined to follow it , ' twill be discover , I have little doubt , that not one of the great personage about the Queen have a define scheme of policy , independent of that private and selfish interest which each be bent on pursue : St. John be for St. John , and Harley for Oxford , and Marlborough for John Churchill , always ; and accord as they could get help from St. Germains or Hanover , they send over proffer of allegiance to the Princes there , or betray one to the other : one cause , or one sovereign , be as good as another to they , so that they could hold the good place under he ; and like Lockit and Peachem , the newgate chief in the " Rogues ' Opera , " Mr. Gay write afterwards , have each in his hand document and proof of treason which would hang the other , only he do not dare to use the weapon , for fear of that one which his neighbor also carry in his pocket . think of the great Marlborough , the great subject in all the world , a conqueror of prince , that have march victorious over Germany , Flanders , and France , that have give the law to sovereign abroad , and be worship as a divinity at home , force to sneak out of England his credit , honor , place , all take from he ; his friend in the army break and ruin ; and fly before Harley , as abject and powerless as a poor debtor before a bailiff with a writ . a paper , of which Harley get possession , and show beyond doubt that the Duke be engage with the Stuart family , be the weapon with which the Treasurer drive Marlborough out of the kingdom . he flee to Antwerp , and begin intrigue instantly on the other side , and come back to England , as all know , a Whig and a Hanoverian . 
 though the Treasurer turn out of the army and office every man , military or civil , know to be the Duke 's friend , and give the vacant post among the Tory party ; he , too , be play the double game between Hanover and St. Germains , await the expected catastrophe of the Queen 's death to be Master of the State , and offer it to either family that should bribe he well , or that the nation should declare for . whichever the King be , Harley 's object be to reign over he ; and to this end he supplant the former famous favorite , decry the action of the war which have make Marlborough 's name illustrious , and disdain no more than the great fall competitor of his , the mean art , flattery , intimidation , that would secure his power . if the great satirist the world ever hath see have writ against Harley , and not for he , what a history have he leave behind of the last year of Queen Anne 's reign ! but Swift , that scorn all mankind , and himself not the least of all , have this merit of a faithful partisan , that he love those chief who treat he well , and stick by Harley bravely in his fall , as he gallantly have support he in his well fortune . 
 incomparably more brilliant , more splendid , eloquent , accomplish than his rival , the great St. John could be as selfish as Oxford be , and could act the double part as skilfully as ambidextrous Churchill . he whose talk be always of liberty , no more shrunk from use persecution and the pillory against his opponent than if he have be at Lisbon and Grand Inquisitor . this lofty patriot be on his knee at Hanover and St. Germains too ; notoriously of no religion , he toast Church and Queen as boldly as the stupid Sacheverel , whom he use and laugh at ; and to serve his turn , and to overthrow his enemy , he could intrigue , coax , bully , wheedle , fawn on the Court favorite and creep up the back - stair as silently as Oxford , who supplant Marlborough , and whom he himself supplant . the crash of my Lord Oxford happen at this very time whereat my history be now arrive . he be come to the very last day of his power , and the agent whom he employ to overthrow the conqueror of Blenheim , be now engage to upset the conqueror 's conqueror , and hand over the staff of government to Bolingbroke , who have be pant to hold it . 
 in expectation of the stroke that be now prepare , the irish regiment in the french service be all bring round about Boulogne in Picardy , to pass over if need be with the Duke of Berwick ; the soldier of France no long , but subject of James the Third of England and Ireland King . the fidelity of the great mass of the Scots   though a most active , resolute , and gallant Whig party , admirably and energetically order and discipline , be know to be in Scotland too   be notoriously unshaken in their king . a very great body of Tory clergy , nobility , and gentry , be public partisan of the exile Prince ; and the indifferent might be count on to cry King George or King James , accord as either should prevail . the Queen , especially in her latter day , incline towards her own family . the Prince be lie actually in London , within a stone 's cast of his sister 's palace ; the first Minister topple to his fall , and so totter that the weak push of a woman 's finger would send he down ; and as for Bolingbroke , his successor , we know on whose side his power and his splendid eloquence would be on the day when the Queen should appear openly before her Council and say : " this , my lord , be my brother ; here be my father 's heir , and mine after I . " 
 during the whole of the previous year the Queen have have many and repeat fit of sickness , fever , and lethargy , and her death have be constantly look for by all her attendant . the Elector of Hanover have wish to send his son , the Duke of Cambridge to pay his court to his cousin the Queen , the Elector say ; in truth , to be on the spot when death should close her career . frightened perhaps to have such a memento mori under her royal eye , her Majesty have angrily forbid the young Prince 's come into England . either she desire to keep the chance for her brother open yet ; or the people about she do not wish to close with the Whig candidate till they could make term with he . the quarrel of her Ministers before her face at the Council board , the prick of conscience very likely , the importunity of her Ministers , and constant turmoil and agitation round about she , have weaken and irritate the Princess extremely ; her strength be give way under these continual trial of her temper , and from day to day it be expect she must come to a speedy end of they . just before Viscount Castlewood and his companion come from France , her Majesty be take ill . the St. Anthony 's fire break out on the royal leg ; there be no hurry for the presentation of the young lord at Court , or that person who should appear under his name ; and my Lord Viscount 's wound break out opportunely , he be keep conveniently in his chamber until such time as his physician would allow he to bend his knee before the Queen . at the commencement of July , that influential lady , with whom it have be mention that our party have relation , come frequently to visit her young friend , the Maid of Honor , at Kensington , and my Lord Viscount   the real or supposititious , who be an invalid at Lady Castlewood 's house . 
 on the 27th day of July , the lady in question , who hold the most intimate post about the Queen , come in her chair from the Palace hard by , bring to the little party in Kensington Square intelligence of the very high importance . the final blow have be strike , and my Lord of Oxford and Mortimer be no long Treasurer . the staff be as yet give to no successor , though my Lord Bolingbroke would undoubtedly be the man . and now the time be come , the Queen 's Abigail say : and now my Lord Castlewood ought to be present to the Sovereign . 
 after that scene which Lord Castlewood witness and describe to his cousin , who pass such a miserable night of mortification and jealousy as he think over the transaction , no doubt the three person who be set by nature as protector over Beatrix come to the same conclusion , that she must be remove from the presence of a man whose desire towards she be express only too clearly ; and who be no more scrupulous in seek to gratify they than his father have be before he . I suppose Esmond 's mistress , her son , and the Colonel himself , have be all secretly debate this matter in their mind , for when Frank break out , in his blunt way , with : " I think Beatrix have well be anywhere but here , " Lady Castlewood say : " I thank you , Frank , I have think so , too ; " and Mr. Esmond , though he only remark that it be not for he to speak , show plainly , by the delight on his countenance , how very agreeable that proposal be to he . 
 " one see that you think with we , Henry , " say the viscountess , with ever so little of sarcasm in her tone : " beatrix be good out of this house whilst we have our guest in it , and as soon as this morning 's business be do , she ought to quit London . " 
 " what morning 's business ? " ask Colonel Esmond , not know what have be arrange , though in fact the stroke next in importance to that of bring the Prince , and of have he acknowledge by the Queen , be now be perform at the very moment we three be converse together . 
 the Court - lady with whom our plan be concert , and who be a chief agent in it , the Court physician , and the Bishop of Rochester , who be the other two most active participator in our plan , have hold many council in our house at Kensington and elsewhere , as to the mean good to be adopt for present our young adventurer to his sister the Queen . the simple and easy plan propose by Colonel Esmond have be agree to by all party , which be that on some rather private day , when there be not many person about the Court , the Prince should appear there as my Lord Castlewood , should be greet by his sister in waiting , and lead by that other lady into the closet of the Queen . and accord to her Majesty 's health or humor , and the circumstance that might arise during the interview , it be to be leave to the discretion of those present at it , and to the Prince himself , whether he should declare that it be the Queen 's own brother , or the brother of Beatrix Esmond , who kiss her royal hand . and this plan be determine on , we be all wait in very much anxiety for the day and signal of execution . 
 two morning after that supper , it be the 27th day of July , the Bishop of Rochester breakfasting with Lady Castlewood and her family , and the meal scarce over , Doctor A. 's coach drive up to our house at Kensington , and the doctor appear amongst the party there , enliven a rather gloomy company ; for the mother and daughter have have word in the morning in respect to the transaction of that supper , and other adventure perhaps , and on the day succeed . Beatrix 's haughty spirit brook remonstrance from no superior , much less from her mother , the gentle of creature , whom the girl command rather than obey . and feel she be wrong , and that by a thousand coquetry   which she could no more help exercise on every man that come near she , than the sun can help shin on great and small   she have provoke the Prince 's dangerous admiration , and allure he to the expression of it , she be only the more wilful and imperious the more she feel her error . 
 to this party , the Prince be serve with chocolate in his bedchamber , where he lie late , sleep away the fume of his wine , the doctor come , and by the urgent and startling nature of his news , dissipate instantly that private and minor unpleasantry under which the family of Castlewood be labor . 
 he ask for the guest ; the guest be above in his own apartment : he bid Monsieur Baptiste go up to his master instantly , and request that MY LORD viscount CASTLEWOOD would straightway put his uniform on , and come away in the Doctor 's coach now at the door . 
 he then inform Madam Beatrix what her part of the comedy be to be : " in half an hour , " say he , " her Majesty and her favorite lady will take the air in the Cedar - walk behind the new Banqueting - house . her Majesty will be draw in a garden - chair , Madam Beatrix Esmond and she BROTHER , MY LORD VISCOUNT CASTLEWOOD , will be walk in the private garden ,   here be Lady Masham 's key ,   and will come unawares upon the Royal party . the man that draw the chair will retire , and leave the Queen , the favorite , and the maid of honor and her brother together ; Mistress Beatrix will present her brother , and then ! and then , my Lord Bishop will pray for the result of the interview , and his Scots clerk will say amen ! quick , put on your hood , Madam Beatrix ; why doth not his Majesty come down ? such another chance may not present itself for month again . " 
 the Prince be late and lazy , and indeed have all but lose that chance through his indolence . the Queen be actually about to leave the garden just when the party reach it ; the Doctor , the Bishop , the maid of honor and her brother go off together in the physician 's coach , and have be go half an hour when Colonel Esmond come to Kensington Square . 
 the news of this errand , on which beatrix be go , of course for a moment put all thought of private jealousy out of Colonel Esmond 's head . in half an hour more the coach return ; the Bishop descend from it first , and give his arm to Beatrix , who now come out . his lordship go back into the carriage again , and the maid of honor enter the house alone . we be all gaze at she from the upper window , try to read from her countenance the result of the interview from which she have just come . 
 she come into the drawing - room in a great tremor and very pale ; she ask for a glass of water as her mother go to meet she , and after drink that and put off her hood , she begin to speak " we may all hope for the good , " say she ; " it have cost the Queen a fit . her Majesty be in her chair in the Cedar - walk , accompany only by Lady , when we enter by the private wicket from the west side of the garden , and turn towards she , the Doctor follow we . they wait in a side walk hide by the shrub , as we advance towards the chair . my heart throb so I scarce could speak ; but my Prince whisper , ' Courage , beatrix , ' and march on with a steady step . his face be a little flushed , but he be not afraid of the danger . he who fight so bravely at Malplaquet fear nothing . " Esmond and Castlewood look at each other at this compliment , neither like the sound of it . 
 " the Prince uncover , " beatrix continue , " and I see the queen turn round to Lady Masham , as if ask who these two be . her Majesty look very pale and ill , and then flush up ; the favorite make we a signal to advance , and I go up , lead my Prince by the hand , quite close to the chair : ' your Majesty will give my Lord Viscount your hand to kiss , ' say her lady , and the Queen put out her hand , which the Prince kiss , kneel on his knee , he who should kneel to no mortal man or woman . 
 " ' you have be long from England , my lord , ' say the Queen : ' why be you not here to give a home to your mother and sister ? ' 
 " ' I be come , Madam , to stay now , if the Queen desire I , ' say the Prince , with another low bow . 
 " ' you have take a foreign wife , my lord , and a foreign religion ; be not that of England good enough for you ? ' 
 " ' in return to my father 's church , ' say the Prince , ' I do not love my mother the less , nor be I the less faithful servant of your majesty . ' 
 " here , " say beatrix , " the favorite give I a little signal with her hand to fall back , which I do , though I die to hear what should pass ; and whisper something to the Queen , which make her Majesty start and utter one or two word in a hurried manner , look towards the Prince , and catch hold with her hand of the arm of her chair . he advance still near towards it ; he begin to speak very rapidly ; I catch the word , ' Father , blessing , forgiveness , ' and then presently the Prince fall on his knee ; take from his breast a paper he have there , hand it to the Queen , who , as soon as she see it , fling up both her arm with a scream , and take away that hand near the Prince , and which he endeavor to kiss . he go on speak with great animation of gesture , now clasp his hand together on his heart , now open they as though to say : ' I be here , your brother , in your power . ' Lady Masham run round on the other side of the chair , kneel too , and speak with great energy . she clasp the Queen 's hand on her side , and pick up the paper her Majesty have let fall . the Prince rise and make a further speech as though he would go ; the favorite on the other hand urge her mistress , and then , run back to the Prince , bring he back once more close to the chair . again he kneel down and take the Queen 's hand , which she do not withdraw , kiss it a hundred time ; my lady all the time , with sob and supplication , speak over the chair . this while the queen sit with a stupefied look , crumple the paper with one hand , as my Prince embrace the other ; then of a sudden she utter several pierce shriek , and burst into a great fit of hysteric tear and laughter . ' enough , enough , sir , for this time , ' I hear Lady Masham say : and the chairman , who have withdraw round the banqueting - room , come back , alarm by the cry . ' quick , ' say Lady Masham , ' get some help , ' and I run towards the Doctor , who , with the Bishop of Rochester , come up instantly . Lady Masham whisper the Prince he might hope for the very good ; and to be ready to - morrow ; and he hath go away to the Bishop of Rochester 's house , to meet several of his friend there . and so the great stroke be strike , " say Beatrix , go down on her knee , and clasp her hand . " God save the king : God save the king ! " 
 beatrix 's tale tell , and the young lady herself calm somewhat of her agitation , we ask with regard to the Prince , who be absent with Bishop Atterbury , and be inform that ' twa likely he might remain abroad the whole day . beatrix 's three kinsfolk look at one another at this intelligence : ' twa clear the same thought be pass through the mind of all . 
 but who should begin to break the news ? Monsieur Baptiste , that be Frank Castlewood , turn very red , and look towards Esmond ; the Colonel bite his lip , and fairly beat a retreat into the window : it be Lady Castlewood that open upon beatrix with the news which we know would do anything but please she . 
 " we be glad , " say she , take her daughter 's hand , and speak in a gentle voice , " that the guest be away . " 
 beatrix draw back in an instant , look round she at we three , and as if divine a danger . " why glad ? " say she , her breast begin to heave ; " be you so soon tired of he ? " 
 " we think one of we be devilishly too fond of he , " cry out Frank Castlewood . 
 " and which be it you , my lord , or be it mamma , who be jealous because he drink my health ? or be it the head of the family "   here she turn with an imperious look towards Colonel Esmond , " who have take of late to preach the King sermon ? " 
 " we do not say you be too free with his Majesty . " 
 " I thank you , madam , " say beatrix , with a toss of the head and a curtsey . 
 but her mother continue , with very great calmness and dignity " at least we have not say so , though we might , be it possible for a mother to say such word to her own daughter , your father 's daughter . " 
 " eh ? mon pere , " break out beatrix , " be no well than other person ' father . " and again she look towards the Colonel . 
 we all feel a shock as she utter those two or three french word ; her manner be exactly imitate from that of our foreign guest . 
 " you have not learn to speak French a month ago , beatrix , " say her mother , sadly , " nor to speak ill of your father . " 
 beatrix , no doubt , see that slip she have make in her flurry , for she blush crimson : " I have learn to honor the king , " say she , draw up , " and ' twere as well that other suspect neither his Majesty nor I . " 
 " if you respect your mother a little more , " Frank say , " trix , you would do yourself no hurt . " 
 " I be no child , " say she , turn round on he ; " we have live very well these five year without the benefit of your advice or example , and I intend to take neither now . why do not the head of the house speak ? " she go on ; " he rule everything here . when his chaplain have do sing the psalm , will his lordship deliver the sermon ? I be tired of the psalm . " the Prince have use almost the very same word in regard to Colonel Esmond that the imprudent girl repeat in her wrath . 
 " you show yourself a very apt scholar , madam , " say the Colonel ; and , turn to his mistress , " do your guest use these word in your ladyship 's hearing , or be it to beatrix in private that he be pleased to impart his opinion regard my tiresome sermon ? " 
 " have you see he alone ? " cry my lord , start up with an oath : " by God , have you see he alone ? " 
 " be he here , you would not   dare so to insult I ; no , you would not dare ! " cry Frank 's sister . " keep your oath , my lord , for your wife ; we be not use here to such language . till you come , there use to be kindness between I and mamma , and I care for she when you never do , when you be away for year with your horse and your mistress , and your popish wife . " 
 " by - , " say my lord , rap out another oath , " Clotilda be an angel ; how dare you say a word against Clotilda ? " 
 Colonel Esmond could not refrain from a smile , to see how easy Frank 's attack be draw off by that feint : " I fancy Clotilda be not the subject in hand , " say Mr. Esmond , rather scornfully ; " her ladyship be at Paris , a hundred league off , prepare baby - linen . it be about my Lord Castlewood 's sister , and not his wife , the question be . " 
 " he be not my Lord Castlewood , " say beatrix , " and he know he be not ; he be Colonel Francis Esmond 's son , and no more , and he wear a false title ; and he live on another man 's land , and he know it . " here be another desperate sally of the poor beleaguered garrison , and an alerte in another quarter . " again , I beg your pardon , " say Esmond . " if there be no proof of my claim , I have no claim . if my father acknowledge no heir , yours be his lawful successor , and my Lord Castlewood hath as good a right to his rank and small estate as any man in England . but that again be not the question , as you know very well ; let we bring our talk back to it , as you will have I meddle in it . and I will give you frankly my opinion , that a house where a Prince lie all day , who respect no woman , be no house for a young unmarried lady ; that you be well in the country than here ; that he be here on a great end , from which no folly should divert he ; and that have nobly do your part of this morning , beatrix , you should retire off the scene awhile , and leave it to the other actor of the play . " 
 as the Colonel speak with a perfect calmness and politeness , such as ' tis to be hop he hath always show to woman ,   his mistress stand by he on one side of the table , and Frank Castlewood on the other , hemming in poor beatrix , that be behind it , and , as it be , surround she with our approach . 
    my dear father saith quite truly , that his manner towards 
  our sex be uniformly courteous . from my infancy upwards , 
  he treat I with an extreme gentleness , as though I be a 
  little lady . I can scarce remember   though I try he 
  often   ever hear a rough word from he , nor be he less 
  grave and kind in his manner to the humblest negress on 
  his estate . he be familiar with no one except my mother , 
  and it be delightful to witness up to the very last day 
  the confidence between they . he be obey eagerly by all 
  under he ; and my mother and all her household live in a 
  constant emulation to please he , and quite a terror lest in 
  any way they should offend he . he be the humblest man 
  with all this ; the least exact , the more easily 
  content ; and Mr. Benson , our minister at Castlewood , who 
  attend he at the last , ever say " I know not what 
  Colonel Esmond 's doctrine be , but his life and death be 
  those of a devout Christian . " R. E. W. 
 have twice sally out and be beat back , she now , as I expect , try the ultima ratio of woman , and have recourse to tear . her beautiful eye fill with they ; I never could bear in she , nor in any woman , that expression of pain : " I be alone , " sob she ; " you be three against I my brother , my mother , and you . what have I do , that you should speak and look so unkindly at I ? be it my fault that the Prince should , as you say , admire I ? do I bring he here ? do I do aught but what you bade I , in make he welcome ? do you not tell I that our duty be to die for he ? do you not teach I , mother , night and morning to pray for the king , before even ourselves ? what would you have of I , cousin , for you be the chief of the conspiracy against I ; I know you be , sir , and that my mother and brother be act but as you bid they ; whither would you have I go ? " 
 " I would but remove from the Prince , " say Esmond , gravely , " a dangerous temptation ; heaven forbid I should say you would yield ; I would only have he free of it . your honor need no guardian , please God , but his imprudence doth . he be so far remove from all woman by his rank , that his pursuit of they can not but be unlawful . we would remove the dearest and fairest of our family from the chance of that insult , and that be why we would have you go , dear beatrix . " 
 " Harry speak like a book , " say Frank , with one of his oath , " and , by - , every word he saith be true . you can not   help be handsome , Trix ; no more can the Prince help follow you . my counsel be that you go out of harm 's way ; for , by the Lord , be the Prince to play any trick with you , King as he be , or be to be , Harry Esmond and I would have justice of he . " 
 " be not two such champion enough to guard I ? " say beatrix , something sorrowfully ; ' sure , with you two watching , no evil could happen to I . " 
 " in faith , I think not , beatrix , " say Colonel Esmond ; " nor if the Prince know we would he try . " 
 " but do he know you ? " interpose Lady Castlewood , very quiet : " he come of a country where the pursuit of king be think no dishonor to a woman . let we go , dear beatrix . shall we go to Walcote or to Castlewood ? we be well away from the city ; and when the Prince be acknowledge , and our champion have restore he , and he hath his own house at St. James 's or Windsor , we can come back to ours here . do you not think so , Harry and Frank ? " 
 Frank and Harry think with she , you may be sure . 
 " we will go , then , " say beatrix , turn a little pale ; " Lady Masham be to give I warn to - night how her Majesty be , and to - morrow " 
 " I think we have well go to - day , my dear , " say my Lady Castlewood ; " we might have the coach and sleep at Hounslow , and reach home to - morrow . ' tis twelve o'clock ; bid the coach , cousin , be ready at one . " 
 " for shame ! " burst out beatrix , in a passion of tear and mortification . " you disgrace I by your cruel precaution ; my own mother be the first to suspect I , and would take I away as my gaoler . I will not go with you , mother ; I will go as no one 's prisoner . if I want to deceive , do you think I could find no mean of evade you ? my family suspect I . as those mistrust I that ought to love I most , let I leave they ; I will go , but I will go alone : to Castlewood , be it . I have be unhappy there and lonely enough ; let I go back , but spare I at least the humiliation of set a watch over my misery , which be a trial I can not   bear . let I go when you will , but alone , or not at all . you three can stay and triumph over my unhappiness , and I will bear it as I have bear it before . let my gaoler - in - chief go order the coach that be to take I away . I thank you , Henry Esmond , for your share in the conspiracy . all my life long I will thank you , and remember you , and you , brother , and you , mother , how shall I show my gratitude to you for your careful defence of my honor ? " 
 she sweep out of the room with the air of an empress , fling glance of defiance at we all , and leave we conqueror of the field , but scar , and almost ashamed of our victory . it do indeed seem hard and cruel that we three should have conspire the banishment and humiliation of that fair creature . we look at each other in silence : ' twa not the first stroke by many of our action in that unlucky time , which , be do , we wish undo . we agree it be good she should go alone , speak stealthily to one another , and under our breath , like person engage in an act they feel ashamed in do . 
 in a half - hour , it might be , after our talk she come back , her countenance wear the same defiant air which it have bear when she leave we . she hold a shagreen - case in her hand ; Esmond know it as contain his diamond which he have give to she for her marriage with Duke Hamilton , and which she have wear so splendidly on the inauspicious night of the Prince 's arrival . " I have bring back , " say she , " to the Marquis of Esmond the present he deign to make I in day when he trust I well than now . I will never accept a benefit or a kindness from Henry Esmond more , and I give back these family diamond , which belong to one king 's mistress , to the gentleman that suspect I would be another . have you be upon your message of coach - caller , my Lord Marquis ? will you send your valet to see that I do not run away ? " we be right , yet , by her manner , she have put we all in the wrong ; we be conqueror , yet the honor of the day seem to be with the poor oppress girl . 
 that luckless box contain the stone have first be ornament with a baron 's coronet , when beatrix be engage to the young gentleman from whom she part , and afterwards the gilt crown of a duchess figure on the cover , which also poor Beatrix be destine never to wear . Lady Castlewood open the case mechanically and scarce think what she do ; and behold , besides the diamond , Esmond 's present , there lie in the box the enamel miniature of the late Duke , which Beatrix have lay aside with her mourning when the King come into the house ; and which the poor heedless thing very likely have forget . 
 " do you leave this , too , beatrix ? " say her mother , take the miniature out , and with a cruelty she do not very often show ; but there be some moment when the tender woman be cruel , and some triumph which angel can not   forego . 
    this remark show how unjustly and contemptuously even the 
  good of man will sometimes judge of our sex . Lady 
  Castlewood have no intention of triumph over her daughter ; 
  but from a sense of duty alone point out her deplorable 
  wrong . H. E. 
 have deliver this stab , Lady Castlewood be frighten at the effect of her blow . it go to poor beatrix 's heart : she flush up and pass a handkerchief across her eye , and kiss the miniature , and put it into her bosom : " I have forget it , " say she ; " my injury make I forget my grief : my mother have recall both to I . Farewell , mother ; I think I never can forgive you ; something hath break between we that no tear nor year can repair . I always say I be alone ; you never love I , never and be jealous of I from the time I sit on my father 's knee . let I go away , the soon the well : I can bear to be with you no more . " 
 " go , child , " say her mother , still very stern ; " go and bend your proud knee and ask forgiveness ; go , pray in solitude for humility and repentance . ' tis not your reproach that make I unhappy , ' tis your hard heart , my poor beatrix ; may God soften it , and teach you one day to feel for your mother . " 
 if my mistress be cruel , at least she never could be get to own as much . her haughtiness quite overtop Beatrix 's ; and , if the girl have a proud spirit , I very much fear it come to she by inheritance . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 our guest quit US as not be hospitable ENOUGH . 

 beatrix 's departure take place within an hour , she maid go with she in the post - chaise , and a man arm on the coach - box to prevent any danger of the road . Esmond and Frank think of escort the carriage , but she indignantly refuse their company , and another man be send to follow the coach , and not to leave it till it have pass over Hounslow Heath on the next day . and these two form the whole of Lady Castlewood 's male domestic , Mr. Esmond 's faithful John Lockwood come to wait on his mistress during their absence , though he would have prefer to escort Mrs. Lucy , his sweetheart , on her journey into the country . 
 we have a gloomy and silent meal ; it seem as if a darkness be over the house , since the bright face of beatrix have be withdraw from it . in the afternoon come a message from the favorite to relieve we somewhat from this despondency . " the Queen hath be much shake , " the note say ; ' she be well now , and all thing will go well . let MY LORD CASTLEWOOD be ready against we send for he . " 
 at night there come a second billet : " there hath be a great battle in Council ; Lord Treasurer hath break his staff , and hath fall never to rise again ; no successor be appoint . Lord B receive a great Whig company to - night at Golden Square . if he be trim , other be true ; the Queen hath no more fit , but be a - bed now , and more quiet . be ready against morning , when I still hope all will be well . " 
 the Prince come home shortly after the messenger who bear this billet have leave the house . his Royal Highness be so much the well for the Bishop 's liquor , that to talk affair to he now be of little service . he be help to the Royal bed ; he call Castlewood familiarly by his own name ; he quite forget the part upon the acting of which his crown , his safety , depend . ' twa lucky that my Lady Castlewood 's servant be out of the way , and only those hear he who would not betray he . he inquire after the adorable beatrix , with a royal hiccup in his voice ; he be easily get to bed , and in a minute or two plunge in that deep slumber and forgetfulness with which Bacchus reward the votary of that god . we wish Beatrix have be there to see he in his cup . we regret , perhaps , that she be go . 
 one of the party at Kensington Square be fool enough to ride to Hounslow that night , coram latronibus , and to the inn which the family use ordinarily in their journey out of London . Esmond desire my landlord not to acquaint Madam Beatrix with his coming , and have the grim satisfaction of pass by the door of the chamber where she lie with she maid , and of watch her chariot set forth in the early morning . he see her smile and slip money into the man 's hand who be order to ride behind the coach as far as Bagshot . the road be open , and the other servant arm , it appear she dispense with the escort of a second domestic ; and this fellow , bid his young mistress adieu with many bow , go and take a pot of ale in the kitchen , and return in company with his brother servant , John Coachman , and his horse , back to London . 
 they be not a mile out of Hounslow when the two worthy stop for more drink , and here they be scar by see Colonel Esmond gallop by they . the man say in reply to Colonel Esmond 's stern question , that his young mistress have send her duty ; only that , no other message : she have have a very good night , and would reach Castlewood by nightfall . the Colonel have no time for further colloquy , and gallop on swiftly to London , have business of great importance there , as my reader very well knoweth . the thought of beatrix rid away from the danger soothe his mind not a little . his horse be at Kensington Square   honest Dapple know the way thither well enough   before the tipsy guest of last night be awake and sober . 
 the account of the previous evening be know all over the town early next day . a violent altercation have take place before the Queen in the Council Chamber ; and all the coffee - house have their version of the quarrel . the news bring my Lord Bishop early to Kensington Square , where he await the waking of his Royal master above stair , and speak confidently of have he proclaim as Prince of Wales and heir to the throne before that day be over . the Bishop have entertain on the previous afternoon certain of the most influential gentleman of the true british party . his Royal highness have charm all , both scot and English , Papists and Churchmen : " even Quakers , " say he , " be at our meeting ; and , if the stranger take a little too much british punch and ale , he will soon grow more accustomed to those liquor ; and my Lord Castlewood , " say the Bishop with a laugh , " must bear the cruel charge of have be for once in his life a little tipsy . he toast your lovely sister a dozen time , at which we all laugh , " say the Bishop , " admire so much fraternal affection . where be that charming nymph , and why doth she not adorn your ladyship 's tea - table with her bright eye ? " 
 her ladyship say , dryly , that beatrix be not at home that morning ; my Lord Bishop be too busy with great affair to trouble himself much about the presence or absence of any lady , however beautiful . 
 we be yet at table when Dr. A come from the Palace with a look of great alarm ; the shock the Queen have have the day before have act on she severely ; he have be send for , and have order she to be blood . the surgeon of Long Acre have come to cup the Queen , and her Majesty be now more easy and breathe more freely . what make we start at the name of Mr. Ayme ? " il faut etre aimable pour etre aime , " say the merry Doctor ; Esmond pull his sleeve , and bid he hush . it be to Ayme 's house , after his fatal duel , that my dear Lord Castlewood , Frank 's father , have be carry to die . 
 no second visit could be pay to the Queen on that day at any rate ; and when our guest above give his signal that he be awake , the Doctor , the Bishop , and Colonel Esmond wait upon the Prince 's levee , and bring he their news , cheerful or dubious . the doctor have to go away presently , but promise to keep the Prince constantly acquaint with what be take place at the Palace hard by . his counsel be , and the Bishop 's , that as soon as ever the Queen 's malady take a favorable turn , the Prince should be introduce to she bedside ; the Council summon ; the guard at Kensington and St. James 's , of which two regiment be to be entirely rely on , and one know not to be hostile , would declare for the Prince , as the Queen would before the Lords of her Council , designate he as the heir to her throne . 
 with locked door , and Colonel Esmond act as secretary , the Prince and his Lordship of Rochester pass many hour of this day , compose Proclamations and Addresses to the Country , to the Scots , to the Clergy , to the People of London and England ; announce the arrival of the exile descendant of three sovereign , and his acknowledgment by his sister as heir to the throne . every safeguard for their liberty , the Church and People could ask , be promise to they . the Bishop could answer for the adhesion of very many prelate , who besought of their flock and brother ecclesiastic to recognize the sacred right of the future sovereign , and to purge the country of the sin of rebellion . 
 during the composition of these paper , more messenger than one come from the Palace regard the state of the august patient there lie . at mid - day she be somewhat well ; at evening the torpor again seize she , and she wander in her mind . at night Dr. A be with we again , with a report rather more favorable : no instant danger at any rate be apprehend . in the course of the last two year her Majesty have have many attack similar , but more severe . 
 by this time we have finish a half - dozen of Proclamations ,   the wording of they so as to offend no party , and not to give umbrage to whig or Dissenters , require very great caution ,   and the young Prince , who have indeed show , during a long day 's labor , both alacrity at seize the information give he , and ingenuity and skill in turn the phrase which be to go out sign by his name , here exhibit a good - humor and thoughtfulness that ought to be set down to his credit . 
 " be these paper to be mislay , " say he , " or our scheme to come to mishap , my Lord Esmond 's writing would bring he to a place where I heartily hope never to see he ; and so , by your leave , I will copy the paper myself , though I be not very strong in spelling ; and if they be find they will implicate none but the person they most concern ; " and so , have carefully copy the Proclamations out , the Prince burn those in Colonel Esmond 's handwriting : " and now , and now , gentleman , " say he , " let we go to supper , and drink a glass with the lady . my Lord Esmond , you will sup with we to - night ; you have give we of late too little of your company . " 
 the Prince 's meal be commonly serve in the chamber which have be Beatrix 's bedroom , adjoin that in which he sleep . and the dutiful practice of his entertainer be to wait until their Royal guest bade they take their place at table before they sit down to partake of the meal . on this night , as you may suppose , only Frank Castlewood and his mother be in wait when the supper be announce to receive the Prince ; who have pass the whole of the day in his own apartment , with the Bishop as his Minister of State , and Colonel Esmond officiate as Secretary of his Council . 
 the Prince 's countenance wear an expression by no means pleasant ; when look towards the little company assemble , and wait for he , he do not see Beatrix 's bright face there as usual to greet he . he ask Lady Esmond for his fair introducer of yesterday : her ladyship only cast her eye down , and say quietly , beatrix could not be of the supper that night ; nor do she show the least sign of confusion , whereas Castlewood turn red , and Esmond be no less embarrassed . I think woman have an instinct of dissimulation ; they know by nature how to disguise their emotion far well than the most consummate male courtier can do . be not the well part of the life of many of they spend in hide their feeling , in cajole their tyrant , in mask over with fond smile and artful gayety , their doubt , or their grief , or their terror ? 
 our guest swallow his supper very sulkily ; it be not till the second bottle his Highness begin to rally . when Lady Castlewood ask leave to depart , he send a message to beatrix , hop she would be present at the next day 's dinner , and apply himself to drink , and to talk afterwards , for which there be subject in plenty . 
 the next day , we hear from our informer at Kensington that the Queen be somewhat well , and have be up for an hour , though she be not well enough yet to receive any visitor . 
 at dinner a single cover be lay for his Royal Highness ; and the two gentleman alone wait on he . we have have a consultation in the morning with Lady Castlewood , in which it have be determine that , should his Highness ask further question about beatrix , he should be answer by the gentleman of the house . 
 he be evidently disturb and uneasy , look towards the door constantly , as if expect some one . there come , however , nobody , except honest John Lockwood , when he knock with a dish , which those within take from he ; so the meal be always arrange , and I believe the council in the kitchen be of opinion that my young lord have bring over a priest , who have convert we all into Papists , and that Papists be like Jews , eat together , and not choose to take their meal in the sight of Christians . 
 the Prince try to cover his displeasure ; he be but a clumsy dissembler at that time , and when out of humor could with difficulty keep a serene countenance ; and have make some foolish attempt at trivial talk , he come to his point presently , and in as easy a manner as he could , say to Lord Castlewood , he hop , he request , his lordship 's mother and sister would be of the supper that night . as the time hang heavy on he , and he must not go abroad , would not Miss Beatrix hold he company at a game of card ? 
 at this , look up at Esmond , and take the signal from he , Lord Castlewood inform his Royal Highness   that his sister Beatrix be not at Kensington ; and that her family have think it well she should quit the town . 
    in London we address the Prince as Royal Highness 
  invariably , though the woman persist in give he the 
  title of King . 
 " not at Kensington ! " say he ; " be she ill ? she be well yesterday ; wherefore should she quit the town ? be it at your order , my lord , or Colonel Esmond 's , who seem the master of this house ? " 
 " not of this , sir , " say Frank very nobly , " only of our house in the country , which he hath give to we . this be my mother 's house , and Walcote be my father 's , and the Marquis of Esmond know he hath but to give his word , and I return his to he . " 
 " the Marquis of Esmond ! the Marquis of Esmond , " say the Prince , toss off a glass , " meddle too much with my affair , and presume on the service he hath do I . if you want to carry your suit with Beatrix , my lord , by block she up in gaol , let I tell you that be not the way to win a woman . " 
 " I be not aware , sir , that I have speak of my suit to Madam Beatrix to your Royal Highness . " 
 " bah , bah , Monsieur ! we need not be a conjurer to see that . it make itself see at all moment . you be jealous , my lord , and the maid of honor can not look at another face without yours begin to scowl . that which you do be unworthy , Monsieur ; be inhospitable be , be lache , yes , lache : "   he speak rapidly in French , his rage carry he away with each phrase :   " I come to your house ; I risk my life ; I pass it in ennui ; I repose myself on your fidelity ; I have no company but your lordship 's sermon or the conversation of that adorable young lady , and you take she from I , and you , you rest ! merci , Monsieur ! I shall thank you when I have the mean ; I shall know to recompense a devotion a little importunate , my lord a little importunate . for a month past your air of protector have annoy I beyond measure . you deign to offer I the crown , and bid I take it on my knee like King John eh ! I know my history , Monsieur , and mock myself of frown baron . I admire your mistress , and you send she to a Bastile of the Province ; I enter your house , and you mistrust I . I will leave it , Monsieur ; from to - night I will leave it . I have other friend whose loyalty will not be so ready to question mine . if I have garter to give away , ' tis to nobleman who be not so ready to think evil . bring I a coach and let I quit this place , or let the fair beatrix return to it . I will not have your hospitality at the expense of the freedom of that fair creature . " 
 this harangue be utter with rapid gesticulation such as the french use , and in the language of that nation . the Prince stride up and down the room ; his face flush , and his hand tremble with anger . he be very thin and frail from repeat illness and a life of pleasure . either Castlewood or Esmond could have break he across their knee , and in half a minute 's struggle put an end to he ; and here he be insult we both , and scarce deign to hide from the two , whose honor it most concerned , the passion he feel for the young lady of our family . my Lord Castlewood reply to the Prince 's tirade very nobly and simply . 
 " Sir , " say he , " your Royal Highness be pleased to forget that other risk their life , and for your cause . very few englishman , please God , would dare to lay hand on your sacred person , though none would ever think of respect ours . our family 's life be at your service , and everything we have except our honor . " 
 " Honor ! bah , sir , who ever think of hurt your honor ? " say the Prince with a peevish air . 
 " we implore your Royal Highness never to think of hurt it , " say Lord Castlewood with a low bow . the night be warm , the window be open both towards the Gardens and the Square . Colonel Esmond hear through the closed door the voice of the watchman call the hour , in the square on the other side . he open the door communicate with the Prince 's room ; Martin , the servant that have ride with Beatrix to Hounslow , be just go out of the chamber as Esmond enter it , and when the fellow be go , and the watchman again sing his cry of " Past ten o'clock , and a starlight night , " Esmond speak to the Prince in a low voice , and say " your Royal Highness hear that man . " 
 " Apres , Monsieur ? " say the Prince . 
 " I have but to beckon he from the window , and send he fifty yard , and he return with a guard of man , and I deliver up to he the body of the person call himself James the Third , for whose capture Parliament hath offer a reward of 500L. , as your Royal Highness see on our ride from Rochester . I have but to say the word , and , by the heaven that make I , I would say it if I think the Prince , for his honor 's sake , would not desist from insult our . but the first gentleman of England know his duty too well to forget himself with the humblest , or peril his crown for a deed that be shameful if it be do . " 
 " have your lordship anything to say , " say the Prince , turn to Frank Castlewood , and quite pale with anger ; " any threat or any insult , with which you would like to end this agreeable night 's entertainment ? " 
 " I follow the head of our house , " say Castlewood , bow gravely . " at what time shall it please the Prince that we should wait upon he in the morning ? " 
 " you will wait on the Bishop of Rochester early , you will bid he bring his coach hither ; and prepare an apartment for I in his own house , or in a place of safety . the King will reward you handsomely , never fear , for all you have do in his behalf . I wish you a good night , and shall go to bed , unless it please the Marquis of Esmond to call his colleague , the watchman , and that I should pass the night with the Kensington guard . fare you well , be sure I will remember you . my Lord Castlewood , I can go to bed to - night without need of a chamberlain . " and the Prince dismiss we with a grim bow , lock one door as he speak , that into the supping - room , and the other through which we pass , after we . it lead into the small chamber which Frank Castlewood or MONSIEUR BAPTISTE occupy , and by which Martin enter when Colonel Esmond but now see he in the chamber . 
 at an early hour next morning the Bishop arrive , and be closet for some time with his master in his own apartment , where the Prince lay open to his counsellor the wrong which , accord to his version , he have receive from the gentleman of the Esmond family . the worthy prelate come out from the conference with an air of great satisfaction ; he be a man full of resource , and of a most assured fidelity , and possess of genius , and a hundred good quality ; but captious and of a most jealous temper , that could not help exult at the downfall of any favorite ; and he be pleased in spite of himself to hear that the Esmond Ministry be at an end . 
 " I have soothe your guest , " say he , come out to the two gentleman and the widow ; who have be make acquainted with somewhat of the dispute of the night before .   by the version we give she , the Prince be only make to exhibit anger because we doubt of his intention in respect to beatrix ; and to leave we , because we question his honor .   " but I think , all thing consider , ' tis as well he should leave this house ; and then , my Lady Castlewood , " say the Bishop , " my pretty beatrix may come back to it . " 
 " she be quite as well at home at Castlewood , " Esmond 's mistress say , " till everything be over . " 
 " you shall have your title , Esmond , that I promise you , " say the good Bishop , assume the air of a Prime Minister . " the Prince hath express himself most nobly in regard of the little difference of last night , and I promise you he hath listen to my sermon , as well as to that of other folk , " say the Doctor , archly ; " he hath every great and generous quality , with perhaps a weakness for the sex which belong to his family , and hath be know in score of popular sovereign from King David downward . " 
 " my lord , my lord ! " break out Lady Esmond , " the levity with which you speak of such conduct towards our sex shock I , and what you call weakness I call deplorable sin . " 
 " sin it be , my dear creature , " say the Bishop , with a shrug , take snuff ; " but consider what a sinner King Solomon be , and in spite of a thousand of wife too . " 
 " enough of this , my lord , " say Lady Castlewood , with a fine blush , and walk out of the room very stately . 
 the Prince enter it presently with a smile on his face , and if he feel any offence against we on the previous night , at present exhibit none . he offer a hand to each gentleman with great courtesy . " if all your bishop preach so well as Doctor Atterbury . " say he , " I do not   know , gentleman , what may happen to I . I speak very hastily , my lord , last night , and ask pardon of both of you . but I must not stay any long , " say he , " give umbrage to good friend , or keep pretty girl away from their home . my Lord Bishop hath find a safe place for I , hard by at a curate 's house , whom the Bishop can trust , and whose wife be so ugly as to be beyond all danger ; we will decamp into those new quarter , and I leave you , thank you for a hundred kindness here . where be my hostess , that I may bid her farewell ; to welcome she in a house of my own , soon , I trust , where my friend shall have no cause to quarrel with I . " 
 Lady Castlewood arrive presently , blush with great grace , and tear fill her eye as the Prince graciously salute she . she look so charming and young , that the doctor , in his banter way , could not help speak of her beauty to the Prince ; whose compliment make her blush , and look more charming still . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 a great scheme , and who balk it . 

 as character write with a secret ink come out with the application of fire , and disappear again and leave the paper white , as soon as it be cool ; a hundred name of man , high in repute and favor the Prince 's cause , that be writ in our private list , would have be visible enough on the great roll of the conspiracy , have it ever be lay open under the sun . what crowd would have press forward , and subscribe their name and protest their loyalty , when the danger be over ! what a number of whig , now high in place and creature of the all - powerful Minister , scorn Mr. Walpole then ! if ever a match be gain by the manliness and decision of a few at a moment of danger ; if ever one be lose by the treachery and imbecility of those that have the card in their hand , and might have play they , it be in that momentous game which be enact in the next three day , and of which the noble crown in the world be the stake . 
 from the conduct of my Lord Bolingbroke , those who be interested in the scheme we have in hand , see pretty well that he be not to be trust . should the Prince prevail , it be his lordship 's gracious intention to declare for he : should the hanoverian party bring in their sovereign , who more ready to go on his knee , and cry , " God Save King George ? " and he betray the one Prince and the other ; but exactly at the wrong time . when he should have strike for King James , he falter and coquet with the Whigs ; and have commit himself by the most monstrous profession of devotion , which the Elector rightly scorn , he prove the justness of their contempt for he by fly and take renegade service with St. Germains , just when he should have keep aloof : and that Court despise he , as the manly and resolute man who establish the Elector in England have before do . he sign his own name to every accusation of insincerity his enemy make against he ; and the King and the Pretender alike could show proof of St. John 's treachery under his own hand and seal . 
 our friend keep a pretty close watch upon his motion , as on those of the brave and hearty Whig party , that make little concealment of theirs . they would have in the elector , and use every mean in their power to effect their end . my Lord Marlborough be now with they . his expulsion from power by the Tories have throw that great captain at once on the Whig side . we hear he be come from Antwerp ; and , in fact , on the day of the Queen 's death , he once more land on English shore . a great part of the army be always with their illustrious leader ; even the Tories in it be indignant at the injustice of the persecution which the Whig officer be make to undergo . the chief of these be in London , and at the head of they one of the most intrepid man in the world , the Scots Duke of Argyle , whose conduct on the second day after that to which I have now bring down my history , end , as such honesty and bravery deserve to end , by establish the present Royal race on the english throne . 
 meanwhile there be no slight difference of opinion amongst the councillor surround the Prince , as to the plan his Highness should pursue . his female Minister at Court , fancy she see some amelioration in the Queen , be for wait a few day , or hour it might be , until he could be bring to she bedside , and acknowledge as her heir . Mr. Esmond be for have he march thither , escort by a couple of troop of Horse Guards , and openly present himself to the Council . during the whole of the night of the 29th-30th July , the Colonel be engage with gentleman of the military profession , whom ' tis needless here to name ; suffice it to say that several of they have exceed high rank in the army , and one of they in especial be a General , who , when he hear the Duke of Marlborough be come on the other side , wave his crutch over his head with a huzzah , at the idea that he should march out and engage he . of the three Secretaries of State , we know that one be devoted to we . the Governor of the Tower be ours ; the two company on duty at Kensington barrack be safe ; and we have intelligence , very speedy and accurate , of all that take place at the Palace within . 
 at noon , on the 30th of July , a message come to the Prince 's friend that the Committee of Council be sit at Kensington Palace , their Graces of Ormonde and Shrewsbury , the Archbishop of Canterbury and the three Secretaries of State , be there assemble . in an hour afterwards , hurried news be bring that the two great Whig Dukes , Argyle and Somerset , have break into the Council - chamber without a summon , and take their seat at table . after hold a debate there , the whole party proceed to the chamber of the Queen , who be lie in great weakness , but still sensible , and the Lords recommend his Grace of Shrewsbury as the fit person to take the vacant place of Lord Treasurer ; her Majesty give he the staff , as all know . " and now , " writ my messenger from Court , " now or never be the TIME . " 
 now or never be the time indeed . in spite of the Whig Dukes , our side have still the majority in the Council , and Esmond , to whom the message have be bring ,   the personage at Court not be aware that the Prince have quit his lodging in Kensington Square ,   and Esmond 's gallant young aide - de - camp , Frank Castlewood , put on sword and uniform , take a brief leave of their dear lady , who embrace and bless they both , and go to her chamber to pray for the issue of the great event which be then pende . 
 Castlewood speed to the barrack to give warning to the captain of the Guard there ; and then go to the " King 's arm " tavern at Kensington , where our friend be assemble , have come by party of two and three , rid or in coach , and be get together in the upper chamber , fifty - three of they ; their servant , who have be instruct to bring arm likewise , be below in the garden of the tavern , where they be serve with drink . out of this garden be a little door that lead into the road of the Palace , and through this it be arrange that master and servant be to march ; when that signal be give , and that personage appear , for whom all be wait . there be in our company the famous officer next in command to the Captain - General of the Forces , his grace the Duke of Ormonde , who be within at the Council . there be with he two more lieutenant - general , nine major - general and brigadier , seven colonel , eleven Peers of Parliament , and twenty - one member of the House of Commons . the Guard be with we within and without the Palace : the Queen be with we ; the Council   save the two Whig Dukes , that must have succumb ; the day be our own , and with a beat heart Esmond walk rapidly to the Mall of Kensington , where he have part with the Prince on the night before . for three night the Colonel have not be to bed : the last have be pass summon the Prince 's friend together , of whom the great majority have no sort of inkling of the transaction pende until they be tell that he be actually on the spot , and be summon to strike the blow . the night before and after the altercation with the Prince , my gentleman , have suspicion of his Royal Highness , and fear lest he should be minded to give we the slip , and fly off after his fugitive beauty , have spend , if the truth must be tell , at the " greyhound " tavern , over against my Lady Castlewood 's house in Kensington Square , with an eye on the door , lest the Prince should escape from it . the night before that he have pass in his boot at the " Crown " at Hounslow , where he must watch forsooth all night , in order to get one moment 's glimpse of beatrix in the morning . and fate have decree that he be to have a fourth night 's ride and wakefulness before his business be end . 
 he run to the curate 's house in Kensington Mall , and ask for Mr. Bates , the name the Prince go by . the curate 's wife say Mr. Bates have go abroad very early in the morning in his boot , say he be go to the Bishop of Rochester 's house at Chelsey . but the Bishop have be at Kensington himself two hour ago to seek for Mr. Bates , and have return in his coach to his own house , when he hear that the gentleman be go thither to seek he . 
 this absence be most unpropitious , for an hour 's delay might cost a kingdom ; Esmond have nothing for it but to hasten to the " King 's arm , " and tell the gentleman there assemble that Mr. George   as we call the Prince there   be not at home , but that Esmond would go fetch he ; and take a General 's coach that happen to be there , Esmond drive across the country to Chelsey , to the Bishop 's house there . 
 the porter say two gentleman be with his lordship , and Esmond run past this sentry up to the locked door of the Bishop 's study , at which he rattle , and be admit presently . of the Bishop 's guest one be a brother prelate , and the other the Abbe g . 
 " where be Mr. George ? " say Mr. Esmond ; " now be the time . " the Bishop look scared : " I go to his lodging , " he say , " and they tell I he be come hither . I return as quick as coach would carry I ; and he hath not be here . " 
 the Colonel burst out with an oath ; that be all he could say to their reverence ; run down the stair again , and bid the coachman , an old friend and fellow - campaigner , drive as if he be charge the French with his master at Wynendael they be back at Kensington in half an hour . 
 again Esmond go to the curate 's house . Mr. Bates have not return . the Colonel have to go with this blank errand to the gentleman at the " King 's arm , " that be grow very impatient by this time . 
 out of the window of the tavern , and look over the garden wall , you can see the green before Kensington Palace , the Palace gate   round which the Ministers ' coach be stand , and the barrack building . as we be look out from this window in gloomy discourse , we hear presently trumpet blow , and some of we run to the window of the front - room , look into the High Street of Kensington , and see a regiment of horse come . 
 " it be Ormonde 's guard , " say one . 
 " no , by God , it be Argyle 's old regiment ! " say my General , clap down his crutch . 
 it be , indeed , Argyle 's regiment that be bring from Westminster , and that take the place of the regiment at Kensington on which we could rely . 
 " oh , Harry ! " say one of the general there present , " you be bear under an unlucky star ; I begin to think that there be no Mr. George , nor Mr. Dragon either . ' tis not the peerage I care for , for our name be so ancient and famous , that merely to be call Lord Lydiard would do I no good ; but ' tis the chance you promise I of fight Marlborough . " 
 as we be talk , Castlewood enter the room with a disturb air . 
 " what news , Frank ? " say the Colonel . " be Mr. George come at last ? " 
 " damn he , look here ! " say Castlewood , hold out a paper . " I find it in the book the what you call it , ' Eikum Basilikum , ' that villain Martin put it there he say his young mistress bid he . it be direct to I , but it be mean for he I know , and I break the seal and read it . " 
 the whole assembly of officer seem to swim away before Esmond 's eye as he read the paper ; all that be write on it be : " beatrix Esmond be send away to prison , to Castlewood , where she will pray for happy day . " 
 " can you guess where he be ? " say Castlewood . 
 " yes , " say Colonel Esmond . he know full well , Frank know full well : our instinct tell whither that traitor have flee . 
 he have courage to turn to the company and say , " gentleman , I fear very much that Mr. George will not be here to - day ; something hath happen and and I very much fear some accident may befall he , which must keep he out of the way . have have your noon 's draught , you have well pay the reckoning and go home ; there can be no game where there be no one to play it . " 
 some of the gentleman go away without a word , other call to pay their duty to her Majesty and ask for her health . the little army disappear into the darkness out of which it have be call ; there have be no writing , no paper to implicate any man . some few officer and member of Parliament have be invite over night to breakfast at the " King 's arm , " at Kensington ; and they have call for their bill and go home . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 AUGUST 1st , 1714 . 

 " do my mistress know of this ? " Esmond ask of Frank , as they walk along . 
 " my mother find the letter in the book , on the toilet - table . she have writ it ere she have leave home , " Frank say . " Mother meet she on the stair , with her hand upon the door , try to enter , and never leave she after that till she go away . he do not think of look at it there , nor have Martin the chance of tell he . I believe the poor devil mean no harm , though I half kill he ; he think ' twa to Beatrix 's brother he be bring the letter . " 
 Frank never say a word of reproach to I for have bring the villain amongst we . as we knock at the door I say , " when will the horse be ready ? " Frank point with his cane , they be turn the street that moment . 
 we go up and bade adieu to our mistress ; she be in a dreadful state of agitation by this time , and that Bishop be with she whose company she be so fond of . 
 " do you tell he , my lord , " say Esmond , " that beatrix be at Castlewood ? " the Bishop blush and stammer : " well , " say he , " I . . . " 
 " you serve the villain right , " break out Mr. Esmond , " and he have lose a crown by what you tell he . " 
 my mistress turn quite white , " Henry , Henry , " say she , " do not kill he . " 
 " it may not be too late , " say Esmond ; " he may not have go to Castlewood ; pray God , it be not too late . " the Bishop be break out with some banale phrase about loyalty , and the sacredness of the Sovereign 's person ; but Esmond sternly bid he hold his tongue , burn all paper , and take care of Lady Castlewood ; and in five minute he and Frank be in the saddle , John Lockwood behind they , rid towards Castlewood at a rapid pace . 
 we be just get to Alton , when who should meet we but old Lockwood , the porter from Castlewood , John 's father , walk by the side of the Hexton flying - coach , who sleep the night at Alton . Lockwood say his young mistress have arrive at home on Wednesday night , and this morning , Friday , have despatch he with a packet for my lady at Kensington , say the letter be of great importance . 
 we take the freedom to break it , while Lockwood star with wonder , and cry out his " Lord bless I 's , " and " who have a thought it be , " at the sight of his young lord , whom he have not see these seven year . 
 the packet from Beatrix contain no news of importance at all . it be write in a jocular strain , affect to make light of her captivity . she ask whether she might have leave to visit Mrs. Tusher , or to walk beyond the court and the garden wall . she give news of the peacock , and a fawn she have there . she bid her mother send her certain gown and smock by old Lockwood ; she send her duty to a certain Person , if certain other person permit she to take such a freedom ; how that , as she be not able to play card with he , she hop he would read good book , such as Doctor Atterbury 's sermon and " Eikon Basilike : " she be go to read good book ; she think she pretty mamma would like to know she be not cry her eye out . 
 " who be in the house besides you , Lockwood ? " say the Colonel . 
 " there be the laundry - maid , and the kitchen - maid , Madam Beatrix 's maid , the man from London , and that be all ; and he sleepeth in my lodge away from the maid , " say old Lockwood . 
 Esmond scribble a line with a pencil on the note , give it to the old man , and bid he go on to his lady . we know why Beatrix have be so dutiful on a sudden , and why she speak of " Eikon Basilike . " she writ this letter to put the Prince on the scent , and the porter out of the way . 
 " we have a fine moonlight night for rid on , " say Esmond ; " Frank , we may reach Castlewood in time yet . " all the way along they make inquiry at the post - house , when a tall young gentleman in a gray suit , with a light brown periwig , just the color of my lord 's , have be see to pass . he have set off at six that morning , and we at three in the afternoon . he ride almost as quickly as we have do ; he be seven hour a - head of we still when we reach the last stage . 
 we ride over Castlewood Downs before the breaking of dawn . we pass the very spot where the car be upset fourteen year since , and Mohun lie . the village be not up yet , nor the forge light , as we ride through it , pass by the elm , where the rook be still roost , and by the church , and over the bridge . we get off our horse at the bridge and walk up to the gate . 
 " if she be safe , " say Frank , trembling , and his honest eye fill with tear , " a silver statue to our Lady ! " he be go to rattle at the great iron knocker on the oak gate ; but Esmond stop his kinsman 's hand . he have his own fear , his own hope , his own despair and grief , too ; but he speak not a word of these to his companion , or show any sign of emotion . 
 he go and tap at the little window at the porter 's lodge , gently , but repeatedly , until the man come to the bar . 
 " who be there ? " say he , look out ; it be the servant from Kensington . 
 " my Lord Castlewood and Colonel Esmond , " we say , from below . " open the gate and let we in without any noise . " 
 " my Lord Castlewood ? " say the other ; " my lord 's here , and in bed . " 
 " open , d n you , " say Castlewood , with a curse . 
 " I shall open to no one , " say the man , shut the glass window as Frank draw a pistol . he would have fire at the porter , but Esmond again hold his hand . 
 " there be more way than one , " say he , " of enter such a great house as this . " Frank grumble that the west gate be half a mile round . " but I know of a way that be not a hundred yard off , " say Mr. Esmond ; and lead his kinsman close along the wall , and by the shrub which have now grow thick on what have be an old moat about the house , they come to the buttress , at the side of which the little window be , which be Father Holt 's private door . esmond climb up to this easily , break a pane that have be mend , and touch the spring inside , and the two gentleman pass in that way , treading as lightly as they could ; and so go through the passage into the court , over which the dawn be now redden , and where the fountain plash in the silence . 
 they speed instantly to the porter 's lodge , where the fellow have not fasten his door that lead into the court ; and pistol in hand come upon the terrify wretch , and bid he be silent . then they ask he   Esmond 's head reel , and he almost fall as he speak   when Lord Castlewood have arrive ? he say on the previous evening , about eight of the clock . " and what then ? " his lordship sup with his sister . " do the man wait ? " yes , he and my lady 's maid both wait : the other servant make the supper ; and there be no wine , and they could give his lordship but milk , at which he grumble ; and and Madam Beatrix keep Miss Lucy always in the room with she . and there be a bed across the court in the Chaplain 's room , she have arrange my lord be to sleep there . Madam Beatrix have come down stair laugh with the maid , and have lock herself in , and my lord have stand for a while talk to she through the door , and she laugh at he . and then he pace the court awhile , and she come again to the upper window ; and my lord implore she to come down and walk in the room ; but she would not , and laugh at he again , and shut the window ; and so my lord , utter what seem curse , but in a foreign language , go to the Chaplain 's room to bed . 
 " be this all ! " " All , " the man swear upon his honor ; all as he hop to be save . " stop , there be one thing more . my lord , on arrive , and once or twice during supper , do kiss his sister , as be natural , and she kiss he . " at this esmond grind his tooth with rage , and wellnigh throttle the amazed miscreant who be speak , whereas Castlewood , seize hold of his cousin 's hand , burst into a great fit of laughter . 
 " if it amuse thee , " say Esmond in French , " that your sister should be exchange of kiss with a stranger , I fear poor beatrix will give thee plenty of sport . " esmond darkly think , how Hamilton , Ashburnham , have before be master of those rose that the young Prince 's lip be now feed on . he sicken at that notion . her cheek be desecrate , her beauty tarnish ; shame and honor stand between it and he . the love be dead within he ; have she a crown to bring he with her love , he feel that both would degrade he . 
 but this wrath against Beatrix do not lessen the angry feeling of the Colonel against the man who have be the occasion if not the cause of the evil . Frank sit down on a stone bench in the court - yard , and fairly fall asleep , while Esmond pace up and down the court , debate what should ensue . what matter how much or how little have pass between the Prince and the poor faithless girl ? they be arrive in time perhaps to rescue her person , but not her mind ; have she not instigate the young Prince to come to she ; suborn servant , dismiss other , so that she might communicate with he ? the treacherous heart within she have surrender , though the place be safe ; and it be to win this that he have give a life 's struggle and devotion ; this , that she be ready to give away for the bribe of a coronet or a wink of the Prince 's eye . 
 when he have think his thought out he shake up poor Frank from his sleep , who rise yawning , and say he have be dream of Clotilda . " you must back I , " say Esmond , " in what I be go to do . I have be think that yonder scoundrel may have be instruct to tell that story , and that the whole of it may be a lie ; if it be , we shall find it out from the gentleman who be asleep yonder . see if the door lead to my lady 's room , "   so we call the room at the north - west angle of the house ,   ' see if the door be bar as he saith . " we try ; it be indeed as the lackey have say , close within . 
 " it may have be open and shut afterwards , " say poor Esmond ; " the foundress of our family let our ancestor in in that way . " 
 " what will you do , Harry , if if what that fellow saith should turn out untrue ? " the young man look scared and frighten into his kinsman 's face ; I dare say it wear no very pleasant expression . 
 " let we first go see whether the two story agree , " say Esmond ; and go in at the passage and open the door into what have be his own chamber now for wellnigh five - and - twenty year . a candle be still burn , and the Prince asleep dress on the bed Esmond do not care for make a noise . the Prince start up in his bed , see two man in his chamber . " Qui est la " say he , and take a pistol from under his pillow . 
 " it be the Marquis of Esmond , " say the Colonel , " come to welcome his Majesty to his house of Castlewood , and to report of what hath happen in London . pursuant to the King 's order , I pass the night before last , after leave his Majesty , in wait upon the friend of the king . it be a pity that his Majesty 's desire to see the country and to visit our poor house should have cause the King to quit London without notice yesterday , when the opportunity happen which in all human probability may not occur again ; and have the King not choose to ride to Castlewood , the Prince of Wales might have sleep at St. James 's . " 
 " ' Sdeath ! gentleman , " say the Prince , start off his bed , whereon he be lie in his clothe , " the Doctor be with I yesterday morning , and after watch by my sister all night , tell I I might not hope to see the Queen . " 
 " it would have be otherwise , " say Esmond with another bow ; " as , by this time , the Queen may be dead in spite of the Doctor . the Council be meet , a new Treasurer be appoint , the troop be devoted to the King 's cause ; and fifty loyal gentleman of the great name of this kingdom be assemble to accompany the Prince of Wales , who might have be the acknowledge heir of the throne , or the possessor of it by this time , have your Majesty not choose to take the air . we be ready ; there be only one person that fail we , your Majesty 's gracious " 
 " Morbleu , Monsieur , you give I too much Majesty , " say the Prince , who have now rise up and seem to be look to one of we to help he to his coat . but neither stir . 
 " we shall take care , " say Esmond , " not much oftener to offend in that particular . " 
 " what mean you , my lord ? " say the Prince , and mutter something about a guet - a - pen , which Esmond catch up . 
 " the snare , Sir , " say he , " be not of our laying ; it be not we that invite you . we come to avenge , and not to compass , the dishonor of our family . " 
 " Dishonor ! Morbleu , there have be no dishonor , " say the Prince , turn scarlet , " only a little harmless playing . " 
 " that be mean to end seriously . " 
 " I swear , " the Prince break out impetuously , " upon the honor of a gentleman , my lord " 
 " that we arrive in time . no wrong hath be do , Frank , " say Colonel Esmond , turn round to young Castlewood , who stand at the door as the talk be go on . " see ! here be a paper whereon his Majesty have deign to commence some verse in honor , or dishonor , of Beatrix . here be ' Madame ' and ' flamme , ' ' Cruelle ' and ' rebelle , ' and ' Amour ' and ' Jour ' in the Royal writing and spelling . have the gracious lover be happy , he have not pass his time in sigh . " in fact , and actually as he be speak , Esmond cast his eye down towards the table , and see a paper on which my young Prince have be scrawl a madrigal , that be to finish his charmer on the morrow . 
 " Sir , " say the Prince , burn with rage   he have assume his Royal coat unassiste by this time , " do I come here to receive insult ? " 
 " to confer they , may it please your Majesty , " say the Colonel , with a very low bow , " and the gentleman of our family be come to thank you . " 
 " Malediction ! " say the young man , tear start into his eye with helpless rage and mortification . " what will you with I , gentleman ? " 
 " if your Majesty will please to enter the next apartment , " say Esmond , preserve his grave tone , " I have some paper there which I would gladly submit to you , and by your permission I will lead the way ; " and , take the taper up , and backing before the Prince with very great ceremony , Mr. Esmond pass into the little Chaplain 's room , through which we have just enter into the house : " please to set a chair for his Majesty , Frank , " say the Colonel to his companion , who wonder almost as much at this scene , and be as much puzzle by it , as the other actor in it . then go to the crypt over the mantel - piece , the Colonel open it , and draw thence the paper which so long have lain there . 
 " here , may it please your Majesty , " say he , " be the Patent of Marquis send over by your Royal Father at St. Germains to Viscount Castlewood , my father : here be the witness certificate of my father 's marriage to my mother , and of my birth and christening ; I be christen of that religion of which your sainted sire give all through life so shin example . these be my title , dear Frank , and this what I do with they : here go Baptism and marriage , and here the Marquisate and the August Sign - Manual , with which your predecessor be pleased to honor our race . " and as Esmond speak he set the paper burn in the brazier . " you will please , sir , to remember , " he continue , " that our family hath ruin itself by fidelity to your : that my grandfather spend his estate , and give his blood and his son to die for your service ; that my dear lord 's grandfather   for lord you be now , Frank , by right and title too   die for the same cause ; that my poor kinswoman , my father 's second wife , after give away her honor to your wicked perjure race , send all her wealth to the king ; and get in return , that precious title that lie in ash , and this inestimable yard of blue ribbon . I lie this at your foot and stamp upon it : I draw this sword , and break it and deny you ; and , have you complete the wrong you design we , by heaven I would have drive it through your heart , and no more pardon you than your father pardon Monmouth . Frank will do the same , will not   you , cousin ? " 
 Frank , who have be look on with a stupid air at the paper , as they flame in the old brazier , take out his sword and break it , hold his head down : " I go with my cousin , " say he , give Esmond a grasp of the hand . " Marquis or not , by - , I stand by he any day . I beg your Majesty 's pardon for swearing ; that be that be I be for the Elector of Hanover . it be all your Majesty 's own fault . the Queen 's dead most likely by this time . and you might have be King if you have not   come dangle after Trix . " 
 " thus to lose a crown , " say the young Prince , start up , and speak French in his eager way ; " to lose the lovely woman in the world ; to lose the loyalty of such heart as your , be not this , my lord , enough of humiliation ? Marquis , if I go on my knee will you pardon I ? no , I can not   do that , but I can offer you reparation , that of honor , that of gentleman . favor I by cross the sword with mine : yours be broke see , yonder in the armoire be two ; " and the Prince take they out as eager as a boy , and hold they towards Esmond : " ah ! you will ? merci , monsieur , merci ! " 
 extremely touch by this immense mark of condescension and repentance for wrong do , Colonel Esmond bow down so low as almost to kiss the gracious young hand that confer on he such an honor , and take his guard in silence . the sword be no soon meet , than Castlewood knock up Esmond 's with the blade of his own , which he have break off short at the shell ; and the Colonel fall back a step drop his point with another very low bow , and declare himself perfectly satisfied . 
 " eh bien , Vicomte ! " say the young Prince , who be a boy , and a french boy , " il ne nous reste qu'une choose a faire : " he place his sword upon the table , and the finger of his two hand upon his breast : " we have one more thing to do , " say he ; " you do not divine it ? " he stretch out his arm : " embrasson nous ! " 
 the talk be scarce over when Beatrix enter the room : what come she to seek there ? she start and turn pale at the sight of her brother and kinsman , draw sword , break sword - blade , and paper yet smoulder in the brazier . 
 " Charming Beatrix , " say the Prince , with a blush which become he very well , " these lord have come a - horseback from London , where my sister lie in a despaired state , and where her successor make himself desire . pardon I for my escapade of last evening . I have be so long a prisoner , that I seize the occasion of a promenade on horseback , and my horse naturally bear I towards you . I find you a queen in your little court , where you deign to entertain I . present my homage to your maid of honor . I sigh as you sleep , under the window of your chamber , and then retire to seek rest in my own . it be there that these gentleman agreeably rouse I . yes , milords , for that be a happy day that make a Prince acquaint , at whatever cost to his vanity , with such a noble heart as that of the Marquis of Esmond . Mademoiselle , may we take your coach to town ? I see it in the hangar , and this poor Marquis must be drop with sleep . " 
 " will it please the King to breakfast before he go ? " be all beatrix could say . the rose have shudder out of her cheek ; her eye be glare ; she look quite old . she come up to Esmond and hiss out a word or two : " if I do not love you before , cousin , " say she , " think how I love you now . " if word could stab , no doubt she would have kill Esmond ; she look at he as if she could . 
 but her keen word give no wound to Mr. Esmond ; his heart be too hard . as he look at she , he wonder that he could ever have love she . his love of ten year be over ; it fall down dead on the spot , at the Kensington Tavern , where Frank bring he the note out of " Eikon Basilike . " the Prince blush and bow low , as she gaze at he , and quit the chamber . I have never see she from that day . 
 horse be fetched and put to the chariot presently . my lord ride outside , and as for Esmond he be so tired that he be no soon in the carriage than he fall asleep , and never wake till night , as the coach come into Alton . 
 as we drive to the " Bell " Inn come a mitred coach with our old friend Lockwood beside the coachman . my Lady Castlewood and the Bishop be inside ; she give a little scream when she see we . the two coach enter the inn almost together ; the landlord and people come out with light to welcome the visitor . 
 we in our coach spring out of it , as soon as ever we see the dear lady , and above all , the Doctor in his cassock . what be the news ? be there yet time ? be the queen alive ? these question be put hurriedly , as Boniface stand wait before his noble guest to bow they up the stair . 
 " be she safe ? " be what Lady Castlewood whisper in a flutter to Esmond . 
 " All be well , thank God , " say he , as the fond lady take his hand and kiss it , and call he her preserver and her dear . she be not   think of Queens and crown . 
 the Bishop 's news be reassure : at least all be not lose ; the Queen yet breathe , or be alive when they leave London , six hour since .   " it be Lady Castlewood who insist on come , " the Doctor say .   Argyle have march up regiment from Portsmouth , and send abroad for more ; the whig be on the alert , a pest on they ,   I be not sure but the Bishop swear as he speak ,   and so too be our people . and all might be save , if only the Prince could be at London in time . we call for horse , instantly to return to London . we never go up poor crestfallen Boniface 's stair , but into our coach again . the Prince and his Prime Minister in one , Esmond in the other , with only his dear mistress as a companion . 
 Castlewood gallop forwards on horseback to gather the Prince 's friend and warn they of his coming . we travel through the night . esmond discourse to his mistress of the event of the last twenty - four hour ; of Castlewood 's ride and his ; of the Prince 's generous behavior and their reconciliation . the night seem short enough ; and the starlit hour pass away serenely in that fond company . 
 so we come along the road ; the Bishop 's coach head our ; and , with some delay in procure horse , we get to Hammersmith about four o'clock on Sunday morning , the first of August , and half an hour after , it be then bright day , we ride by my Lady Warwick 's house , and so down the street of Kensington . 
 early as the hour be , there be a bustle in the street and many people move to and fro . round the gate lead to the Palace , where the guard be , there be especially a great crowd . and the coach ahead of we stop , and the Bishop 's man get down to know what the concourse mean ? 
 there presently come from out of the gate Horse Guards with their trumpet , and a company of herald with their tabard . the trumpet blow , and the herald - at - arm come forward and proclaim GEORGE , by the Grace of God , of Great Britain , France , and Ireland , King , Defender of the Faith . and the people shout God save the king ! 
 among the crowd shout and wave their hat , I catch sight of one sad face , which I have know all my life , and see under many disguise . it be no other than poor Mr. Holt 's , who have slip over to England to witness the triumph of the good cause ; and now behold its enemy victorious , amidst the acclamation of the english people . the poor fellow have forget to huzzah or to take his hat off , until his neighbor in the crowd remark his want of loyalty , and curse he for a Jesuit in disguise , when he ruefully uncover and begin to cheer . sure he be the most unlucky of man : he never play a game but he lose it ; or engage in a conspiracy but ' twa certain to end in defeat . I see he in Flanders after this , whence he go to Rome to the head - quarter of his order ; and actually reappear among we in America , very old , and busy , and hopeful . I be not sure that he do not assume the hatchet and moccasin there ; and , attire in a blanket and war - paint , skulk about a missionary amongst the Indians . he lie bury in our neighboring province of Maryland now , with a cross over he , and a mound of earth above he ; under which that unquiet spirit be for ever at peace . 
 with the sound of King George 's trumpet , all the vain hope of the weak and foolish young Pretender be blow away ; and with that music , too , I may say , the drama of my own life be end . that happiness , which hath subsequently crown it , can not be write in word ; ' tis of its nature sacred and secret , and not to be speak of , though the heart be ever so full of thankfulness , save to Heaven and the one ear alone to one fond being , the true and tender and pure wife ever man be bless with . as I think of the immense happiness which be in store for I , and of the depth and intensity of that love which , for so many year , hath bless I , I own to a transport of wonder and gratitude for such a boon nay , be thankful to have be endow with a heart capable of feeling and know the immense beauty and value of the gift which God hath bestow upon I . sure , love vincit omnia ; be immeasurably above all ambition , more precious than wealth , more noble than name . he know not life who know not that : he hath not feel the high faculty of the soul who hath not enjoy it . in the name of my wife I write the completion of hope , and the summit of happiness . to have such a love be the one blessing , in comparison of which all earthly joy be of no value ; and to think of she , be to praise God . 
 it be at Bruxelles , whither we retreat after the failure of our plot our Whig friend advise we to keep out of the way that the great joy of my life be bestow upon I , and that my dear mistress become my wife . we have be so accustomed to an extreme intimacy and confidence , and have live so long and tenderly together , that we might have go on to the end without thinking of a close tie ; but circumstance bring about that event which so prodigiously multiply my happiness and her   for which I humbly thank Heaven , although a calamity befell we , which , I blush to think , hath occur more than once in our house . I know not what infatuation of ambition urge the beautiful and wayward woman , whose name hath occupy so many of these page , and who be serve by I with ten year of such constant fidelity and passion ; but ever after that day at Castlewood , when we rescue she , she persist in hold all her family as her enemy , and leave we , and escape to France , to what a fate I disdain to tell . nor be her son 's house a home for my dear mistress ; my poor Frank be weak , as perhaps all our race hath be , and lead by woman . those around he be imperious , and in a terror of his mother 's influence over he , lest he should recant , and deny the creed which he have adopt by their persuasion . the difference of their religion separate the son and the mother : my dear mistress feel that she be sever from her child and alone in the world alone but for one constant servant on whose fidelity , praise be Heaven , she could count . ' twas after a scene of ignoble quarrel on the part of Frank 's wife and mother   for the poor lad have be make to marry the whole of that german family with whom he have connect himself , that I find my mistress one day in tear , and then besought she to confide herself to the care and devotion of one who , by God 's help , would never forsake she . and then the tender matron , as beautiful in her Autumn , and as pure as virgin in their spring , with blush of love and " eye of meek surrender , " yield to my respectful importunity , and consent to share my home . let the last word I write thank she , and bless she who hath bless it . 
 by the kindness of Mr. Addison , all danger of prosecution , and every obstacle against our return to England , be remove ; and my son Frank 's gallantry in Scotland make his peace with the King 's government . but we two care no long to live in England : and Frank formally and joyfully yield over to we the possession of that estate which we now occupy , far away from Europe and its trouble , on the beautiful bank of the Potomac , where we have build a new Castlewood , and think with grateful heart of our old home . in our transatlantic country we have a season , the calm and most delightful of the year , which we call the indian summer : I often say the autumn of our life resemble that happy and serene weather , and be thankful for its rest and its sweet sunshine . Heaven hath bless we with a child , which each parent love for her resemblance to the other . our diamond be turn into plough and axis for our plantation ; and into negro , the happy and merriest , I think , in all this country : and the only jewel by which my wife set any store , and from which she hath never part , be that gold button she take from my arm on the day when she visit I in prison , and which she wear ever after , as she tell I , on the tender heart in the world . 
