AYALA 'S ANGEL 
 by 
 ANTHONY TROLLOPE , 
 VOL . I. 
 CHAPTER I. 
 the two sister . 
 when Egbert Dormer die he leave his two daughter utterly penniless 
 upon the world , and it must be say of Egbert Dormer that nothing 
 else could have be expect of he . the two girl be both 
 pretty , but Lucy , who be twenty - one , be suppose to be simple and 
 comparatively unattractive , whereas Ayala be credited,--as her 
 somewhat romantic name might show,--with poetic charm and a taste for 
 romance . Ayala when her father die be nineteen . 
 we must begin yet a little early and say that there have been,--and 
 have die many year before the death of Egbert dormer,--a clerk in 
 the Admiralty , by name Reginald Dosett , who , and whose wife , have be 
 conspicuous for personal beauty . their charm be go , but the 
 record of they have be leave in various grandchild . there have 
 be a son bear to Mr. Dosett , who be also a Reginald and a clerk 
 in the Admiralty , and who also , in his turn , have be a handsome 
 man . with he , in his decadence , the reader will become acquainted . 
 there be also two daughter , whose reputation for perfect feminine 
 beauty have never be contest . the elder have marry a city man of 
 wealth,--of wealth when he marry she , but who have become enormously 
 wealthy by the time of our story . he have when he marry be simply 
 Mister , but be now Sir Thomas Tringle , Baronet , and be senior 
 partner in the great firm of Travers and Treason . of Traverses and 
 Treasons there be none leave in these day , and Mr. Tringle be 
 suppose to manipulate all the million with which the great firm in 
 Lombard Street be concern . he have marry old Mr. Dosett 's eld 
 daughter , Emmeline , who be now Lady Tringle , with a house at the top 
 of Queen 's Gate , rent at £ 1,500 a year , with a palatial moor in 
 Scotland , with a seat in Sussex , and as many carriage and horse as 
 would suit an archduchess . Lady Tringle have everything in the world ; 
 a son , two daughter , and an open - handed stout husband , who be say 
 to have tell she that money be a matter of no consideration . 
 the second Miss Dosett , Adelaide Dosett , who have be considerably 
 young than her sister , have insist upon give herself to Egbert 
 Dormer , the artist , whose death we commemorate in our first line . 
 but she have die before her husband . they who remember the two 
 Miss Dosetts as girl be will not to declare that , though Lady Tringle 
 might , perhaps , have have the advantage in perfection of feature and 
 in unequalled symmetry , Adelaide have be the more attractive from 
 expression and brilliancy . to her Lord Sizes have offer his hand 
 and coronet , promise to abandon for her sake all the haunt of his 
 mature life . to her Mr. Tringle have kneel before he have take the 
 eld sister . for her Mr. Program , the popular preacher of the day , 
 for a time so totally lose himself that he be nearly minded to go 
 over to Rome . she be say to have have offer from a widow Lord 
 Chancellor and from a russian prince . her triumph would have quite 
 obliterate that of her sister have she not insist on marry 
 Egbert Dormer . 
 then there have be , and still be , Reginald Dosett , the son of old 
 Dosett , and the eld of the family . he too have marry , and be now 
 live with his wife ; but to they have no child be bear , luckily , 
 as he be a poor man . alas , to a beautiful son it be not often that 
 beauty can be a fortune as to a daughter . Young Reginald Dosett,--he 
 be anything now but young,--had do but little for himself with his 
 beauty , have simply marry the estimable daughter of a brother 
 clerk . now , at the age of fifty , he have his £ 900 a year from his 
 office , and might have live in fair comfort have he not allow a 
 small millstone of debt to hang round his neck from his early 
 year . but still he live creditably in a small but very genteel 
 house at Notting Hill , and would have undergo any want rather than 
 have declare himself to be a poor man to his rich relation the 
 Tringles . 
 such be now the remain two child of old Mr. Dosett,--Lady 
 Tringle , namely , and Reginald Dosett , the clerk in the Admiralty . 
 Adelaide , the beauty in chief of the family , be go ; and now 
 also her husband , the improvident artist , have follow his wife . 
 Dormer have be by no mean a fail artist . he have achieve 
 great honour,--had at an early age be accept into the Royal 
 Academy,--had sell picture to illustrious prince and more 
 illustrious dealer , have be engrave and have live to see his own 
 work resold at five time their original price . Egbert Dormer might 
 also have be a rich man . but he have a taste for other beautiful 
 thing besides a wife . the sweetest little phaeton that be to 
 cost nothing , the most perfect bijou of a little house at South 
 Kensington,--he have boast that it might have be pack without 
 trouble in his brother - in - law Tringle 's dining - room,--the simple 
 little gem for his wife , just a blue set of china for his dinner 
 table , just a paint cornice for his studio , just satin hanging for 
 his drawing - room,--and a few simple ornament for his little girl ; 
 these with a few ring for himself , and velvet suit of clothing 
 in which to do his painting ; these , with a few little dinner 
 party to show off his blue china , be the first and last of his 
 extravagance . but when he go , and when his pretty thing be 
 sell , there be not enough to cover his debt . there be , however , a 
 sweet savour about his name . when he die it be say of he that his 
 wife 's death have kill he . he have drop his pallette , refuse 
 to finish the order portrait of a princess , and have simply turn 
 himself round and die . 
 then there be the two daughter , Lucy and Ayala . it should be 
 explain that though a proper family intercourse have always be 
 maintain between the three family , the Tringles , the dormer , and 
 the Dosetts , there have never be cordiality between the first and 
 the two latter . the wealth of the Tringles have seem to convey with 
 it a fetid odour . Egbert Dormer , with every luxury around he which 
 money could purchase , have affect to despise the heavy magnificence 
 of the Tringles . it may be that he affect a fashion high than 
 that which the Tringles really attain . Reginald Dosett , who be 
 neither brilliant nor fashionable , be in truth independent , and , 
 perhaps , a little thin - skinned . he would submit to no touch of 
 arrogance from Sir Thomas ; and Sir Thomas seem to carry arrogance 
 in his brow and in his paunch . it be there rather , perhaps , than in 
 his heart ; but there be man to whom a knack of fumble their money 
 in their pocket and of look out from under penthouse brow over 
 an expanse of waistcoat , give an air of overweene pride which 
 their true idiosyncracie may not justify . to Dosett have , perhaps , 
 be speak a word or two which on some occasion he have inwardly 
 resent , and from thenceforward he have ever be ready to league 
 with Dormer against the " bullionaire , " as they agree to call Sir 
 Thomas . Lady Tringle have even say a word to her sister , Mrs. Dormer , 
 as to expense , and that have never be forgive by the artist . so 
 thing be when Mrs. Dormer die first ; and so they remain when 
 her husband follow she . 
 then there arise a sudden necessity for action , which , for a while , 
 bring Reginald Dosett into connexion with Sir Thomas and Lady 
 Tringle . something must be do for the poor girl . that the 
 something should come out of the pocket of Sir Thomas would have 
 seem to be natural . money with he be no object,--not at all . 
 another girl or two would be nothing to him,--a regard simple 
 expenditure . but the care of a human being be an important matter , 
 and so Sir Thomas know . Dosett have not a child at all , and would be 
 the well for such a windfall . Dosett he suppose to be,--in his , 
 Dosett 's way,--fairly well off . so he make this proposition . he would 
 take one girl and let Dosett take the other . to this Lady Tringle 
 add her proviso , that she should have the choice . to her nerve 
 affair of taste be of such paramount importance ! to this Dosett 
 yield . the matter be decide in Lady Tringle 's back drawing - room . 
 Mrs. Dosett be not even consult in that matter of choice , have 
 already acknowledge the duty of mother a motherless child . Dosett 
 have think that the bullionaire should have say a word as to some 
 future provision for the penniless girl , for whom he would be able 
 to do so little . but Sir Thomas have say no such word , and Dosett , 
 himself , lack both the courage and the coarseness to allude to the 
 matter . then Lady Tringle declare that she must have Ayala , and so 
 the matter be settle . Ayala the romantic ; Ayala the poetic ! it be 
 a matter of course that Ayala should be choose . Ayala have already 
 be make intimate with the magnificent saloon of the Tringles , 
 and have be feel by Lady Tringle to be an attraction . her long 
 dark black lock , which have never hitherto be tuck up , which 
 be never curl , which be never so long as to be awkward , be 
 already know as be the lovely lock in London . she sing as 
 though Nature have intend she to be a singing - bird,--require no 
 education , no labour . she have be once for three month in Paris , 
 and French have come naturally to she . her father have teach she 
 something of his art , and flatterer have already begin to say that 
 she be bear to be the one great female artist of the world . her 
 hand , her foot , her figure be perfect . though she be as yet but 
 nineteen , London have already begin to talk about Ayala Dormer . of 
 course Lady Tringle choose Ayala , not remember at the moment that 
 her own daughter might probably be supersede by their cousin . 
 and , therefore , as Lady Tringle say herself to Lucy with her 
 sweetest smile -- Mrs. Dosett have choose Lucy . the two girl be old 
 enough to know something of the meaning of such a choice . Ayala , 
 the young , be to be adopt into immense wealth , and Lucy be to 
 be give up to comparative poverty . she know nothing of her uncle 
 Dosett 's circumstance , but the genteel house at notte hill,--no . 
 3 , Kingsbury crescent,--wa know to she , and be but a poor affair 
 as compare even with the bijou in which she have hitherto live . her 
 aunt Dosett never rise to any vehicle beyond a four - wheeler , and 
 be careful even in thinking of that accommodation . Ayala would be 
 whirl about the park by a wire - wig and a pair of brown horse which 
 they have hear it say be not to be match in London . Ayala would 
 be carry with her aunt and her cousin to the show - room of Madame 
 Tonsonville , the great french milliner of Bond Street , whereas she , 
 Lucy , might too probably be call on to make her own gown . all the 
 fashion of Queen 's Gate , something , perhaps , of the fashion of Eaton 
 Square , would be open to Ayala . Lucy understand enough to know that 
 Ayala 's own charm might probably cause still more August gate to 
 be open to she , whereas Aunt Dosett enter no gate . it be quite 
 natural that Ayala should be choose . Lucy acknowledge as much to 
 herself . but they be sister , and have be so near ! by what a chasm 
 would they be dissever , now so far asunder ! 
 Lucy herself be a lovely girl , and know her own loveliness . she 
 be fair than Ayala , somewhat tall , and much more quiet in her 
 demeanour . she be also clever , but her cleverness do not show 
 itself so quickly . she be a musician , whereas her sister could only 
 sing . she could really draw , whereas her sister would rush away into 
 effect in which the drawing be not always very excellent . Lucy be 
 do the good she could for herself , know something of french 
 and German , though as yet not very fluent with her tongue . the two 
 girl be , in truth , both greatly gift ; but Ayala have the gift of 
 show her talent without thought of show it . Lucy see it all , 
 and know that she be outshone ; but how great have be the price of 
 the outshining ! 
 the artist 's house have be badly order , and the two girl be of 
 well disposition and well conduct than might have be expect 
 from such fitful training . Ayala have be the father 's pet , and Lucy 
 the mother 's . parent do ill in make pet , and here they have do 
 ill . Ayala have be teach to think herself the favourite , because 
 the artist , himself , have be more prominent before the world than 
 his wife . but the evil have not be last enough to have make bad 
 feeling between the sister . Lucy know that her sister have be 
 preferred to she , but she have be self - deny enough to be aware 
 that some such preference be due to Ayala . she , too , admire Ayala , 
 and love she with her whole heart . and Ayala be always good to 
 her,--had try to divide everything,--had assume no preference as a 
 right . the two be true sister . but when it be decide that Lucy 
 be to go to Kingsbury Crescent the difference be very great . the 
 two girl , on their father 's death , have be take to the great red 
 brick house in Queen 's Gate , and from thence , three or four day 
 after the funeral , Lucy be to be transfer to her Aunt Dosett . 
 Hitherto there have be little between they but weep for their 
 father . now have come the hour of parting . 
 the tiding have be communicate to Lucy , and to Lucy alone , by Aunt 
 tringle,--"as you be the eld , dear , we think that you will be 
 well able to be a comfort to your aunt , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " I will do the good I can , Aunt Emmeline , " say Lucy , declare to 
 herself that , in give such a reason , her aunt be lie basely . 
 " I be sure you will . poor dear Ayala be young than her cousin , and 
 will be more subject to they . " so in truth be Lucy young than her 
 cousin , but of that she say nothing . " I be sure you will agree with 
 I that it be good that we should have the young . " 
 " perhaps it be , Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " Sir Thomas would not have have it any other way , " say Lady Tringle , 
 with a little severity , feel that Lucy 's accord have hardly be 
 as generous as it should be . but she recover herself quickly , 
 remember how much it be that Ayala be to get , how much that Lucy 
 be to lose . " but , my dear , we shall see you very often , you know . 
 it be not so far across the park ; and when we do have a few party 
 again-- " 
 " oh , aunt , I be not think of that . " 
 " of course not . we can none of we think of it just now . but when 
 the time do come of course we shall always have you , just as if 
 you be one of we . " then her aunt give she a roll of bank - note , a 
 little present of twenty - five pound , to begin the world with , and 
 tell she that the carriage should take she to Kingsbury Crescent 
 on the following morning . on the whole Lucy behave well and leave 
 a pleasant impression on her aunt 's mind . the difference between 
 Queen 's Gate and Kingsbury crescent,--between Queen 's Gate and 
 Kingsbury Crescent for life,--wa indeed great ! 
 " I wish it be you , with all my heart , " say Ayala , cling to her 
 sister . 
 " it could not have be I . " 
 " why not ! " 
 " because you be so pretty and you be so clever . " 
 " no ! " 
 " yes ! if we be to be separate of course it would be so . do not 
 suppose , dear , that I be disappointed . " 
 " I be . " 
 " if I can only like Aunt Margaret,"--Aunt Margaret be Mrs. Dosett , 
 with whom neither of the girl have hitherto become intimate , and who 
 be know to be quiet , domestic , and economical , but who have also 
 be speak of as have a will of her own,--"i shall do well with 
 she than you would , Ayala . " 
 " I do not see why . " 
 " because I can remain quiet long than you . it will be very quiet . 
 I wonder how we shall see each other ! I can not walk across the park 
 alone . " 
 " Uncle Reg will bring you . " 
 " not often , I fear . Uncle Reg have enough to do with his office . " 
 " you can come in a cab . " 
 " cab cost money , Ayey dear . " 
 " but Uncle Thomas-- " 
 " we have well understand one or two thing , Ayala . Uncle Thomas will 
 pay everything for you , and as he be very rich thing will come as 
 they be want . there will be cab , and if not cab , carriage . 
 Uncle Reg must pay for I , and he be very very kind to do so . but 
 as he be not rich , there will be no carriage , and not a great many 
 cab . it be good to understand it all . " 
 " but they will send for you . " 
 " that be as they please . I do not think they will very often . I would 
 not for the world put you against Uncle Thomas , but I have a feeling 
 that I shall never get on with he . but you will never separate 
 yourself from I , Ayala ! " 
 " separate myself ! " 
 " you will not -- not be my sister because you will be one of these rich 
 one ? " 
 " oh , I wish,--i wish that I be to be the poor one . I be sure I 
 should like it well . I never care about be rich . oh , Lucy , can not 
 we make they change ? " 
 " no , Ayey , my own , we can not make they change . and if we could , we 
 would not . it be altogether best that you should be a rich Tringle and 
 that I should be a poor Dosett . " 
 " I will always be a Dormer , " say Ayala , proudly . 
 " and I will always be so too , my pet . but you should be a bright 
 Dormer among the Tringles , and I will be a dull Dormer among the 
 Dosetts . I shall begrudge nothing , if only we can see each other . " 
 so the two girl be part , the elder be take away to Kingsbury 
 Crescent and the latter remain with her rich relation at Queen 's 
 Gate . Ayala have not probably realize the great difference of their 
 future position . to she the attraction of wealth and the privation 
 of comparative poverty have not make themselves as yet palpably plain . 
 they do not become so manifest to those to whom the wealth falls,--at 
 any rate , not in early life,--as to the opposite party . if the other 
 lot have fall to Ayala she might have feel it more keenly . 
 Lucy feel it keenly enough . without any longing after the 
 magnificence of the Tringle mansion she know how great be the fall 
 from her father 's well - assorted luxury and prettinesse down to the 
 plain wall , table , and chair of her Uncle Dosett 's house . her aunt 
 do not subscribe to Mudie 's . the old piano have not be tune for 
 the last ten year . the parlour - maid be a cross old woman . her aunt 
 always sit in the dining - room through the great part of the day , 
 and of all room the dining - room in Kingsbury Crescent be the 
 dingy . Lucy understand very well to what she be go . her father 
 and mother be go . her sister be divide from she . her life 
 offer for the future nothing to she . but with it all she carry a 
 good courage . there be present to she an idea of great misfortune ; 
 but present to she at the same time an idea also that she would do 
 her duty . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 LUCY with her aunt dosett . 
 for some day Lucy find herself to be absolutely crushed,--in the 
 first place , by a strong resolution to do some disagreeable duty , 
 and then by a feeling that there be no duty the doing of which be 
 within her reach . it seem to she that her whole life be a blank . 
 her father 's house have be a small affair and consider to be poor 
 when compare with the Tringle mansion , but she now become aware that 
 everything there have in truth abound . in one little room there 
 have be two or three hundred beautifully bind book . that Mudie 's 
 unnumbered volume should come into the house as they be want 
 have almost be as much a provision of nature as water , gas , and hot 
 roll for breakfast . a piano of the good kind , and always in order , 
 have be a first necessary of life , and , like other necessary , of 
 course , forthcoming . there have be the little room in which the 
 girl paint , join their father 's studio and share its light , 
 surround by every pretty female appliance . then there have always 
 be visitor . the artist from Kensington have be will not to gather 
 there , and the artist ' daughter , and perhaps the artist ' son . 
 every day have have its round of delights,--it round of occupation , 
 as the girl would call they . there have be some reading , some 
 painting , some music,--perhaps a little needlework and a great deal 
 of talk . 
 how little do we know how other people live in the house close to 
 we ! we see the house look like our own , and we see the people 
 come out of they look like ourselves . but a Chinaman be not more 
 different from the English John Bull than be No . 10 from no . 11 . 
 here there be book , painting , music , wine , a little dilettanti 
 get - up of subject of the day , a little dilettanti think on 
 great affair , perhaps a little dilettanti religion ; few domestic 
 law , and those easily break ; few domestic duty , and those easily 
 evade ; breakfast when you will , with dinner almost as little 
 binding , with much company and acknowledge aptitude for idle luxury . 
 that be life at No . 10 . at no . 11 everything be case in iron . there 
 shall be equal plenty , but at No . 11 even plenty be a bondage . duty 
 rule everything , and it have come to be acknowledge that duty be to 
 be hard . so many hour of needlework , so many hour of book , so many 
 hour of prayer ! that all the household shall shiver before daylight , 
 be a law , the breach of which by any member either augur sickness or 
 require condign punishment . to be comfortable be a sin ; to laugh be 
 almost equal to bad language . such and so various be life at No . 10 
 and at no . 11 . 
 from one extremity , as far remove , to another poor Lucy have be 
 convey ; though all the law be not exactly carry out in 
 Kingsbury Crescent as they have be describe at No . 11 . the 
 enforce prayer be not there , nor the early hour . it be simply 
 necessary that Lucy should be down to breakfast at nine , and have 
 she not appear nothing violent would have be say . but it be 
 require of she that she should endure a life which be altogether 
 without adornment . Uncle Dosett himself , as a clerk in the Admiralty , 
 have a certain position in the world which be sufficiently maintain 
 by decent apparel , a well - keep , slight , grey whisker , and an umbrella 
 which seem never to have be violate by use . Dosett be popular 
 at his office , and be regard by his brother clerk as a friend . 
 but no one be acquaint with his house and home . they do not 
 dine with he , nor he with they . there be such man in all public 
 offices,--not the less respected because of the quiescence of their 
 life . it be know of he that he have burden , though it be not 
 know what his burden be . his friend , therefore , be intimate 
 with he as far as the entrance into Somerset house,--where his 
 duty lay,--and not beyond it . Lucy be destine to know the other 
 side of his affair , the domestic side , which be as quiet as the 
 official side . the link between they , which consist of a journey by 
 the Underground Railway to the Temple Station , and a walk home along 
 the Embankment and across the park and Kensington Gardens , be the 
 pleasantest part of Dosett 's life . 
 Mr. Dosett 's salary have be say to be £ 900 per annum . what a fund 
 of comfort there be in the word ! when the youth of nineteen enter 
 an office how far beyond want would he think himself should he ever 
 reach the pecuniary paradise of £ 900 a - year ! how he would see all his 
 friend , and in return be see of they ! but when the income have be 
 achieve its capability be find to be by no mean endless . and 
 Dosett in the early sphere of his married life have unfortunately 
 anticipate something of such comfort . for a year or two he have 
 spend a little money imprudently . something which he have expect 
 have not come to he ; and , as a result , he have be force to 
 borrow , and to insure his life for the amount borrow . then , 
 too , when that misfortune as to the money came,--came from the 
 non - realization of certain claim which his wife have be suppose 
 to possess,--provision have also to be make for she . in this way an 
 assurance office eat up a large fraction of his income , and leave he 
 with mean which in truth be very straiten . Dosett at once give 
 up all glory of social life , settle himself in Kingsbury Crescent , 
 and resolve to satisfy himself with his walk across the park and 
 his frugal dinner afterwards . he never complain to any one , nor 
 do his wife . he be a man small enough to be content with a thin 
 existence , but far too great to ask any one to help he to widen it . 
 Sir Thomas Tringle never hear of that £ 175 pay annually to the 
 assurance office , nor have Lady Tringle , Dosett 's sister , even hear 
 of it . when it be suggest to he that he should take one of the 
 Dormer girl , he consent to take she and say nothing of the 
 assurance office . 
 Mrs. Dosett have have her great blow in life , and have suffer more 
 perhaps than her husband . this money have be expect . there have 
 be no doubt of the money,--at any rate on her part . it do not 
 depend on an old gentleman with or without good intention , but 
 simply on his death . there be to be ever so much of it , four or five 
 hundred a - year , which would last for ever . when the old gentleman 
 die , which take place some ten year after Dosett 's marriage , it 
 be find that the money , tie tight as it have be by half - a - dozen 
 lawyer , have in some fashion vanish . Whither it have go be little 
 to our purpose , but it have go . then there come a great crash upon 
 the Dosetts , which she for a while have be hardly able to endure . 
 but when she have collect herself together after the crash , and 
 have make up her mind , as have Dosett also , to the nature of the life 
 which they must in future lead , she become more stringent in it even 
 than he . he could bear and say nothing ; but she , in bear , find 
 herself compel to say much . it have be she fault,--the fault of 
 people on her side,--and she would fain have feed her husband with 
 the full flowery potato while she eat only the rind . she tell he , 
 unnecessarily , over and over again , that she have ruin he by her 
 marriage . no such idea be ever in his head . the thing have come , and 
 so it must be . there be food to eat , potatoe enough for both , and a 
 genteel house in which to live . he could still be happy if she would 
 not groan . a certain amount of groan she do postpone while in his 
 presence . the sewing of seam , and the darning of household linen , 
 which in his eye amount to groaning , be do in his absence . 
 after their genteel dinner he would sleep a little , and she would 
 knit . he would have his glass of wine , but would make his bottle of 
 port last almost for a week . this be the house to which Lucy Dormer 
 be bring when Mr. Dosett have consent to share with Sir Thomas 
 the burden leave by the death of the improvident artist . 
 when a month pass by Lucy begin to think that time itself would 
 almost drive her mad . her father have die early in September . the 
 Tringles have then , of course , be out of town , but Sir Thomas 
 and his wife have find themselves compel to come up on such an 
 occasion . something they know must be do about the girl , and they 
 have not choose that that something should be do in their absence . 
 Mr. Dosett be also enjoy his official leave of absence for 
 the year , but be enjoy it within the economical precinct of 
 Kingsbury Crescent . there be but seldom now an excursion for he or 
 his wife to the joy of the country . once , some year ago , they have 
 pay a visit to the palatial luxury of Glenbogie , but the delight 
 of the place have not pay for the expense of the long journey . they , 
 therefore , have be at hand to undertake their duty . Dosett and 
 Tringle , with a score of artist , have follow poor Dormer to his 
 grave in Kensal Green , and then Dosett and Tringle have part again , 
 probably not to see each other for another term of year . 
 " my dear , what do you like to do with your time ? " Mrs. Dosett say to 
 her niece , after the first week . at this time Lucy 's wardrobe be not 
 yet of a nature to need much work over its ravage . the Dormer girl 
 have hardly know where their frock have come from when they want 
 frocks,--hardly with more precision than the Tringle girl . frock 
 have come -- dark , gloomy frock , lately , alas ! and these , too , have now 
 come a second time . let creditor be ever so unsatisfied , new raiment 
 will always be find for mourning family . everything about Lucy be 
 nearly new . the need of repair would come upon she by degree , but 
 it have not come as yet . therefore there have seem , to the anxious 
 aunt , to be a necessity for some such question as the above . 
 " I will do anything you like , aunt , " say Lucy . 
 " it be not for I , my dear . I get through a deal of work , and be 
 oblige to do so . " she be , at this time , sit with a sheet in her 
 lap , which she be turn . Lucy have , indeed , once offer to assist , 
 but her assistance have be reject . this have be two day since , 
 and she have not renew the proposal as she should have do . this 
 have be mainly from bashfulness . though the work would certainly be 
 distasteful to she , she would do it . but she have not like to seem to 
 interfere , not have as yet fall into way of intimacy with her 
 aunt . " I do not want to burden you with my task - work , " continue Mrs. 
 Dosett , " but I be afraid you seem to be listless . " 
 " I be read till just before you speak , " say Lucy , again turn 
 her eye to the little volume of poetry , which be one of the few 
 treasure which she have bring away with she from her old home . 
 " reading be very well , but I do not like it as an excuse , Lucy . " 
 Lucy 's anger boil within she when she be tell of an excuse , and 
 she declare to herself that she could never like her aunt . " I be 
 quite sure that for young girl , as well as for old woman , there 
 must be a great deal of waste time unless there be needle and thread 
 always about . and I know , too , unless lady be well off , they 
 can not afford to waste time any more than gentleman . " 
 in the whole course of her life nothing so much like scold as 
 this have ever be address to she . so at least think Lucy at 
 that moment . Mrs. Dosett have intend the remark all in good part , 
 think they to be simply fitting from an aunt to a niece . it be 
 her duty to give advice , and for the giving of such advice some day 
 must be take as the beginning . she have purposely allow a week to 
 run by , and now she have speak she word,--as she think in good 
 season . 
 to Lucy it be a new and most bitter experience . though she be 
 read the " Idylls of the king , " or pretend to read they , she 
 be , in truth , think of all that have go from she . her mind have , 
 at that moment , be intent upon her mother , who , in all respect , 
 have be so different from this careful , sheet - darn housewife of a 
 woman . and in thinking of her mother there have no doubt be regret 
 for many thing of which she would not have venture to speak as 
 share her thought with the memory of her mother , but which be 
 nevertheless there to add darkness to the retrospective . everything 
 behind have be so bright , and everything behind have go away from 
 she ! everything before be so gloomy , and everything before must last 
 for so long ! after her aunt 's lecture about waste time Lucy sit 
 silent for a few minute , and then burst into uncontrolled tear . 
 " I do not mean to vex you , " say her aunt . 
 " I be think of my -- darling , darling mamma , " sob Lucy . 
 " of course , Lucy , you will think of she . how should you not ? and of 
 your father . those be sorrow which must be bear . but sorrow such 
 as those be much light to the busy than to the idle . I sometimes 
 think that the labourer grieve less for those they love than we do 
 just because they have not time to grieve . " 
 " I wish I be a labourer then , " say Lucy , through her tear . 
 " you may be if you will . the soon you begin to be a labourer the 
 well for yourself and for those about you . " 
 that Aunt Dosett 's voice be harsh be not her fault,--nor that in 
 the obduracy of her daily life she have lose much of her original 
 softness . she have simply mean to be useful , and to do her duty ; but 
 in tell Lucy that it would be well that the labouring should be 
 commence at once for the sake of " those about you,"--who could only 
 be Aunt Dosett herself,--she have seem to the girl to be harsh , 
 selfish , and almost unnatural . the volume of poetry fall from her 
 hand , and she jump up from the chair quickly . " give it I at once , " 
 she say , take hold of the sheet,--which be not itself a pleasant 
 object ; Lucy have never see such a thing at the bijou . " give it I at 
 once , " she say , and claw the long fold of linen nearly out of her 
 aunt 's lap . 
 " I do not mean anything of the kind , " say Aunt Dosett . " you should 
 not take I up in that way . I be speak only for your good , because 
 I know that you should not dawdle away your existence . leave the 
 sheet . " 
 Lucy do leave the sheet , and then , sob violently , run out of the 
 room up to her own chamber . Mrs. Dosett determine that she would 
 not follow she . she partly forgave the girl because of her sorrow , 
 partly remind herself that she be not soft and facile as have be 
 her sister - in - law , Lucy 's mother ; and then , as she continue she 
 work , she assure herself that it would be good to let her niece 
 have she cry out upstairs . Lucy 's violence have astonish she for a 
 moment , but she have teach herself to think it well to allow such 
 little ebullition to pass off by themselves . 
 Lucy , when she be alone , fling herself upon her bed in absolute 
 agony . she think that she have misbehave , and yet how cruel,--how 
 harsh have be her aunt 's word ! if she , the quiet one , have 
 misbehave , what would Ayala have do ? and how be she to find 
 strength with which to look forward to the future ? she struggle hard 
 with herself for a resolution . should she determine that she would 
 henceforward darn sheet morning , noon , and night till she work 
 her finger to the bone ? perhaps there have be something of truth 
 in that assertion of her aunt 's that the labourer have no time to 
 grieve . as everything else be shut out from she , it might be well 
 for she to darn sheet . should she rush down penitent and beg she 
 aunt to allow she to commence at once ? 
 she would have do it as far as the sheet be concern , but she 
 could not do it as regard her aunt . she could put herself into 
 unison with the crumpled soil linen , but not with the hard woman . 
 oh , how terrible be the change ! her father and her mother who have 
 be so gentle to she ! all the sweet prettiness of her life ! all 
 her occupation , all her friend , all her delight ! even Ayala 
 be go from she ! how be she to bear it ? she begrudge Ayala 
 nothing,--no , nothing . but yet it be hard ! Ayala be to have 
 everything . aunt emmeline,--though they have not hitherto be very 
 fond of Aunt Emmeline,--was sweetness itself as compare with this 
 woman . " the soon you begin to labour the well for yourself and 
 those about you . " would it not have be fitter that she should have 
 be send at once to some actual poor - house in which there would have 
 be no mistake as to her position ? 
 that it should all have be decide for she , for she and Ayala , not 
 by any will of their own , not by any concert between themselves , but 
 simply by the fantasy of another ! why should she thus be make a slave 
 to the fantasy of any one ! let Ayala have her uncle 's wealth and her 
 aunt 's palace at her command , and she would walk out simply a pauper 
 into the world,--into some workhouse , so that at least she need not 
 be obedient to the harsh voice and the odious common sense of her 
 Aunt Dosett ! but how should she take herself to some workhouse ? in 
 what way could she prove her right to be admit even then ? it 
 seem to she that the same decree which have admit Ayala into the 
 golden hall of the fairy have doom she not only to poverty , but 
 to slavery . there be no escape for she from her aunt and her aunt 's 
 sermon . " oh , Ayala , my darling,--my own one ; oh , Ayala , if you do 
 but know ! " she say to herself . what would Ayala think , how would 
 Ayala bear it , could she but guess by what a gulf be her heaven 
 divide from her sister 's hell ! " I will never tell she , " she say to 
 herself . " I will die , and she shall never know . " 
 as she lie there sob all the gild thing of the world be 
 beautiful in her eye . alas , yes , it be true . the magnificence of 
 the mansion at Queen 's Gate , the glory of Glenbogie , the closely 
 study comfort of Merle Park , as the place in Sussex be call , 
 all the carriage and horse , Madame Tonsonville and all the 
 drapery , the seat at the Albert Hall into which she have be 
 accustomed to go with as much ease as into her bed - room , the box at 
 the opera , the pretty furniture , the frequent gem , even the raiment 
 which would make she pleasing to the eye of man whom she would like 
 to please -- all these thing grow in her eye and become beautiful . 
 no . 3 , Kingsbury Crescent , be surely , of all place on the earth 's 
 surface , the most ugly . and yet,--yet she have endeavour to do she 
 duty . " if it have be the workhouse I could have bear it , " she say 
 to herself ; " but not to be the slave of my Aunt Dosett ! " again she 
 appeal to her sister , " oh , Ayala , if you do but know it ! " then she 
 remember herself , declare that it might have be bad to Ayala 
 than even to she . " if one have to bear it , it be well for I , " she 
 say , as she struggle to prepare herself for her uncle 's dinner . 
 CHAPTER III . 
 LUCY 's trouble . 
 the evening after the affair with the sheet go off quietly , as do 
 many day and many evening . Mrs. Dosett be wise enough to forget 
 the little violence and to forget also the feeling which have be 
 display . when Lucy first ask for some household needlework , which 
 she do with a falter voice and shame - face remembrance of her 
 fault , her aunt take it all in good part and give she a task somewhat 
 light as a beginning than the handling of a sheet . Lucy sit at it 
 and suffer . she go on sit and suffering . she tell herself 
 that she be a martyr at every stitch she make . as she occupy the 
 seat opposite to her aunt 's accustomed chair she would hardly speak 
 at all , but would keep her mind always intent on Ayala and the joy 
 of Ayala 's life . that they who have be bear together , sister , with 
 equal fortune , who have so closely live together , should be sunder 
 so utterly one from the other ; that the one should be so exalted and 
 the other so debased ! and why ? what justice have there be ? could it 
 be from heaven or even from earth that the law have go forth for 
 such a division of the thing of the world between they ? 
 " you have get very little to say to a person ? " say Aunt Dosett , one 
 morning . this , too , be a reproach . this , too , be scold . and yet 
 Aunt Dosett have intend to be as pleasant as she know how . 
 " I have very little to say , " reply Lucy , with repressed anger . 
 " but why ? " 
 " because I be stupid , " say Lucy . " stupid people can not talk . you 
 should have have Ayala . " 
 " I hope you do not envy Ayala her fortune , Lucy ? " a woman with any 
 tact would not have ask such a question at such a time . she should 
 have feel that a touch of such irony might be natural , and that 
 unless it be express loudly , or show actively , it might be leave 
 to be suppress by affection and time . but she , as she have grow 
 old , have teach herself to bear disappointment , and think it wise 
 to teach Lucy to do the same . 
 " Envy ! " say Lucy , not passionately , but after a little pause for 
 thought . " I sometimes think it be very hard to know what envy be . " 
 " Envy , hatred , and malice , " say Mrs. Dosett , hardly know what she 
 mean by the use of the well - wear word . 
 " I do know what hatred and malice be , " say Lucy . " do you think I 
 hate Ayala ? " 
 " I be sure you do not . " 
 " or that I bear her malice ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " if I have the power to take anything from she , would I do it ? I love 
 Ayala with my whole heart . whatever be my misery I would rather bear 
 it than let Ayala have even a share of it . whatever good thing she 
 may have I would not rob she even of a part of they . if there be joy 
 and sorrow to be divide between we I would wish to have the sorrow 
 so that she might have the joy . that be not hatred and malice . " Mrs. 
 Dosett look at she over her spectacle . this be the girl who have 
 declare that she could not speak because she be too stupid ! " but , 
 when you ask I whether I envy she , I hardly know , " continue Lucy . 
 " I think one do covet one 's neighbour 's house , in spite of the 
 tenth commandment , even though one do not want to steal it . " 
 Mrs. Dosett repent herself that she have give rise to any 
 conversation at all . silence , absolute silence , the old silence which 
 she have know for a dozen year before Lucy have come to she , would 
 have be well than this . she be very angry , more angry than she 
 have ever yet be with Lucy ; and yet she be afraid to show her 
 anger . be this the girl 's gratitude for all that her uncle be do 
 for her,--for shelter , food , comfort , for all that she have in the 
 world ? Mrs. Dosett know , though Lucy do not , of the little increase 
 pinching which have be make necessary by the advent of another 
 inmate in the house ; so many pound of the meat in the week , and so 
 much bread , and so much tea and sugar ! it have all be calculate . 
 in genteel house such calculation must often be make . and when by 
 degrees,--degrees very quick,--the garment should become wear which 
 Lucy have bring with she , there must be something take from the 
 tight - fit income for that need . arrangement have already be 
 make of which Lucy know nothing , and already the two glass of port 
 wine a day have be knock off from poor Mr. Dosett 's comfort . his 
 wife have sob in despair when he have say that it should be so . he 
 have declare gin and water to be as support as port wine , and the 
 thing have be do . Lucy inwardly have be disgust by the gin and 
 water , know nothing of its history . her father , who have not always 
 be punctual in pay his wine - merchant 's bill , would not have 
 touch gin and water , would not have allow it to contaminate his 
 table ! everything in Mr. Dosett 's house be pay for weekly . 
 and now Lucy , who have be make welcome to all that the genteel house 
 could afford , who have be take in as a child , have speak of her 
 lot as one which be all sorrowful . bad as it is,--this live in 
 Kingsbury crescent,--i would rather bear it myself than subject Ayala 
 to such misery ! it be thus that she have , in fact , speak of her new 
 home when she have find it necessary to defend her feeling towards 
 her sister . it be impossible that her aunt should be altogether 
 silent under such treatment . " we have do the good for you that be 
 in our power , Lucy , " she say , with a whole load of reproach in her 
 tone . 
 " have I complain , aunt ? " 
 " I think you do . " 
 " oh , no ! you ask I whether I envy Ayala . what be I to say ? 
 perhaps I should have say nothing , but the idea of envy Ayala be 
 painful to I . of course she-- " 
 " well ? " 
 " I have well say nothing more , aunt . if I be to pretend to be 
 cheerful I should be false . it be as yet only a few week since papa 
 die . " then the work go on in silence between they for the next 
 hour . 
 and the work go on in solemn silence between they through the 
 winter . it come to pass that the sole excitement of Lucy 's life 
 come from Ayala 's letters,--the sole excitement except a meeting 
 which take place between the sister one day . when Lucy be take to 
 Kingsbury Crescent Ayala be at once carry down to Glenbogie , and 
 from thence there come letter twice a week for six week . Ayala 's 
 letter , too , be full of sorrow . she , too , have lose her mother , 
 her father , and her sister . moreover , in her foolish petulance she 
 say thing of her Aunt Emmeline , and of the girl , and of Sir 
 Thomas , which ought not to have be write of those who be 
 kind to she . her cousin Tom , too , she ridiculed,--tom Tringle , the 
 son - and - heir,--saying that he be a lout who endeavour to make eye 
 at she . oh , how distasteful , how vulgar they be after all that 
 she have know . perhaps the eld girl , Augusta , be the bad . she 
 do not think that she could put up with the assumed authority of 
 Augusta . Gertrude be well , but a simpleton . Ayala declare herself 
 to be sad at heart . but then the sweet scenery of Glenbogie , and the 
 colour of the moor , and the glorious height of Ben Alchan , make 
 some amend . even in her sorrow she would rave about the beauty of 
 Glenbogie . Lucy , as she read the letter , tell herself that Ayala 's 
 grief be a grief to be bear , a grief almost to be enjoy . to sit 
 and be sad with a stream purl by you , how different from the 
 sadness of that dining - room in the Crescent . to look out upon the 
 glory of a mountain , while a tear would now and again force itself 
 into the eye , how much less bitter than the fall of salt drop 
 over a tattered towel . 
 Lucy , in her answer , endeavour to repress the groan of her 
 spirit . in the first place she do acknowledge that it do not become 
 she to speak ill of those who be , in truth , her benefactor ; and 
 then she be anxious not to declare to Ayala her feeling of the 
 injustice by which their two lot have be define to they . though 
 she have fail to control herself once or twice in speak to she 
 aunt she do control herself in write her letter . she would never , 
 never , write a word which should make Ayala unnecessarily unhappy . on 
 that she be determine . she would say nothing to explain to Ayala 
 the unutterable tedium of that downstairs parlour in which they 
 pass their life , lest Ayala should feel herself to be wound by 
 the luxurious comfort around she . 
 it be thus she write . then there come a time in which they be to 
 meet,--just at the beginning of November . the Tringles be go to 
 Rome . they generally do go somewhere . Glenbogie , Merle Park , and the 
 house in Queen 's Gate , be not enough for the year . Sir Thomas be 
 to take they to Rome , and then return to London for the manipulation 
 of the million in Lombard Street . he generally do remain nine 
 month out of the twelve in town , because of the million , make his 
 visit at Merle Park very short ; but Lady Tringle find that change 
 of air be good for the girl . it be her intention now to remain at 
 Rome for two or three month . 
 the party from Scotland reach Queen 's Gate late one Saturday 
 evening , and intend to start early on the Monday . to Ayala , who have 
 make it quite a matter of course that she should see her sister , Lady 
 Tringle have say that in that case a carriage must be send across . 
 it be awkward , because there be no carriage in London . she have 
 think that they have all intend to pass through London just as 
 though they be not stop . Sunday , she have think , be not to 
 be regard as be a day at all . then Ayala flash up . she have 
 flash up some time before . be it suppose that she be not go 
 to see Lucy ? carriage ! she would walk across Kensington Gardens , and 
 find the house out all by herself . she would spend the whole day with 
 Lucy , and come back alone in a cab . she be strong enough , at any 
 rate , to have her way so far , that a carriage , wherever it come from , 
 be send for Lucy about three in the afternoon , and do take she back 
 to Kingsbury Crescent after dinner . 
 then at last the sister be together in Ayala 's bed - room . " and now 
 tell I about everything , " say Ayala . 
 but Lucy be resolve that she would not tell anything . " I be so 
 wretched ! " that would have be all ; but she would not tell she 
 wretchedness . " we be so quiet in Kingsbury Crescent , " she say ; " you 
 have so much more to talk of . " 
 " oh , Lucy , I do not like it . " 
 " not your aunt ? " 
 " she be not the bad , though she sometimes be hard to bear . I 
 can not tell you what it be , but they all seem to think so much of 
 themselves . in the first place they never will say a word about 
 papa . " 
 " perhaps that be from feel , Ayey . " 
 " no , it be not . one would know that . but they look down upon papa , 
 who have more in his little finger than they have with all their 
 money . " 
 " then I should hold my tongue . " 
 " so I do,--about he ; but it be very hard . and then Augusta have a way 
 with I , as though she have a right to order I . I certainly will not 
 be order by Augusta . you never order I . " 
 " Dear Ayey ! " 
 " Augusta be old than you,--of course , ever so much . they make she 
 out twenty - three at her last birthday , but she be twenty - four . but 
 that be not difference enough for ordering,--certainly between 
 cousin . I do hate Augusta . " 
 " I would not hate she . " 
 " how be one to help one' - self ? she have a way of whispering to 
 Gertrude , and to her mother , when I be there , which almost kill I . 
 ' if you will only give I notice I will go out of the room at once , ' I 
 say the other day , and they be all so angry . " 
 " I would not make they angry if I be you , Ayey . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " not Sir Thomas , or Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " I do not care a bit for Sir Thomas . I be not sure but he be the most 
 good - natured , though he be so podgy . of course , when Aunt Emmeline 
 tell I anything I do it . " 
 " it be so important that you should be on good term with they . " 
 " I do not see it at all , " say Ayala , flash round . 
 " Aunt Emmeline can do so much for you . we have nothing of our 
 own,--you and i. " 
 " be I to sell myself because they have get money ! no , indeed ! no one 
 despise money so much as I do . I will never be other to they than if 
 I have the money , and they be the poor relation . " 
 " that will not do , Ayey . " 
 " I will make it do . they may turn I out if they like . of course , I 
 know that I should obey my aunt , and so I will . if Sir Thomas tell 
 I anything I should do it . but not augusta . " then , while Lucy be 
 think how she might well put into soft word advice which be so 
 clearly need , Ayala declare another trouble . " but there be bad 
 still . " 
 " what be that ? " 
 " Tom ! " 
 " what do Tom do ? " 
 " you know Tom , Lucy ? " 
 " I have see he . " 
 " of all the horror he be the horridest . " 
 " do he order you about ? " 
 " no ; but he-- " 
 " what be it , ayey ? " 
 " oh ! Lucy , he be so dreadful . he-- " 
 " you do not mean that he make love to you ? " 
 " he do . what be I to do , Lucy ? " 
 " do they know it ? " 
 " augusta do , I be sure ; and pretend to think that it be my fault . 
 I be sure that there will be a terrible quarrel some day . I tell he 
 the day before we leave Glenbogie that I should tell his mother . I do 
 indeed . then he grin . he be such a fool . and when I laugh he 
 take it all as kindness . I could not have help laugh if I have 
 die for it . " 
 " but he have be leave behind . " 
 " yes , for the present . but he be to come over to we some time after 
 Christmas , when Uncle Tringle have go back . " 
 " a girl need not be bother by a lover unless she choose , Ayey . " 
 " but it will be such a bother to have to talk about it . he look at 
 I , and be such an idiot . then augusta frown . when I see Augusta 
 frowning I be so angry that I feel like box her ear . do you know , 
 Lucy , that I often think that it will not do , and that I shall have 
 to be send away . I wish it have be you that they have choose . " 
 such be the conversation between the girl . of what be say 
 everything appertain to Ayala . of the very nature of Lucy 's life 
 not a word be speak . as Ayala be talk Lucy be constantly 
 thinking of all that might be lose by her sister 's imprudence . even 
 though Augusta might be disagreeable , even though Tom might be a 
 bore , it should all be borne,--borne at any rate for a while,--seeing 
 how terrible would be the alternative . the alternative to Lucy seem 
 to be Kingsbury Crescent and Aunt Dosett . it do not occur to she to 
 think whether in any possible case Ayala would indeed be add to the 
 Crescent family , or what in that case would become of herself , and 
 whether they two might live with Aunt Dosett , and whether in that 
 case life would not be infinitely improve . Ayala have all that money 
 could do for she , and would have such a look - out into the world from 
 a wealthy house as might be sure at last to bring she some such 
 husband as would be desirable . Ayala , in fact , have everything before 
 she , and Lucy have nothing . wherefore it become Lucy 's duty to warn 
 Ayala , so that she should bear with much , and throw away nothing . if 
 Ayala could only know what life might be , what life be at Kingsbury 
 Crescent , then she would be patient , then she would softly make a 
 confidence with her aunt as to Tom 's folly , then she would propitiate 
 Augusta . not care for money ! Ayala have not yet live in an ugly room 
 and darned sheet all the morning . Ayala have never sit for two hour 
 between the slumber of Uncle Dosett and the knitting of Aunt Dosett . 
 Ayala have not be bring into contact with gin and water . 
 " oh , Ayala ! " she say , as they be go down to dinner together , 
 " do struggle ; do bear it . tell Aunt Emmeline . she will like you to 
 tell she . if Augusta want you to go anywhere , do go . what do it 
 signify ? Papa and mamma be go , and we be alone . " all this she 
 say without a word of allusion to her own suffering . Ayala make a 
 half promise . she do not think she would go anywhere for Augusta 's 
 telling ; but she would do she good to satisfy Aunt Emmeline . then 
 they go to dinner , and after dinner Lucy be take home without 
 further word between they . 
 Ayala write long letter on her journey , full of what she see , and 
 full of her companion . from Paris she write , and then from Turin , 
 and then again on their immediate arrival at Rome . her letter be 
 most imprudent as write from the close vicinity of her aunt and 
 cousin . it be such a comfort that that oaf Tom have be leave behind . 
 Uncle Tringle be angry because he do not get what he like to eat . 
 Aunt Emmeline give that courier such a terrible life , send for he 
 every quarter of an hour . Augusta would talk first french and then 
 Italian , of which no one could understand a word . Gertrude be so 
 sick with travel that she be as pale as a sheet . nobody seem 
 to care for anything . she could not get her aunt to look at the 
 Campanile at Florence , or her cousin to know one picture from 
 another . " as for picture , I be quite sure that Mangle 's angel would 
 do as well as Raffael 's . " Mangle be a brother academician whom their 
 father have teach they to despise . there be contempt , most foolish 
 contempt , for all the Tringles ; but , luckily , there have be no 
 quarrelling . then it seem that both in Paris and in Florence Ayala 
 have buy pretty thing , from which it be to be argue that her 
 uncle have provide she liberally with money . one pretty thing have 
 be send from Paris to Lucy , which could not have be buy for 
 less than many frank . it would not be fair that Ayala should take so 
 much without give something in return . 
 Lucy know that she too should give something in return . though 
 Kingsbury Crescent be not attractive , though Aunt Dosett be not to 
 she a pleasant companion , she have begin to realise the fact that it 
 behove she to be grateful , if only for the food she eat , and for the 
 bed on which she sleep . as she think of all that Ayala owe she 
 remember also her own debt . as the winter go on she struggle to 
 pay they . but Aunt Dosett be a lady not much give to vacillation . 
 she have become aware at first that Lucy have be rough to she , and 
 she do not easily open herself to Lucy 's endearment . Lucy 's life at 
 Kingsbury Crescent have begin badly , and Lucy , though she understand 
 much about it , find it hard to turn a bad beginning to a good 
 result . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 ISADORE HAMEL . 
 it be suggest to Lucy before she have be long in Kingsbury 
 Crescent that she should take some exercise . for the first week she 
 have hardly be out of the house ; but this be attribute to her 
 sorrow . then she have accompany her aunt for a few day during the 
 half - hour 's marketing which take place every morning , but in this 
 there have be no sympathy . Lucy would not interest herself in 
 the shoulder of mutton which must be of just such a weight as to 
 last conveniently for two days,--twelve pounds,--of which , it be 
 explain to she , more than one - half be intend for the two 
 servant , because there be always a more lavish consumption in the 
 kitchen than in the parlour . Lucy would not appreciate the fact that 
 egg at a penny a piece , whatever they might be , must be use for 
 pudding , as egg with even a reputation of freshness cost twopence . 
 Aunt Dosett , beyond this , never leave the house on week - day except 
 for a few call which be make perhaps once a month , on which 
 occasion the Sunday glove and the Sunday silk dress be use . on 
 Sunday they all go to church . but this be not enough for exercise , 
 and as Lucy be become pale she be recommend to take to walk 
 in Kensington Gardens . 
 it be generally understand that there be rag lion about the 
 metropolis , who would certainly eat up young lady whole if young 
 lady be to walk about the street or even about the park by 
 themselves . there be , however , begin to be some vacillation as 
 to the receive belief on this subject as regard London . in large 
 continental town , such as Paris and Vienna , young lady would be 
 devour certainly . such , at least , be the creed . in New York and 
 Washington there be suppose to be no lion , so that young lady 
 go about free as air . in London there be a rise doubt , under which 
 before long , probably , the lion will succumb altogether . Mrs. Dosett 
 do believe somewhat in lion , but she believe also in exercise . and 
 she be aware that the lion eat up chiefly rich people . young lady 
 who must go about without mother , brother , uncle , carriage , or 
 attendant of any sort , be not often eat or even roar at . it 
 be the dainty darling for whom the roaring have to be fear . Mrs. 
 Dosett , aware that daintiness be no long within the reach of she 
 and her , do assent to these walking in Kensington Gardens . at some 
 hour in the afternoon Lucy would walk from the house by herself , and 
 within a quarter of an hour would find herself on the broad gravel 
 path which lead down to the Round Pond . from thence she would go by 
 the back of the Albert Memorial , and then across by the Serpentine 
 and return to the same gate , never leave Kensington Gardens . Aunt 
 Dosett have express some old - fashioned idea that lion be more 
 likely to roar in Hyde Park than within the comparatively retire 
 purlieus of Kensington . 
 now the reader must be take back for a few moment to the bijou , as 
 the bijou be before either the artist or his wife have die . in those 
 day there have be a frequent concourse of people in the artist 's 
 house . society there have not consist chiefly of eat and 
 drinking . man and woman would come in and out as though really for 
 a purpose of talk . there would be three or four constantly with 
 Dormer in his studio , help he but little perhaps in the real 
 furtherance of his work , though discuss art subject in a manner 
 calculate to keep alive art - feeling among they . a novelist or two of 
 a morning might perhaps aid I in my general pursuit , but would , I 
 think , interfere with the actual tally of page . Egbert Dormer do 
 not turn out from his hand so much work as some man that I know , but 
 he be overflow with art up to his ears;--and with tobacco , so 
 that , upon the whole , the bijou be a pleasant rendezvous . 
 there have come there of late , quite of late , a young sculptor , name 
 Isadore Hamel . Hamel be an Englishman , who , however , have be 
 carry very early to Rome and have be breed there . of his mother 
 question never be make , but his father have be well know as an 
 english sculptor resident at Rome . the elder Hamel have be a man of 
 mark , who have a fine suite of room in the city and a villa on one 
 of the lake , but who never come to England . english connection 
 be , he say , to he abominable , by which he perhaps mean that the 
 restriction of decent life be not to his taste . but his bust 
 come , and his group in marble , and now and again some great work for 
 some public decoration : so that money be plentiful with he , and 
 he be a man of note . it must be acknowledge of he that he spar 
 nothing in bring up his son , give he such education as might 
 good suit his future career as an artist , and that money be always 
 forthcoming for the lad 's want and fantasy . 
 then young Hamel also become a sculptor of much promise ; but early in 
 life differed from his father on certain subject of importance . the 
 father be wed to Rome and to Italy . Isadore gradually express 
 an opinion that the nearer a man be to his market the well for 
 he , that all that art could do for a man in Rome be as nothing 
 to the position which a great artist might make for himself in 
 London,--that , in fact , an Englishman have well be an Englishman . at 
 twenty - six he succeed in his attempt , and become know as a young 
 sculptor with a workshop at Brompton . he become know to many both 
 by his work and his acquirement ; but it may not be surprising that 
 after a year he be still unable to live , as he have be teach to 
 live , without draw upon his father . then his father throw his 
 failure in his tooth , not refuse he money indeed , but make the 
 receipt of it unpleasant to he . 
 at no house have Isadore Hamel be make so welcome as at Dormer 's . 
 there be a sympathy between they both on that great question of 
 art , whether to an artist his art should be a matter to he of more 
 importance than all the world besides . so say Dormer,--who simply 
 die because his wife die , who could not have touch his brush if 
 one of his girl have be suffer , who , with all his genius , be 
 but a faineant workman . his art more than all the world to he ! 
 no , not to he . perhaps here and again to some enthusiast , and he 
 hardly remove from madness ! where be the painter who shall paint a 
 picture after his soul 's longing though he shall get not a penny for 
 it,--though he shall starve as he put his last touch to it , when he 
 know that by draw some duchess of the day he shall in a fortnight 
 earn a ducal price ? shall a wife and child be less dear to he than 
 to a lawyer,--or to a shoemaker ; or the very craving of his hunger 
 less obdurate ? a man 's self , and what he have within he and his 
 belonging , with his outlook for this and other worlds,--let that 
 be the first , and the work , noble or otherwise , be the second . 
 to be honest be great than to have paint the San Sisto , or 
 to have chisel the Apollo ; to have assist in make other 
 honest,--infinitely great . all of which be discuss at great 
 length at the bijou , and the bijouite always side with the 
 master of the house . to an artist , say Dormer , let his art be 
 everything,--above wife and child , above money , above health , 
 above even character . then he would put out his hand with his 
 jewel finger , and stretch forth his velvet - clothe arm , and soon 
 after lead his friend away to the little dinner at which no luxury 
 have be spar . but young Hamel agree with the sermon , and not the 
 less because Lucy Dormer have sit by and listen to they with rapt 
 attention . 
 not a word of love have be speak to she by the sculptor when her 
 mother die , but there have be glance and little feeling of which 
 each be half conscious . it be so hard for a young man to speak of 
 love , if there be real love,--so impossible that a girl should do so ! 
 not a word have be speak , but each have think that the other must 
 have know . to Lucy a word have be speak by her mother,--"do not 
 think too much of he till you know , " the mother have said,--not 
 quite prudently . " oh , no ! I will think of he not at all , " Lucy have 
 reply . and she have think of he day and night . " I wonder why Mr. 
 Hamel be so different with you ? " Ayala have say to her sister . " I be 
 sure he be not different with I , " Lucy have reply . then Ayala have 
 shake her full lock and smile . 
 thing come quickly after that . Mrs. Dormer have sicken and die . 
 there be no time then for thinking of that handsome brow , of 
 that short jet black hair , of those eye so full of fire and 
 thoughtfulness , of that perfect mouth , and the deep but yet soft 
 voice . still even in her sorrow this new god of her idolatry be not 
 altogether forget . it be tell to she that he have be summon 
 off to Rome by his father , and she wonder whether he be to find 
 his home at Rome for ever . then her father be ill , and in his 
 illness Hamel come to say one word of farewell before he start . 
 " you find I crush to the ground , " the painter say . something the 
 young man whisper as to the consolation which time would bring . 
 " not to I , " say Dormer . " it be as though one have lose his eye . one 
 can not see without his eye . " it be true of he . his light have be 
 put out . 
 then , on the landing at the top of the stair , there have be one 
 word between Lucy and the sculptor . " I ought not to have intrude on 
 you perhaps , " he say ; " but after so much kindness I could hardly go 
 without a word . " 
 " I be sure he will be glad that you have come . " 
 " and you ? " 
 " I be glad too,--so that I may say good - bye . " then she put out her 
 hand , and he hold it for a moment as he look into her eye . there 
 be not a word more , but it seem to Lucy as though there have be 
 so many word . 
 thing go on quickly . Egbert Dormer die , and Lucy be take away 
 to Kingsbury Crescent . when once Ayala have speak about Mr. Hamel , 
 Lucy have silence she . any allusion to the idea of love wound she , 
 as though it be too impossible for dream , too holy for word . how 
 should there be word about a lover when father and mother be both 
 dead ? he have go to his old and natural home . he have go , and of 
 course he would not return . to Ayala , when she come up to London 
 early in November , to Ayala , who be go to Rome , where Isadore 
 Hamel now be , Isadore Hamel 's name be not mention . but through 
 the long morning of her life , through the long evening , through the 
 long night , she still think of him,--she could not keep herself 
 from think . to a girl whose life be full of delight her lover 
 need not be so very much,--need not , at least , be everything . 
 though he be a lover to be love at all point , her friend will be 
 something , her dancing , her horse , her theatre - go , her brother 
 and sister , even her father and mother . but Lucy have nothing . the 
 vision of Isadore Hamel have pass across her life , and have leave with 
 she the only possession that she have . it need hardly be say that 
 she never allude to that possession at Kingsbury Crescent . it be 
 not a possession from which any enjoyment could come except that of 
 thinking of it . he have pass away from she , and there be no point 
 of life at which he could come across she again . there be no long 
 that half - joint studio . if it have be her lot to be as be Ayala , 
 she then would have be take to Rome . then again he would have 
 look into her eye and take her hand in his . then perhaps-- . 
 but now , even though he be to come back to London , he would know 
 nothing of her haunt . even in that case nothing would bring they 
 together . as the idea be cross her mind,--as it do cross it 
 so frequently,--she see he turn from the path on which she be 
 walk , make his way towards the step of the Memorial . 
 though she see no more than his back she be sure that it be Isadore 
 Hamel . for a moment there be an impulse on she to run after he and 
 to call his name . it be then early in January , and she be take 
 her daily walk through Kensington Gardens . she have walk there daily 
 now for the last two month and have never speak a word or be 
 addressed,--had never see a face that she have recognise . it have 
 seem to she that she have not an acquaintance in the world except 
 Uncle Reg and Aunt Dosett . and now , almost within reach of her hand , 
 be the one be in all the world whom she most long to see . she 
 do stand , and the word be form within her lip ; but she could not 
 speak it . then come the thought that she would run after he , but the 
 thought be expel quickly . though she might lose he again and for 
 ever she could not do that . she stand almost gasping till he be out 
 of sight , and then she pass on upon her usual round . 
 she never omit her walk after that , and always pause a moment 
 as the path turn away to the Memorial . it be not that she think 
 that she might meet he there,--there rather than elsewhere,--but 
 there be present to we often an idea that when some object have pass 
 from we that we have desire then it may be see again . day after 
 day , and week after week , she do not see he . during this time there 
 come letter from Ayala , say that their return to England be 
 postpone till the first week in february,--that she would certainly 
 see Lucy in february,--that she be not go to be hurry through 
 London in half - an - hour because her aunt wish it ; and that she would 
 do as she please as to visit her sister . then there be a word 
 or two about tom,--"oh , Tom -- that idiot Tom ! " and another word or 
 two about Augusta . " Augusta be bad than ever . we have not speak 
 to each other for the last day or two . " this come but a day or two 
 before the intend return of the Tringles . 
 no actual day have be fix . but on the day before that on which 
 Lucy think it probable that the tringle might return to town she 
 be again walk in the Gardens . have put two and two together , 
 as people do , she feel sure that the traveller could not be away 
 more than a day or two long . her mind be much intent upon Ayala , 
 feel that the imprudent girl be subject herself to great 
 danger , know that it be wrong that she and Augusta should be 
 together in the house without speaking,--thinking of her sister 's 
 perils,--when , of a sudden , Hamel be close before she ! there be no 
 question of call to he now,--no question of an attempt to see he 
 face to face . she have be wander along the path with eye fix 
 upon the ground , when her name be sharply call , and they two be 
 close to each other . Hamel have a friend with he , and it seem to 
 Lucy at once , that she could only bow to he , only mutter something , 
 and then pass on . how can a girl stand and speak to a gentleman in 
 public , especially when that gentleman have a friend with he ? she 
 try to look pleasant , bow , smile , mutter something , and be 
 pass on . but he be not minded to lose she thus immediately . " Miss 
 Dormer , " he say , " I have see your sister at Rome . may I not say a 
 word about she ? " 
 why should he not say a word about Ayala ? in a minute he have leave 
 his friend , and be walk back along the path with Lucy . there be 
 not much that he have to say about Ayala . he have see Ayala and the 
 Tringles , and do manage to let it escape he that Lady Tringle 
 have not be very gracious to himself when once , in public , he have 
 claim acquaintance with Ayala . but at that he simply smile . then 
 he have ask of Lucy where she live . " with my uncle , Mr. Dosett , " 
 say Lucy , " at Kingsbury Crescent . " then , when he ask whether he 
 might call , Lucy , with many blush , have say that her aunt do not 
 receive many visitors,--that her uncle 's house be different from 
 what her father 's have be . 
 " shall I not see you at all , then ? " he ask . 
 she do not like to ask he after his own purpose of life , whether 
 he be now a resident in London , or whether he intend to return to 
 Rome . she be cover with bashfulness , and dread to seem even to 
 be interested in his affair . " oh , yes , " she say ; " perhaps we may 
 meet some day . " 
 " here ? " he ask . 
 " oh , no ; not here ! it be only an accident . " as she say this she 
 determine that she must walk no more in Kensington Gardens . it would 
 be dreadful , indeed , be he to imagine that she would consent to 
 make an appointment with he . it immediately occur to she that the 
 lion be about , and that she must shut herself up . 
 " I have think of you every day since I have be back , " he say , 
 " and I do not know where to hear of you . now that we have meet be I 
 to lose you again ! " lose she ! what do he mean by lose she ? she , 
 too , have find a friend,--she who have be so friendless ! would it 
 not be dreadful to she , also , to lose he ? " be there no place where I 
 may ask of you ? " 
 " when Ayala be back , and they be in town , perhaps I shall sometimes 
 be at Lady Tringle 's , " say Lucy , resolve that she would not tell 
 he of her immediate abode . this be , at any rate , a certain address 
 from where he might commence further inquiry , should he wish to 
 make inquiry ; and as such he accept it . " I think I have well go 
 now , " say Lucy , tremble at the apparent impropriety of her present 
 conversation . 
 he know that it be intend that he should leave she , and he go . 
 " I hope I have not offend you in come so far . " 
 " oh , no . " then again she give he her hand , and again there be the 
 same look as he take his leave . 
 when she get home , which be before the dusk , have resolve that 
 she must , at any rate , tell she aunt that she have meet a friend , she 
 find that her uncle have return from his office . this be a most 
 unusual occurrence . her uncle , she know , leave Somerset House exactly 
 at half - past four , and always take an hour and a quarter for his 
 walk . she have never see he in Kingsbury Crescent till a quarter 
 before six . " I have get letter from Rome , " he say , in a solemn 
 voice . 
 " from Ayala ? " 
 " one from Ayala , for you . it be here . and I have have one from my 
 sister , also ; and one , in the course of the day , from your uncle 
 in Lombard Street . you have well read they ! " there be something 
 terribly tragic in Uncle Dosett 's voice as he speak . 
 and so must the reader read the letter ; but they must be delay for 
 a few chapter . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 AT GLENBOGIE . 
 we must go back to Ayala 's life during the autumn and winter . she be 
 rapidly whirl away to Glenbogie amidst the affectionate welcoming 
 of her aunt and cousin . all manner of good thing be do for she , 
 as to present and comfort . young as she be , she have money give to 
 she , which be not without attraction ; and though she be , of course , 
 in the depth of her mourning , she be make to understand that even 
 mourning might be make become if no expense be spar . no expense 
 among the Tringles ever be spar , and at first Ayala like the 
 bounty of profusion . but before the end of the first fortnight there 
 grow upon she a feeling that even bank note become tawdry if you be 
 teach to use they as curl - paper . it may be say that nothing in the 
 world be charming unless it be achieve at some trouble . if it rain 
 " ' 64 Leoville,"--which I regard as the most divine of nectars,--I 
 feel sure that I should never raise it to my lip . Ayala do not 
 argue the matter out in her mind , but in very early day she begin to 
 entertain a dislike to Tringle magnificence . there have be a good 
 deal of luxury at the bijou , but always with a feeling that it ought 
 not to be there,--that more money be be spend than prudence 
 authorised,--which have certainly add a savour to the luxury . a 
 lovely bonnet , be it not more lovely because the destine wearer 
 know that there be some wickedness in achieve it ? all the bonnet , 
 all the claret , all the horse , seem to come at Queen 's Gate and at 
 Glenbogie without any wickedness . there be no more question about 
 they than as to one 's ordinary bread and butter at breakfast . Sir 
 Thomas have a way,--a merit shall we call it or a fault?--of pour 
 out his wealth upon the family as though it be water run in 
 perpetuity from a mountain tarn . Ayala the romantic , Ayala the 
 poetic , find very soon that she do not like it . 
 perhaps the only pleasure leave to the very rich be that of thinking 
 of the deprivation of the poor . the bonnet , and the claret , and the 
 horse , have lose their charm ; but the Gladstone , and the old hat , 
 and the four - wheel cab of their neighbour , still have a little 
 flavour for they . from this source it seem to Ayala that the 
 Tringles draw much of the recreation of their life . Sir Thomas 
 have his way of enjoy this amusement , but it be a way that do 
 not specially come beneath Ayala 's notice . when she hear that 
 break - at - last , the Huddersfield manufacturer , have to sell his 
 picture , and that all Shoddy and Stuffgoods ' grand doing for 
 the last two year have only be a flash in the pan , she do not 
 understand enough about it to feel wound ; but when she hear she 
 aunt say that people like the Poodles have well not have a place 
 in Scotland than have to let it , and when Augusta hint that Lady 
 Sophia smallware have pawn her diamond , then she feel that she 
 near and dear relative smell abominably of money . 
 of all the family Sir Thomas be most persistently the kind to 
 she , though he be a man who do not look to be kind . she be pretty , 
 and though he be ugly himself he like to look at thing pretty . he 
 be , too , perhaps , a little tired of his own wife and daughters,--who 
 be indeed what he have make they , but still be not quite to his 
 taste . in a general way he give instruction that Ayala should 
 be treat exactly as a daughter , and he inform his wife that 
 he intend to add a codicil to his will on her behalf . " be that 
 necessary ? " ask Lady Tringle , who begin to feel something like 
 natural jealousy . " I suppose I ought to do something for a girl if 
 I take she by the hand , " say Sir Thomas , roughly . " if she get a 
 husband I will give she something , and that will do as well . " nothing 
 more be say about it , but when Sir Thomas go up to town the 
 codicil be add to his will . 
 Ayala be foolish rather than ungrateful , not understand the 
 nature of the family to which she be relegate . before she have be 
 take away she have promise Lucy that she would be " obedient " to her 
 aunt . there have hardly be such a word as obedience know at the 
 bijou . if any be obedient , it be the mother and the father to the 
 daughter . Lucy , and Ayala as well , have understand something of this ; 
 and therefore Ayala have promise to be obedient to her aunt . " and to 
 Uncle Thomas , " Lucy have demand , with an implore embrace . " oh , 
 yes , " say Ayala , dread her uncle at that time . she soon learn 
 that no obedience whatsoever be exact from Sir Thomas . she have to 
 kiss he morning and evening , and then to take whatever present he 
 make she . an easy uncle he be to deal with , and she almost learn 
 to love he . nor be Aunt Emmeline very exigeant , though she be 
 fantastic and sometimes disagreeable . but Augusta be the great 
 difficulty . Lucy have not tell she to obey Augusta , and Augusta she 
 would not obey . now Augusta demand obedience . 
 " you never order I , " Ayala have say to Lucy when they meet in 
 London as the Tringles be pass through . at the bijou there have 
 be a republic , in which all the inhabitant and all the visitor 
 have be free and equal . such republicanism have be the very 
 mainspring of life at the bijou . Ayala love equality , and she 
 specially feel that it should exist among sister . do anything for 
 Lucy ? oh , yes , indeed , anything ; abandon anything ; but for Lucy as a 
 sister among sister , not for an elder as from a young ! and if she 
 be not bind to serve Lucy then certainly not augusta . but Augusta 
 like to be serve . on one occasion she send Ayala upstairs , and on 
 another she send Ayala down - stair . Ayala go , but determine to 
 be equal with her cousin . on the morning follow , in the presence 
 of Aunt Emmeline and of Gertrude , in the presence also of two other 
 lady who be visit at the house , she ask Augusta if she would 
 mind run upstairs and fetch her scrap - book ! she have be 
 think about it all the night and all the morning , pluck up her 
 courage . but she have be determine . she find a great difficulty in 
 say the word , but she say they . the thing be so preposterous 
 that all the lady in the room look aghast at the proposition . " I 
 really think that Augusta have get something else to do , " say Aunt 
 Emmeline . " oh , very well , " say Ayala , and then they be all silent . 
 Augusta , who be employ on a silk purse , sit still and do not say 
 a word . 
 have a great secret , or rather a great piece of news which pervade 
 the family , be previously communicate to Ayala , she would not 
 probably have make so insane a suggestion . Augusta be engage to 
 be married to the honourable Septimus Traffick , the member for Port 
 Glasgow . a young lady who be already half a bride be not suppose 
 to run up and down stair as readily as a mere girl . for run up 
 and down stair at the bijou Ayala have be proverbial . they be a 
 family who run up and down with the great alacrity . " oh , papa , my 
 basket be out on the seat"--for there have be a seat in the two - foot 
 garden behind the house . Papa would go down in two jump and come up 
 with three skip , and there be the basket , only because his girl 
 like he to do something for she . but for he Ayala would run about 
 as though she be a tricksy Ariel . have the important matrimonial 
 news be convey to Ariel , with a true girl 's spirit she would have 
 feel that during the present period Augusta be entitle to special 
 exemption from all ordering . have she herself be engage she would 
 have run more and quick than ever,--would have be excite thereto 
 by the peculiar vitality of her new prospect ; but to even Augusta 
 she would be subservient , because of her appreciation of bridal 
 importance . she , however , have not be tell till that afternoon . 
 " you should not have ask Augusta to go up stair , " say Aunt 
 Emmeline , in a tone of mitigated reproach . 
 " oh ! I do not know , " say Ayala . 
 " you have mean to say that because she have send you you be to send 
 she . there be a difference , you know . " 
 " I do not know , " say Ayala , begin to think that she would fight 
 her battle if tell of such difference as she believe to exist . 
 " I have mean to tell you before , but I may as well tell you now , 
 Augusta be engage to be married to the honourable Mr. Septimus 
 Traffick . he be second son of Lord Boardotrade , and be in the House . " 
 " dear I ! " say Ayala , acknowledge at once within her heart that 
 the difference allege be one against which she need not rouse 
 herself to the fight . Aunt Emmeline have , in truth , intend to insist 
 on that difference -- and another ; but her courage have fail she . 
 " yes , indeed . he be a man very much thought of just now in public 
 life , and Augusta 's mind be naturally much occupy . he write all 
 those letter in the Times about supply and demand . " 
 " do he , aunt ? " Ayala do feel that if Augusta 's mind be entirely 
 occupy with supply and demand she ought not to be make to go 
 upstairs to fetch a scrap - book . but she have her doubt about 
 Augusta 's mind . nevertheless , if the forthcoming husband be true , 
 that might be a reason . " if anybody have tell I before I would not 
 have ask she , " she say . 
 then Lady Tringle explain that it have be think well not to 
 say anything heretofore as to the come matrimonial hilarity 
 because of the sadness which have fall upon the Dormer family . Ayala 
 accept this as an excuse , and nothing far be say as to the 
 iniquity of her request to her cousin . but there be a general 
 feeling among the woman that Ayala , in lieu of gratitude , have 
 exhibit an intention of rebel . 
 on the next day Mr. Traffick arrive , whose come have probably 
 make it necessary that the news should be tell . Ayala be never so 
 surprised in her life as when she see he . she have never yet have a 
 lover of her own , have never dream of a lover , but she have her own 
 idea as to what a lover ought to be . she have think that Isadore 
 Hamel would be a very nice lover -- for her sister . Hamel be young , 
 handsome , with a great deal to say on such a general subject as art , 
 but too bashful to talk easily to the girl he admire . Ayala have 
 think that all that be just as it should be . she be altogether 
 resolve that Hamel and her sister should be lover , and be 
 determined to be devoted to her future brother - in - law . but the 
 Honourable Septimus Traffick ! it be a question to she whether her 
 Uncle Tringle would not have be well as a lover . 
 and yet there be nothing amiss about Mr. Traffick . he be very much 
 like an ordinary hard - work member of the House of Commons , over 
 perhaps rather than under forty year of age . he be somewhat bald , 
 somewhat grey , somewhat fat , and have lose that look of rosy plumpness 
 which be seldom , I fear , compatible with hard work and late hour . he 
 be not particularly ugly , nor be he absurd in appearance . but he 
 look to be a disciple of business , not of pleasure , nor of art . " to 
 sit out on the bank of a stream and have he beside one would not be 
 particularly nice , " think Ayala to herself . Mr. Traffick no doubt 
 would have enjoy it very well if he could have spar the time ; but 
 to Ayala it seem that such a man as that could have care nothing 
 for love . as soon as she see he , and realise in her mind the fact 
 that Augusta be to become his wife , she feel at once the absurdity 
 of send Augusta on a message . 
 Augusta that evening be somewhat more than ordinarily kind to her 
 cousin . now that the great secret be tell , her cousin no doubt 
 would recognise her importance . " I suppose you have not hear of he 
 before ? " she say to Ayala . 
 " I never do . " 
 " that be because you have not attend to the debate . " 
 " I never have . what be debate ? " 
 " Mr. Traffick be very much thought of in the House of Commons on all 
 subject affect commerce . " 
 " oh ! " 
 " it be the most glorious study which the world afford . " 
 " the House of Commons . I do not think it can be equal to art . " 
 then Augusta turn up her nose with a double turn,--first as against 
 painter , Mr. Dormer have be no more , and then at Ayala 's 
 ignorance in suppose that the House of Commons could have be 
 speak of as a study . " Mr. Traffick will probably be in the 
 government some day , " she say . 
 " have not he be yet ? " ask Ayala . 
 " not yet . " 
 " then will not he be very old before he get there ? " this be a terrible 
 question . young lady of five - and - twenty , when they marry gentleman 
 of four - and - fifty , make up their mind for well - understand and 
 well - recognise old age . they see that they have well declare their 
 purpose , and they do declare it . " of course , Mr. Walker be old enough 
 to be my father , but I have make up my mind that I like that well 
 than anything else . " then the wall have be jump , and the thing can 
 go smoothly . but at forty - five there be suppose to be so much of 
 youth leave that the difference of age may possibly be tide over and 
 not make to appear abnormal . Augusta Tringle have determine to tide 
 it over in this way . the forty - five have be gradually reduce to 
 " less than forty,"--though all the Peerages be there to give the 
 lie to the assertion . she talk of her lover as Septimus , and be 
 quite prepared to sit with he beside a stream if only half - an - hour 
 for the amusement could be find . when , therefore , Ayala suggest 
 that if her lover want to get into office he have well do so 
 quickly , lest he should be too old , Augusta be not well pleased . 
 " Lord Boardotrade be much old when he begin , " say Augusta . " his 
 friend , indeed , tell Septimus that he should not push himself 
 forward too quickly . but I do not think that I ever come across any 
 one who be so ignorant of such thing as you be , Ayala . " 
 " perhaps he be not so old as he look , " say Ayala . after this it may 
 be imagine that there be not close friendship between the cousin . 
 Augusta 's mind be fill with a strong conception as to Ayala 's 
 ingratitude . the houseless , penniless orphan have be take in , and 
 have do nothing but make herself disagreeable . young ! no doubt she 
 be young . but have she be as old as Methuselah she could not have 
 be more insolent . it do not , however , matter to she , Augusta . 
 she be go away ; but it would be terrible to her mamma and to 
 Gertrude ! thus it be that Augusta speak of her cousin to her mother . 
 and then there come another trouble , which be more troublesome to 
 Ayala even than the other . Tom Tringle , who be in the house in 
 Lombard Street , who be the only son , and heir to the title and no 
 doubt to much of the wealth , have choose to take Ayala 's part and to 
 enlist himself as her special friend . Ayala have , at first , accept 
 he as a cousin , and have consent to fraternise with he . then , on 
 some unfortunate day , there have be some word or look which she have 
 fail not to understand , and immediately she have become afraid of 
 Tom . Tom be not like Isadore Hamel,--was very far , indeed , from that 
 idea of a perfect lover which Ayala 's mind have conceive ; but he be 
 by no mean a lout , or an oaf , or an idiot , as Ayala in her letter 
 to her sister have describe he . he have be first at Eton and then 
 at Oxford , and have spend a great deal of money recklessly , and 
 do but little towards his education , have be withdraw and put 
 into the office . his father declare of he now that he would do 
 fairly well in the world . he have a taste for dress , and keep four or 
 five hunter which he get but little credit by rid . he make a fuss 
 about his shooting , but do not shoot much . he be stout and awkward 
 looking,--very like his father , but without that settle air which 
 age give to heavy man . in appearance he be not the sort of lover 
 to satisfy the preconception of such a girl as Ayala . but he be 
 good - natured and true . at last he become to she terribly true . his 
 love , such as it seem at first , be absurd to she . " if you make 
 yourself such a fool , Tom , I will never speak to you again , " she have 
 say , once . even after that she have not understand that it be 
 more than a stupid joke . but the joke , while it be consider as 
 such , be very distasteful to she ; and afterwards , when a certain 
 earnestness in it be drive in upon she , it become bad than 
 distasteful . 
 she repudiate his love with such power as she have , but she could not 
 silence he . she could not at all understand that a young man , who 
 seem to she to be an oaf , should really be in love,--honestly in 
 love with she . but such be the case . then she become afraid lest 
 other should see it,--afraid , though she often tell herself that she 
 would appeal to her aunt for protection . " I tell you I do not care a 
 bit about you , and you ought not to go on , " she say . but he do go 
 on , and though her aunt do not see it Augusta do . 
 then Augusta speak a word to she in scorn . " Ayala , " she say , " you 
 should not encourage Tom . " 
 encourage he ! what a word from one girl to another ! what a world 
 of wrong there be in the idea which have create the word ! what an 
 absence of the sort of feeling which , accord to Ayala 's theory 
 of life , there should be on such a matter between two sister , two 
 cousin , or two friend ! encourage he ! when Augusta ought to have 
 be the first to assist she in her trouble ! " oh , Augusta , " she say , 
 turn sharply round , " what a spiteful creature you be . " 
 " I suppose you think so , because I do not choose to approve . " 
 " approve of what ! Tom be thoroughly disagreeable . sometimes he make 
 my life such a burden to I that I think I shall have to go to my 
 aunt . but you be bad . oh ! " exclaim Ayala , shudder as she 
 think of the unwomanly treachery of which her cousin be guilty 
 towards she . 
 nothing more come of it at Glenbogie . Tom be require in Lombard 
 Street , and the matter be not suspect by Aunt Emmeline,--as far , 
 at least , as Ayala be aware . when he be go it be to she as 
 though there would be a world of time before she would see he again . 
 they be to go to Rome , and he would not be at Rome till January . 
 before that he might have forget his folly . but Ayala be quite 
 determined that she would never forget the ill office of Augusta . 
 she do hate Augusta , as she have tell her sister . then , in this frame 
 of mind , the family be take to Rome . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 AT ROME . 
 during her journeying and during her sojourn at Rome Ayala do enjoy 
 much ; but even these joy do not come to she without cause some 
 trouble of spirit . at Glenbogie everybody have know that she be a 
 dependent niece , and that as such she be in truth nobody . on that 
 morning when she have order Augusta to go upstairs the two visitor 
 have star with amazement,--who would not have star at all have 
 they hear Ayala order in the same way . but it come about that in 
 Rome Ayala be almost of more importance than the Tringles . it be 
 absolutely true that Lady Tringle and Augusta and Gertrude be ask 
 here and there because of Ayala ; and the bad of it be that the 
 fact be at last suspect by the tringle themselves . sometimes they 
 would not always be ask . one of the Tringle girl would only be 
 name . but Ayala be never forget . once or twice an effort be 
 make by some grand lady , whose taste be perhaps more conspicuous 
 than her good - nature , to get Ayala without burden herself with any 
 of the Tringles . when this become clear to the mind of Augusta,--of 
 Augusta , engage as she be to the honourable Septimus Traffick , 
 Member of Parliament,--Augusta 's feeling be -- such as may well 
 be understand than describe ! " do not let she go , mamma , " she say to 
 Lady Tringle one morning . 
 " but the Marchesa have make such a point of it . " 
 " Bother the Marchesa ! who be the Marchesa ? I believe it be all 
 Ayala 's do because she expect to meet that Mr. Hamel . it be 
 dreadful to see the way she go on . " 
 " Mr. Hamel be a very intimate friend of her father 's . " 
 " I do not believe a bit of it . " 
 " he certainly use to be at his house . I remember see he . " 
 " I daresay ; but that do not justify Ayala in run after he as 
 she do . I believe that all this about the Marchesa be because of 
 Mr. Hamel . " this be well than believe that Ayala be to be ask 
 to sing , and that Ayala be to be fête and admire and dance with , 
 simply because Ayala be Ayala , and that they , the Tringles , in spite 
 of Glenbogie , Merle Park , and Queen 's Gate , be not want at all . 
 but when Aunt Emmeline signify to Ayala that on that particular 
 morning she have well not go to the Marchesa 's picnic , Ayala simply 
 say that she have promised;--and Ayala go . 
 at this time no gentleman of the family be with they . Sir Thomas 
 have go , and Tom Tringle have not come . then , just at Christmas , the 
 Honourable Septimus Traffick come for a short visit,--a very short 
 visit , no more than four or five day , because Supply and Demand be 
 require all his service in preparation for the come session 
 of Parliament . but for five halcyon day he be prepared to devote 
 himself to the glory of Rome under the guidance of Augusta . he 
 do not of course sleep at the Palazzo Ruperti , where it delight 
 Lady Tringle to inform her friend in Rome that she have a suite of 
 apartment " au première , " but he eat there and drank there and almost 
 live there ; so that it become absolutely necessary to inform the 
 world of Rome that it be Augusta 's destiny to become in course of 
 time the Honourable Mrs. Traffick , otherwise the close intimacy 
 would hardly have be discreet,--unless it have be think , as the 
 ill - natured Marchesa have hint , that Mr. Traffick be Lady Tringle 's 
 eld brother . augusta , however , be by no mean ashamed of her 
 lover . perhaps she feel that when it be know that she be about 
 to be the bride of so great a man then door would be open for she 
 at any rate as wide as for her cousin . at this moment she be very 
 important to herself . she be about to convey no less a sum than 
 £ 120,000 to Mr. Traffick , who , in truth , as young son of Lord 
 Boardotrade , be himself not well endow . consider her own 
 position and her future husband 's rank and standing , she do not 
 know how a young woman could well be more important . she be very 
 important at any rate to Mr. Traffick . she be sure of that . when , 
 therefore , she learn that Ayala have be ask to a grand ball at 
 the Marchesa 's , that Mr. Traffick be also to be among the guest , 
 and that none of the Tringles have be invited,--then her anger 
 become hot . 
 she must have be very stupid when she take it into her head to be 
 jealous of Mr. Traffick 's attention to her cousin ; stupid , at any 
 rate , when she think that her cousin be lay out feminine lur 
 for Mr. Traffick . Poor Ayala ! we shall see much of she in these 
 page , and it may be well to declare of she at once that her idea 
 at this moment about men,--or rather about a possible man,--were 
 confine altogether to the abstract . she have float in her young 
 mind some fancy as to the beauty of love . that there should be a 
 hero must of course be necessary . but in her day - dream this hero be 
 almost celestial,--or , at least , æthereal . it be a concentration 
 of poetic perfection to which there be not as yet any appanage of 
 apparel , of feature , or of wealth . it be a something out of heaven 
 which should think it well to spend his whole time in adore she 
 and make she more blessed than have ever yet be a woman upon the 
 earth . then her first approach to a mundane feeling have be her 
 acknowledgment to herself that Isadore Hamel would do as a lover for 
 Lucy . Isadore Hamel be certainly very handsome,--was possess of 
 infinite good gift ; but even he would by no mean have come up to 
 her requirement for her own hero . that hero must have wing ting 
 with azure , whereas Hamel have a not much more ætherealised than 
 ordinary coat and waistcoat . she know that hero with azure wing 
 be not existent save in the imagination , and , as she desire a real 
 lover for Lucy , Hamel would do . but for herself her imagination be 
 too valuable then to allow she to put her foot upon earth . such as 
 she be , must not augusta have be very stupid to have think that 
 Ayala should become fond of her Mr. Traffick ! 
 her cousin Tom have come to she , and have be to she as a Newfoundland 
 dog be when he jump all over you just when he have come out of a 
 horsepond . she would have like Tom have he keep his dog - like gambol 
 at a proper distance . but when he would cover she with muddy water 
 he be abominable . but this Augusta have not understand . with Mr. 
 Traffick there would be no dog - like gambol ; and , as he be not harsh 
 to she , Ayala like he . she have like her uncle . such man be , to 
 her thinking , more like dog than lover . she sing when Mr. Traffick 
 ask she , and make a picture for he , and go with he to the 
 Coliseum , and laugh at he about Supply and Demand . she be very 
 pretty , and perhaps Mr. Traffick do like to look at she . 
 " I really think you be too free with Mr. Traffick last night , " 
 Augusta say to her one morning . 
 " free ! how free ? " 
 " you be -- laugh at he . " 
 " oh , he like that , " say Ayala . " all that time we be up at the top 
 of St. Peter 's I be quiz he about his speech . he let I say 
 just what I please . " 
 this be wormwood . in the first place there have be a word or two 
 between the lover about that go up of St. Peter 's , and Augusta 
 have refuse to join they . she have wish Septimus to remain down with 
 her,--which would have be tantamount to prevent any of the party 
 from go up ; but Septimus have persist on ascend . then Augusta 
 have be leave for a long hour alone with her mother . Gertrude have no 
 doubt go up , but Gertrude have lag during the ascent . Ayala have 
 skip up the interminable stair and Mr. Traffick have trot after 
 she with admire breathless industry . this itself , with the thought 
 of the good time which Septimus might be have at the top , be very 
 bad . but now to be tell that she , Ayala , should laugh at he ; and 
 that he , Septimus , should like it ! " I suppose he take you to be a 
 child , " say Augusta ; " but if you be a child you ought to conduct 
 yourself . " 
 " I suppose he do perceive the difference , " say Ayala . 
 she have not in the least know what the word might convey,--had 
 probably mean nothing . but to Augusta it be apparent that Ayala 
 have declare that her lover , her Septimus , have prefer her extreme 
 youth to the more mature charm of his own true love,--or have , 
 perhaps , prefer Ayala 's raillery to Augusta 's serious demeanour . 
 " you be the most impertinent person I ever know in my life , " say 
 Augusta , rise from her chair and walk slowly out of the room . 
 Ayala star after she , not above half comprehend the cause of the 
 anger . 
 then come the very serious affair of the ball . the Marchesa have ask 
 that her dear little friend Ayala Dormer might be allow to come 
 over to a little dance which her own girl be go to have . her 
 own girl be so fond of Ayala ! there would be no trouble . there 
 be a carriage which would be go somewhere else , and she would be 
 fetched and take home . Ayala at once declare that she intend to 
 go , and her Aunt Emmeline do not refuse her sanction . Augusta be 
 shocked , declare that the little dance be to be one of the great 
 ball of the season , and pronounce the whole to be a falsehood ; but 
 the affair be arrange before she could stop it . 
 but Mr. Traffick 's affair in the matter come more within her range . 
 " Septimus , " she say , " I would rather you would not go to that 
 woman 's party . " Septimus have be ask only on the day before the 
 party,--as soon , indeed , as his arrival have become know to the 
 Marchesa . 
 " why , my own one ? " 
 " she have not treat mamma well,--nor yet I . " 
 " Ayala be go . " he have no right to call her Ayala . so Augusta 
 thought . 
 " my cousin be behave badly in the matter , and mamma ought not to 
 allow she to go . who know anything about the Marchesa Baldoni ? " 
 " both he and she be of the very good family in Rome , " say Mr. 
 Traffick , who know everything about it . 
 " at any rate they be behave very badly to we , and I will take it 
 as a favour that you do not go . ask Ayala , and then ask you , as 
 good as from the same house , be too marked . you ought not to go . " 
 perhaps Mr. Traffick have on some former occasion feel some little 
 interference with his freedom of action . perhaps he like the 
 acquaintance of the Marchesa . perhaps he like Ayala Dormer . be that 
 as it might , he would not yield . " Dear Augusta , it be right that I 
 should go there , if it be only for half - an - hour . " this he say in a 
 tone of voice with which Augusta be already acquaint , which she 
 do not love , and which , when she hear it , would make she think of 
 her £ 120,000 . when he have speak he leave she , and she begin to think 
 of her £ 120,000 . 
 they both go , Ayala and Mr. Traffick,--and Mr. Traffick , instead 
 of stay half - an - hour , bring Ayala back at three o'clock in the 
 morning . though Mr. Traffick be nearly as old as Uncle Tringle , yet 
 he could dance . Ayala have be astonish to find how well he could 
 dance , and think that she might please her cousin Augusta by 
 praise the juvenility of her lover at luncheon the next day . she 
 have not appear at breakfast , but have be full of the ball at 
 lunch . " oh , dear , yes , I dare say there be two hundred people 
 there . " 
 " that be what she call a little dance , " say Augusta , with scorn . 
 " I suppose that be the italian way of talk about it , " say Ayala . 
 " italian way ! I hate italian way . " 
 " Mr. Traffick like it very much . I be sure he will tell you so . I have 
 no idea he would care to dance . " 
 augusta only shake herself and turn up her nose . Lady Tringle 
 think it necessary to say something in defence of her daughter 's 
 choice . " why should not Mr. Traffick dance like any other gentleman ? " 
 " oh , I do not know . I think that a man who make so many speech 
 in Parliament would think of something else . I be very glad he do , 
 for he dance three time with I . he can waltz as lightly as-- " as 
 though he be young , she be go to say , but then she stop 
 herself . 
 " he be the good dancer I ever dance with , " say Augusta . 
 " but you almost never do dance , " say Ayala . 
 " I suppose I may know about it as well as another , " say Augusta , 
 angrily . 
 the next day be the last of Mr. Traffick 's sojourn in Rome , and on 
 that day he and Augusta so quarrel that , for a certain number of 
 hour , it be almost suppose in the family that the match would be 
 break off . on the afternoon of the day after the dance Mr. Traffick 
 be walk with Ayala on the Pincian , while Augusta be absolutely 
 remain behind with her mother . for a quarter - of - an - hour,--the 
 whole day , as it seem to augusta,--there be a full two hundred 
 yard between they . it be not that the engage girl could not bear 
 the severance , but that she could not endure the attention pay to 
 Ayala . on the next morning " she have it out , " as some people say , with 
 her lover . " if I be to be treat in this way you have well tell I 
 so at once , " she say . 
 " I know no well way of treat you , " say Mr. Traffick . 
 " dance with that chit all night , turn her head , and then walk 
 with she all the next day ! I will not put up with such conduct . " 
 Mr. Traffick value £ 120,000 very highly , as do most man , and would 
 have do much to keep it ; but he believe that the good way of 
 make sure of it would be by show himself to be the master . " my 
 own one , " he say , " you be really make an ass of yourself . " 
 " very well ! then I will write to papa , and let he know that it must 
 be all over . " 
 for three hour there be terrible trouble in the apartment in the 
 Palazzo Ruperti , during which Mr. Traffick be enjoy himself by 
 walk up and down the Forum , and calculate how many Romans could 
 have congregate themselves in the space which be suppose to have 
 see so much of the world 's doing . during this time Augusta be 
 very frequently in hysteric ; but , whether in hysteric or out of 
 they , she would not allow Ayala to come near she . she give it to be 
 understand that Ayala have interfere fatally , foully , damnably , with 
 all her happiness . she demand , from fit to fit , that telegram 
 should be send over to bring her father to Italy for her protection . 
 she would rave about Septimus , and then swear that , under no 
 consideration whatever , would she ever see he again . at the end 
 of three hour she be tell that Septimus be in the drawing - room . 
 Lady Tringle have send half - a - dozen messenger after he , and at last 
 he be find look up at the Arch of Titus . " bid he go , " say 
 Augusta . " I never want to behold he again . " but within two minute 
 she be in his arm , and before dinner she be able to take a stroll 
 with he on the Pincian . 
 he leave , like a thriving lover , high in the good grace of his 
 beloved ; but the anger which have fall on Ayala have not be 
 remove . then come a rumour that the Marchesa , who be half english , 
 have call Ayala Cinderella , and the name have add fuel to the fire 
 of Augusta 's wrath . there be much say about it between Lady Tringle 
 and her daughter , the aunt really feel that more blame be be 
 attribute to Ayala than she deserve . " perhaps she give herself 
 air , " say Lady Tringle , " but really it be no more . " 
 " she be a viper , " say Augusta . 
 Gertrude rather take Ayala 's part , tell her mother , in private , 
 that the accusation about Mr. Traffick be absurd . " the truth be , " 
 say Gertrude , " that Ayala think herself very clever and very 
 beautiful , and Augusta will not stand it . " Gertrude acknowledge 
 that Ayala be upsetting and ungrateful . Poor Lady Tringle , in her 
 husband 's absence , do not know what to do about her niece . 
 altogether , they be uncomfortable after Mr. Traffick go and 
 before Tom Tringle have come . on no consideration whatsoever would 
 Augusta speak to her cousin . she declare that Ayala be a viper , and 
 would give no other reason . in all such quarreling the matter most 
 distressing be that the evil can not be hide . everybody at Rome who 
 know the Tringles , or who know Ayala , be aware that Augusta Tringle 
 would not speak to her cousin . when Ayala be ask she would shake 
 her lock , and open her eye , and declare that she know nothing about 
 it . in truth she know very little about it . she remember that 
 passage - at - arm about the go upstairs at Glenbogie , but she could 
 hardly understand that for so small an affront , and one so distant , 
 Augusta would now refuse to speak to she . that Augusta have always 
 be angry with she , and since Mr. Traffick 's arrival more angry than 
 ever , she have feel ; but that Augusta be jealous in respect to she 
 lover have never yet at all come home to Ayala . that she should have 
 want to captivate Mr. Traffick,--she with her high idea of some 
 transcendental , more than human , hero ! 
 but she have to put up with it , and to think of it . she have sense 
 enough to know that she be no more than a stranger in her aunt 's 
 family , and that she must go if she make herself unpleasant to they . 
 she be aware that hitherto she have not succeed with her residence 
 among they . perhaps she might have to go . some thing she would 
 bear , and in they she would endeavour to amend her conduct . in other 
 matter she would hold her own , and go , if necessary . though her 
 young imagination be still full of her unsubstantial hero,--though 
 she still have her castle in the air altogether incapable of 
 terrestrial foundation,--still there be a common sense about she 
 which tell she that she must give and take . she would endeavour to 
 submit herself to her aunt . she would be kind,--as she have always 
 be kind,--to Gertrude . she would in all matter obey her uncle . her 
 misfortune with the Newfoundland dog have almost dwindle out of her 
 mind . to Augusta she could not submit herself . but then Augusta , 
 as soon as the next session of Parliament should be over , would be 
 marry out of the way . and , on her own part , she do think that her 
 aunt be inclined to take her part in the quarrel with Augusta . 
 thus matter be go on in Rome when there come up another and a 
 bad cause for trouble . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 TOM TRINGLE in EARNEST . 
 Tom Tringle , though he have first appear to his cousin Ayala as a 
 Newfoundland dog which might perhaps be pleasantly playful , and then , 
 as the same dog , very unpleasant because dripping with muddy water , 
 be nevertheless a young man with so much manly truth about he as to 
 be very much in love . he do not look like it ; but then perhaps the 
 young man who do fall most absolutely into love do not look like it . 
 to Ayala her cousin Tom be as unloveable as Mr. Septimus Traffick . 
 she could like they both well enough while they would be kind to 
 she . but as to regard cousin Tom as a lover,--the idea be so 
 preposterous to she that she could not imagine that any one else 
 should look upon it as real . but with Tom the idea have be real , 
 and be , moreover , permanent . the black lock which would be shake 
 here and there , the bright glance eye which could be so joyous and 
 could be so indignant , the colour of her face which have nothing in it 
 of pink , which be brown rather , but over which the tell - tale blood 
 would rush with a quickness which be marvellous to he , the lithe 
 quick figure which have in it nothing of the weight of earth , the 
 little foot which in itself be a perfect joy , the step with all the 
 elasticity of a fawn,--these charm together have master he . Tom 
 be not romantic or poetic , but the romance and poetry of Ayala have 
 be divine to he . it be not always like to like in love . Titania 
 love the weaver Bottom with the ass 's head . Bluebeard , though a 
 bad husband , be suppose to have be fond of his last wife . the 
 Beauty have always be belove by the Beast . to Ayala the thing 
 be monstrous;--but it be natural . Tom Tringle be determined to 
 have his way , and when he start for Rome be more intent upon his 
 love - making than all the glory of the Capitol and the Vatican . 
 when he first make his appearance before Ayala 's eye he be bedeck 
 in a manner that be awful to she . down at Glenbogie he have affect 
 a rough attire , as be the custom with young man of ample mean when 
 fishing , shooting , or the like , be suppose to be the employment 
 then in hand . the roughness have be a little overdone , but it have 
 add nothing to his own uncouthness . in London he be apt to run a 
 little towards ornamental gilding , but in London his taste have be 
 temper by the ill - natured criticism of the world at large . he have 
 hardly dare at Queen 's Gate to wear his big pin ; but he have 
 take upon himself to think that at Rome an Englishman might expose 
 himself with all his jewelry . " oh , Tom , I never see anything so 
 stunning , " his sister Gertrude say to he . he have simply frown 
 upon she , and have turn himself to Ayala , as though Ayala , be 
 an artist , would be able to appreciate something beautiful in art . 
 Ayala have look at he and have marvel , and have venture to hope 
 that , with his Glenbogie dress , his Glenbogie manner and Glenbogie 
 propensity would be change . 
 at this time the family at Rome be very uncomfortable . Augusta would 
 not speak to her cousin , and have declare to her mother and sister 
 her determination never to speak to Ayala again . for a time Aunt 
 Emmeline have almost take her niece 's part , feel that she might 
 well bring thing back to a condition of peace in this manner . Ayala , 
 she have think , might thus be decoy into a state of submission . 
 Ayala , so instigated , have make her attempt . " what be the matter , 
 Augusta , " she have say , " that you be determined to quarrel with I ? " 
 then have follow a little offer that bygone should be bygone . 
 " I have quarrel with you , " say Augusta , " because you do not know 
 how to behave yourself . " then Ayala have flash forth , and the little 
 attempt lead to a bad condition than ever , and word be speak 
 which even Aunt Emmeline have feel to be irrevocable , irremediable . 
 " only that you be go away I would not consent to live here , " say 
 Ayala . then Aunt Emmeline have ask she where she would go to live 
 should it please she to remove herself . Ayala have think of this for 
 a moment , and then have burst into tear . " if I could not live I could 
 die . anything would be well than to be treat as she treat I . " 
 so the matter be when Tom come to Rome with all his jewelry . 
 Lady Tringle have already tell herself that , in choose Ayala , she 
 have choose wrong . Lucy , though not so attractive as Ayala , be 
 pretty , quiet , and ladylike . so she think now . and as to Ayala 's 
 attraction , they be not at all of a nature to be serviceable to 
 such a family as her . to have her own girl outshone , to be make 
 to feel that the poor orphan be the one person most worthy of note 
 among they , to be subject to the caprice of a pretty , proud , 
 ill - condition minx;--thu it be that Aunt Emmeline be teach 
 to regard her own charity and good - nature towards her niece . there 
 be , she say , no gratitude in Ayala . have she say that there be no 
 humility she would have be more nearly right . she be entitle , she 
 think , to expect both gratitude and humility , and she be sorry 
 that she have open the Paradise of her opulent home to one so little 
 grateful and so little humble as Ayala . she see now her want of 
 judgment in that she have not take Lucy . 
 Tom , who be not a fool , in spite of his trinket , see the state of 
 the case , and take Ayala 's part at once . " I think you be quite 
 right , " he say to she , on the first occasion on which he have 
 contrive to find himself alone with she after his arrival . 
 " right about what ? " 
 " in not give up to Augusta . she be always like that when she be a 
 child , and now her head be turn about Traffick . " 
 " I should not grudge she her lover if she would only let I alone . " 
 " I do not suppose she hurt you much ? " 
 " she set my aunt against I , and that make I unhappy . of course I 
 be wretche . " 
 " oh , Ayala , do not be wretche . " 
 " how be one to help it ? I never say an ill - natured word to she , 
 and now I be so lonely among they ! " in say this,--in seek to 
 get one word of sympathy from her cousin , she forget for a moment 
 his disagreeable pretension . but , no soon have she speak of her 
 loneliness , than she see that ogle in his eye of which she have speak 
 with so much ludicrous awe in her letter from Glenbogie to her 
 sister . 
 " I shall always take your part , " say he . 
 " I do not want any taking of part . " 
 " but I shall . I be not go to see you put upon . you be more to I , 
 Ayala , than any of they . " then he look at she , whereupon she get up 
 and run away . 
 but she could not always run away , nor could she always refuse when 
 he ask she to go with he about the show - place of the city . to 
 avoid start alone with he be within her power ; but she find 
 herself compel to join herself to Gertrude and her brother in 
 some of those little excursion which be take for her benefit . at 
 this time there have come to be a direct quarrel between Lady Tringle 
 and the Marchesa , which , however , have arise altogether on the part 
 of Augusta . Augusta have force her mother to declare that she be 
 insult , and then there be no more visit between they . this have 
 be sad enough for Ayala , who have strike up an intimacy with the 
 Marchesa 's daughter . but the Marchesa have explain to she that 
 there be no help for it . " it will not do for you to separate yourself 
 from your aunt , " she have say . " of course we shall be friend , and 
 at some future time you shall come and see we . " so there have be a 
 division , and Ayala would have be quite alone have she decline the 
 proffer companionship of Gertrude . 
 within the wall and arch and upraised terrace of the Coliseum 
 they be join one day by young Hamel , the sculptor , who have not , 
 as yet , go back to London,--and have not , as yet , meet Lucy in the 
 garden at Kensington ; and with he there have be one Frank Houston , 
 who have make acquaintance with Lady Tringle , and with the Tringles 
 generally , since they have be at Rome . Frank Houston be a young man 
 of family , with a taste for art , very good - look , but not specially 
 well off in regard to income . he have hear of the good fortune of 
 Septimus Traffick in have prepare for himself a connection with so 
 wealthy a family as the Tringles , and have think it possible that a 
 settlement in life might be comfortable for himself . what few soft 
 word he have hitherto be able to say to Gertrude have be take 
 in good part , and when , therefore , they meet among the wall of the 
 Coliseum , she have naturally straggle away to see some special wonder 
 which he have a special aptitude for show . Hamel remain with 
 Ayala and Tom , talk of the old day at the bijou , till he find 
 himself oblige to leave they . then Tom have his opportunity . 
 " Ayala , " he say , " all this must be alter . " 
 " what must be alter ? " 
 " if you only know , Ayala , how much you be to I . " 
 " I wish you would not , Tom . I do not want to be anything to anybody in 
 particular . " 
 " what I mean be , that I will not have they sit upon you . they treat 
 you as -- as,--well , as though you have only half a right to be one of 
 they . " 
 " no more I have . I have no right at all . " 
 " but that be not the way I want it to be . if you be my wife-- " 
 " Tom , pray do not . " 
 " why not ? I be in earnest . why be not I to speak as I think ? oh , Ayala , 
 if you know how much I think of you . " 
 " but you should not . you have not get a right . " 
 " I have get a right . " 
 " but I do not want it , Tom , and I will not have it . " he have carry she 
 away now to the end of the terrace , or ruin tier of seat , on which 
 they be walk , and have get she so hem into a corner that she 
 could not get away from he . she be afraid of he , lest he should 
 put out his hand to take hold of her,--lest something even more 
 might be attempt . and yet his manner be manly and sincere , and 
 have it not be for his pin and his chain she could not but have 
 acknowledge his goodness to she , much as she might have dislike his 
 person . " I want to get out , " she say . " I will not stay here any more . " 
 Mr. Traffick , on the top of St. Peter 's , have be a much pleasanter 
 companion . 
 " do not you believe I when I tell you that I love you well than 
 anybody ? " plead Tom . 
 " no . " 
 " not believe I ? oh , Ayala ! " 
 " I do not want to believe anything . I want to get out . if you go on , 
 I will tell my aunt . " 
 tell her aunt ! there be a want of personal consideration to himself 
 in this way of receive his address which almost anger he . Tom 
 Tringle be not in the least afraid of his mother,--wa not even 
 afraid of his father as long as he be fairly regular at the office 
 in Lombard Street . he be quite determined to please himself in 
 marriage , and be disposed to think that his father and mother would 
 like he to be settle . money be no object . there be , to his 
 thinking , no good reason why he should not marry his cousin . for she 
 the match be so excellent that he hardly expect she would reject 
 he when she could be make to understand that he be really in 
 earnest . " you may tell all the world , " he say proudly . " all I want 
 be that you should love I . " 
 " but I do not . there be Gertrude and Mr. Houston , and I want to go to 
 they . " 
 " say one nice word to I , Ayala . " 
 " I do not know how to say a nice word . can not you be make to understand 
 that I do not like it ? " 
 " Ayala . " 
 " why do not you let I go away ? " 
 " ayala,--give I -- one -- kiss . " then Ayala do go away , escape by 
 some kid - like manoeuvre among the ruin , and run quickly , while 
 he follow she , join herself to the other pair of lover , who 
 probably be less in want of her society than she of theirs . " Ayala , 
 I be quite in earnest , " say Tom , as they be walk home , " and I 
 mean to go on with it . " 
 Ayala think that there be nothing for it but to tell her aunt . 
 that there would be some absurdity in such a proceeding she do 
 feel,--that she would be act as though her cousin be a naughty 
 boy who be merely tease she . but she feel also the peculiar danger 
 of her own position . her aunt must be make to understand that she , 
 Ayala , be innocent in the matter . it would be terrible to she to 
 be suspect even for a moment of a desire to inveigle the heir . 
 that Augusta would bring such an accusation against she she think 
 probable . Augusta have say as much even at Glenbogie . she must 
 therefore be on the alert , and let it be understand at once 
 that she be not league with her cousin Tom . there would be an 
 absurdity;--but that would be well than suspicion . 
 she think about it all that afternoon , and in the evening she come 
 to a resolution . she would write a letter to her cousin and persuade 
 he if possible to desist . if he should again annoy she after that 
 she would appeal to her aunt . then she write and send her letter , 
 which be as follows;-- 
    DEAR TOM , 
    you do not know how unhappy you make I at the coliseum 
    to - day . I do not think you ought to turn against I when 
    you know what I have to bear . it be turn against I 
    to talk as you do . of course it mean nothing ; but you 
    should not do it . it _ never never _ could mean anything . I 
    hope you will be good - natured and kind to I , and then I 
    shall be so much oblige to you . if you will not say anything 
    more like that I will forget it altogether . 
    your affectionate cousin , 
    AYALA . 
 the letter ought to have convince he . those two underscored never 
 should have eradicate from his mind the feeling which have be 
 previously produce by the assertion that he have " mean nothing . " 
 but he be so assured in his own meaning that he pay no attention 
 whatever to the never . the letter be a delight to he because it 
 give he the opportunity of a rejoinder,--and he write his rejoinder 
 on a scented sheet of note - paper and copy it twice;-- 
    DEAREST AYALA , 
    why do you say that it mean nothing ? it mean everything . 
    no man be ever more in earnest in speak to a lady than 
    I be with you . why should I not be in earnest when I be so 
    deeply in love ? from the first moment in which I see you 
    down at Glenbogie I know how it be go to be with I . 
    as for my mother I do not think she would say a word . why 
    should she ? but I be not the sort of man to be talk out 
    of my intention in such a matter as this . I have set my 
    heart upon have you and nothing will ever turn I off . 
    Dearest Ayala , let I have one look to say that you will 
    love I , and I shall be the happy man in England . I 
    think you so beautiful ! I do , indeed . the governor have 
    always say that if I would settle down and marry there 
    should be lot of money . what could I do well with it 
    than make my darling look as grand as the good of they . 
    your , always mean it , 
    most affectionately , 
    T. TRINGLE . 
 it almost touch her,--not in the way of love but of gratitude . he 
 be still to she like Bottom with the ass 's head , or the Newfoundland 
 dog gambol out of the water . there be the heavy face , and there 
 be the big chain and the odious ring , and the great hand and 
 the clumsy feet,--making together a creature whom it be impossible 
 even to think of with love . she shudder as she remember the 
 proposition which have be make to she in the coliseum . 
 and now by write to he she have bring down upon herself this 
 absolute love - letter . she have think that by appeal to he as 
 " Dear Tom , " and by sign herself his affectionate cousin , she might 
 have prevail . if he could only be make to understand that it could 
 never mean anything ! but now , on the other hand , she have begin to 
 understand that it do _ mean _ a great deal . he have send to she a 
 regular offer of marriage ! the magnitude of the thing strike she at 
 last . the heir of all the wealth of her mighty uncle want to make 
 she his wife ! 
 but it be to she exactly as though the heir have come to she wear 
 an ass 's head on his shoulder . love he ! marry him!--or even touch 
 he ? oh , no . they might ill - use she ; they might scold she ; they might 
 turn she out of the house ; but no consideration would induce she to 
 think of Tom Tringle as a lover . 
 and yet he be in earnest , and honest , and good . and some 
 answer,--some further communication must be make to he . she 
 do recognise some nobility in he , though personally he be so 
 distasteful to she . now his appeal to she have take the guise of an 
 absolute offer of marriage he be entitle to a discreet and civil 
 answer . romantic , dreamy , poetic , childish as she be , she know as 
 much as that . " go away , Tom , you fool , you , " would no long do for 
 the occasion . as she think of it all that night it be bear in 
 upon she more strongly than ever that her only protection would be in 
 tell her aunt , and in get her aunt to make Tom understand that 
 there must be no more of it . early on the follow morning she find 
 herself in her aunt 's bedroom . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 the LOUT . 
 " Aunt Emmeline , I want you to read this letter . " so it be that Ayala 
 commence the interview . at this moment Ayala be not on much well 
 term with her aunt than she be with her cousin Augusta . Ayala be 
 a trouble to her,--Lady Tringle,--who be altogether perplex with 
 the feeling that she have burden herself with an inmate in her house 
 who be distasteful to she and of whom she could not rid herself . 
 Ayala have turn out on her hand something altogether different 
 from the girl she have intend to cherish and patronise . Ayala 
 be independent ; superior rather than inferior to her own girl ; 
 more thought of by other ; apparently without any touch of that 
 subservience which should have be produce in she by her position . 
 Ayala seem to demand as much as though she be a daughter of the 
 house , and at the same time to carry herself as though she be more 
 gifted than the daughter of the house . she be less obedient even 
 than a daughter . all this Aunt Emmeline could not endure with a 
 placid bosom . she be herself kind of heart . she acknowledge she 
 duty to her dead sister . she wish to protect and foster the orphan . 
 she do not even yet wish to punish Ayala by utter desertion . she 
 would protect she in opposition to Augusta 's more declared malignity ; 
 but she do wish to be rid of Ayala , if she only know how . 
 she take her son 's letter and read it , and as a matter of course 
 misunderstood the position . at Glenbogie something have be whisper 
 to she about Tom and Ayala , but she have not believe much in it . 
 Ayala be a child , and Tom be to she not much more than a boy . but 
 now here be a genuine love - letter,--a letter in which her son have 
 make a distinct proposition to marry the orphan . she do not stop to 
 consider why Ayala have bring the letter to she , but entertain at 
 once an idea that the two young people be go to vex her very 
 soul by a lamentable love affair . how imprudent she have be to let 
 the two young people be together in Rome , see that the matter have 
 be whisper to she at Glenbogie ! " how long have this be go 
 on ? " she ask , severely . 
 " he use to tease I at Glenbogie , and now he be do it again , " 
 say Ayala . 
 " there must certainly be put an end to it . you must go away . " 
 Ayala know at once that her aunt be angry with she , and be 
 indignant at the injustice . " of course there must be put an end to 
 it , Aunt Emmeline . he have no right to annoy I when I tell he not . " 
 " I suppose you have encourage he . " 
 this be too cruel to be bear ! encourage he ! Ayala 's anger be 
 cause not so much by a feeling that her aunt have misappreciate the 
 cause of she come as that it should have be think possible that 
 she should have " encourage " such a lover . it be the outrage to she 
 taste rather than to her conduct which afflict she . " he be a lout , " 
 she say ; " a stupid lout ! " thus cast she scorn upon the mother as 
 well as on the son , and , indeed , upon the whole family . " I have not 
 encourage he . it be untrue . " 
 " Ayala , you be very impertinent . " 
 " and you be very unjust . because I want to put a stop to it I come 
 to you , and you tell I that I encourage he . you be bad than 
 Augusta . " 
 this be too much for the good nature even of Aunt Emmeline . whatever 
 may have be the truth as to the love affair , however innocent Ayala 
 may have be in that matter , or however guilty Tom , such word 
 from a niece to her aunt,--from a dependent to her superior,--were 
 unpardonable . the extreme youthfulness of the girl , a peculiar look 
 of childhood which she still have with she , make the feeling so much 
 the strong . " you be bad than Augusta ! " 
 and this be say to she who be specially conscious of her 
 endeavour to mitigate Augusta 's just anger . she bridle up , and 
 try to look big and knit her brow . at that moment she could not 
 think what must be the end of it , but she feel that Ayala must be 
 crush . " how dare you speak to I like that , ' miss ' ? " she say . 
 " so you be . it be very cruel . Tom will go on say all this 
 nonsense to I , and when I come to you you say I encourage he ! I 
 never encourage he . I despise he too much . I do not think my own 
 aunt could have tell I that I encourage any man . no , I do not . you 
 drive I to it , so that I have get to be impertinent . " 
 " you have well go to your room , " say the aunt . then Ayala , lift 
 her head as high as she know how , walk towards the door . " you have 
 well leave that letter with I . " Ayala consider the matter for 
 a moment , and then hand the letter a second time to her aunt . it 
 could be nothing to she who see the letter . she do not want it . 
 have thus give it up she stalk off in silent disdain and go to 
 her chamber . 
 Aunt Emmeline , when she be leave alone , feel herself to be envelop 
 in a cloud of doubt . the desirableness of Tom as a husband first 
 force itself upon her attention , and the undesirableness of Ayala as 
 a wife for Tom . she be perplex at her own folly in not have see 
 that danger of this kind would arise when she first propose to take 
 Ayala into the house . aunt and uncle do not like the marriage of 
 cousin , and the parent of rich child do not , as a rule , approve 
 of marriage with those which be poor . although Ayala have be so 
 violent , Lady Tringle could not rid herself of the idea that her 
 darling boy be go to throw himself away . then her cheek become 
 red with anger as she remember that her Tom have be call a 
 lout,--a stupid lout . there be an ingratitude in the use of such 
 language which be not alleviate even by the remembrance that it 
 tend against that matrimonial danger of which she be so much 
 afraid . Ayala be behave very badly . she ought not to have coax 
 Tom to be her lover , and she certainly ought not to have call Tom a 
 lout . and then Ayala have tell her aunt that she be unjust and bad 
 than Augusta ! it be out of the question that such a state of thing 
 should be endure . Ayala must be make to go away . 
 before the day be over Lady Tringle speak to her son , and be 
 astonish to find that the " lout " be quite in earnest,--so much 
 in earnest that he declare his purpose of marry his cousin in 
 opposition to his father and mother , in opposition even to Ayala 
 herself . he be so much in earnest that he would not be rouse to 
 wrath even when he be tell that Ayala have call he a lout . and 
 then grow upon the mother a feeling that the young man have never be 
 so little loutish before . for there have be , even in her maternal 
 bosom , a feeling that Tom be open to the criticism express on he . 
 Tom have be a hobble - de - hoy , one of those overgrow lad who come 
 late to their manhood , and who be regard by young lady as lout . 
 though he have spend his money only too freely when away , his sister 
 have sometimes say that he could not say " bo to a goose " at home . but 
 now,--now Tom be quite an altered young man . when his own letter be 
 show to he he simply say that he mean to stick to it . when it be 
 represent to he that his cousin would be quite an unfit wife for 
 he he assure his mother that his own opinion on that matter be 
 very different . when his father 's anger be threaten he declare 
 that his father would have no right to be angry with he if he 
 marry a lady . at the word " lout " he simply smile . " she will come to 
 think different from that before she be do with I , " he say , with a 
 smile . even the mother could not but perceive that the young man have 
 be much improve by his love . 
 but what be she to do ? two or three day go on , during which there 
 be no reconciliation between she and Ayala . between Augusta and 
 Ayala no word be speak . message be take to she by Gertrude , 
 the object of which be to induce she to ask her aunt 's pardon . but 
 Ayala be of opinion that her aunt ought to ask her pardon , and could 
 not be beat from it . " why do she say that I encourage he ? " she 
 demand indignantly of Gertrude . " I do not think she do encourage 
 he , " say Gertrude to her mother . this might possibly be true , but 
 not the less have she misbehave . and though she might not yet have 
 encourage her lover it be only too probable that she might do so 
 when she find that her lover be quite in earnest . 
 Lady Tringle be much harass . and then there come an additional 
 trouble . Gertrude inform her mother that she have engage herself 
 to Mr. Francis Houston , and that Mr. Houston be go to write to 
 her father with the object of propose himself as a son - in - law . Mr. 
 Houston come also to herself , and tell she , in the most natural tone 
 in the world , that he intend to marry her daughter . she have not 
 know what to say . it be Sir Thomas who manage all matter of 
 money . she have an idea that Mr. Houston be very poor . but then so 
 also have be Mr. Traffick , who have be receive into the family 
 with open arm . but then Mr. Traffick have a career , whereas Mr. 
 Houston be lamentably idle . she could only refer Mr. Houston to Sir 
 Thomas , and beg he not to come among they any more till Sir Thomas 
 have decide . upon this Gertrude also get angry , and shut herself up 
 in her room . the apartment Ruperti be , therefore , upon the whole , 
 an uncomfortable home to they . 
 letter upon letter be write to Sir Thomas , and letter upon 
 letter come . the first letter have be about Ayala . he have be 
 much more tender towards Ayala than her aunt have be . he talk 
 of calf - love , and say that Tom be a fool ; but he have not at once 
 think it necessary to give imperative order for Tom 's return . as 
 to Ayala 's impudence , he evidently regard it as nothing . it be not 
 till Aunt Emmeline have speak out in her third letter that he seem 
 to recognise the possibility of get rid of Ayala altogether . and 
 this he do in answer to a suggestion which have be make to he . " if 
 she like to change with her sister Lucy , and you like it , I shall 
 not object , " say Sir Thomas . then there come an order to Tom that 
 he should return to Lombard Street at once ; but this order have be 
 render abortive by the sudden return of the whole family . Sir 
 Thomas , in his first letter as to Gertrude , have declare that the 
 Houston marriage would not do at all . then , when he be tell that 
 Gertrude and Mr. Houston have certainly meet each other more than once 
 since an order have be give for their separation , he desire the 
 whole family to come back at once to Merle Park . 
 the proposition as to Lucy have arise in this wise . Tom be in the 
 same house with Ayala , of course have she very much at advantage , and 
 would carry on his suit in spite of any abuse which she might lavish 
 upon he . it be quite in vain that she call he lout . " you will 
 think very different from that some of these day , Ayala , " he say , 
 more seriously . 
 " no , I shall not ; I shall think always the same . " 
 " when you know how much I love you , you will change . " 
 " I do not want you to love I , " she say ; " and if you be anything 
 that be good you would not go on after I have tell you so often . it be 
 not manly of you . you have bring I to all manner of trouble . it be 
 your fault , but they make I suffer . " 
 after that Ayala again go to her aunt , and on this occasion the 
 family misfortune be discuss in more seemly language . Ayala be 
 still indignant , but she say nothing insolent . Aunt Emmeline be 
 still averse to her niece , but she abstain from crimination . they 
 know each as enemy , but recognise the wisdom of keep the peace . 
 " as for that , Aunt Emmeline , " Ayala say , " you may be quite sure that 
 I shall never encourage he . I shall never like he well enough . " 
 " very well . then we need say no more about that , my dear . of course , 
 it must be unpleasant to we all , be in the same house together . " 
 " it be very unpleasant to I , when he will go on bother I like 
 that . it make I wish that I be anywhere else . " 
 then Aunt Emmeline begin to think about it very seriously . it be 
 very unpleasant . Ayala have make herself disagreeable to all the 
 lady of the family , and only too agreeable to the young gentleman . 
 nor do the manifest favour of Sir Thomas do much towards raise 
 Ayala in Lady Tringle 's estimation . Sir Thomas have only laugh when 
 Augusta have be request to go upstairs for the scrap - book . Sir 
 Thomas have be profuse with his present even when Ayala have be 
 most persistent in her misbehaviour . and then all that affair of the 
 Marchesa , and even Mr. Traffick 's infatuation ! if Ayala wish that 
 she be somewhere else would it not be well to indulge her wish ! 
 Aunt Emmeline certainly wish it . " if you think so , perhaps some 
 arrangement can be make , " say Aunt Emmeline , very slowly . 
 " what arrangement ? " 
 " you must not suppose that I wish to turn you out ? " 
 " but what arrangement ? " 
 " you see , Ayala , that unfortunately we have not all of we hit it off 
 nicely ; have we ? " 
 " not at all , Aunt Emmeline . Augusta be always angry with I . and 
 you,--you think that I have encourage Tom . " 
 " I be say nothing about that , Ayala . " 
 " but what arrangement be it , Aunt Emmeline ? " the matter be one of 
 fearful import to Ayala . she be prudent enough to understand that 
 well . the arrangement must be one by which she would be banish from 
 all the wealth of the Tringles . her come among they have not be a 
 success . she have already make they tired of she by her petulance and 
 independence . young as she be she could see that , and comprehend the 
 material injury she have do herself by her folly . she have be very 
 wrong in tell Augusta to go upstairs . she have be wrong in the 
 triumph of her exclusive visit to the Marchesa . she have be wrong 
 in walk away with Mr. Traffick on the Pincian . she could see that . 
 she have not be wrong in regard to tom,--except in call he a 
 lout ; but whether wrong or right she have be most unfortunate . but 
 the thing have be do , and she must go . 
 at this moment the wealth of the Tringles seem to be more to she 
 than it have ever be before,--and her own poverty and destitution 
 seem to be more absolute . when the word " arrangement " be whisper 
 to she there come upon she a clear idea of all that which she be 
 to lose . she be to be banish from Merle Park , from Queen 's Gate , 
 and from Glenbogie . for she there be to be no more carriage , and 
 horse , and pretty trinkets;--none of that abandon of the luxury 
 of money among which the tringle live . but she have do it for 
 herself , and she would not say a word in opposition to the fate which 
 be before she . " what arrangement , aunt ? " she say again , in a voice 
 which be intend to welcome any arrangement that might be make . 
 then her aunt speak very softly . " of course , dear Ayala , we do not 
 wish to do less than we at first intended . but as you be not happy 
 here-- " then she pause , almost ashamed of herself . 
 " I be not happy here , " say Ayala , boldly . 
 " how would it be if you be to change,--with Lucy ? " 
 the idea which have be present to Lady Tringle for some week past 
 have never strike Ayala . the moment she hear it she feel that she 
 be more than ever bind to assent . if the home from which she be 
 to be banish be good , then would that good fall upon Lucy . Lucy 
 would have the carriage and the horse and the trinket , Lucy , who 
 certainly be not happy at Kingsbury Crescent . " I should be very 
 glad , indeed , " say Ayala . 
 her voice be so brave and decide that , in itself , it give fresh 
 offence to her aunt . be there to be no regret after so much 
 generosity ? but she misunderstood the girl altogether . as the word 
 be come from her lips,--"i should be very glad , indeed,"--Ayala 's 
 heart be sink with tenderness as she remember how much after 
 all have be do for she . but as they wish she to go there should 
 be not a word , not a sign of unwillingness on her part . 
 " then perhaps it can be arrange , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " I do not know what Uncle Dosett may say . perhaps they be very fond 
 of Lucy now . " 
 " they would not wish to stand in her way , I should think . " 
 " at any rate , I will not . if you , and my uncle , and Aunt Margaret , will 
 consent , I will go whenever you choose . of course I must do just as 
 I be tell . " 
 Aunt Emmeline make a faint demur to this ; but still the matter be 
 hold to be arrange . letter be write to Sir Thomas , and letter 
 come , and at last even Sir Thomas have assent . he suggest , in 
 the first place , that all the fact which would follow the exchange 
 should be explain to Ayala ; but he be oblige after a while to 
 acknowledge that this would be inexpedient . the girl be willing ; and 
 know no doubt that she be to give up the great wealth of her present 
 home . but she have prove herself to be an unfit participator , and it 
 be well that she should go . 
 then the departure of they all from Rome be hurry on by the 
 indiscretion of Gertrude . Gertrude declare that she have a right to 
 her lover . as to his have no income , what matter for that . everyone 
 know that Septimus Traffick have no income . Papa have income enough for 
 they all . Mr. Houston be a gentleman . till this moment no one have 
 know of how strong a will of her own Gertrude be possess . when 
 Gertrude declare that she would not consent to be separate from Mr. 
 Houston then they be all hurried home . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 the EXCHANGE . 
 such be the state of thing when Mr. Dosett bring the three 
 letter home with he to Kingsbury Crescent , have be so much 
 disturb by the content of the two which be address to himself 
 as to have find himself compel to leave his office two hour 
 before the proper time . the three letter be hand together by her 
 uncle to Lucy , and she , see the importance of the occasion , read 
 the two open one before she break the envelope of her own . that from 
 Sir Thomas come first , and be as follows;-- 
    Lombard Street , January , 187 - - . 
    MY DEAR dosett , 
    I have have a correspondence with the lady at Rome which 
    have be painful in its nature , but which I have well 
    perhaps communicate to you at once . Ayala have not get on 
    as well with Lady Tringle and the girl as might have be 
    wish , and they all think it will be well that she and 
    Lucy should change place . I chiefly write to give my 
    assent . your sister will no doubt write to you . I may as 
    well mention to you , should you consent to take charge of 
    Ayala , that I have make some provision for she in my will , 
    and that I shall not change it . I have to add on my own 
    account that I have no complaint of my own to make against 
    Ayala . 
    your sincerely , 
    T. TRINGLE . 
 Lucy , when she have read this , proceed at once to the letter from 
 her aunt . the matter to she be one of terrible importance , but the 
 importance be quite as great to Ayala . she have be allow to go 
 up alone into her own room . the letter be of such a nature that 
 she could hardly have read they calmly in the presence of her Aunt 
 Dosett . it be thus that her Aunt Emmeline have written;-- 
    Palazzo Ruperti , Rome , Thursday . 
    MY DEAR REGINALD , 
    I be sure you will be sorry to hear that we be in great 
    trouble here . this have become so bad that we be oblige 
    to apply to you to help we . now you must understand that 
    I do not mean to say a word against dear ayala;--only she 
    do not suit . it will occur sometimes that people who 
    be most attach to each other do not suit . so it have 
    be with dear Ayala . she be not happy with we . she have 
    not perhaps accommodate herself to her cousin quite as 
    carefully as she might have do . she be fully as sensible 
    of this as I be , and be , herself , persuade that there have 
    well be a change . 
    now , my dear Reginald , I be quite aware that when poor 
    Egbert die it be I who choose Ayala , and that you take 
    Lucy partly in compliance with my wish . now I write to 
    suggest that there should be a change . I be sure you will 
    give I credit for a desire to do the good I can for both 
    the poor dear girl . I do think that this might be well 
    do by let Ayala come to we . I now think that Lucy 
    would do well with her cousin , and that Ayala would be 
    more attractive without the young people around she . 
    when I see you I will tell you everything . there have be 
    no great fault . she have speak a word or two to I which 
    have be well unsaid , but I be well convinced that it 
    have come from hot temper and not from a bad heart . perhaps 
    I have well tell you the truth . Tom have admire she . she 
    have behave very well ; but she could not bear to be speak 
    to , and so there have be unpleasantness . and the girl 
    certainly have not get on well together . Sir Thomas quite 
    agree with I that if you will consent there have well 
    be a change . 
    I will not write to dear Lucy herself because you and 
    Margaret can explain it all so much better,--if you will 
    consent to our plan . Ayala also will write to her sister . 
    but pray tell she from I that I will love she very dearly 
    if she will come to I . and indeed I have love Ayala 
    almost as though she be my own , only we have not be 
    quite able to hit it off together . 
    of course neither have Sir Thomas or have I any idea of 
    escape from a responsibility . I should be quite unhappy 
    if I do not have one of poor dear Egbert 's girl with I . 
    only I do think that Lucy would be the good for we ; and 
    Ayala think so too . I should be quite unhappy if I be 
    do this in opposition to Ayala . 
    we shall be in England almost as soon as this letter , and 
    I should be so glad if this could be decide at once . if 
    a thing like this be to be do it be so much well for 
    all party that it should be do quickly . pray give my 
    good love to Margaret , and tell she that Ayala shall bring 
    everything with she that she want . 
    your most affectionate sister , 
    EMMELINE TRINGLE . 
 the letter , though it be much long than her uncle 's , go into 
 detail , such as that of Tom 's unfortunate passion for his cousin , 
 have less effect upon Lucy , as it do not speak with so much authority 
 as that from Sir Thomas . what Sir Thomas say would surely be do ; 
 whereas Aunt Emmeline be only a woman , and her letter , unsupported , 
 might not have carry conviction . but , if Sir Thomas wish it , 
 surely it must be do . then , at last , come Ayala 's letter;-- 
    Rome , Thursday . 
    DEAREST , DEAREST LUCY , 
    oh , I have such thing to write to you ! Aunt Emmeline have 
    tell it all to Uncle Reginald . you be to come and be the 
    princess , and I be to go and be the milkmaid at home . I be 
    quite content that it should be so because I know that it 
    will be the good . you ought to be a princess and I ought 
    to be a milkmaid . 
    it have be come almost ever since the first day that I 
    come among them,--since I tell Augusta to go upstairs for 
    the scrap - book . I feel from the very moment in which the 
    word be utter that I have go and do for myself . 
    but I be not a bit sorry , as you will come in my place . 
    Augusta will very soon be go now , and Aunt Emmeline 
    be not bad at all if you will only not contradict she . 
    I always contradict she , and I know that I have be a 
    fool . but I be not a bit sorry , as you be to come instead 
    of I . 
    but it be not only about Augusta and Aunt Emmeline . there 
    have be that oaf Tom . poor Tom ! I do believe that he be 
    the most good - natured fellow alive . and if he have not so 
    many chain I should not dislike he so very much . but he 
    will go on say horrible thing to I . and then he write 
    I a letter ! oh dear ! I take the letter to Aunt Emmeline , 
    and that make the quarrel . she say that I have -- encourage 
    he ! oh , Lucy , if you will think of that ! I be so angry 
    that I say ever so much to her,--till she send I out of 
    the room . she have no business to say that I encourage 
    he . it be shameful ! but she have never forgive I , 
    because I scold she . so they have decide among they 
    that I be to be send away , and that you be to come in my 
    place . 
    my own darling Lucy , it will be ever so much well . I 
    know that you be not happy in Kingsbury Crescent , and 
    that I shall bear it very much well . I can sit still and 
    mend sheet . 
 Poor Ayala , how little she know herself ! 
    and you will make a beautiful grand lady , quiescent and 
    dignified as a grand lady ought to be . at any rate it 
    would be impossible that I should remain here . Tom be bad 
    enough , but to be tell that I encourage he be more than I 
    can bear . 
    I shall see you very soon , but I can not help write and 
    tell it to you all . give my love to Aunt Dosett . if she 
    will consent to receive I I will endeavour to be good to 
    she . in the meantime good - bye . 
    your most affectionate sister , 
    AYALA . 
 when Lucy have complete the reading of the letter she sit for a 
 considerable time wrap in thought . there be , in truth , very much 
 that require thinking . it be propose that the whole tenour of 
 her life should be change , and change in a direction which would 
 certainly suit her taste . she have acknowledge to herself that she 
 have hat the comparative poverty of her Uncle Dosett 's life , hat 
 herself in that she be compel to make such acknowledgment . but 
 there have be more than the poverty which have be distasteful to 
 her,--a something which she have be able to tell herself that she 
 might be justify in hat without shame . there have be to her an 
 absence of intellectual charm in the habit and manner of Kingsbury 
 Crescent which she have regard as unfortunate and depressing . there 
 have be no thought of art delight . no one read poetry . no one hear 
 music . no one look at picture . a sheet to be darn be the one 
 thing of great importance . the due development of a leg of mutton , 
 the stretching of a pound of butter , the good way of repress the 
 washerwoman 's bills,--these have be the matter of interest . and 
 they have not be make the less irritate to she by her aunt 's 
 extreme goodness in the matter . the leg of mutton be to be develop 
 in the absence of her uncle,--if possible without his knowledge . he 
 be to have his run of clean linen . Lucy do not grudge he anything , 
 but be sicken by that partnership in economy which be establish 
 between she and her aunt . undoubtedly from time to time she have 
 thought of the luxury which have be throw in Ayala 's way . there 
 have be a regret,--not that Ayala should have they but that she 
 should have miss they . money she declare that she despised;--but 
 the easy luxury of the bijou be sweet to her memory . 
 now it be suggest to she suddenly that she be to exchange the 
 poverty for the luxury , and to return to a mode of life in which 
 her mind might be devoted to thing of beauty . the very scenery of 
 glenbogie,--what a charm it would have for she ! judge from her 
 uncle 's manner , as well as she could during that moment in which he 
 hand to she the letter , she imagine that he intend to make no 
 great objection . her aunt dislike she . she be sure that her aunt 
 dislike she in spite of the partnership . only that there be one 
 other view of the case -- how happy might the transfer be . her uncle 
 be always gentle to she , but there could hardly as yet have grow up 
 any strong affection for she . to he she be grateful , but she could 
 not tell herself that to part from he would be a pang . there be , 
 however , another view of the case . 
 Ayala ! how would it be with Ayala ! would Ayala like the partnership 
 and the economy ? would Ayala be cheerful as she sit opposite to 
 her aunt for four hour at a time ! Ayala have say that she could sit 
 still and mend sheet , but be it not manifest enough that Ayala know 
 nothing of the life of which she be speak . and would she , Lucy , 
 be able to enjoy the glory of Glenbogie while she think that 
 Ayala be eat out her heart in the sad companionship of Kingsbury 
 Crescent ? for above an hour she sit and think ; but of one aspect 
 which the affair bore she do not think . she do not reflect that she 
 and Ayala be in the hand of Fate , and that they must both do as 
 their elder should require of they . 
 at last there come a knock at the door , and her aunt enter . she 
 would soon that it should have be her uncle : but there be no 
 choice but that the matter should be now discuss with the woman 
 whom she do not love,--this matter that be so dreadful to herself 
 in all its bearing , and so dreadful to one for whom she would 
 willingly sacrifice herself if it be possible ! she do not know 
 what she could say to create sympathy with Aunt Dosett . " Lucy , " say 
 Aunt Dosett , " this be a very serious proposal . " 
 " very serious , " say Lucy , sternly . 
 " I have not read the letter , but your uncle have tell I about it . " 
 then Lucy hand she the two letter , keep that from Ayala to 
 herself , and she sit perfectly still while her aunt read they both 
 slowly . " your Aunt Emmeline be certainly in earnest , " say Mrs. 
 Dosett . 
 " Aunt Emmeline be very good - natured , and perhaps she will change she 
 mind if we tell she that we wish it . " 
 " but Sir Thomas have agree to it . " 
 " I be sure my uncle will give way if Aunt Emmeline will ask he . 
 he say he have no complaint to make against Ayala . I think it be 
 Augusta , and Augusta will be marry , and will go away very soon . " 
 then there come a change , a visible change , over the countenance of 
 Aunt Dosett , and a softening of the voice,--so that she look and 
 speak as Lucy have not see or hear she before . there be people 
 apparently so hard , so ungenial , so unsympathetic , that they who only 
 half know they expect no trait of tenderness , think that feature 
 so little alluring can not be compatible with softness . Lucy have 
 acknowledge her Aunt Dosett to be good , but believe she to be 
 incapable of be touch . but a word or two have now conquer 
 she . the girl do not want to leave her,--did not seize the first 
 opportunity of run from her poverty to the splendour of the 
 Tringles ! " but , Lucy , " she say , and come and place herself nearer 
 to Lucy on the bed . 
 " Ayala-- , " say Lucy , sob . 
 " I will be kind to her,--perhaps kind than I have be to you . " 
 " you have be kind , and I have be ungrateful . I know it . but I 
 will do well now , Aunt Dosett . I will stay , if you will have I . " 
 " they be rich and powerful , and you will have to do as they direct . " 
 " no ! who be they that I should be make to come and go at their 
 bidding ? they can not make I leave you . " 
 " but they can rid themselves of Ayala . you see what your uncle say 
 about money for Ayala . " 
 " I hate money . " 
 " money be a thing which none of we can afford to hate . do you think 
 it will not be much to your Uncle Reginald to know that you be both 
 provide for ? already he be wretched because there will be nothing to 
 come to you . if you go to your Aunt Emmeline , Sir Thomas will do for 
 you as he have do for Ayala . Dear Lucy , it be not that I want to 
 send you away . " then for the first time Lucy put her arm round her 
 aunt 's neck . " but it have well be as be propose , if your aunt still 
 wish it , when she come home . I and your Uncle Reginald would not 
 do right be we to allow you to throw away the prospect that be 
 offer you . it be natural that Lady Tringle should be anxious about 
 her son . " 
 " she need not , in the least , " say Lucy , indignantly . 
 " but you see what they say . " 
 " it be his fault , not her . why should she be punish ? " 
 " because he be Fortune 's favourite , and she be not . it be no good 
 kicking against the prick , my dear . he be his father 's son and heir , 
 and everything must give way to he . " 
 " but Ayala do not want he . Ayala despise he . it be too hard that 
 she be to lose everything because a young man like that will go on 
 make himself disagreeable . they have no right to do it after have 
 accustom Ayala to such a home . do not you feel that , Aunt Dosett ? " 
 " I do feel it . " 
 " however it might have be arrange at first , it ought to remain 
 now . even though Ayala and I be only girl , we ought not to be 
 change about as though we be horse . if she have do anything 
 wrong,--but Uncle Tom say that she have do nothing wrong . " 
 " I suppose she have speak to her aunt disrespectfully . " 
 " because her aunt tell she that she have encourage this man . what 
 would you have a girl say when she be falsely accuse like that ? 
 would you say it to I merely because some horrid man would come and 
 speak to I ? " then there come a slight pang of conscience as she 
 remember Isadore Hamel in Kensington Gardens . if the man be not 
 think to be horrid , then perhaps the speaking might be a sin worthy 
 of most severe accusation . 
 there be nothing more say about it that night , nor till the 
 following afternoon , when Mr. Dosett return home at the usual 
 hour from his office . then Lucy be closet with he for a 
 quarter - of - an - hour in the drawing - room . he have be into the City and 
 see Sir Thomas . Sir Thomas have be of opinion that it would be much 
 well that Lady Tringle 's wish should be obey . it be quite true 
 that he himself have no complaint to make against Ayala , but he do 
 think that Ayala have be pert ; and , though it might be true that 
 Ayala have not encourage Tom , there be no knowing what might grow 
 out of such a propensity on Tom 's part . and then it could not be 
 pleasant to Lady Tringle or to himself that their son should be 
 banish out of their house . when something be hint as to the 
 injustice of this , Sir Thomas endeavour to put all that right by 
 declare that , if Lady Tringle 's wish could be attend to in 
 this matter , provision would be make for the two girl . he certainly 
 would not strike Ayala 's name out of his will , and as certainly would 
 not take Lucy under his wing as his own child without make some 
 provision for she . look at the matter in this light he do not 
 think that Mr. Dosett would be justify in rob Lucy of the 
 advantage which be offer to she . with this view Mr. Dosett find 
 himself compel to agree , and with these argument he declare to 
 Lucy that it be her duty to submit herself to the propose exchange . 
 early in February all the Tringle family be in Queen 's Gate , and 
 Lucy on her first visit to the house find that everyone , include 
 Ayala , look upon the thing as settle . Ayala , who under these 
 circumstance be live on affectionate term with all the Tringles , 
 except Tom , be quite radiant . " I suppose I have well go to - morrow , 
 aunt ? " she say , as though it be a matter of most trivial 
 consequence . 
 " in a day or two , Ayala , it will be well . " 
 " it shall be Monday , then . you must come over here in a cab , Lucy . " 
 " the carriage shall be send , my dear . " 
 " but then it must go back with I , Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " it shall , my dear . " 
 " and the horse must be put up , because Lucy and I must change all 
 our thing in the drawer . " Lucy at the time be sit in the 
 drawing - room , and Augusta , with most affectionate confidence , be 
 sing to she all the praise of Mr. Traffick . in this way it be 
 settle , and the change , so greatly affect the fortune of our two 
 sister , be arrange . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 AYALA and her AUNT MARGARET . 
 till the last moment for go Ayala seem to be childish , 
 triumphant , and indifferent . but , till that last moment , she be 
 never alone with Lucy . it be the presence of her aunt and cousin 
 which sustain she in her hardihood . Tom be never there,--or 
 so rarely as not to affect she greatly . in London he have his own 
 lodging , and be not encourage to appear frequently till Ayala 
 should have go . but Aunt Emmeline and Gertrude be perseveringly 
 gracious , and even Augusta have somewhat relaxed from her wrath . with 
 they Ayala be always good - humour , but always brave . she affect 
 to rejoice at the change which be to be make . she speak of Lucy 's 
 come and of her own go as an unmixed blessing . this she do so 
 effectually as to make Aunt Emmeline declare to Sir Thomas , with 
 tear in her eye , that the girl be heartless . but when , at the 
 moment of parting , the two girl be together , then Ayala break 
 down . 
 they be in the room , together , which one have occupy and the other 
 be to occupy , and their box be still upon the floor . though less 
 than six month have pass since Ayala have come among the rich thing 
 and Lucy have be among the poor , Ayala 's belonging have become 
 much more important than her sister 's . though the Tringles have be 
 unpleasant they have be generous . Lucy be sit upon the bed , 
 while Ayala be now move about the room restlessly , now cling 
 to her sister , and now sob almost in despair . " of course I know , " 
 she say . " what be the use of tell story about it any long ? " 
 " it be not too late yet , Ayala . if we both go to Uncle Tom he will 
 let we change it . " 
 " why should it be change ? if I could change it by lift up my 
 little finger I could not do it . why should it not be you as well 
 as I ? they have try I , and,--as Aunt Emmeline says,--i have not 
 suit . " 
 " Aunt Dosett be not ill - natured , my darling . " 
 " no , I dare say not . it be I that be bad . it be bad to like pretty 
 thing and money , and to hate poor thing . or , rather , I do not 
 believe it be bad at all , because it be so natural . I believe it be 
 all a lie as to its be wicked to love rich . I love they , whether 
 it be wicked or not . " 
 " oh , Ayala ! " 
 " do not you ? do not let we be hypocritical , Lucy , now at the last 
 moment . do you like the way in which they live in Kingsbury 
 Crescent ? " 
 Lucy pause before she answer . " I like it well than I do , " she 
 say . " at any rate , I would willingly go back to Kingsbury Crescent . " 
 " yes,--for my sake . " 
 " indeed I would , my pet . " 
 " and for your sake I would rather die than stay . but what be the good 
 of talk about it , Lucy . you and I have no voice in it , though 
 it be all about ourselves . as you say , we be like two tame bird , 
 who have to be move from one cage into another just as the owner 
 please . we belong either to Uncle Tom or Uncle Dosett , just as they 
 like to settle it . oh , Lucy , I do so wish that I be dead . " 
 " Ayala , that be wicked . " 
 " how can I help it , if I be wicked ? what be I to do when I get there ? 
 what be I to say to they ? how be I to live ? Lucy , we shall never see 
 each other . " 
 " I will come across to you constantly . " 
 " I mean to do so , but I do not . they be two world , mile asunder . 
 Lucy , will they let Isadore Hamel come here ? " Lucy blush and 
 hesitate . " I be sure he will come . " 
 Lucy remember that she have give her friend her address at Queen 's 
 Gate , and feel that she would seem to have do it as though she 
 have know that she be about to be transfer to the other uncle 's 
 house . " it will make no difference if he do , " she say . 
 " oh , I have such a dream,--such a castle - in - the - air ! if I could think 
 it might ever be so , then I should not want to die . " 
 " what do you dream ? " but Lucy , though she ask the question , know 
 the dream . 
 " if you have a little house of your own , oh , ever so tiny ; and if you 
 and he-- ? " 
 " there be no he . " 
 " there might be . and , if you and he would let I have any corner for 
 myself , then I should be happy . then I would not want to die . you 
 would , would not you ? " 
 " how can I talk about it , Ayala ? there be not such a thing . but 
 yet,--but yet ; oh , Ayala , do you not know that to have you with I 
 would be well than anything ? " 
 " no;--not well than anything;--second well . he would be good . I do 
 so hope that he may be ' he . ' come in . " there be a knock at the door , 
 and Aunt Emmeline , herself , enter the room . 
 " now , my dear , the horse be stand there , and the man be come 
 up for the luggage . Ayala , I hope we shall see you very often . and 
 remember that , as regard anything that be unpleasant , bygone shall 
 be bygone . " then there be a crowd of farewell kiss , and in a few 
 minute Ayala be alone in the carriage on her road up to Kingsbury 
 Crescent . 
 the thing have be do so quickly that hitherto there have hardly 
 be time for tear . to Ayala herself the most remarkable matter in 
 the whole affair have be Tom 's persistence . he have , at last , be 
 allow to bring they home from Rome , there have be no other 
 gentleman whose service be available for the occasion . he have be 
 watch on the journey very closely , and have have no slant in his 
 favour , as the young lady to whom he be devoted be quite as anxious 
 to keep out of his way as have be the other of the party to 
 separate they . but he have make occasion , more than once , sufficient 
 to express his intention . " I do not mean to give you up , you know , " he 
 have say to she . " when I say a thing I mean it . I be not go to be 
 put off by my mother . and as for the governor he would not say a word 
 against it if he think we be both in earnest . " 
 " but I be not in earnest , " say Ayala ; " or rather , I be very much in 
 earnest . " 
 " so be I. that be all I have get to say just at present . " from this 
 there grow up within her mind a certain respect for the " lout , " 
 which , however , make he more disagreeable to she than he might have 
 be have he be less persistent . 
 it be late in the afternoon , not much before dinner , when Ayala 
 reach the house in Kingsbury Crescent . Hitherto she have know 
 almost nothing of her Aunt Dosett , and have never be intimate even 
 with her uncle . they , of course , have hear much of she , and have be 
 lead to suppose that she be much less tractable than the simple Lucy . 
 this feeling have be so strong that Mr. Dosett himself would hardly 
 have be lead to sanction the change have it not be for that promise 
 from Sir Thomas that he would not withdraw the provision he have make 
 for Ayala , and would do as much for Lucy if Lucy should become an 
 inmate of his family . Mrs. Dosett have certainly be glad to welcome 
 any change , when a change be propose to she . there have grow up 
 something of affection at the last moment , but up to that time she 
 have certainly dislike her niece . Lucy have appear to she to be at 
 first idle and then sullen . the girl have seem to affect a high 
 nature than her own , and have be wilfully indifferent to the little 
 thing which have give to her life whatever interest it possess . 
 Lucy 's silence have be a reproach to she , though she herself have 
 be able to do so little to abolish the silence . perhaps Ayala might 
 be well . 
 but they be both afraid of Ayala,--as they have not be afraid of 
 Lucy before her arrival . they make more of preparation for she in 
 their own mind , and , as to their own conduct , Mr. Dosett be there 
 himself to receive she , and be conscious in do so that there have 
 be something of failure in their intercourse with Lucy . Lucy have 
 be allow to come in without preparation , with an expectation that 
 she would fall easily into her place , and there have be failure . 
 there have be no regular consultation as to this new coming , but 
 both Mr. and Mrs. Dosett be conscious of an intended effort . 
 Lady Tringle and Mr. Dosett have always be Aunt Emmeline and 
 Uncle Reginald , by reason of the nearness of their relationship . 
 circumstance of close intercourse have cause Sir Thomas to be Uncle 
 Tom . but Mrs. Dosett have never become more than Aunt Dosett to either 
 of the girl . this in itself have be matter almost of soreness to 
 she , and she have intend to ask Lucy to adopt the more endearing 
 form of her christian name ; but there have be so little endearment 
 between they that the moment for do so have never come . she be 
 think of all this up in her own room , preparatory to the reception 
 of this other girl , while Mr. Dosett be bid she welcome to 
 Kingsbury Crescent in the drawing - room below . 
 Ayala have be dissolve in tear during the drive round by 
 Kensington to bayswater , and be hardly able to repress her sob as 
 she enter the house . " my dear , " say the uncle , " we will do all 
 that we can to make you happy here . " 
 " I be sure you will ; but -- but -- it be so sad come away from Lucy . " 
 " Lucy I be sure will be happy with her cousin . " if Lucy 's happiness 
 be make to depend on her cousin , think Ayala , it would not be 
 well assure . " and my sister Emmeline be always good - natured . " 
 " Aunt Emmeline be very good , only-- " 
 " only what ? " 
 " I do not know . but it be such a sudden change , Uncle Reginald . " 
 " yes , it be a very great change , my dear . they be very rich and we 
 be poor enough . I should hardly have consent to this , for your 
 sake , but that there be reason which will make it well for you 
 both . " 
 " as to that , " say Ayala , stoutly , " I have to come away . I do not 
 suit . " 
 " you shall suit we , my dear . " 
 " I hope so . I will try . I know more now than I do then . I think I 
 be to be Augusta 's equal . " 
 " we shall all be equal here . " 
 " People ought to be equal , I think,--except old people and young 
 people . I will do whatever you and my aunt tell I . there be no 
 young people here , so there will not be any trouble of that kind . " 
 " there will be no other young person , certainly . you shall go 
 upstairs now and see your aunt . " 
 then there be the interview upstairs , which consist chiefly in 
 promise and kiss , and Ayala be leave alone to unpack her box and 
 prepare for dinner . before she begin her operation she sit still for 
 a few moment , and with an effort collect her energy and make she 
 resolution . she have say to Lucy in her passion that she would that 
 she be dead . that that should have be wicked be not matter of 
 much concern to she . but she acknowledge to herself that it have be 
 weak and foolish . there be her life before she , and she would still 
 endeavour to be happy though there have be so much to distress she . 
 she have fling away wealth . she be determined to fle it away still 
 when it should present itself to she in the shape of her cousin Tom . 
 but she have her dreams,--her day - dreams,--those castle in the air 
 which it have be the delight of her life to construct , and in the 
 building of which her hour have never run heavy with she . Isadore 
 Hamel would , of course , come again , and would , of course , marry Lucy , 
 and then there would be a home for she after her own heart . with 
 Isadore as her brother , and her own own Lucy close to she , she would 
 not feel the want of rich and of luxury . if there be only some 
 intellectual charm in her life , some touch of art , some devotion 
 to thing beautiful , then she could do without gold and silver and 
 costly raiment . of course , Isadore would come ; and then -- then -- in the 
 far distance , something else would come , something of which in her 
 castle - building she have not yet develop the form , of which she do 
 not yet know the bearing , or the manner of its beauty , or the music 
 of its voice ; but as to which she be very sure that its form would 
 be beautiful and its voice full of music . it can hardly be say that 
 this something be the centre of her dream , or the foundation of 
 her castle . it be the extreme point of perfection at which she 
 would arrive at last , when her thought have become sublimate by the 
 intensity of her thinking . it be the tower of the castle from which 
 she could look down upon the inferior world below,--the last point 
 of the dream in arrange which she would all but escape from earth 
 to heaven,--when in the moment of her escape the cruel wake back 
 into the world would come upon she . but this she knew,--that this 
 something , whatever might be its form or whatever its voice , would be 
 exactly the opposite of Tom Tringle . 
 she have fall away from her resolution to her dream for a time , 
 when suddenly she jump up and begin her work with immense energy . 
 Open go one box after another , and in five minute the room be 
 strew with her possession . the modest set of drawer which be to 
 supply all her want be fill with immediate haste . thing be 
 deposit in whatever nook might be find , and every corner be 
 utilize . her character for tidiness have never stand high . at the 
 bijou Lucy , or her mother , or the favourite maid , have always be at 
 hand to make good her deficiency with a reproach which have never 
 go beyond a smile or a kiss . at Glenbogie and even on the journey 
 there have be attendant lady 's maid . but here she be all alone . 
 everything be still in confusion when she be call to dinner . as 
 she go down she recall to herself her second resolution . she 
 would be good;--whereby she intimate to herself that she would 
 endeavour to do what might be pleasing to her Aunt Dosett . she have 
 little doubt as to her uncle . but she be aware that there have be 
 difference between her aunt and Lucy . if Lucy have find it difficult 
 to be good how great would be the struggle require from she ! 
 she sit herself down at table a little near to her aunt than her 
 uncle , because it be specially her aunt whom she wish to win , and 
 after a few minute she put out her little soft hand and touch 
 that of Mrs. Dosett . " my dear , " say that lady . " I hope you will be 
 happy . " 
 " I be determined to be happy , " say Ayala , " if you will let I love 
 you . " 
 Mrs. Dosett be not beautiful , nor be she romantic . in appearance 
 she be the very reverse of Ayala . the care of the world , the 
 look after shilling and their result , have give she that look of 
 commonplace insignificance which be so frequent and so unattractive 
 among middle - aged woman upon whom the world lean heavily . but there 
 be a tender corner in her heart which be still green , and from 
 which a little rill of sweet water could be make to flow when it 
 be touch aright . on this occasion a tear come to her eye as 
 she press her niece 's hand ; but she say nothing . she be sure , 
 however , that she would love Ayala much well than she have be able 
 to love Lucy . 
 " what would you like I to do ? " ask Ayala , when her aunt 
 accompany she that night to her bed room . 
 " to do , my dear ? what do you generally do ? " 
 " nothing . I read a little and draw a little , but I do nothing useful . 
 I mean it to be different now . " 
 " you shall do as you please , Ayala . " 
 " oh , but I mean it . and you must tell I . of course thing have to be 
 different . " 
 " we be not rich like your uncle and aunt Tringle . " 
 " perhaps it be well not to be rich , so that one may have something 
 to do . but I want you to tell I as though you really care for I . " 
 " I will care for you , " say Aunt Dosett , sob . 
 " then first begin by tell I what to do . I will try and do it . of 
 course I have think about it , come away from all manner of rich 
 thing ; and I have determine that it shall not make I unhappy . I 
 will rise above it . I will begin to - morrow and do anything if you 
 will tell I . " then Aunt Dosett take she in her arm and kiss she , 
 and declare that on the morrow they would begin their work together 
 in perfect confidence and love with each other . 
 " I think she will do well than Lucy , " say Mrs. Dosett to her 
 husband that night . 
 " Lucy be a dear girl too , " say Uncle Reginald . 
 " oh , yes;--quite so . I do not mean to say a word against Lucy ; but I 
 think that I can do well with Ayala . she will be more diligent . " 
 Uncle Reginald say nothing to this , but he could not but think that 
 of the two Lucy would be the one most likely to devote herself to 
 hard work . 
 on the next morning Ayala go out with her aunt on the round to the 
 shopkeeper , and listen with profound attention to the domestic 
 instruction which be give to she on the occasion . when she come 
 home she know much of which she have know nothing before . what be 
 the price of mutton , and how much mutton she be expect as one of 
 the family to eat per week ; what be the necessity of the house in 
 bread and butter , how far a pint of milk might be stretched,--with a 
 proper understanding that her Uncle Reginald as head of the family 
 be to be subject to no limit . and before their return from that 
 walk,--on the first morning of Ayala 's sojourn,--Ayala have undertake 
 always to call Mrs. Dosett Aunt Margaret for the future . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 TOM TRINGLE come to the CRESCENT . 
 during the next three month , up to the end of the winter and through 
 the early spring , thing go on without any change either in Queen 's 
 Gate or Kingsbury Crescent . the sister see each other occasionally , 
 but not as frequently as either of they have intend . Lucy be not 
 encourage in the use of cab , nor be the carriage lent to she often 
 for the purpose of go to the Crescent . the reader may remember 
 that she have be in the habit of walk alone in Kensington 
 Gardens , and a walk across Kensington Gardens would carry she the 
 great part of the distance to Kingsbury Crescent . but Lucy , in 
 her new circumstance , be not advised,--perhaps , I may say , be 
 not allowed,--to walk alone . Lady Tringle , be a lady of rank and 
 wealth , be afraid , or pretend to be afraid , of the lion . poor 
 Ayala be really afraid of the lion . thus it come to pass that the 
 intercourse be not frequent . in her daily life Lucy be quiet and 
 obedient . she do not run counter to Augusta , whose approach 
 nuptial give she that predominance in the house which be always 
 accord to young lady in her recognise position . Gertrude be at 
 this time a subject of trouble at Queen 's Gate . Sir Thomas have not 
 be get to approve of Mr. Frank Houston , and Gertrude have positively 
 refuse to give he up . Sir Thomas be , indeed , considerably trouble 
 by his child . there have be a period of disagreeable obstinacy 
 even with Augusta before Mr. Traffick have be take into the bosom 
 of the family . now Gertrude have her own idea , and so also have 
 Tom . Tom have become quite a trouble . Sir Thomas and Lady Tringle , 
 together , have determine that Tom must be wean ; by which they mean 
 that he must be cure of his love . but Tom have altogether refuse to 
 be wean . Mr. Dosett have be request to deny he admittance to 
 the house in Kingsbury Crescent , and as this request have be fully 
 endorse by Ayala herself order have be give to the effect to the 
 parlour - maid . Tom have call more than once , and have be unable to 
 obtain access to his beloved . but yet he resolutely refuse to be 
 wean . he tell his father to his face that he intend to marry 
 Ayala , and abuse his mother roundly when she attempt to interfere . 
 the whole family be astound by his perseverance , so that there have 
 already spring up an idea in the mind of some among the Tringles 
 that he would be successful at last . Augusta be very firm , declare 
 that Ayala be a viper . but Sir Thomas , himself , begin to inquire , 
 within his own bosom , whether Tom should not be allow to settle 
 down in the manner desire by himself . in no consultation hold at 
 Queen 's Gate on the subject be there the slight expression of an 
 opinion that Tom might be deny the opportunity of settle down as 
 he wish through any unwillingness on the part of Ayala . 
 when thing be in this position , Tom seek an interview one 
 morning with his father in Lombard Street . they rarely see each other 
 at the office , each have his own peculiar branch of business . Sir 
 Thomas manipulate his million in a little back room of his own , 
 while Tom , deal probably with limited thousand , make himself 
 useful in an outer room . they never go to , or leave , the office 
 together , but Sir Thomas always take care to know that his son 
 be or be not on the premise . " I want to say a word or two , Sir , 
 about -- about the little affair of mine , " say Tom . 
 " what affair ? " say Sir Thomas , look up from his million . 
 " I think I should like to -- marry . " 
 " the good thing you can do , my boy ; only it depend upon who the 
 young lady may be . " 
 " my mind be make up about that , Sir ; I mean to marry my cousin . I 
 do not see why a young man be not to choose for himself . " then Sir 
 Thomas preach his sermon , but preach it in the manner which man 
 be will not to use when they know that they be preach in vain . there 
 be a tone of refusal , which , though the word use may be manifestly 
 enough word of denial , be in itself indicative of assent . Sir Thomas 
 end the conference by take a week to think over the matter , and 
 when the week be over give way . he be still inclined to think that 
 marriage with cousin have well be avoid ; but he give way , and at 
 last promise that if Tom and Ayala be of one mind an income should 
 be forthcoming . 
 for the carrying out of this purpose it be necessary that the door 
 of Uncle Dosett 's house should be unlocked , and with the object of 
 turn the key Sir Thomas himself call at the Admiralty . " I find 
 my boy be quite in earnest about this , " he say to the Admiralty 
 clerk . 
 " oh ; indeed . " 
 " I can not say I quite like it myself . " Mr. Dosett could only shake his 
 head . " Cousins have well be cousin , and nothing more . " 
 " and then you would probably expect he to get money ? " 
 " not at all , " say Sir Thomas , proudly . " I have get money enough for 
 they both . it be not an affair of money . to make a long story short , 
 I have give my consent ; and , therefore , if you do not mind , I shall 
 be glad if you will allow Tom to call at the Crescent . of course , 
 you may have your own view ; but I do not suppose you can hope to do 
 well for the girl . cousin do marry , you know , very often . " Mr. 
 Dosett could only say that he could not expect to do anything for the 
 girl nearly so good , and that , as far as he be concern , his nephew 
 Tom should be make quite welcome at Kingsbury Crescent . it be not , 
 he add , in his power to answer for Ayala . as to this , Sir Thomas 
 do not seem to have any doubt . the good thing of the world , which 
 it be in his power to offer , be so good , that it be hardly 
 probable that a young lady in Ayala 's position should refuse they . 
 " my dear , " say Aunt Margaret , the next morning , speak in her most 
 suasive tone , " your Cousin Tom be to be allow to call here . " 
 " Tom Tringle ? " 
 " yes , my dear . Sir Thomas have consent . " 
 " then he have well not , " say Ayala , bristle up in hot anger . 
 " Uncle Tom have get nothing to do with it , either in refuse or 
 consent . I will not see he . " 
 " I think you must see he if he call . " 
 " but I do not want . oh , Aunt Margaret , pray make he not come . I 
 do not like he a bit . we be do so very well . be we not , Aunt 
 Margaret ? " 
 " certainly , my dear , we be do very well;--at least , I hope so . 
 but you be old enough now to understand that this be a very serious 
 matter . " 
 " of course it be serious , " say Ayala , who certainly be not guilty 
 of the fault of make light of her future life . those dream of 
 her , in which be contain all her hope and all her aspiration , 
 be very serious to she . this be so much the case that she have 
 by no mean thought of her Cousin Tom in a light spirit , as though 
 he be a matter of no moment to she . he be to she just what the 
 Beast must have be to the Beauty , when the Beast first begin to 
 be in love . but her safety have consist in the fact that no one 
 have approve of the Beast be in love with she . now she could 
 understand that all the horror of oppression might fall upon she . of 
 course it be serious ; but not the less be she resolve that nothing 
 should induce she to marry the Beast . 
 " I think you ought to see he when he come , and to remember how 
 different it will be when he come with the approval of his father . 
 it be , of course , say that they be ready to welcome you as their 
 daughter . " 
 " I do not want to be anybody 's daughter . " 
 " but , Ayala , there be so many thing to be think of . here be a 
 young man who be able to give you not only every comfort but great 
 opulence . " 
 " I do not want to be opulent . " 
 " and he will be a baronet . " 
 " I do not care about baronet , Aunt Margaret . " 
 " and you will have a house of your own in which you may be of service 
 to your sister . " 
 " I have rather she should have a house . " 
 " but Tom be not in love with Lucy . " 
 " he be such a lout ! Aunt Margaret , I will not have anything to say to 
 he . I would a great deal soon die . Uncle Tom have no right to send 
 he here . they have get rid of I , and I be very glad of it ; but 
 it be not fair that he should come after I now that I be go away . 
 could not Uncle Reginald tell he to stay away ? " 
 a great deal more be say , but nothing that be say have the 
 slight effect on Ayala . when she be tell of her dependent 
 position , and of the splendour of the prospect offer , she declare 
 that she would rather go into the poor - house than marry her cousin . 
 when she be tell that Tom be good - nature , honest , and true , she 
 declare that good - nature , honesty , and truth have nothing to do with 
 it . when she be ask what it be that she look forward to in the 
 world she could merely sob and say that there be nothing . she could 
 not tell even her sister Lucy of those dream and castle . how , then , 
 could she explain they to her Aunt Margaret ? how could she make she 
 aunt understand that there could be no place in her heart for Tom 
 Tringle see that it be to be keep in reserve for some angel of 
 light who would surely make his appearance in due season,--but who 
 must still be there , present to she as her angel of light , even 
 should he never show himself in the flesh . how vain it be to talk 
 of Tom Tringle to she , when she have so visible before her eye that 
 angel of light with whom she be compel to compare he ! 
 but , though she could not be bring to say that she would listen 
 patiently to his story , she be nevertheless make to understand that 
 she must see he when he come to she . Aunt Margaret be very full on 
 that subject . a young man who be approve of by the young lady 's 
 friend , and who have mean at command , be , in Mrs. Dosett 's opinion , 
 entitle to a hearing . how otherwise be properly authorise 
 marriage to be make up and arrange ? when this be go on there 
 be in some slight degree a diminished sympathy between Ayala and her 
 aunt . Ayala still continue her household duties,--over which , in the 
 privacy of her own room , she groan sadly ; but she continue they 
 in silence . her aunt , upon whom she have count , be , she think , 
 turn against she . Mrs. Dosett , on the other hand , declare to 
 herself that the girl be romantic and silly . husband with every 
 immediate comfort , and a prospect of almost unlimited wealth , be not 
 to be find under every hedge . what right could a girl so dependent 
 as Ayala have to refuse an eligible match ? she therefore in this way 
 become an advocate on behalf of Tom,--as do also Uncle Reginald , 
 more mildly . Uncle Reginald merely remark that Tom be attend 
 to his business , which be a great thing in a young man . it be not 
 much , but it show Ayala that in this matter her uncle be her 
 enemy . in this , her terrible crisis , she have not a friend , unless it 
 might be Lucy . 
 then a day be fix on which Tom be to come , which make the matter 
 more terrible by anticipation . " what can be the good ? " Ayala say to 
 her aunt when the hour name for the interview be tell she , " as I 
 can tell he everything just as well without his come at all . " but 
 all that have be settle . Aunt Margaret have repeat over and over 
 again that such an excellent young man as Tom , with such admirable 
 intention , be entitle to a hearing from any young lady . in reply 
 to this Ayala simply make a grimace , which be intend to signify 
 the utter contempt in which she hold her cousin Tom with all his 
 wealth . 
 Tom Tringle , in spite of his ring and a certain dash of vulgarity , 
 which be , perhaps , not altogether his own fault , be not a bad 
 fellow . have take it into his heart that he be very much in love 
 he be very much in love . he picture to himself a happiness of a 
 wholesome cleanly kind . to have the girl as his own , to caress she 
 and foster she , and expend himself in make she happy ; to exalt she , 
 so as to have it acknowledge that she be , at any rate , as important 
 as Augusta ; to learn something from she , so that he , too , might 
 become romantic , and in some degree poetical;--all this have come 
 home to he in a not ignoble manner . but it have not come home to he 
 that Ayala might probably refuse he . Hitherto Ayala have be very 
 persistent in her refusal ; but then hitherto there have exist the 
 opposition of all the family . now he have overcome that , and he feel 
 therefore that he be entitle to ask and to receive . 
 on the day fix , and at the hour fix , he come in the plenitude of 
 all his ring . poor Tom ! it be a pity that he should have have no 
 one to advise he as to his apparel . Ayala hat his jewelry . she 
 be not quite distinct in her mind as to the raiment which would be 
 wear by the angel of light when he should come , but she be sure 
 that he would not be chiefly conspicuous for heavy gilding ; and Tom , 
 moreover , have a waistcoat which would of itself have be suicidal . 
 such as he be , however , he be show up into the drawing - room , where 
 he find Ayala alone . it be certainly a misfortune to he that no 
 preliminary conversation be possible . Ayala have be instruct 
 to be there with the express object of listen to an offer of 
 marriage . the work have to be done,--and should be do ; but it would 
 not admit of other ordinary courtesy . she be very angry with 
 he , and she look her anger . why should she be subject to this 
 terrible annoyance ? he have sense enough to perceive that there be no 
 place for preliminary courtesy , and therefore rush away at once to 
 the matter in hand . " Ayala ! " he exclaim , come and stand before 
 she as she sit upon the sofa . 
 " Tom ! " she say , look boldly up into his face . 
 " Ayala , I love you well than anything else in the world . " 
 " but what be the good of it ? " 
 " of course it be different when I tell you so before . I mean to 
 stick to it , and I be determined that the governor should give way . 
 but you could not know that . Mother and the girl be all against 
 we . " 
 " they be not against I , " say Ayala . 
 " they be against our be marry , and so they squeeze you out 
 as it be . that be why you have be send to this place . but they 
 understand I now , and know what I be about . they have all give 
 their consent , and the governor have promise to be liberal . when he 
 say a thing he will do it . there will be lot of money . " 
 " I do not care a bit about money , " say Ayala , fiercely . 
 " no more do i,--except only that it be comfortable . it would not do to 
 marry without money,--would it ? " 
 " it would do very well if anybody care for anybody . " the angel of 
 light generally appear " in formâ pauperis , " though there be always 
 about he a tinge of bright azure which be hardly compatible with 
 the draggle - tail hue of everyday poverty . 
 " but an income be a good thing , and the governor will come down like 
 a brick . " 
 " the governor have nothing to do with it . I tell you before that it 
 be all nonsense . if you will only go away and say nothing about it I 
 shall always think you very good - natured . " 
 " but I will not go away , " say Tom speak out boldly , " I mean to stick 
 to it . Ayala , I do not believe you understand that I be thoroughly in 
 earnest . " 
 " why should not I be in earnest , too ? " 
 " but I love you , Ayala . I have set my heart upon it . you do not know 
 how well I love you . I have quite make up my mind about it . " 
 " and I have make up my mind . " 
 " but ayala-- " now the tenor of his face change , and something of the 
 look of a despair lover take the place of that offensive triumph 
 which have at first sit upon his brow . " I do not suppose you care for 
 any other fellow yet . " 
 there be the angel of light . but even though she might be most 
 anxious to explain to he that his suit be altogether impracticable 
 she could say nothing to he about the angel . though she be sure 
 that the angel would come , she be not certain that she would ever 
 give herself altogether even to the angel . the celestial castle 
 which be ever be build in her imagination be as yet very much 
 complicated . but have it be ever so clear it would have be quite 
 impossible to explain anything of this to her cousin Tom . " that have 
 nothing to do with it , " she say . 
 " if you know how I love you ! " this come from he with a sob , and as 
 he sob he go down before she on his knee . 
 " do not be a fool , tom,--pray do not . if you will not get up I shall go 
 away . I must go away . I have hear all that there be to hear . I tell 
 they that there be no use in your coming . " 
 " Ayala ! " with this there be veritable sob . 
 " then why do not you give it up and let we be good friend . " 
 " I can not give it up . I will not give it up . when a fellow mean it as I 
 do he never give it up . nothing on earth shall make I give it up . 
 Ayala , you have get to do it , and so I tell you . " 
 " nobody can make I , " say Ayala , nod her head , but somewhat 
 tame by the unexpected passion of the young man . 
 " then you will not say one kind word to I ? " 
 " I can not say anything kind . " 
 " very well . then I shall go away and come again constantly till you 
 do . I mean to have you . when you come to know how very much I love 
 you I do think you will give way at last . " with that he pick 
 himself up from the ground and hurry out of the house without 
 say another word . 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 " would you ? " 
 the scene describe in the last chapter take place in March . for 
 three day afterwards there be quiescence in Kingsbury Crescent . 
 then there come a letter from Tom to Ayala , very pressing , full of 
 love and resolution , offer to wait any time,--even a month,--if 
 she wish it , but still persist in his declare intention of 
 marry she soon or later;--not by any mean a bad letter have 
 there not be about it a little touch of bombast which make it 
 odious to Ayala 's sensitive appreciation . to this . Ayala write a 
 reply in the follow word : 
    when I tell you that I will not , you ought not to go on . it 
    be not manly . 
    AYALA . 
    pray do not write again for I shall never answer another . 
 of this she say nothing to Mrs. Dosett , though the arrival of Tom 's 
 letter must have be know to that lady . and she post her own 
 epistle without a word as to what she be do . 
 she write again and again to Lucy implore her sister to come to 
 she , urge that as circumstance now be she could not show herself 
 at the house in Queen 's Gate . to these Lucy always reply ; but she 
 do not reply by come , and hardly make it intelligible why she do 
 not come . Aunt Emmeline hop , she say , that Ayala would very soon 
 be able to be at Queen 's Gate . then there be a difficulty about the 
 carriage . no one would walk across with she except Tom ; and walk 
 by herself be forbid . Aunt Emmeline do not like cab . then there 
 come a third or fourth letter , in which Lucy be more explanatory , 
 but yet not sufficiently so . during the Easter recess , which would 
 take place in the middle of April , Augusta and Mr. Traffick would 
 be marry . the happy couple be to be bless with a divide 
 honeymoon . the interval between Easter and Whitsuntide would require 
 Mr. Traffick 's presence in the House , and the bride with her 
 bridegroom be to return to Queen 's Gate . then they would depart 
 again for the second holiday , and when they be so go Aunt 
 Emmeline hop that Ayala would come to they for a visit . " they quite 
 understand , " say Lucy , " that it will not do to have you and augusta 
 together . " 
 this be not at all what Ayala want . " it will not at all do to have I 
 and he together , " say Ayala to herself , allude of course to Tom 
 Tringle . but why do not Lucy come over to she ? Lucy , who know so 
 well that her sister do not want to see any one of the Tringles , who 
 must have be sure that any visit to Queen 's Gate must have be 
 impossible , ought to have come to she . to whom else could she say 
 a word in her trouble ? it be thus that Ayala argue with herself , 
 declare to herself that she must soon die in her misery,--unless 
 indeed that angel of light might come to her assistance very quickly . 
 but Lucy have trouble of her own in reference to the family at 
 Queen 's Gate , which do , in fact , make it almost impossible to visit 
 her sister for some week . Sir Thomas have give an unwilling but a 
 frank consent to his son 's marriage,--and then expect simply to be 
 tell that it would take place at such and such a time , when money 
 would be require . Lady Tringle have give she consent,--but not quite 
 frankly . she still would fain have forbid the bann , have any power 
 of forbid remain in her hand . Augusta be still hot against 
 the marriage , and still resolute to prevent it . that propose journey 
 upstairs after the scrap - book at Glenbogie , that real journey up to 
 the top of St. Peter 's , still rankle in her heart . that Tom should 
 make Ayala a future baronet 's wife ; that Tom should endow Ayala with 
 the great share of the Tringle wealth ; that Ayala should become 
 powerful in Queen 's Gate , and dominant probably at Merle Park and 
 glenbogie,--wa wormwood to she . she be conscious that Ayala be 
 pretty and witty , though she could affect to despise the wit and the 
 prettiness . by instigate her mother , and by induce Mr. Traffick 
 to interfere when Mr. Traffick should be a member of the family , 
 she think that she might prevail . with her mother she do in part 
 prevail . her future husband be at present too much engage with 
 Supply and Demand to be able to give his thought to Tom 's affair . 
 but there would soon be a time when he naturally would be compel 
 to divide his thought . then there be Gertrude . Gertrude 's own 
 affair have not as yet be smile upon , and the want of smile she 
 attribute very much to Augusta . why should Augusta have her way and 
 not she , Gertrude , nor her brother Tom ? she therefore league herself 
 with Tom , and declare herself quite prepared to receive Ayala into 
 the house . in this way the family be very much divide . 
 when Lucy first make her petition for the carriage , express she 
 desire to see Ayala , both her uncle and her aunt be in the room . 
 objection be made,--some frivolous objection,--by Lady Tringle , who 
 do not in truth care to maintain much connection between Queen 's 
 Gate and the Crescent . then Sir Thomas , in his burly authoritative 
 way , have say that Ayala have well come to they . that same evening 
 he have settle or intend to settle it with his wife . let Ayala come 
 as soon as the Trafficks,--as they then would be,--should have go . 
 to this Lady Tringle have assent , know more than her husband as 
 to Ayala 's feeling , and think that in this way a breach might be 
 make between they . Ayala have be a great trouble to she , and she be 
 begin to be almost sick of the Dormer connection altogether . it 
 be thus that Lucy be hinder from see her sister for six week 
 after that first formal declaration of his love make by Tom to Ayala . 
 Tom have still persevere and have force his way more than once into 
 Ayala 's presence , but Ayala 's answer have be always the same . " it be 
 a great shame , and you have no right to treat I in this , way . " 
 then come the Traffick marriage with great éclat . there be no less 
 than four Traffick bridesmaid , all of they no doubt noble , but none 
 of they very young , and Gertrude and Lucy be bridesmaids,--and two 
 of Augusta 's friend . Ayala , of course , be not of the party . Tom be 
 gorgeous in his apparel , not in the least depressed by his numerous 
 repulse , quite confident of ultimate success , and proud of his 
 position as a lover with so beautiful a girl . he talk of his 
 affair to all his friend , and seem to think that even on this 
 wedding - day his part be as conspicuous as that of his sister , 
 because of his affair with his beautiful cousin . " Augusta do not hit 
 it off with she , " he say to one of his friend , who ask why Ayala 
 be not at the wedding,--"augusta be the big fool out , you know . 
 she be proud of her husband because he be the son of a lord . I would not 
 change Ayala for the daughter of any duchess in europe;"--thus 
 show that he regard Ayala as be almost his own already . Lord 
 Boardotrade be there , make a semi - jocose speech , quite in the 
 approve way for a cognate paterfamilia . perhaps there be something 
 of a thorn in this to Sir Thomas , as it have become apparent at last 
 that Mr. Traffick himself do not purpose to add anything from his 
 own resource to the income on which he intend to live with his 
 wife . Lord Boardotrade have be oblige to do so much for his eld 
 son that there appear to be nothing leave for the member for Port 
 Glasgow . Sir Thomas be prepare with his £ 120,000 , and do not 
 perhaps mind this very much . but a man , when he pay his money , like 
 to have some return for it , and he do not quite like the tone with 
 which the old nobleman , not possess of very old standing in the 
 peerage , seem to imply that he , like a noble old providence , have 
 envelop the whole Tringle family in the mantle of his noble blood . 
 he combine the jocose and the paternal in the manner appropriate to 
 such occasion ; but there do run through Sir Thomas 's mind as he 
 hear he an idea that £ 120,000 be a sufficient sum to pay , and that 
 it might be necessary to make Mr. Traffick understand that out of the 
 income thenceforth come he must provide a house for himself and his 
 wife . it have be already arrange that he be to return to Queen 's 
 Gate with his wife for the period between Easter and Whitsuntide . 
 it have lately,--quite lately,--been hint to Sir Thomas that the 
 married pair would run up again after the second holiday . Mr. 
 Septimus Traffick have once speak of Glenbogie as almost all his own , 
 and Augusta have , in her father 's hearing , say a word intend to be 
 very affectionate about " dear Merle Park . " Sir Thomas be a father 
 all over , with all a father 's feeling ; but even a father do not 
 like to be do . Mr. Traffick , no doubt , be a member of Parliament 
 and son of a peer;--but there might be a question whether even Mr. 
 Traffick have not be purchase at quite his full value . 
 nevertheless the marriage be pronounce to have be a success . 
 immediately after it,--early , indeed , on the follow morning,--sir 
 Thomas inquire when Ayala be come to Queen 's Gate . " be it 
 necessary that she should come quite at present ? " ask Lady Tringle . 
 " I think it be all settle , " say Sir Thomas , angrily . this have 
 be say in the privacy of his own dressing - room , but downstairs 
 at the breakfast - table , in the presence of Gertrude and Lucy , he 
 return to the subject . Tom , who do not live in the house , be 
 not there . " I suppose we might as well have Ayala now , " he say , 
 address himself chiefly to Lucy . " do you go and manage it with 
 she . " there be not a word more say . Sir Thomas do not always have 
 his own way in his family . what man be ever happy enough to do that ? 
 but he be seldom directly contradict . Lady Tringle when the order 
 be give purse up her lip , and he , have he be observant , might 
 have know that she do not intend to have Ayala if she could help 
 it . but he be not observant,--except as to million . 
 when Sir Thomas be go , Lady Tringle discuss the matter with 
 Lucy . " of course , my dear , " she say , " if we could make dear Ayala 
 happy-- " 
 " I do not think she will come , Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " not come ! " this be not say at all in a voice of anger , but simply 
 as elicit some further expression of opinion . 
 " she be afraid of -- Tom . " Lucy have never hitherto express a positive 
 opinion on that matter at Queen 's Gate . when Augusta have speak of 
 Ayala as have run after Tom , Lucy have be indignant , and have 
 declare that the running have be all on the other side . in a side 
 way she have hint that Ayala , at any rate at present , be far from 
 favourable to Tom 's suit . but she have never yet speak out her mind 
 at Queen 's Gate as Ayala have speak it to she . 
 " Afraid of he ? " say Aunt Emmeline . 
 " I mean that she be not a bit in love with he , and when a girl be 
 like that I suppose she be -- be afraid of a man , if everybody else 
 want she to marry he . " 
 " why should everybody want she to marry Tom ? " ask Lady Tringle , 
 indignantly . " I be sure I do not want she . " 
 " I suppose it be Uncle Tom , and Aunt Dosett , and Uncle Reginald , " 
 say poor Lucy , find that she have make a mistake . 
 " I do not see why anybody should want she to marry Tom . Tom be carry 
 away by her baby face , and make a fool of himself . as to everybody 
 want she , I hope she do not flatter herself that there be 
 anything of the kind . " 
 " I only mean that I think she would rather not be bring here , 
 where she would have to see he daily . " 
 after this the loan of the carriage be at last make , and Lucy be 
 allow to visit her sister at the Crescent . " have he be there ? " be 
 almost the first question that Ayala ask . 
 " what he do you mean ? " 
 " Isadore Hamel . " 
 " no ; I have not see he since I meet he in the Park . but I do not 
 want to talk about Mr. Hamel , Ayala . Mr. Hamel be nothing . " 
 " oh , Lucy . " 
 " he be nothing . have he be anything , he have go , and there would be 
 an end to it . but he be nothing . " 
 " if a man be true he may go , but he will come back . " Ayala have she 
 idea about the angel of light very clearly impressed upon her mind 
 in regard to the conduct of the man , though they be terribly 
 vague as to his personal appearance , his condition of life , his 
 appropriateness for marriage , and many other detail of his 
 circumstance . it have also often occur to she that this angel of 
 light , when he should come , might not be in love with herself,--and 
 that she might have to die simply because she have see he and love 
 he in vain . but he would be a man sure to come back if there be 
 fitting reason that he should do so . Isadore Hamel be not quite an 
 angel of light , but he be nearly angelic,--at any rate very good , 
 and surely would come back . 
 " never mind about Mr. Hamel , Ayala . it be not nice to talk about a 
 man who have never speak a word . " 
 " never speak a word ! oh , Lucy ! " 
 " Mr. Hamel have never speak a word , and I will not talk about he . 
 there ! all my heart be open to you , Ayala . you know that . but I will 
 not talk about Mr. Hamel . Aunt Emmeline want you to come to Queen 's 
 Gate . " 
 " I will not . " 
 " or rather it be Sir Thomas who want you to come . I do like Uncle 
 Tom . I do , indeed . " 
 " so do I. " 
 " you ought to come when he ask you . " 
 " why ought I ? that lout would be there,--of course . " 
 " I do not know about his be a lout , Ayala . " 
 " he come here , and I have to be perfectly brutal to he . you can not 
 guess the sort of thing I say to he , and he do not mind it a bit . 
 he think that he have to go on long enough , and that I must give way 
 at last . if I be to go to Queen 's Gate it would be just as much as 
 to say that I have give way . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " Lucy ! " 
 " why not ? he be not bad . he be honest , and true , and kind - hearted . I 
 know you can not be happy here . " 
 " no . " 
 " Aunt Dosett , with all her affair , must be trouble to you . I could 
 not bear they patiently . how can you ? " 
 " because they be well than Tom Tringle . I read somewhere about 
 there be seven house of the Devil , each one be low and bad 
 than the other . Tom would be the lowest,--the lowest,--the low . " 
 " Ayala , my darling . " 
 " do not tell I that I ought to marry Tom , " say Ayala , almost 
 stand off in anger from the proferred kiss . " do you think that I 
 could love he ? " 
 " I think you could if you try , because he be loveable . it be so 
 much to be good , and then he love you truly . after all , it be 
 something to have everything nice around you . you have not be make 
 to be poor and uncomfortable . I fear that it must be bad with you 
 here . " 
 " it be bad . " 
 " I wish I could have stay , Ayala . I be more tranquil than you , and 
 could have bear it well . " 
 " it be bad . it be one of the houses,--but not the low . I can eat 
 my heart out here , peaceably , and die with a great needle in my hand 
 and a towel in my lap . but if I be to marry he I should kill 
 myself the first hour after I have go away with he . thing ! what 
 would thing be with such a monster as that lean over one ? would 
 you marry he ? " in answer to this , Lucy make no immediate reply . " why 
 do not you say ? you want I to marry he . would you ? " 
 " no . " 
 " then why should I ? " 
 " I could not try to love he . " 
 " try ! how can a girl try to love any man ? it should come because she 
 can not help it , let she try ever so . try to love Tom Tringle ! why 
 can not you try ? " 
 " he do not want I . " 
 " but if he do ? I do not suppose it would make the least difference to 
 he which it be . would you try if he ask ? " 
 " no . " 
 " then why should I ? be I so much a poor creature than you ? " 
 " you be a fine creature . you know that I think so . " 
 " I do not want to be finer . I want to be the same . " 
 " you be free to do as you please . I be not -- quite . " 
 " that mean Isadore Hamel . " 
 " I try to tell you all the truth , Ayala ; but pray do not talk about 
 he even to I . as for you , you be free ; and if you could-- " 
 " I can not . I do not know that I be free , as you call it . " then Lucy 
 start , as though about to ask the question which would naturally 
 follow . " you need not look like that , Lucy . there be not any one to be 
 name . " 
 " a man not to be name ? " 
 " there be not a man at all . there be not anybody . but I may have my 
 own idea if I please . if I have an Isadore Hamel of my own I could 
 compare Tom or Mr. Traffick , or any other lout to he , and could say 
 how infinitely high in the order of thing be my Isadore than 
 any of they . though I have not an Isadore can not I have an image ? and 
 can not I make my image bright , even high , than Isadore ? you will not 
 believe that , of course , and I do not want you to believe it yourself . 
 but you should believe it for I . my image can make Tom Tringle just 
 as horrible to I as Isadore Hamel can make he to you . " thus it be 
 that Ayala endeavour to explain to her sister something of the 
 castle which she have build in the air , and of the angel of light who 
 inhabit the castle . 
 then it be decide between they that Lucy should explain to Aunt 
 Emmeline that Ayala could not make a prolonged stay at Queen 's Gate . 
 " but how shall I say it ? " ask Lucy . 
 " tell she the truth , openly . ' Tom want to marry Ayala , and Ayala 
 will not have he . therefore , of course , she can not come , because it 
 would look as though she be go to change her mind,--which she 
 be not . ' Aunt Emmeline will understand that , and will not be a bit 
 sorry . she do not want to have I for a daughter - in - law . she have 
 quite enough of I at Rome . " 
 all this time the carriage be wait , and Lucy be oblige to 
 return before half of all that be necessary have be say . what be 
 to be Ayala 's life for the future ? how be the sister to see each 
 other ? what be to be do when , at the end of the come summer , 
 Lucy should be take first to Glenbogie and then to Merle Park ? 
 there be a support in any excitement , though it be in the excitement 
 of sorrow only . at the present moment Ayala be keep alive by the 
 necessity of her battle with Tom Tringle , but how would it be with 
 she when Tom should have give up the fight ? Lucy know , by sad 
 experience , how great might be the tedium of life in Kingsbury 
 Crescent , and know , also , how unfitted Ayala be to endure it . there 
 seem to be no prospect of escape in future . " she know nothing of 
 what I be suffer , " say Ayala , " when she give I the thing to 
 do , and tell I of more thing , and more , and more ! how can there 
 be so many thing to be do in such a house as this ? " but as Lucy 
 be endeavour to explain how different be the arrangement in 
 Kingsbury Crescent from those which have prevail at the bijou , the 
 offend coachman send up word to say that he do not think Sir Thomas 
 would like it if the horse be keep out in the rain any long . 
 then Lucy hurry down , not have speak of half the thing which 
 be down in her mind on the list for discussion . 
 CHAPTER XIII . 
 how the tringles fall into TROUBLE . 
 after the Easter holiday the Trafficks come back to Queen 's Gate , 
 make a combination of honeymoon and business which do very well 
 for a time . it be understand that it be to be so . during honeymoon 
 time the fashionable married couple be always lodge and generally 
 board for nothing . that opening wide of generous hand , which 
 exhibit itself in the joyous enthusiasm of a come marriage , take 
 the shape of a houseful of present , of a gorgeous and ponderous 
 trousseau , of a splendid marriage feast , and not unfrequently of 
 subsidiary present from the opulent papa,--present which be 
 subsidiary to the grand substratum of settle dowry,--generously 
 extend itself to luxurious provision for a month or two . that Mr. 
 and Mrs. Traffick should come back to Queen 's Gate for the six week 
 intervene between Easter and Whitsuntide have be arrange , and 
 arrange also that the use of Merle Park , for the Whitsun holiday , 
 should be allow to they . this last boon Augusta , with her sweetest 
 kiss , have obtain from her father only two day before the wedding . 
 but when it be suggest , just before the departure to Merle Park , 
 that Mr. Traffick 's unnecessary boot might be leave at Queen 's Gate , 
 because he would come back there , then Sir Thomas , who have think 
 over the matter , say a word . 
 it be in this way . " Mamma , " say Augusta , " I suppose I can leave a 
 lot of thing in the big wardrobe . Jemima say I can not take they to 
 Merle Park without ever so many extra trunk . " 
 " certainly , my dear . when anybody occupy the room , they will not want 
 all the wardrobe . I do not know that any one will come this summer . " 
 this be only the thin end of the wedge , and , as Augusta feel , be 
 not introduce successfully . the word speak seem to have admit 
 that a return to Queen 's Gate have not be intend . the conversation 
 go no far at the moment , but be recommence the same evening . 
 " Mamma , I suppose Septimus can leave his thing here ? " 
 " of course , my dear ; he can leave anything,--to be take care of . " 
 " it will be so convenient if we can come back,--just for a few day . " 
 now , there certainly have be a lack of confidence between the 
 married daughter and her mother as to a new residence . a word have 
 be speak , and Augusta have say that she suppose they would go 
 to Lord Boardotrade when they leave Queen 's Gate , just to finish the 
 season . now , it be know that his lordship , with his four unmarried 
 daughter , live in a small house in a small street in Mayfair . the 
 locality be no doubt fashionable , but the house be inconvenient . Mr. 
 Traffick , himself , have occupy lodging near the House of Commons , 
 but these have be give up . " I think you must ask your papa , " say 
 Lady Tringle . 
 " could not you ask he ? " say the Honourable Mrs. Traffick . Lady 
 Tringle be drive at last to consent , and then put the question to 
 Sir thomas,--beginne with the suggestion as to the unnecessary 
 boot . 
 " I suppose Septimus can leave his thing here ? " 
 " where do they mean to live when they come back to town ? " ask Sir 
 Thomas , sharply . 
 " I suppose it would be convenient if they could come here for a 
 little time , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " and stay till the end of the season,--and then go down to Glenbogie , 
 and then to Merle Park ! where do they mean to live ? " 
 " I think there be a promise about Glenbogie , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " I never make a promise . I hear Traffick say that he would like 
 to have some shooting,--though , as far as I know , he can not hit a 
 haystack . they may come to Glenbogie for two or three week , if they 
 like , but they shall not stay here during the entire summer . " 
 " you will not turn your own daughter out , Tom . " 
 " I will turn Traffick out , and I suppose he will take his wife with he , " 
 say Sir Thomas , thus close the conversation in wrath . 
 the Trafficks go and come back , and be admit into the bed - room 
 with the big wardrobe , and to the dressing - room where the boot 
 be keep . on the very first day of his arrival Mr. Traffick 
 be in the House at four , and remain there till four the next 
 morning,--certain Irish Members have be very eloquent . he be not 
 down when Sir Thomas leave the next morning at nine , and be again at 
 the House when Sir Thomas come home to dinner . " how long be it to 
 be ? " say Sir Thomas , that night , to his wife . there be a certain 
 tone in his voice which make Lady Tringle feel herself to be ill all 
 over . it must be say , in justice to Sir Thomas , that he do not 
 often use this voice in his domestic circle , though it be well know 
 in Lombard Street . but he use it now , and his wife feel herself to 
 be unwell . " I be not go to put up with it , and he need not think 
 it . " 
 " do not destroy poor Augusta 's happiness so soon . " 
 " that be d----d , " say the father , energetically . " who be go to 
 destroy her happiness . her happiness ought to consist in live in 
 her husband 's house . what have I give she all that money for ? " then 
 Lady Tringle do not dare to say another word . 
 it be not till the third day that Sir Thomas and his son - in - law meet 
 each other . by that time Sir Thomas have get it into his head that his 
 son - in - law be avoid he . but on the Saturday there be no House . 
 it be then just the middle of June,--Saturday , June 15,--and Sir 
 Thomas have consider , at the most , that there would be yet nearly 
 two month before Parliament would cease to sit and the time for 
 Glenbogie would come . he have feed his anger warm , and be determine 
 that he would not be do . " well , Traffick , how be you ? " he say , 
 encounter his son - in - law in the hall , and lead he into the 
 dining - room . " I have not see you since you have be back . " 
 " I have be in the House morning , noon , and night , pretty near . " 
 " I dare say . I hope you find yourself comfortable at Merle Park . " 
 " a charming house,--quite charming . I do not know whether I should not 
 build the stable a little further from-- " 
 " very likely . nothing be so easy as knock other people 's house 
 about . I hope you will soon have one to knock about of your own . " 
 " all in good time , " say Mr. Traffick , smile . 
 Sir Thomas be one of those man who during the course of a successful 
 life have contrive to repress their original roughness , and who 
 make a not ineffectual attempt to live after the fashion of those 
 with whom their wealth and success have throw they . but among such 
 will occasionally be find one whose roughness do not altogether 
 desert he , and who can on an occasion use it with a purpose . such 
 a one will occasionally surprise his latter - day associate by the 
 sudden ferocity of his brow , by the hardness of his voice , and by an 
 apparently unaccustomed use of violent word . the man feel that he 
 must fight , and , not have learn the practice of fine weapon , 
 fight in this way . unskille with foil or rapier he fall back 
 upon the bludgeon with which his hand have not lose all its old 
 familiarity . such a one be Sir Thomas Tringle , and a time for such 
 exercise have seem to he to have come now . there be other man who 
 by the possession of imperturbable serenity seem to be arm equally 
 against rapier and bludgeon , whom there be no wounding with any 
 weapon . such a one be Mr. Traffick . when he be tell of knock 
 about a house of his own , he quite take the meaning of Sir Thomas 's 
 word , and be immediately prepare for the sort of conversation 
 which would follow . " I wish I might;--a Merle Park of my own for 
 instance . if I have go into the city instead of to Westminster it 
 might have come in my way . " 
 " it seem to I that a good deal have come in your way without very 
 much trouble on your part . " 
 " a seat in the House be a nice thing,--but I work hard I take it 
 than you do , Sir Thomas . " 
 " I never have have a shilling but what I earn . when you leave this 
 where be you and Augusta go to live ? " 
 this be a home question , which would have disconcert most 
 gentleman in Mr. Traffick 's position , be it not that gentleman 
 easily disconcert would hardly find themselves there . 
 " where shall we go when we leave this ? you be so kind as to say 
 something about Glenbogie when Parliament be up . " 
 " no , I do not . " 
 " I think I understand it . " 
 " you say something and I do not refuse . " 
 " put it any way you like , Sir Thomas . " 
 " but what do you mean to do before Parliament be up ? the long and the 
 short of it be , we do not expect you to come back after the holiday . 
 I like to be plain . this might go on for ever if I do not speak out . " 
 " and a very comfortable way of go on it would be . " Sir Thomas 
 raise his eyebrow in unaffected surprise , and then again assume 
 his frown . " of course I be think of Augusta chiefly . " 
 " Augusta make up her mind no doubt to leave her father 's house when 
 she marry . " 
 " she show her affection for her parent by wish to remain in it . 
 the fact , I suppose , be , you want the room . " 
 " but even if we do not ? you be not go to live here for ever , I 
 suppose . " 
 " that , Sir , be too good to be think of , I fear . the truth be we 
 have an idea of stay at my father 's . he speak of go down to the 
 country and lend we the house . my sister have make he change his 
 mind and so here we be . of course we can go into lodging . " 
 " or to an hotel . " 
 " too dear ! you see you have make I pay such a sum for insure my 
 life . I will tell you what I will do . if you will let we make it out here 
 till the 10th of July we will go into an hotel then . " Sir Thomas , 
 surprised at his own compliance , do at last give way . " and then we 
 can have a month at Glenbogie from the 12th . " 
 " three week , " say Sir Thomas , shout at the top of his voice . 
 " very well ; three week . if you could have make it the month it would 
 have be convenient ; but I hate to be disagreeable . " thus the matter 
 be settle , and Mr. Traffick be altogether well pleased with the 
 arrangement . 
 " what be we to do ? " say Augusta , with a very long face . " what be 
 we to do when we be make to go away ? " 
 " I hope I shall be able to make some of the girl go down by that 
 time , and then we must squeeze in at my father 's . " 
 this and other matter make Sir Thomas in those day irritable and 
 disagreeable to the family . " Tom , " he say to his wife , " be the 
 big fool that ever live . " 
 " what be the matter with he now ? " ask Lady Tringle , who do not 
 like to have she only son abuse . 
 " he be away half his time , and when he do come he would well be away . 
 if he want to marry that girl why do not he marry she and have do 
 with it ? " 
 now this be a matter upon which Lady Tringle have idea of her own 
 which be become every day strong . " I be sure I should be very 
 sorry to see it , " she say . 
 " why should you be sorry ? be not it the good thing a young man can do ? 
 if he be set his heart that way all the world will not talk he off . I 
 think all that be settle . " 
 " you can not make the girl marry he . " 
 " be that it ? " ask Sir Thomas , with a whistle . " you use to say she 
 be set her cap at he . " 
 " she be one of those girl you do not know what she would be at . she be 
 full of romance and nonsense , and be not half as fond of tell the 
 truth as she ought to be . she make my life a burden to I while she 
 be with we , and I do not think she would be any well for Tom . " 
 " but he be still determine . " 
 " what be the use of that ? " say Lady Tringle . 
 " then he shall have she . I make he a promise and I be not go to 
 give it up . I tell he that if he be in earnest he should have she . " 
 " you can not make a girl marry a young man . " 
 " you have she here , and then we will take she to Glenbogie . now when I 
 say it I mean it . you go and fetch she , and if you do not I will . I be 
 not go to have she turn out into the cold in that way . " 
 " she will not come , Tom . " then he turn round and frown at she . 
 the immediate result of this be that Lady Tringle herself do drive 
 across to Kingsbury Crescent accompany by Gertrude and Lucy , and 
 do make her request in form . " my dear , your uncle particularly want 
 you to come to we for the next month . " Mrs. Dosett be sit by . " I 
 hope Ayala may be allow to come to we for a month . " 
 " Ayala must answer for herself , " say Mrs. Dosett , firmly . there have 
 never be any warm friendship between Mrs. Dosett and her husband 's 
 eld sister . 
 " I can not , " say Ayala , shake her head . 
 " why not , my dear ? " say Lady Tringle . 
 " I can not , " say Ayala . 
 Lady Tringle be not in the least offended or annoy at the refusal . 
 she do not at all desire that Ayala should come to Glenbogie . Ayala 
 at Glenbogie would make her life miserable to she . it would , of 
 course , lead to Tom 's marriage , and then there would be internecine 
 fighting between Ayala and Augusta . but it be necessary that she 
 should take back to her husband some reply;--and this reply , if 
 in the form of refusal , must come from Ayala herself . " your uncle 
 have send I , " say Lady Tringle , " and I must give he some reason . 
 as for expense , you know,"--then she turn to Mrs. Dosett with a 
 smile,--"that of course would be our affair . " 
 " if you ask I , " say Mrs. Dosett , " I think that as Ayala have come 
 to we she have well remain with we . of course thing be very 
 different , and she would be only discontent . " at this Lady Tringle 
 smile her sweetest smile,--as though acknowledge that thing 
 certainly be different,--and then turn to Ayala for a further 
 reply . 
 " Aunt Emmeline , I can not , " say Ayala . 
 " but why , my dear ? can not be not a courteous answer to a request that 
 be mean to be kind . " 
 " speak out , Ayala , " say Mrs. Dosett . " there be nobody here but your 
 aunt . " 
 " because of Tom . " 
 " Tom would not eat you , " say Lady Tringle , again smile . 
 " it be bad than eat I , " say Ayala . " he will go on when I tell 
 he not . if I be down there he would be do it always . and then you would 
 tell I that I -- encourage he ! " 
 Lady Tringle feel this to be unkind and undeserved . those passage 
 in Rome have be very disagreeable to every one concern . the girl 
 certainly , as she think , have be arrogant and impertinent . she have 
 be accept from charity and have then domineer in the family . she 
 have give herself air and have go out into company almost without 
 authority , into company which have reject her,--Lady Tringle . it have 
 become absolutely necessary to get rid of an inmate so troublesome , 
 so unbearable . the girl have be send away,--almost ignominiously . 
 now she , Lady Tringle , the offended aunt , the aunt who have so 
 much cause for offence , have be good enough , gracious enough , to 
 pardon all this , and be again offer the fruition of a portion 
 of her good thing to the sinner . no doubt she be not anxious 
 that the offer should be accept , but not the less be it make 
 graciously,--as she feel herself . in answer to this she have throw 
 back upon she the only hard word she have ever speak to the girl ! 
 " you would not be tell anything of the kind , but you need not come if 
 you do not like it . " 
 " then I do not , " say Ayala , nod her head . 
 " but I do think that after all that have pass , and when I be try 
 to be kind to you , you would have make yourself more pleasant to I . 
 I can only tell your uncle that you say you will not . " 
 " give my love to my uncle , and tell he that I be much oblige to he 
 and that I know how good he be ; but I can't -- because of Tom . " 
 " Tom be too good for you , " exclaim Aunt Emmeline , who could not 
 bear to have her son depreciate even by the girl whom she do not 
 wish to marry he . 
 " I do not say he be not , " say Ayala , burst into tear . " the 
 Archbishop of Canterbury would be too good for I , but I do not want 
 to marry he . " then she get up and run out of the room in order that 
 she might weep over her trouble in the privacy of her own chamber . 
 she be thoroughly convinced that she be be ill - use . no one have 
 a right to tell she that any man be too good for she unless she 
 herself should make pretension to the man . it be an insult to 
 she even to connect her name with that of any man unless she have 
 do something to connect it . in her own estimation her cousin Tom 
 be infinitely beneath her,--world beneath her,--a denizen of an 
 altogether inferior race , such as the Beast be to the Beauty ! not 
 that Ayala have ever boast to herself of her own face or form . it 
 be not in that respect that she liken herself to the Beauty when 
 she think of Tom as the Beast . her assumed superiority exist in 
 certain intellectual or rather artistic and æsthetic gifts,--certain 
 celestial gift . but as she have boast of they to no one , as she 
 have never say that she and her cousin be pole asunder in their 
 taste , pole asunder in their feeling , pole asunder in their 
 intelligence , be it not very , very cruel that she should be tell , 
 first that she encourage he , and then that she be not good enough 
 for he ? Cinderella do not ask to have the Prince for her husband . 
 when she have her own image of which no one could rob she , and be 
 content with that , why should they treat she in this cruel way ? 
 " I be afraid you be have a great deal of trouble with she , " say 
 Lady Tringle to Mrs. Dosett . 
 " no , indeed . of course she be romantic , which be very objectionable . " 
 " quite detestable ! " say Lady Tringle . 
 " but she have be bring up like that , so that it be not her fault . 
 now she endeavour to do she good . " 
 " she be so upsetting . " 
 " she be angry because her cousin persecute she . " 
 " persecute she , indeed ! Tom be in a position to ask any girl to be 
 his wife . he can give she a home of her own , and a good income . she 
 ought to be proud of the offer instead of speak like that . but 
 nobody want she to have he . " 
 " he want it , I suppose . " 
 " just take by her baby face;--that be all . it will not last , and she 
 need not think so . however , I have do my good to be kind , Mrs. Dosett , 
 and there be an end of it . if you please I will ring the bell for the 
 carriage . good - bye . " after that she swam out of the room and have 
 herself carry back to Queen 's Gate . 
 CHAPTER XIV . 
 FRANK HOUSTON . 
 three or four day afterwards Sir Thomas ask whether Ayala be to 
 come to Glenbogie . " she positively refuse , " say his wife , " and 
 be so rude and impertinent that I could not possibly have she now . " 
 then Sir Thomas frown and turn himself away , and say not a word 
 far on that occasion . 
 there be many candidate for Glenbogie on this occasion . among 
 other there be Mr. Frank Houston , whose candidature be not press 
 by himself,--as could not well have be done,--but be enforce by 
 Gertrude on his behalf . it be now July . Gertrude and Mr. Houston 
 have see something of each other in Rome , as may be remember , and 
 since then have see a good deal of each other in town . Gertrude be 
 perfectly well aware that Mr. Houston be impecunious ; but Augusta 
 have be allow to have an impecunious lover , and Tom to throw 
 himself at the foot of an impecunious love . Gertrude feel herself to 
 be entitle to her £ 120,000 ; do not for a moment doubt but that she 
 would get it . why should not she give it to any young man she like 
 as long as he belong to decent people ? Mr. Houston be not a member 
 of Parliament,--but then he be young and good - look . Mr. Houston 
 be not son to a lord , but he be brother to a county squire , and come 
 of a family much old than that of those stupid Boardotrade and 
 Traffick people . and then Frank Houston be very presentable , be not 
 at all bald , and be just the man for a girl to like as a husband . it 
 be din into her ear that Houston have no income at all,--just a 
 few hundred a year on which he never could keep himself out of debt . 
 but he be a generous man , who would be more than content with the 
 income come from £ 120,000 . he would not spunge upon the house at 
 Queen 's Gate . he would not make use of Merle Park and Glenbogie . he 
 would have a house of his own for his old boot . four - per - cent . would 
 give they nearly £ 5,000 a year . Gertrude know all about it already . 
 they could have a nice house near Queen 's gate;--say somewhere about 
 Onslow Gardens . there would be quite enough for a carriage for three 
 month upon a mountain in Switzerland , and three more among the art 
 treasure of Italy . it be astonish how completely Gertrude have 
 it all at her finger 's end when she discuss the matter with her 
 mother . Mr. Houston be a man of no expensive taste . he do not want 
 to hunt . he do shoot , no doubt , and perhaps a little shooting at 
 Glenbogie might be nice before they go to Switzerland . in that case 
 two month on the top of the mountain would suffice . but if he be 
 not ask he would never condescend to demand an entry at Glenbogie 
 as a part of his wife 's dower . Lady Tringle be thus talk over , 
 though she do think that at least one of her daughter ' husband 
 ought to have an income of his own . there be another point which 
 Gertrude put forward very frankly , and which no doubt have weight with 
 her mother . " Mamma , I mean to have he , " she say , when Lady Tringle 
 express a doubt . 
 " but papa ? " 
 " I mean to have he . Papa can scold , of course , if he please . " 
 " but where would the income come from if papa do not give it ? " 
 " of course he will give it . I have a right to it as much as Augusta . " 
 there be something in Gertrude 's face as she say this which make 
 her mother think that she would have her way . 
 but Sir Thomas have hitherto decline . when Frank Houston , after 
 the manner of would - be son - in - law , have apply to Sir Thomas , Sir 
 Thomas , who already know all about it , ask after his income , his 
 prospect , and his occupation . fifty year ago young man use to 
 encounter the misery of such question , and to live afterwards often 
 in the enjoyment of the stern questioner 's money and daughter . but 
 there use in those day to be a bad quarter of an hour while the 
 question be be ask , and not un - frequently a bad six month 
 afterwards , while the stern questioner be gradually undergo a 
 soften process under the hand of the female of the family . but 
 the young man of to - day have no bad quarter of an hour . " you be a 
 mercantile old brick , with money and a daughter . I be a jeunesse 
 dorée,--gilde by blood and fashion , though so utterly impecunious ! 
 let we know your term . how much be it to be , and then I can say 
 whether we can afford to live upon it . " the old brick surrender 
 himself more readily and speedily to the latter than to the former 
 manner;--but he hardly surrender himself quite at once . Frank 
 Houston , when inquire into , declare at once , without blushing , 
 that he have no income at all to speak of in reference to matrimonial 
 life . as to family prospect he have none . his eld brother have four 
 blooming boy , and be likely to have more . as for occupation , he 
 be very fond of painting , very fond of art all round , could shoot a 
 little , and be never in want of anything to do as long as he have a 
 book . but for the earning of money he have no turn whatever . he be 
 quite sure of himself that he could never earn a shilling . but then 
 on the other hand he be not extravagant,--which be almost as good 
 as earn . it be almost incredible ; but with his mean , limit 
 as they be to a few hundred , he do not owe above a thousand 
 pounds;--a fact which he think would weigh much with Sir Thomas in 
 regard to his daughter 's future happiness . 
 Sir Thomas give he a flat refusal . " I think that I may boast that 
 your daughter 's happiness be in my charge , " say Frank Houston . 
 " then she must be unhappy , " say Sir Thomas . Houston shrug his 
 shoulder . " a fool like that have no right to be happy . " 
 " there be not another man in the world by whom I would allow she to be 
 speak of like that , " say Houston . 
 " Bother ! " 
 " I regard she as all that be perfect in woman , and you must forgive 
 I if I say that I shall not abandon my suit . I may be allow , at 
 any rate , to call at the house ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " that be a kind of thing that be never do nowadays;--never , " say 
 Houston , shake his head . 
 " I suppose my own house be my own . " 
 " Yours and Lady Tringle 's , and your daughter ' , no doubt . at any 
 rate , Sir Thomas , you will think of this again . I be sure you will 
 think of it again . if you find that your daughter 's happiness depend 
 upon it-- " 
 " I shall find nothing of the kind . good morning . " 
 " good morning , Sir Thomas . " then Mr. Houston , bow graciously , leave 
 the little back room in Lombard Street , and jump into a cab , have 
 himself take straight away to Queen 's Gate . 
 " Papa be always like that , " say Gertrude . on that day Mrs. Traffick , 
 with all the boot , have take herself away to the small house in 
 Mayfair , and Gertrude , with her mother , have the house to herself . at 
 the present moment Lady Tringle be elsewhere , so that the young lady 
 be alone with her lover . 
 " but he come round , I suppose . " 
 " if he do not have too much to eat,--which disagree with him,--he 
 do . he be always well down at Glenbogie because he be out of door 
 a good deal , and then he can digest thing . " 
 " then take he down to Glenbogie and let he digest it at once . " 
 " of course we can not go till the 12th . perhaps we shall start on the 
 10th , because the 11th be Sunday . what will you do , Frank ? " there have 
 be a whisper of Frank 's go to the Tyrol in August , there to join 
 the Mudbury Docimers , who be his far - away cousin . Imogene Docimer 
 be a young lady of marvellous beauty,--not possess indeed of 
 £ 120,000,--of whom Gertrude have hear , and be already anxious that 
 her Frank should not go to the Tyrol this year . she be already aware 
 that her Frank have -- just an artist 's eye for feminine beauty in its 
 various shape , and think that in the present condition of thing 
 he would be well at Glenbogie than in the Tyrol . 
 " I be think of wander away somewhere;--perhap to the Tyrol . 
 the Mudbury Docimers be there . he be a pal of mine , besides be a 
 cousin . Mrs. Docimer be a very nice woman . " 
 " and her sister ? " 
 " a lovely creature . such a turn of the neck ! I have promise to make a 
 study of her back head . " 
 " come down to Glenbogie , " say Gertrude , sternly . 
 " how can I do that when your governor will not let I enter his 
 house - door even in London ? " 
 " but you be here . " 
 " Well,--yes;--I be here . but he tell I not . I do not see how I be to 
 drive in at the gate at Glenbogie with all my trap , and ask to be 
 show my room . I have cheek enough for a good deal , my pet . " 
 " I believe you have , Sir;--cheek enough for anything . but mamma must 
 manage it,--mamma and I , between we . only keep yourself disengage . 
 you will not go to the Tyrol,--eh ? " then Frank Houston promise that he 
 would not go to the Tyrol as long as there be a chance open that he 
 might be invite to Glenbogie . 
 " I will not hear of it , " say Sir Thomas to his wife . on that occasion 
 his digestion have perhaps fail he a little . " he only want to get 
 my money . " 
 " but Gertrude have set her heart on it , and nothing will turn she 
 away . " 
 " why can not she set her heart on some one who have get a decent income . 
 that man have not a shilling . " 
 " nor yet have Mr. Traffick . " 
 " Mr. Traffick have , at any rate , get an occupation . be it to do 
 again , Mr. Traffick would never see a shilling of my money . by ---- , 
 those fellow , who have not get a pound belong to they , think that 
 they be to live on the fat of the land out of the sweat of the brow 
 of such man as I . " 
 " what be your money for , Tom , but for the child ? " 
 " I know what it be for . I would soon build a hospital than give it to an 
 idle fellow like that Houston . when I ask he what he do , he say 
 he be fond of ' picter ! ' " Sir Thomas would fall back from his usual 
 mode of expression when he be a little excited . 
 " of course he have not be bring up to work . but he be a gentleman , 
 and I do think he would make our girl happy . " 
 " my money would make he happy,--till he have spend it . " 
 " tie it up . " 
 " you do not know what you be talk about . how be you to prevent a 
 man from spend his wife 's income ? " 
 " at any rate , if you have he down at Glenbogie you can see what sort 
 of a man he be . you do not know he now . " 
 " as much as I wish to . " 
 " that be not fair to the poor girl . you need not give your consent to 
 a marriage because he come to Glenbogie . you have only to say that 
 you will not give the money and then it must be off . they can not take 
 the money from you . " his digestion could not have be very bad , for 
 he allow himself to be persuade that Houston should be ask to 
 Glenbogie for ten day . this be the letter of invitation;-- 
    MY DEAR MR . HOUSTON , 
    we shall start for Glenbogie on the 10th of next month . 
    Sir Thomas wish you to join we on the 20th if you can , 
    and stay till the end of the month . we shall be a little 
    crowded at first , and therefore can not name an early 
    day . 
    I be particularly to warn you that this mean nothing more 
    than a simple invitation . I know what pass between you 
    and Sir Thomas , and he have not at all change his mind . I 
    think it right to tell you this . if you like to speak to 
    he again when you be at Glenbogie of course you can . 
    very sincerely your , 
    EMMELINE TRINGLE . 
 at the same time , or within a post of it , he get another letter , 
 which be as follows;-- 
    DEAREST F , 
    Papa , you see , have not cut up so very rough , after all . you 
    be to be allow to come and help to slaughter grouse , 
    which will be well than go to that stupid Tyrol . 
    if you want to draw somebody 's back head you can do it 
    there . be not it a joke papa 's give way like that all in 
    a moment ? he get so fierce sometimes that we think he be 
    go to eat everybody . then he have to come down , and he 
    get eat bad than anybody else . 
    of course , as you be ask to Glenbogie , you can come 
    here as often as you like . I shall ride on Thursday and 
    Friday . I shall expect you exactly at six , just under the 
    Memorial . you can not come home to dinner , you know , because 
    he might flare up ; but you can turn in at lunch every day 
    you please except Saturday and Sunday . I intend to be so 
    jolly down at Glenbogie . you must not be shoot always . 
    ever your own , 
    G. 
 Frank Houston as he read this throw himself back on the sofa and give 
 way to a soft sigh . he know he be do his duty,--just as another 
 man do who go forth from his pleasant home to earn his bread 
 and win his fortune in some dry , comfortless climate , far from the 
 delight to which he have be always accustom . he must do his duty . 
 he could not live always add a hundred or two of debt to the 
 burden already round his neck . he must do his duty . as he think 
 of this he praise himself mightily . how beautiful be his far - away 
 cousin , Imogene Docimer , as she would twist her head round so as to 
 show the turn of her neck ! how delightful it would be to talk love to 
 Imogene ! as to marry Imogene , who have not quite so many hundred 
 as himself , that he know to be impossible . as for marriage , he 
 be not quite sure that he want to marry any one . marriage , to his 
 thinking , be " a sort of grind , " at the good . a man would have to get 
 up and go to bed with some regularity . his wife might want he to 
 come down in a frock coat to breakfast . his wife would certainly 
 object to his draw the back head of other young woman . then he 
 think of the provocation he have receive to draw Gertrude 's back 
 head . Gertrude have not get any turn of a neck to speak of . Gertrude 
 be a stout , healthy girl ; and , have £ 120,000 , be entitle to such 
 a husband as himself . if he wait long he might be drive to bad 
 before he find the money which be so essentially necessary . he be 
 grateful to Gertrude for not be bad , and be determined to treat 
 she well . but as for love , romance , poetry , art,--all that must for 
 the future be out of the question . of course , there would now be no 
 difficulty with Sir Thomas , and therefore he must at once make up his 
 mind . he decide that morning , with many soft regret , that he would 
 go to Glenbogie , and let those dream of wandering in the mountain 
 of the Tyrol pass away from he . " dear , dearest Imogene ! " he could 
 have love Imogene dearly have fate be more propitious . then he get 
 up and shake himself , make his resolution like a man , eat a large 
 allowance of curried salmon for his breakfast,--and then write the 
 following letter . " duty first ! " he say to himself as he sit down to 
 the table like a hero . 
    Letter No . 1 . 
    DEAR LADY TRINGLE , 
    so many thank ! nothing could suit my book so well as a 
    few day at Glenbogie just at the end of August . I will be 
    there , like a book , on the 20th . of course I understand 
    all that you say . father can not be expect to yield all 
    at once , especially when suitor have not get very much of 
    their own . I should not have dare to ask have not I know 
    myself to be a most moderate man . of course I shall ask 
    again . if you will help I , no doubt I shall succeed . I 
    really do think that I be the man to make Gertrude happy . 
    your , dear Lady Tringle , ever so much , 
    F. HOUSTON . 
    Letter No . 2 . 
    my own one , 
    your governor be a brick . of course , Glenbogie will be 
    well than the Tyrol , as you be to be there . not but 
    what the Tyrol be a very jolly place , and we will go and see 
    it together some day . ask Tom to let I know whether one 
    can wear heavy boot in the Glenbogie mountain . they be 
    much the good for the heather ; but I have shoot generally 
    in Yorkshire , and there they be too hot . what number do 
    he shoot with generally ? I fancy the bird be wilder with 
    you than with we . 
    as for riding , I do not dare to sit upon a horse this 
    weather . nobody but a woman can stand it . indeed , now I 
    think of it , I sell my horse last week to pay the fellow 
    I buy paint from . I have get the saddle and bridle , and if 
    I stick they up upon a rail , under the tree , it would be 
    well than any horse while the thermometer be near 80 . 
    all the lady could come round and talk to one so nicely . 
    I hate lunch , because it make I red in the face , and 
    nobody will give I my breakfast before eleven at the 
    early . but I will come in about three as often as you 
    like to have I . I think I perhaps shall run over to the 
    Tyrol after Glenbogie . a man must go somewhere when he have 
    be turn out in that fashion . there be so many baby 
    at Buncombe Hall ! 
 --Buncombe Hall be the family seat of the Houstons,-- 
    and I do not like to see my own fate typify before the 
    time . 
    can I do anything for you except rid or eat 
    lunch,--which be simply feminine exercise ? always your 
    own , 
    FRANK . 
    Letter No . 3 . 
    DEAR COUSIN IM , 
    how pleasant it be that a little strain of thin blood 
    should make the use of that pretty name allowable ! what 
    a stupid world it be when the people who like each other 
    good can not get together because of propriety , and 
    marriage , and such balderdash as we call love . I do not 
    in the least want to be in love with you,--but I do want 
    to sit near you , and listen to you , and look at you , and 
    to know that the whole air around be impregnate by the 
    mysterious odour of your presence . when one be thoroughly 
    satisfied with a woman there come a scent as of sweet 
    flower , which do not reach the sens of those whose 
    feeling be not so awakened . 
    and now for my news ! I suppose that G. T. will in a 
    tremendously short period become Mistress F. H. ' a long 
    day , my Lord . ' but , if you be to be hung , well be hang 
    at once . Père Tringle have not consented,--has do just 
    the reverse,--has turn I out of his house , morally . 
    that be , out of his London house . he ask of my ' house 
    and my home , ' as they do of Allan - a - Dale . 
       Queen 's Gate and Glenbogie stand fair on the hill . 
       " my home , " quoth bold Houston , " show gallanter still . 
       ' tis the garret up three pair-- " 
    then he tell I roughly to get I go ; but ' I have laugh 
    on the lass with my bonny black eye . ' so the next day I 
    get an invite to Glenbogie , and at the appropriate time in 
    August , 
       she will go to the mountain to hear a love tale , 
       and the youth-- 
    it will be tell by be to be your poor unfortunate coz , 
    Frank Houston . who be go to whimper ? have not I know 
    all along what be to come ? it have not be my lot in 
    life to see a flower and pick it because I love it . but 
    a good head of cabbage when you be hungry be wholesome 
    food.--your love cousin , but not love as he ought not 
    to love , 
    FRANK HOUSTON . 
    I shall still make a dash for the Tyrol when this episode 
    at Glenbogie be over . 
 CHAPTER XV . 
 AYALA with her friend . 
 some few day after Lady Tringle have be at Kingsbury Crescent , 
 two visitor , who know little or nothing of each other , come to see 
 Ayala . one be a lady and the other a gentleman , and the lady come 
 first . the gentleman , however , arrive before the lady have go . Mrs. 
 Dosett be present while the lady remain ; but when the gentleman 
 come she be invite to leave he alone with she niece,--as shall be 
 tell . 
 the lady be the Marchesa Baldoni . can the reader go so far back as 
 to remember the Marchesa Baldoni ? it be she who rather instigate 
 Ayala to be naughty to the Tringles in Rome , and would have Ayala 
 at her party when she do not want the Tringles . the Marchesa be 
 herself an Englishwoman , though she have live at Rome all her life , 
 and have marry an italian nobleman . she be now in London for a few 
 week , and still bear in mind her friendship for Ayala , and a certain 
 promise she have once make she . in Rome Lady Tringle , actuate by 
 Augusta , who at the moment be very angry with everybody include 
 her own lover , have quarrel with the Marchesa . the Marchesa have 
 then tell Ayala that she , Ayala , must stay with her aunt,--must , 
 in fact , cease for the time to come to the Marchesa 's apartment , 
 because of the quarrel ; but that a time would come in which they 
 might again be friend . soon afterwards the Marchesa have hear that 
 the Tringle family have discard poor Ayala,--that her own quarrel 
 have , in fact , extend itself to Ayala , and that Ayala have be 
 shunt off to a poor relation , far away from all the wealth and 
 luxury which she have be allow to enjoy for so short a time . 
 therefore , soon after her arrival in London , the Marchesa have make 
 herself acquaint with the address of the Dosetts , and now be in 
 Kingsbury Crescent in fulfilment of her promise make at Rome . 
 " so now you have get our friend Ayala , " say the Marchesa with a 
 smile to Mrs. Dosett . 
 " yes ; we have she now . there have be a change . her sister , Lucy , have 
 go to my husband 's sister , Lady Tringle . " 
 the Marchesa make a pleasant little bow at each word . she seem to 
 Mrs. Dosett to be very gorgeously dressed . she be thoroughly well 
 dress , and look like a Marchesa;--or perhaps , even , like a 
 Marchioness . she be a tall , handsome woman , with a smile perhaps 
 a little too continuously sweet , but with a look conscious of her 
 own position behind it . she have see in a moment of what nature be 
 Ayala , how charming , how attractive , how pretty , how clever,--how 
 completely the very opposite of the Tringles ! Ayala learn italian 
 so readily that she could talk it almost at once . she could sing , 
 and play , and draw . the Marchesa have be quite willing that her 
 own daughter Nina should find a friend in Ayala . then have come the 
 quarrel . now she be quite willing to renew the friendship , though 
 Ayala 's position be so sadly alter . Mrs. Dosett be almost 
 frighten as the grand lady sit hold Ayala 's hand , and pat 
 it . " we use to know she so well in Rome;--did we not , Ayala ? " 
 " you be very kind to I . " 
 " Nina could not come , because her father would make she go with he to 
 the picture . but now , my dear , you must come to we just for a little 
 time . we have a furnished house in Brook Street , near the park , till 
 the end of the season , and we have one small spare room which will 
 just do for you . I hope you will let she come to we , for we really 
 be old friend , " say the Marchesa , turn to Mrs. Dosett . 
 Mrs. Dosett look black . there be people who always look black when 
 such application be make to them,--who look black at any allusion 
 to pleasure . and then there come across her mind serious thought as 
 to flower and ribbons,--and then more serious thought as to boot , 
 dress , and hat . Ayala , no doubt , have come there less than six 
 month since with good store of everything ; but Mrs. Dosett know that 
 such a house as would be that of this lady would require a girl to 
 show herself with the new sheen on everything . and Ayala know it 
 too . the Marchesa turn from the blackness of Mrs. Dosett 's face 
 with her sweetest smile to Ayala . " can not we manage it ? " say the 
 Marchesa . 
 " I do not think we can , " say Ayala , with a deep sigh . 
 " and why not ? " 
 Ayala look furtively round to her aunt . " I suppose I may tell , Aunt 
 Margaret ? " she say . 
 " you may tell everything , my dear , " say Mrs. Dosett . 
 " because we be poor , " say Ayala . 
 " what do that matter ? " say the Marchesa , brighten up . " we want 
 you because you be rich in good gift and pretty way . " 
 " but I can not get new frock now as I use to do in Rome . Aunt 
 Emmeline be cruel to I , and say thing which I could not bear . but 
 they let I have everything . Uncle Reginald give I all that he have , 
 and I be much happy here . but we can not go out and buy things,--can 
 we , Aunt Margaret ? " 
 " no , my dear ; we can not . " 
 " it do not signify , " say the Marchesa . " we be quite quiet , and 
 what you have get will do very well . frock ! the frock you have in 
 Rome be good enough for London . I will not have a word of all that . 
 Nina have set her heart upon it , and so have my husband , and so have 
 I. Mrs. Dosett , when we be at home we be the most homely people in 
 the world . we think nothing of dress . not to come and see your old 
 friend because of your frock ! we shall send for you the day after 
 to - morrow . do not you know , Mrs. Dosett , it will do she good to be 
 with her young friend for a few day . " Mrs. Dosett have not succeed 
 in her remonstrance when Sir Thomas Tringle be show into the room , 
 and then the Marchesa take she leave . for Sir Thomas Tringle be the 
 other visitor who come on that morning to see Ayala . 
 " if you would not mind , Mrs. Dosett , " say Sir Thomas before he sit 
 down , " I should like to see Ayala alone . " Mrs. Dosett have not a word 
 to say against such a request , and at once take she leave . 
 " my dear , " he begin , come and sit opposite to Ayala , with his 
 knee almost touch she , " I have get something very particular to 
 say to you . " Ayala be at once much frightened . her uncle have never 
 before speak to she in this way,--had never in truth say a word to 
 she seriously . he have always be kind to she , make her present , 
 and allow himself to be kiss graciously morning and evening . he 
 have never scold she , and , well than all , have never say a word to 
 she , one way or the other , about Tom . she have always like her uncle , 
 because he have never cause her trouble when all the other in his 
 house have be troublesome to she . but now she be afraid of he . he 
 do not frown , but he look very seriously at she , as he might look , 
 perhaps , when he be count out all his million in Lombard Street . 
 " I hope you think that I have always wish to be kind to you , 
 Ayala . " 
 " I be sure you have , Uncle Tom . " 
 " when you have come to we I always wish you to stay . I do not like 
 change of this sort . I suppose you do not hit it off with Augusta . 
 but she be go now . " 
 " Aunt Emmeline say something . " that accusation , as to 
 " encouragement , " so rankle in her heart , that when she look back 
 at her grievance among the Tringles that always loom the large . 
 " I do not want to hear anything about it , " say Sir Thomas . " let 
 bygone be bygone . your aunt , I be sure , never mean unkindly by 
 you . now , I want you to listen to I . " 
 " I will , Uncle Tom . " 
 " listen to I to the end , like a good girl . " 
 " I will . " 
 " your Cousin Tom-- . " Ayala give a visible shudder , and utter an 
 audible groan , but as yet she do not say a word . Sir Thomas , have 
 see the shudder , and hear the groan , do frown as he begin again . 
 " your Cousin Tom be most truly attach to you . " 
 " why will not he leave I alone , then ? " 
 " Ayala , you promise to listen to I without speak . " 
 " I will , Uncle Tom . Only-- " 
 " listen to I , and then I will hear anything you have to say . " 
 " I will , " say Ayala , screw up her lip , so that no word should 
 come out of they , let the provocation be what it might . 
 Sir Thomas begin again . " your Cousin Tom be most truly attach to 
 you . for some time I and his mother disapprove of this . we think 
 you be both too young , and there be other reason which I need 
 not now mention . but when I come to see how thoroughly he be in 
 earnest , how he put his heart into it , how the very fact that he 
 love you have make a man of he ; then how the fact that you would 
 not return his love unmanned him,--when I see all that , I give my 
 permission . " here he pause , almost as though expect a word ; but 
 Ayala give an additional turn to the screw on her lip , and remain 
 quite silent . " yes ; we give our permission,--i and your aunt . of 
 course , our son 's happiness be all in all to we ; and I do believe 
 that you be so good that you would make he a good wife . " 
 " but-- " 
 " listen till I have do , Ayala . " then there be another squeeze . " I 
 suppose you be what they call romantic . Romance , my dear , will not buy 
 bread and butter . Tom be a very good young man , and he love you 
 most dearly . if you will consent to be his I will make a rich man of 
 he . he will then be a respectable man of business , and will become 
 a partner in the house . you and he can choose a place to live in 
 almost where you please . you can have your own establishment and your 
 carriage , and will be able to do a deal of good . you will make he 
 happy , and you will be my dear child . I have come here to tell you 
 that I will make you welcome into the family , and to promise that I 
 will do everything I can to make you happy . now you may say what you 
 like ; but , Ayala , think a little before you speak . " 
 Ayala think a little;--not as to what she should say , but as to 
 the word in which she might say it . she be conscious that a great 
 compliment be pay to she . and there be a certain pride in her 
 heart as she think that this invitation into the family have come to 
 she after that ignominious accusation of encouragement have be make . 
 Augusta have snub she about Tom , and her aunt ; but now she be 
 ask to come among they , and be one of they , with full observance . 
 she be aware of all this , and aware , also , that such treatment 
 require from she a gracious return . but not on that account could 
 she give herself to the Beast . not on that account could she be 
 untrue to her image . not on that account could she rob her bosom 
 of that idea of love which be seat there . not on that account 
 could she look upon the marriage propose to she with aught but a 
 shuddering abhorrence . she sit silent for a minute or two , while her 
 heavy eye be fix upon his . then , fall on her knee before 
 he , she put up her little hand to pray to he . " Uncle Tom , I 
 can not , " she say . and then the tear come run down her cheek . 
 " why can not you , Ayala ? why can not you be sensible , as other girl 
 be ? " say Sir Thomas , lift she up , and put she on his knee . 
 " I can not , " she say . " I do not know how to tell you . " 
 " do you love some other man ? " 
 " no ; no ; no ! " to Uncle Tom , at any rate , she need say nothing of the 
 image . 
 " then why be it ? " 
 " because I can not . I do not know what to say , but I can not . I know how 
 very , very , very good you be . " 
 " I would love you as my daughter . " 
 " but I can not , Uncle Tom . pray tell he , and make he get somebody 
 else . he would be quite happy if he could get somebody else . " 
 " it be you that he love . " 
 " but what be the use of it , when I can not ? dear , dear Uncle Tom , do 
 have it all settle for I . nothing on earth could ever make I do 
 it . I should die if I be to try . " 
 " that be nonsense . " 
 " I do so want not to make you angry , Uncle Tom . and I do so wish he 
 would be happy with someone else . nobody ought to be make to marry 
 unless they like it;--ought they ? " 
 " there be no talk of make , " say Sir Thomas , frown . 
 " at any rate I can not , " say Ayala , release herself from her uncle 's 
 embrace . 
 it be in vain that even after this he continue his request , beg 
 she to come down to Glenbogie , so that she might make herself use 
 to Tom and his way . if she could only once more , he think , be 
 introduce to the luxury of a rich house , then she would give way . 
 but she would not go to Glenbogie ; she would not go to Merle Park ; 
 she would not consent to see Tom anywhere . her uncle tell she that 
 she be romantic and foolish , endeavour to explain to she over 
 and over again that the good thing of the world be too good to be 
 throw away for a dream . at last there be a touch of dignity in the 
 final repetition of her refusal . " I be sorry to make you angry , but 
 I can not , Uncle Tom . " then he frown with all his power of frown , 
 and , take his hat , leave the room and the house almost without a 
 word . 
 at the time fix the Marchesa 's carriage come , and Ayala with her 
 box be take away to Brook Street . Uncle Reginald have offer 
 to do something for she in the way of buy a frock , but this she 
 refuse , declare that she would not allow herself to become an 
 expense merely because her friend in Rome have be kind to she . so 
 she have pack up the good of what she have and start , with her 
 heart in her mouth , fear the grandeur of the Marchesa 's house . on 
 her arrival she be receive by Nina , who at once throw herself into 
 all her old intimacy . " oh , Ayala , " she say , " this be so nice to have 
 you again . I have be look forward to this ever since we leave 
 Rome . " 
 " yes , " say Ayala , " it be nice . " 
 " but why do you tell mamma you would not come ? what nonsense to 
 talk to she about frock ? why not come and tell I ? you use to have 
 everything at Rome , much more than I have . " 
 then Ayala begin to explain the great difference between Uncle Tom 
 and Uncle Reginald,--how Uncle Tom have so many thousand that nobody 
 could count they , how Uncle Reginald be so shorn in his hundred 
 that there be hardly enough to supply the necessary of life . 
 " you see , " she say , " when papa die Lucy and I be divide . I 
 get the rich uncle , and Lucy get the poor one ; but I make myself 
 disagreeable , and do not suit , and so we have be change . " 
 " but why do you make yourself disagreeable ? " say Nina , open her 
 eye . " I remember when we be at Rome your cousin Augusta be always 
 quarrel with you . I never quite know what it be all about . " 
 " it be not only that , " say Ayala , whispering . 
 " do you do anything very bad ? " 
 then it occur to Ayala that she might tell the whole story to 
 her friend , and she tell it . she explain the nature of that great 
 persecution as to Tom . " and that be the real reason why we be 
 change , " say Ayala , as she complete her story . 
 " I remember see the young man , " say Nina . 
 " he be such a lout ! " 
 " but be he very much in love ? " ask Nina . 
 " well , I do not know . I suppose he be after his way . I do not think 
 lout like that can be very much in love to signify . young man when 
 they look like that would do with one girl as well as another . " 
 " I do not see that at all , " say Nina . 
 " I be sure he would if he would only try . at any rate what be the good of 
 his go on ? they can not make a girl marry unless she choose . " 
 " will not he be rich ? " 
 " awfully rich , " say Ayala . 
 " then I should think about it again , " say the young lady from Rome . 
 " never , " say Ayala , with an impressive whisper . " I will never think 
 about it again . if he be make of diamond I would not think about 
 it again . " 
 " and be that why you be change ? " say Nina . 
 " well , yes . no ; it be very hard to explain . Aunt Emmeline tell I 
 that -- that I encourage he . I think I should have rush out of 
 the house when she say that . then I have to be change . I do not know 
 whether they could forgive I , but I could not forgive she . " 
 " and how be it now ? " 
 " it be different now , " say Ayala , softly . " only that it can not make 
 any real difference . " 
 " how different ? " 
 " they would let I come if I would , I suppose ; but I shall never , never 
 go to they any more . " 
 " I suppose you will not tell I everything ? " say Nina , after a pause . 
 " what everything ? " 
 " you will not be angry if I ask ? " 
 " no , I will not be angry . " 
 " I suppose there be someone else you really care for ? " 
 " there be no one , " say Ayala , escape a little from her friend 's 
 embrace . 
 " then why should you be so determined against that poor young man ? " 
 " because he be a lout and a beast , " say Ayala , jump up . " I wonder 
 you should ask me;--as if that have anything to do with it . would you 
 fall in love with a lout because you have no one else ? I would rather 
 live for ever all alone , even in Kingsbury Crescent , than have to 
 think of become the wife of my cousin Tom . " at this Nina shrug 
 her shoulder , show that her education in Italy have be less 
 romantic than that accord to Ayala in London . 
 CHAPTER XVI . 
 JONATHAN STUBBS . 
 but , though Nina differ somewhat from Ayala as to their idea as 
 to life in general , they be close friend , and everything be do 
 both by the Marchesa and by her daughter to make Ayala happy . there 
 be not very much of go into grand society , and that difficulty 
 about the dress solve itself , as do other difficulty . there come 
 a few present , with entreaty from Ayala that present of that 
 kind might not be make . but the present be , of course , accept , 
 and our girl be as prettily array , if not as richly , as the good 
 around she . at first there be an evening at the opera , and then a 
 theatre,--diversions which be easy . Ayala , after her six dull month 
 in Kingsbury Crescent , find herself well pleased to be take to 
 easy amusement . the carriage in the park be delightful to she , and 
 delightful a visit which be make to she by Lucy . for the Tringle 
 carriage could be spar for a visit in Brook Street , even though 
 there be still a remembrance in the bosom of Aunt Emmeline of the 
 evil thing which have be do by the Marchesa in Rome . then there 
 come a dance,--which be not so easy . the Marchesa and Nina be 
 go to a dance at Lady Putney 's , and arrangement be make 
 that Ayala should be take . Ayala beg that there might be no 
 arrangement , declare that she would be quite happy to see Nina go 
 forth in her finery . but the Marchesa be a woman who always have she 
 way , and Ayala be take to Lady Putney 's dance without a suspicion 
 on the part of any who see she that her ball - room apparatus be not 
 all that it ought to be . 
 Ayala when she enter the room be certainly a little bashful . when 
 in Rome , even in the old day at the bijou , when she do not consider 
 herself to be quite out , she have not be at all bashful . she have 
 be able to enjoy herself entirely , be very fond of dancing , 
 conscious that she could dance well , and always have plenty to say 
 for herself . but now there have settle upon her something of the 
 tedium , something of the silence , of Kingsbury Crescent , and she 
 almost feel that she would not know how to behave herself if she be 
 ask to stand up and dance before all Lady Putney 's world . in her 
 first attempt she certainly be not successful . an elderly gentleman 
 be bring up to her,--a gentleman whom she afterwards declare to 
 be a hundred , and who be , in truth , over forty , and with he she 
 manoeuvre gently through a quadrille . he ask she two or three 
 question to which she be able to answer only in monosyllable . 
 then he cease his question , and the manoeuvre be carry on in 
 perfect silence . Poor Ayala do not attribute any blame to the man . 
 it be all because she have be six month in Kingsbury Crescent . 
 of course this aged gentleman , if he want to dance , would have a 
 partner choose for he out of Kingsbury Crescent . Conversation be 
 not to be expect from a gentleman who be make to stand up with 
 Kingsbury Crescent . any power of talk that have ever belong 
 to herself have of course evaporate amidst the gloom of Kingsbury 
 Crescent . after this she be return speedily to the wing of the 
 Marchesa , and during the next dance sit in undisturbed peace . then 
 suddenly , when the Marchesa have for a moment leave she , and when Nina 
 have just be take away to join a set , she see the man of silence 
 come to she from a distance , with an evident intention of ask 
 she to stand up again . it be in his eye , in his toe , as he come 
 bow forward . he have evidently learn to suppose that they two 
 outcast might lessen their misery by join they together . she 
 be to dance with he because no one else would ask she ! she have 
 pluck up her spirit and resolve that , desolate as she might be , 
 she would not descend so far as that , when , in a moment , another 
 gentleman spring in , as it be , between she and her enemy , and 
 address she with free and easy speech as though he have know she 
 all her life . " you be Ayala Dormer , I be sure , " say he . she look 
 up into his face and nod her head at he in her own peculiar way . 
 she be quite sure that she have never set her eye on he before . 
 he be so ugly that she could not have forget he . so at least 
 she tell herself . he be very , very ugly , but his voice be very 
 pleasant . " I know you be , and I be Jonathan Stubbs . so now we be 
 introduce , and you be to come and dance with I . " 
 she have hear the name of Jonathan Stubbs . she be sure of that , 
 although she could not at the moment join any fact with the name . 
 " but I do not know you , " she say , hesitate . though he be so ugly 
 he could not but be well than that ancient dancer whom she see 
 stand at a distance , look like a dog that have be deprive of 
 his bone . 
 " yes , you do , " say Jonathan Stubbs , " and if you will come and dance 
 I will tell you about it . the Marchesa tell I to take you . " 
 " do she ? " say Ayala , get up , and put she little hand upon 
 his arm . 
 " I will go and fetch she if you like ; only she be a long way off , and we 
 shall lose our place . she be my aunt . " 
 " oh , " say Ayala , quite satisfied,--remembere now that she have 
 hear her friend Nina boast of a Colonel cousin , who be suppose 
 to be the young Colonel in the british army , who have do some 
 wonderful thing,--taken a new province in India , or march across 
 Africa , or defend the Turks,--or perhaps conquer they . she know 
 that he be very brave,--but why be he so very ugly ? his hair be 
 ruby red , and very short ; and he have a thick red beard : not silky , 
 but bristly , with each bristle almost a dagger,--and his mouth be 
 enormous . his eye be very bright , and there be a smile about he , 
 partly of fun , partly of good humour . but his mouth ! and then that 
 bristle beard ! Ayala be half inclined to like he , because he 
 be so completely master of himself , so unlike the unhappy ancient 
 gentleman who be still hover at a distance . but why be he so 
 ugly ? and why be he call Jonathan Stubbs ? 
 " there now , " he say , " we can not get in at any of the set . that be 
 your fault . " 
 " no , it be not , " say Ayala . 
 " yes , it be . you would not stand up till you have hear all about I . " 
 " I do not know anything about you now . " 
 " then come and walk about and I will tell you . then we shall be ready 
 for a waltz . do you waltz well ? " 
 " do you ? " 
 " I will back myself against any Englishman , Frenchman , German , or 
 Italian , for a large sum of money . I can not come quite up to the 
 Poles . the fact be , the honester the man be the bad he always 
 dance . yes ; I see what you mean . I must be a rogue . perhaps I 
 am;--perhap I be only an exception . I know your father . " 
 " Papa ! " 
 " yes , I do . he be down at Stalham with the Alburys once . that be 
 five year ago , and he tell I he have a daughter name Ayala . I 
 do not quite believe he . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " it be such an out - of - the - way name . " 
 " it be as good as Jonathan , at any rate . " and Ayala again nod she 
 head . 
 " there be a prejudice about Jonathan , as there be about Jacob and 
 Jonah . I never could quite tell why . I be go to marry a girl once 
 with a hundred thousand pound , and she would not have I at last 
 because she could not bring her lip to say Jonathan . do you think she 
 be right ? " 
 " do she love you ? " say Ayala , look up into his face . 
 " awfully ! but she could not bear the name ; so within three month 
 she give herself and all her money to Mr. Montgomery Talbot de 
 Montpellier . he get drunk , and throw she out of the window before a 
 month be over . that be what come of go in for sweet name . " 
 " I do not believe a word of it , " say Ayala . 
 " very well . do not Septimus Traffick marry your cousin ? " 
 " of course he do , about a month ago . " 
 " he be another friend of mine . why do not you go to your cousin 's 
 marriage ? " 
 " there be reason , " say Ayala . 
 " I know all about it , " say the Colonel . " you quarrel with Augusta 
 down in Scotland , and you do not like poor traffick because he have get 
 a bald head . " 
 " I believe you be a conjuror , " say Ayala . 
 " and then your cousin be jealous because you go to the top of St. 
 Peter 's , and because you would walk with Mr. Traffick on the Pincian . 
 I be in Rome , and see all about it . " 
 " I will not have anything more to do with you , " say Ayala . 
 " and then you quarrel with one set of uncle and aunt , and now you 
 live with another . " 
 " your aunt tell you that . " 
 " and I know your cousin , Tom Tringle . " 
 " you know Tom ? " ask Ayala . 
 " yes ; he be ever so good to I in Rome about a horse ; I like Tom 
 Tringle in spite of his chain . do not you think , upon the whole , if 
 that young lady have put up with Jonathan she would have do well 
 than marry Montpellier ? but now they be go to waltz , come along . " 
 Thereupon Ayala get up and dance with he for the next ten minute . 
 again and again before the evening be over she dance with he ; 
 and although , in the course of the night , many other partner have 
 offer themselves , and many have be accept , she feel that Colonel 
 Jonathan Stubbs have certainly be the partner of the evening . why 
 should he be so hideously ugly ? say Ayala to herself , as she wish 
 he good night before she leave the room with the Marchesa and Nina . 
 " what do you think of my nephew ? " say the Marchesa , when they be 
 in the carriage together . 
 " do tell we what you think of Jonathan ? " ask Nina . 
 " I think he be very good - natured . " 
 " and very handsome ? " 
 " Nina , do not be foolish . Jonathan be one of the most rise officer 
 in the british service , and luckily he can be that without be 
 beautiful to look at . " 
 " I declare , " say Nina , " sometimes , when he be talk , I think he 
 perfectly lovely . the fire come out of his eye , and he rub his old 
 red hair about till they sparkle . then he shin all over like a 
 carbuncle , and every word he say make I die of laughter . " 
 " I laugh too , " say Ayala . 
 " but you do not think he beautiful , " say Nina . 
 " no , I do not , " say Ayala . " I like he very much , but I think 
 he very ugly . be it true about the young lady who marry Mr. 
 Montgomery de Montpellier and be throw out of window a week 
 afterwards ? " 
 " there be one other thing I must tell you about Jonathan , " say Nina . 
 " you must not believe a word that he say . " 
 " that I deny , " say the Marchesa ; " but here we be . and now , girl , 
 get out of the carriage and go up to bed at once . " 
 Ayala , before she go to sleep , and again when she wake in the 
 morning , think a great deal about her new friend . as to shin 
 like a carbuncle,--perhaps he do , but that be not her idea of manly 
 beauty . and hair ought not to sparkle . she be sure that Colonel 
 Stubbs be very , very ugly . she be almost disposed to think that he 
 be the ugly man she have ever see . he certainly be a great deal 
 bad than her cousin Tom , who , after all , be not particularly ugly . 
 but , nevertheless , she would very much rather dance with Colonel 
 Stubbs . she be sure of that , even without reference to Tom 's 
 objectionable love - making . upon the whole she like dance with 
 Colonel Stubbs , ugly as he be . indeed , she like he very much . she 
 have spend a very pleasant evening because he have be there . " it 
 all depend upon whether any one have anything to say . " that be the 
 determination to which she come when she endeavour to explain 
 to herself how it have come to pass that she have like dancing 
 with anybody so very hideous . the Angel of Light would of course 
 have plenty to say for himself , and would be something altogether 
 different in appearance . he would be handsome,--or rather , intensely 
 interesting , and his talk would be of other thing . he would not 
 say of himself that he dance as well as though he be a rogue , or 
 declare that a lady have be throw out of a window the week after 
 she be marry . nothing could be more unlike an Angel of Light 
 than Colonel stubbs,--unless , perhaps , it be Tom Tringle . Colonel 
 Stubbs , however , be completely unangelic,--so much so that the 
 marvel be that he should yet be so pleasant . she have no horror of 
 Colonel Stubbs at all . she would go anywhere with Colonel Stubbs , and 
 feel herself to be quite safe . she hop she might meet he again 
 very often . he be , as it be , the Genius of Comedy , without a touch 
 of which life would be very dull . but the Angel of Light must have 
 something tragic in his composition,--must verge , at any rate , on 
 tragedy . Ayala do not know that beautiful description of a " sallow , 
 sublime , sort of Werther - face man , " but I fear that in create she 
 Angel of Light she draw a picture in her imagination of a man of that 
 kind . 
 day go on , till the last day of Ayala 's visit have come , and it be 
 necessary that she should go back to Kingsbury Crescent . it be now 
 August , and everybody be leave town . the Marchesa and Nina be 
 go to their relation , the Alburys , at Stalham , and could not , 
 of course , take Ayala with they . the Dosetts would remain in town 
 for another month , with a distant hope of be able to run down to 
 Pegwell Bay for a fortnight in September . but even that have not yet 
 be promise . Colonel Stubbs have be more than once at the house in 
 Brook Street , and Ayala have come to know he almost as she might some 
 great tame dog . it be now the afternoon of the last day , and she be 
 sorry because she would not be able to see he again . she be to be 
 take to the theatre that night,--and then to Kingsbury Crescent and 
 the realm of Lethe early on the following morning . 
 it be very hot , and they be sit with the shutter nearly 
 closed , have resolve not to go out , in order that they might be 
 ready for the theatre -- when the door be open and Tom Tringle be 
 announce . Tom Tringle have come to call on his cousin . 
 " Lady Baldoni , " he say , " I hope you will not think I intrusive , but I 
 think I would come and see my cousin once whilst she be stay here . " 
 the Marchesa bow , and assure he that he be very welcome . " it be 
 tremendously hot , " say Tom . 
 " very hot , indeed , " say the Marchesa . 
 " I do not think it be ever so hot as this in Rome , " say Nina , fan 
 herself . 
 " I find it quite impossible to walk a yard , " say Tom , " and therefore 
 I have hire a Hansom cab all to myself . the man go home and change 
 his horse regularly when I go to dinner ; then he come for I at ten , 
 and stick to I till I go to bed . I call that a very good plan . " 
 Nina ask he why he do not drive the cab himself . " that would be a 
 grind , " say he , " because it would be so hot all day , and there might 
 be rain at night . have you read what my brother - in - law , Traffick , 
 say in the House last night , my Lady ? " 
 " I be afraid I pass it over , " say the Marchesa . " indeed , I be not 
 very good at the debate . " 
 " they be dull , " say Tom , " but when it be one 's brother - in - law , one 
 do like to look at it . I think he make that very clear about the 
 malt tax . " the Marchesa smile and bow . 
 " what be -- malt tax ? " ask Nina . 
 " well , it mean beer , " say Tom . " the question be whether the poor 
 man pay it who drink the beer , or the farmer who grow the malt . it 
 be very interesting when you come to think of it . " 
 " but I fear I never have come to think of it , " say the Marchesa . 
 during all this time Ayala never say a word , but sit look at her 
 cousin , and remember how much well Colonel Jonathan Stubbs would 
 have talk if he have be there . then , after a pause , Tom get up , 
 and take his leave , have to content himself with simply squeeze 
 his cousin 's hand as he leave the room . 
 " he be a lout , " say Ayala , as soon as she know that the door be 
 close behind he . 
 " I do not see anything loutish at all , " say the Marchesa . 
 " he be just like most other young man , " say Nina . 
 " he be not at all like Colonel Stubbs , " say Ayala . 
 then the Marchesa preach a little sermon . " Colonel Stubbs , my 
 dear , " she say , " happen to have be throw a good deal about the 
 world , and have thus be able to pick up that easy mode of talk 
 which young lady like , perhaps because it mean nothing . your 
 cousin be a man of business , and will probably have amass a large 
 fortune when my poor nephew will be a do - nothing old general on 
 half - pay . his chatter will not then have avail he quite so much as 
 your cousin 's habit of business . " 
 " Mamma , " say Nina , " Jonathan will have money of his own . " 
 " never mind , my dear . I do not like to hear a young man call a lout 
 because he be more like a man of business than a man of pleasure . " 
 Ayala feel herself to be snub , but be not a whit the less sure 
 that Tom be a lout , and the Colonel an agreeable partner to dance 
 with . but at the same time she remember that neither the one nor 
 the other be to be speak of in the same breath , or think of in 
 the same spirit , as the Angel of Light . 
 when they be dress , and just go to dinner , the ugly man with 
 the red head be announce , and declare his purpose of go with 
 they to the theatre . " I have be to the office , " say he , " and get a 
 stall next to your , and have manage it all . it now only remain 
 that you should give I some dinner and a seat in the carriage . " of 
 course he be tell that there be no dinner sufficient for a man to 
 eat ; but he put up with a feminine repast , and spend the whole of the 
 evening sit next to his aunt , on a back tier , while the two girl 
 be place in front . in this way , lean forward , with his ugly 
 head between they , he act as a run chorus to the play during 
 the whole performance . Ayala thoroughly enjoy herself , and think 
 that in all her experience no play she have see have ever be so 
 delightful . on their return home the two girl be both tell to 
 go to bed in the Marchesa 's good - natured authoritative tone ; but , 
 nevertheless , Ayala do manage to say a word before she finally 
 adjust herself on her pillow . " it be all very well , Nina , for your 
 mamma to say that a young man of business be the good ; but I do know 
 a lout when I see he ; and I be quite sure that my cousin Tom be a 
 lout , and that Colonel Jonathan be not . " 
 " I believe you be fall in love with Colonel Jonathan , " say Nina . 
 " I should as soon think of fall in love with a wild bear;--but 
 he be not a lout , and therefore I like he . " 
 CHAPTER XVII . 
 LUCY be very firm . 
 it be just before the Tringles have return from Rome , during the 
 winter , that Lucy Dormer have meet Mr. Hamel in Kensington Gardens for 
 the second time , have walk there with he perhaps for half - an - hour , 
 and have then return home with a conviction that she have do a 
 wicked thing . but she have other conviction also , which be perhaps 
 strong . " now that we have meet , be I to lose you again ? " he have 
 say . what could he mean by lose , except that she be the one thing 
 which he desire to find ? but she have not see he since , or hear a 
 word of his whereabouts , although , as she so well remember , she have 
 give he an address at her Aunt emmeline's,--not know then that 
 it would be her fate to become a resident in her Aunt Emmeline 's 
 house . she have tell he that Ayala would live there , and that perhaps 
 she might sometimes be find visit Ayala . now , she be herself 
 fill Ayala 's place , and might so easily have be find . but she 
 know nothing of the man who have once ask whether he be " to lose 
 she again . " 
 her own feeling about Isadore Hamel be clear enough to herself 
 now . Ayala in her hot humour have ask she whether she could give she 
 hand and her heart to such a one as their cousin Tom , and she have 
 find herself constrain to say that she could not do so , because 
 she be not free,--not quite free,--to do as she please with she 
 hand and her heart . she have strive hard not to acknowledge anything , 
 even to ayala,--even to herself . but the word have be force 
 from she , and now she be conscious , terribly conscious , that the 
 word be true . there could be no one else now , whether Tom or 
 another,--whether such as Tom or such as any other . it be just that 
 little word that have win she . " be I to lose you again ? " a girl love 
 most often because she be loved,--not from choice on her part . she be 
 win by the flattery of the man 's desire . " be I to lose you again ? " he 
 have seem to throw all his soul into his voice and into his eye as 
 he have ask the question . a sudden thrill have fill she , and , for 
 his sake,--for his sake,--she have hop that she might not be lose to 
 he . now she begin to fear that he be lose to she . 
 something have be tell of the relation between Isadore Hamel and 
 his father . they be both sculptor , the father have become a 
 successful artist . the father be liberal , but he be essentially 
 autocratic . if he supply to his son the mean of living,--and 
 he be willing to supply the mean of very comfortable life,--he 
 expect that his son should live to some extent in accordance with 
 his fancy . the father wish his son to live in Rome , and to live 
 after the manner of Romans . Isadore would prefer to live in London , 
 and after the manner of londoner . for a time he have be allow to 
 do so , and have achieve a moderate success . but a young artist may 
 achieve a moderate success with a pecuniary result that shall be 
 almost less than moderate . after a while the sculptor in Rome have 
 tell his son that if he intend to remain in London he ought to do 
 so on the independent proceed of his own profession . Isadore , if 
 he would return to Rome , would be make welcome to join his affair 
 to those of his father . in other word , he be to be turn adrift 
 if he remain in London , and pet with every luxury if he would 
 consent to follow his art in Italy . but in Rome the father live 
 after a fashion which be distasteful to the son . Old Mr. Hamel have 
 repudiate all convention . convention be apt to go very quickly , 
 one after another , when the first have be throw aside . the man who 
 cease to dress for dinner soon find it to be a trouble to wash his 
 hand . a house be a bore . calling be a bore . church be a great bore . 
 a family be a bore . a wife be an unendurable bore . all law be 
 bore , except those by which inferior can be constrain to do their 
 work . Mr. Hamel have get rid of a great many bore , and have a strong 
 opinion that bore prevail more mightily in London than in Rome . 
 Isadore be not a bore to he . he be always willing to have Isadore 
 near to he . but if Isadore choose to enter the conventional mode of 
 life he must do it at his own expense . it may be say at once that 
 Isadore 's present view of life be very much influence by Lucy 
 Dormer , and by a feeling that she certainly be conventional . a small 
 house , very prettily furnish , somewhat near the Fulham Road , or 
 perhaps verge a little towards South Kensington , with two maid , 
 and perhaps an additional one as nurse in the process of some month , 
 with a pleasant english breakfast and a pleasant english teapot in 
 the evening , afford certainly a very conventional aspect of life . 
 but , at the present moment , it be his aspect , and therefore he could 
 not go upon all four with his father . in this state of thing there 
 have , during the last twelvemonth , be more than one journey make 
 to Rome and back . Ayala have see he at Rome , and Lady Tringle , 
 remember that the man have be intimate with her brother , be 
 afraid of he . they have make inquiry about he , and have fully 
 resolve that he should not be allow into the house if he come 
 after Ayala . he have no mother,--to speak of ; and he have little 
 brother and sister , who also have no mother,--to speak of . Mr. 
 Hamel , the father , entertain friend on Sunday , with the express 
 object of play card . that a Papist should do so be to be 
 borne;--but Mr. Hamel be not a Papist , and , therefore , would 
 certainly be ---- . all this and much more have be learn at Rome , 
 and therefore Lucy , though she herself never mention Mr. Hamel 's 
 name in Queen 's Gate , hear evil thing say of the man who be so 
 dear to she . 
 it be the custom of her life to be drive out every day with her 
 aunt and Gertrude . not to be take two or three time round the 
 park would be to Lady Tringle to rob she of the well appreciated of 
 all those gift of fortune which have come to she by reason of the 
 banker 's wealth . it be a stern law;--and as stern a law that Lucy 
 should accompany she . Gertrude , as be an absolute daughter of 
 the house , and as have an almost acknowledge lover of her own , 
 be allow some choice . but for Lucy there be no alternative . why 
 should she not go and be drive ? two day before they leave town she 
 be be drive , while her aunt be sit almost in a slumber 
 beside she , when suddenly a young man , lean over the railing , 
 take off his hat so close to Lucy that she could almost have put out 
 her hand to he . he be stand there all alone , and seem simply 
 to be watch the carriage as they pass . she feel that she 
 blush as she bow to he , and see also that the colour have rise 
 to his face . then she turn gently round to her aunt , whom she hop 
 to find still sleep ; but Aunt Emmeline could slumber with one eye 
 open . " who be that young man , my dear ? " say Aunt Emmeline . 
 " it be Mr. Hamel . " 
 " Mr. Isadore Hamel ! " say Aunt Emmeline , horrify . " be that the 
 young man at Rome who have get the horrible father ? " 
 " I do not know his father , " say Lucy ; " but he do live at Rome . " 
 " of course , it be the Mr. Hamel I mean . he scrap some acquaintance 
 with Ayala , but I would not have it for a moment . he be not at all 
 the sort of person any young girl ought to know . his father be a 
 horrible man . I hope he be no friend of your , Lucy ! " 
 " he be a friend of mine . " Lucy say this in a tone of voice which be 
 very seldom hear from she , but which , when hear , be evidence that 
 beneath the softness of her general manner there lie a will of her 
 own . 
 " then , my dear , I hope that such friendship may be discontinue as 
 long as you remain with we . " 
 " he be a friend of papa 's , " say Lucy . 
 " that be all very well . I suppose artist must know artist , even 
 though they be disreputable . " 
 " Mr. Hamel be not disreputable . " 
 Aunt Emmeline , as she hear this , could almost fancy that she 
 be renew one of her difficulty with Ayala . " my dear , " she 
 said,--and she intend to be very impressive as she spoke,--"in 
 a matter such as this I must beg you to be guide by I . you must 
 acknowledge that I know the world well than you do . Mr. Hamel be 
 not a fit person to be acquaint with a young lady who occupy the 
 place of my daughter . I be sure that will be sufficient . " then she 
 leant back in the carriage , and seem again to slumber ; but she 
 still have one eye open , so that if Mr. Hamel should appear again at 
 any corner and venture to raise his hand she might be aware of the 
 impropriety . but on that day Mr. Hamel do not appear again . 
 Lucy do not speak another word during the drive , and on reach 
 the house go at once to her bed - room . while she have be out with 
 her aunt close to she , and while it have be possible that the man 
 she love should appear again , she have be unable to collect she 
 thought or to make up her mind what she would do or say . one thing 
 simply be certain to she , that if Mr. Hamel should present himself 
 again to she she would not desert he . all that her aunt have say to 
 she as to impropriety and the like have no effect at all upon she . 
 the man have be welcome at her father 's house , have be allow 
 there to be intimate with she , and be now , as she be well aware , 
 much dearer to she than any other human being . not for all the Aunt 
 Emmelines in the world would she regard he otherwise than as she 
 dear friend . 
 when she be alone she discuss the matter with herself . it be 
 repugnant to she that there should be any secret on the subject 
 between herself and her aunt after what have be said,--much more 
 that there should be any deceit . " Mr. Hamel be not fit to be 
 acquaint with a lady who occupy the position of my daughter . " it 
 be thus that her aunt have speak . to this the proper answer seem 
 to be,--seeme at least to lucy,--"in that case , my dear aunt , I 
 can not for a moment long occupy the position of your daughter , 
 as I certainly be acquaint and shall remain acquainted with Mr. 
 Hamel . " but to such speech as this on her own part there be two 
 impediment . in the first place it would imply that Mr. Hamel be she 
 lover,--for imply which Mr. Hamel have give she no authority ; and 
 then what should she immediately do when she have thus obstinately 
 declare herself to be unfit for that daughter 's position which she 
 be suppose now to occupy ? with all her firmness of determination 
 she could not bring herself to tell she aunt that Mr. Hamel be her 
 lover . not because it be not as yet true . she would have be quite 
 willing that her aunt should know the exact truth , if the exact 
 truth could be explain . but how could she convey to such a one 
 as Aunt Emmeline the meaning of those words,--"am I to lose you 
 again ? " how could she make her aunt understand that she hold herself 
 to be absolutely bind , as by a marriage vow , by such word as 
 those,--word in which there be no promise , even have they come from 
 some fitting suitor , but which would be regard by Aunt Emmeline 
 as be simply impertinent come as they do from such a one as 
 Isadore Hamel . it be quite out of the question to tell all that to 
 Aunt Emmeline , but yet it be necessary that something should be 
 tell . she have be order to drop her acquaintance with Isadore , and 
 it be essential that she should declare that she would do nothing 
 of the kind . she would not recognise such obedience as a duty on her 
 part . the friendship have be create by her father , to whom she 
 early obedience have be due . it might be that , refuse to render 
 such obedience , her aunt and her uncle might tell she that there 
 could be no long shelter for she in that house . they could not 
 cherish and foster a disobedient child . if it must be so , it must . 
 though there should be no home leave to she in all the wide world she 
 would not accept an order which should separate she from the man 
 she love . she must simply tell her aunt that she could not drop Mr. 
 Hamel 's acquaintance,--because Mr. Hamel be a friend . 
 early on the next morning she do so . " be you aware , " say Aunt 
 Emmeline , with a severe face , " that he be -- illegitimate . " Lucy 
 blush , but make no answer . " be he -- be he -- engage to you ? " 
 " no , " say Lucy , sharply . 
 " have he ask you to marry he ? " 
 " no , " say Lucy . 
 " then what be it ? " ask Lady Tringle , in a tone which be intend 
 to signify that as nothing of that kind have take place such a 
 friendship could be a matter of no consequence . 
 " he be papa 's friend . " 
 " my dear , what can that matter ? your poor papa have go , and you be 
 in my charge and your uncle 's . surely you can not object to choose 
 your friend as we should wish . Mr. Hamel be a gentleman of whom we 
 do not approve . you can not have see very much of he , and it would 
 be very easy for you , should he bow to you again in the park , to let 
 he see that you do not like it . " 
 " but I do like it , " say Lucy , with energy . 
 " Lucy ! " 
 " I do like to see Mr. Hamel , and I feel almost sure that he will come 
 and call here now that he have see I . last winter he ask I my 
 address , and I give he this house . " 
 " when you be live with your Aunt Dosett ? " 
 " yes , I do , Aunt Emmeline . I think Aunt Margaret would not like 
 he to come to Kingsbury Crescent , and , as Ayala be to be here , I 
 tell he he might call at Queen 's Gate . " 
 then Lady Tringle be really angry . it be not only that her house 
 should have be select for so improper a use but that Lucy should 
 have show a fear and a respect for Mrs. Dosett which have not be 
 accord to herself . it be shocking to her pride that that should 
 have appear to be easy of achievement at Queen 's Gate which be 
 too wicked to be attempt at Kingsbury Crescent . and then the thing 
 which have be do seem in itself to she to be so horrible ! this 
 girl , when live under the care of her aunt , have make an appointment 
 with an improper young man at the house of another aunt ! any 
 appointment make by a young lady with a young man must , as she 
 think , be wrong . she begin to be aghast at the very nature of the 
 girl who could do such a thing , and on reflect that that girl be 
 at present under her charge as an adopt daughter . " Lucy , " she say , 
 very impressively , " there must be an end of this . " 
 " there can not be an end of it , " say Lucy . 
 " do you mean to say that he be to come here to this house whether I 
 and your uncle like it or not ? " 
 " he will come , " say Lucy ; " I be sure he will come . now he have see 
 I he will come at once . " 
 " why should he do that if he be not your lover ? " 
 " because , " say lucy,--and then she pause ; " because-- . it be very 
 hard to tell you , Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " why should he come so quickly ? " demand Aunt Emmeline again . 
 " Because-- . though he have say nothing to I such as that you mean , " 
 stammer out Lucy , determine to tell the whole truth , " I believe 
 that he will . " 
 " and you ? " 
 " if he do I should accept he . " 
 " has he any mean ? " 
 " I do not know . " 
 " have you any ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " and you would consent to be his wife after what I have tell you ? " 
 " yes , " say Lucy , " I should . " 
 " then it must not be in this house . that be all . I will not have he 
 here on any pretence whatsoever . " 
 " I think not , Aunt Emmeline , and therefore I have tell you . " 
 " do you mean that you will make an appointment with he elsewhere ? " 
 " certainly not . I have not in fact ever make an appointment with he . 
 I do not know his address . till yesterday I think that he be in 
 Rome . I never have a line from he in my life , and of course have 
 never write to he . " upon hear all this Lady Tringle sit in 
 silence , not quite know how to carry on the conversation . the 
 condition of Lucy 's mind be so strange to she , that she feel herself 
 to be incompetent to dictate . she could only resolve that under no 
 circumstance should the objectionable man be allow into her house . 
 " now , Aunt Emmeline , " say Lucy , " I have tell you everything . of 
 course you have a right to order , but I also have some right . you 
 tell I I be to drop Mr. Hamel , but I can not drop he . if he come 
 in my way I certainly shall not drop he . if he come here I shall 
 see he if I can . if you and Uncle Tom choose to turn I out of 
 course you can do so . " 
 " I shall tell your uncle all about it , " say Aunt Emmeline , angrily , 
 " and then you will hear what he say . " and so the conversation be 
 end . 
 at that moment Sir Thomas be , of course , in the City manage his 
 million , and as Lucy herself have suggest that Mr. Hamel might not 
 improbably call on that very day , and as she be quite determined 
 that Mr. Hamel should not enter the door of the house in Queen 's 
 Gate , it be necessary that step should be take at once . some hour 
 afterwards Mr. Hamel do call and ask for Miss Dormer . the door be 
 open by a well - appoint footman , who , with lugubrious face,--with 
 a face which speak much more eloquently than his words,--declare 
 that Miss Dormer be not at home . in answer to further inquiry he 
 go on to express an opinion that Miss Dormer never would be at 
 home;--from all which it may be see that Aunt Emmeline have take 
 strong measure to carry out her purpose . Hamel , when he hear his 
 fate thus plainly speak from the man 's mouth , turn away , not 
 doubt its meaning . he have see Lucy 's face in the park , and have 
 see also Lady Tringle 's gesture after his greeting . that Lady 
 Tringle should not be dispose to receive he at her house be not 
 matter of surprise to he . 
 when Lucy go to bed that night she do not doubt that Mr. Hamel have 
 call , and that he have be turn away from the door . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . 
 DOWN in SCOTLAND . 
 when the time come , all the Tringles , together with the Honourable 
 Mrs. Traffick , start for Glenbogie . Aunt Emmeline have tell Sir 
 Thomas all Lucy 's sin , but Sir Thomas have not make so much of they 
 as his wife have expect . " it would not be a bad thing to have a 
 husband for Lucy , " say Sir Thomas . 
 " but the man have not get a sixpence . " 
 " he have a profession . " 
 " I do not know that he make anything . and then think of his father ! 
 he be -- illegitimate ! " Sir Thomas seem rather to sneer at this . " and 
 if you know the way the old man live in Rome ! he play card all 
 Sunday ! " again Sir Thomas sneer . Sir Thomas be fairly submissive 
 to the conventionality himself , but do not think that they ought 
 to stand in the way of a provision for a young lady who have no 
 provision of her own . " you would not wish to have he at Queen 's 
 Gate ? " ask Lady Tringle . 
 " certainly not , if he make nothing by his profession . a good deal , 
 I think , depend upon that . " then nothing far be say , but Lucy 
 be not tell her uncle 's opinion on the matter , as have be promise . 
 when she go down to Glenbogie she only know that Mr. Hamel be 
 consider to be by far too black a sheep to be admit into her 
 aunt 's presence , and that she must regard herself as separate from 
 the man as far as any separation could be effect by her present 
 protector . but if he would be true to she , as to a girl whom he have 
 a short time since so keenly rejoice in " find again , " she be 
 quite sure that she could be true to he . 
 on the day fix , the 20th of August , Mr. Houston arrive at 
 Glenbogie , with boot and stocking and ammunition , such as Tom 
 have recommend when interrogate on those matter by his sister , 
 Gertrude . " I travel down with a man I think you know , " he say to 
 Lucy;--"at any rate your sister do , because I see he with she at 
 Rome . " the man turn out to be Isadore Hamel . " I do not like to ask 
 he whether he be come here , " say Frank Houston . 
 " no ; he be not come here , " say Aunt Emmeline . 
 " certainly not , " say Gertrude , who be quite prepared to take up the 
 cudgel on her mother 's behalf against Mr. Hamel . 
 " he say something about another man he use to know at Rome , before 
 you come . he be a nephew of that Marchesa Baldoni . " 
 " she be a lady we do not like a bit too well , " say Gertrude . 
 " a very stick - up sort of person , who do all she could to spoil 
 Ayala , " say Aunt Emmeline . 
 " Ayala have just be stay with she , " say Lucy . " she have be very 
 kind to Ayala . " 
 " we have nothing to do with that now , " say Aunt Emmeline . " Ayala can 
 stay with whom she and her aunt please . be this Mr. Hamel , whom you 
 see , a friend of the Marchesa 's ? " 
 " he seem to be a friend of the Marchesa 's nephew , " continue 
 Houston;--"one Colonel Stubbs . we use to see he at Rome , and a most 
 curious man he be . his name be Jonathan , and I do not suppose that any 
 man be ever see so red before . he be shoot somewhere , and Hamel 
 seem to be go to join he . I think he might have be come 
 here afterwards , as you all be in Rome together . " 
 " certainly he be not come here , " say Aunt Emmeline . " and as for 
 Colonel Stubbs , I never hear of he before . " 
 a week of the time allot to Frank Houston have go before he have 
 repeat a word of his suit to Sir Thomas . but with Gertrude every 
 opportunity have be allow he , and by the rest of the family they 
 have be regard as though they be engage . Mr. Traffick , who be 
 now at Glenbogie , in accordance with the compact make with he , do 
 not at first approve of Frank Houston . he have insinuate to Lady 
 Tringle , and have say very plainly to Augusta , that he regard a 
 young man , without any employment and without any income , as be 
 quite unfit to marry . " if he have a seat in the House it would be 
 quite a different thing , " he have say to Augusta . but his wife have 
 snub he ; tell he , almost in so many word , that if Gertrude 
 be determined to have her way in opposition to her father she 
 certainly would not be deter by her brother - in - law . " it be nothing 
 to I , " Mr. Traffick have then say ; " the money will not come out of my 
 pocket ; but when a man have nothing else to do he be sure to spend all 
 that he can lay his hand upon . " after that , however , he withdraw 
 his opposition , and allow it to be suppose that he be ready to 
 receive Frank Houston as his brother - in - law , should it be so decide . 
 the time be run by both with Houston , the expectant son - in - law , 
 and with Mr. Traffick , who have achieve his position , and both be 
 aware that no grace would be allow to they beyond that which have 
 be promise . Frank have fully consider the matter , and be quite 
 resolve that it would be unmanly in he to run after his cousin 
 Imogene , in the Tyrol , before he have perform his business . one 
 day , therefore , after have return from the daily allowance of 
 slaughter , he contrive to find Sir Thomas in the solitude of his own 
 room , and again begin to act the part of Allan - a - Dale . " I think , 
 Mr. Houston , " say Sir Thomas , " that we have settle that matter 
 before . " 
 " not quite , " say Houston . 
 " I do not know why you should say so . I intend to be understand as 
 express my mind . " 
 " but you have be good enough to ask I down here . " 
 " I may ask a man to my house , I suppose , without intend to give 
 he my daughter 's hand . " then he again ask the important question , 
 to which Allan - a - Dale 's answer be so unreasonable and so successful . 
 " have you an income on which to maintain my daughter ? " 
 " I can not just say that I have , Sir Thomas , " say Houston , 
 apologetically . 
 " then you mean to ask I to furnish you with an income . " 
 " you can do as you please about that , Sir Thomas . " 
 " you can hardly marry she without it . " 
 " well ; no ; not altogether . no doubt it be true that I should not have 
 propose myself have I not think that the young lady would have 
 something of her own . " 
 " but she have nothing of her own , " say Sir Thomas . and then that 
 interview be over . 
 " you will not throw we over , Lady Tringle ? " Houston say to Gertrude 's 
 mother that evening . 
 " Sir Thomas like to have his own way , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " somebody get round he about Septimus Traffick . " 
 " that be different , " say Lady Tringle . " Mr. Traffick be in 
 Parliament , and that give he an employment . he be a son of Lord 
 Boardotrade , and some of these day he will be in office . " 
 " of course , you know that if Gertrude stick to it she will have she 
 own way . when a girl stick to it her father have to give way . what 
 do it matter to he whether I have any business or not ? the money 
 would be the same in one case as the other , only it do seem such an 
 unnecessary trouble to have it put off . " 
 all this Lady Tringle seem to take in good part , and half 
 acknowledge that if Frank Houston be constant in the matter he 
 would succeed at last . Gertrude , when the time for his departure 
 have come , express herself as thoroughly disgust by her father 's 
 sternness . " it be all bosh , " she say to her lover . " who be Lord 
 Boardotrade that that should make a difference ? I have as much right 
 to please myself as Augusta . " but there be the stern fact that the 
 money have not be promise , and even Frank have not propose to marry 
 the girl of his heart without the concomitant thousand . 
 before he leave Glenbogie , on the evening of his departure , he write a 
 second letter to Miss Docimer , as follows;-- 
    DEAR COUSIN IM , 
    here I be at Glenbogie , and here I have be for a week , 
    without do a stroke of work . the father still ask " of 
    his house and his home , " and do not seem to be at all 
    affect by my reference to the romantic grandeur of my 
    own peculiar residence . perhaps I may boast so far as to 
    say that I have laugh on the lass as successfully as do 
    Allan - a - Dale . but what be the good of laugh on a lass 
    when one have get nothing to eat . Allan - a - Dale could pick 
    a pocket or cut a purse , accomplishment in which I be 
    altogether deficient . I suppose I shall succeed soon or 
    later , but when I put my neck into the collar I have no 
    idea that there would be so much up - hill work before I . 
    it be all very well joke , but it be not nice to be ask 
    " of your house and your home " by a gentleman who know 
    very well you have get none , and be conscious of inhabit 
    three or four palace himself . such treatment must be 
    describe as be decidedly vulgar . and then he must know 
    that it can be of no possible permanent use . the lady 
    be all on my side , but I be tell by Tringle mère that 
    I be less acceptable than old Traffick , who marry the 
    other girl , because I be not the son of Lord Boardotrade ! 
    nothing astonish I so much as the bad taste of some 
    people . now , it must all be put off till Christmas , and 
    the cruel part be , that one do not see how I be to go on 
    living . 
    in the meantime I have a little time in which to amuse 
    myself , and I shall turn up in about three week at Merle 
    Park . I wish chiefly to beg that you will not dissuade I 
    from what I see clearly to be a duty . I know exactly your 
    line of argument . follow a girl for her money be , you 
    will say , mercenary . so , as far as I can see , be every 
    transaction in the world by which man live . the judge , 
    the bishop , the poet , the Royal academician , and the 
    Prime Ministers , be all mercenary;--as be also the man 
    who break stone for 2_s . _ 6_d . _ a - day . how shall a man 
    live without be mercenary unless he be bear to fortune ? 
    be not girl always mercenary ? will she marry I know 
    that I have nothing ? will you not marry some one whom 
    you will probably like much less simply because he will 
    have something for you to eat and drink ? of course I 
    be mercenary , and I do not even pretend to old Tringle 
    that I be not so . I feel a little tired of this special 
    effort;--but if I be to abandon it I should simply have 
    to begin again elsewhere . I have sight my stag , and 
    I must go on follow he , try to get on the right 
    side of the wind till I bring he down . it be not nice , 
    but it be to I manifestly my duty,--and I shall do it . 
    therefore , do not let there be any blowing up . I hate to 
    be scold . 
    your always affectionately , 
    F. H. 
 Gertrude , when he be go , do not take the matter quite so quietly 
 as he do , feel that , as she have make up her mind , and as all 
 her world would know that she have make up her mind , it behove she 
 to carry her purpose to its desire end . a girl who be know to 
 be engage , but whose engagement be not allow , be always in a 
 disagreeable plight . 
 " Mamma , " she say , " I think that papa be not treat I well . " 
 " my dear , your papa have always have his own way . " 
 " that be all very well;--but why be I to be worse use than Augusta ? 
 it turn out now that Mr. Traffick have not get a shilling of his 
 own . " 
 " your papa like his be in Parliament . " 
 " all the girl can not marry member of Parliament . " 
 " and he like his be the son of Lord Boardotrade . " 
 " Lord Boardotrade ! I call that very mean . Mr. Houston be a gentleman , 
 and the Buncombe property have be for ever so many hundred of year 
 in the family . I think more of Frank as to birth and all that than I 
 do of Lord Boardotrade and his mushroom peerage . can not you tell papa 
 that I mean to marry Mr. Houston at last , and that he be make very 
 little of I to let I be talk about as I shall be ? " 
 " I do not think I can , Gertrude . " 
 " then I shall . what would he say if I be to run away with Frank ? " 
 " I do not think Frank Houston would do that . " 
 " he would if I tell him,--in a moment . " there Miss Tringle be 
 probably in error . " and unless papa consent I shall tell he . I be 
 not go to be make miserable for ever . " 
 this be at Glenbogie , in inverness - shire , on the southeastern side 
 of Loch Ness , where Sir Thomas Tringle possess a beautiful mansion , 
 with a deer - forest , and a waterfall of his own , and any amount of 
 moor which the mind of sportman could conceive . nothing in Scotland 
 could be more excellent , unless there might be some truth in the 
 remark of those who say that the grouse be scarce , and that the 
 deer be almost non - existent . on the other side of the lake , four 
 mile up from the gate , on the edge of a ravine , down which rush 
 a little stream call the Caller , be an inconvenient ricketty 
 cottage , build piecemeal at two or three different time , call 
 Drumcaller . from one room you go into another , and from that into 
 a third . to get from the sitting - room , which be call the parlour , 
 into another which be call the den , you have to pass through the 
 kitchen , or else to make communication by a covered passage out of 
 door which seem to hang over the margin of the ravine . pine - tree 
 envelop the place . look at the house from the outside any 
 one would declare it to be wet through . it certainly could not 
 with truth be describe as a comfortable family residence . but you 
 might , perhaps , travel through all Scotland without find a more 
 beautifully romantic spot in which to reside . from that passage , 
 which seem to totter suspend over the rock , whence the tumbling 
 rushing water could always be hear like music close at hand , the 
 view down over the little twisting river be such as fill the mind 
 with a conviction of realise poetry . behind the house across the 
 little garden there be a high rock where a little path have be 
 form , from which could be see the whole valley of the Caller and 
 the broad shin expanse of the lake beyond . those who know the 
 cottage of Drumcaller be apt to say that no man in Scotland have a 
 more picturesque abode , or one more inconvenient . even bread have to 
 be carry up from Callerfoot , as be call the little village down 
 on the lake side , and other provision , such even as meat , have to be 
 fetch twenty mile , from the town of Inverness . 
 a few day after the departure of Houston from Glenbogie two man 
 be seat with pipe in their mouth on the landing outside the 
 room call the den to which the passage from the parlour ran . here 
 a square platform have be construct capable of contain two 
 arm - chair , and here the owner of the cottage be accustom to sit , 
 when he be dispose , as he call it , to loaf away his time at 
 Drumcaller . this man be Colonel Jonathan Stubbs , and his companion 
 at the present moment be Isadore Hamel . 
 " I never know they in Rome , " say the Colonel . " I never even see 
 Ayala there , though she be so much at my aunt 's house . I be in 
 sicily part of the time , and do not get back till they have all 
 quarrel . I do know the nephew , who be a good - natured but a 
 vulgar young man . they be vulgar people , I should say . " 
 " you could hardly have find Ayala vulgar ? " ask Hamel . 
 " indeed , no . but uncle and aunt and nephew and niece be not at 
 all bind to run together . Ayala be the dainty little darling I 
 ever see . " 
 " I know their father and mother , and certainly no one would have 
 call they vulgar . " 
 " sister when they marry of course go off accord to their 
 husband , and the child follow . in this case one sister become 
 Tringlish after Sir Tringle , and the other Dormerish , after that most 
 improvident of human being , your late friend the artist . I do not 
 suppose any amount of experience will teach Ayala how many shilling 
 there be in a pound . no doubt the Honourable Mrs. Traffick know all 
 about it . " 
 " I do not think a girl be much improve by know how many shilling 
 there be in a pound , " say Hamel . 
 " it be useful sometimes . " 
 " so it might be to kill a sheep and skin it , or to milk a cow and 
 make cheese ; but here , as in other thing , one acquirement will drive 
 out other . a woman , if she can not be beautiful , should at any rate 
 be graceful , and if she can not soar to poetry , should at least be 
 soft and unworldly . " 
 " that be all very well in its way , but I go in for roasting , bake , 
 and boil . 
    I can bake and I can brew ; 
    I can make an irish stew ; 
    wash a shirt and iron it too . 
 that be the sort of girl I mean to go in for if ever I marry ; and 
 when you have get six child and a small income it be apt to turn out 
 well than grace and poetry . " 
 " a little of both perhaps , " say Hamel . 
 " well , yes ; I do not mind a little Byron now and again , so there be 
 no nonsense . as to Glenbogie , it be right over there across the lake . 
 you can get a boat at Callerfoot , and a fellow to take you across and 
 wait for you will not cost you more than three half - crown . I suppose 
 Glenbogie be as far from the lake on that side as my cottage be on 
 this . how you will get up except by walk I can not say , unless you 
 will write a note to Sir Thomas and ask he to send a horse down for 
 you . " 
 " Sir Thomas would not accommodate I . " 
 " you think he will frown if you come after his niece ? " 
 " I simply want to call on Miss Dormer , " say Hamel , blushing , 
 " because her father be always kind to I . " 
 " I do not mean to ask any question , " say the Colonel . 
 " it be just so as I say . I do not like be in the neighbourhood 
 without call on Miss Dormer . " 
 " I daresay not . " 
 " but I doubt whether Sir Thomas or Lady Tringle would be at all 
 inclined to make I welcome . as to the distance , I can walk that 
 easily enough , and if the door be slam in my face I can walk back 
 again . " 
 thus it be resolve that early on the follow morning after 
 breakfast Isadore Hamel should go across the lake and make his way up 
 to Glenbogie . 
 CHAPTER XIX . 
 ISADORE HAMEL be ask TO LUNCH . 
 on the following morning , the morning of Monday , 2nd September , 
 Isadore Hamel start on his journey . he have think much about the 
 journey before he make it . no doubt the door have be slam in his 
 face in London . he feel quite conscious of that , and conscious also 
 that a man should not renew his attempt to enter a door when it have 
 be once slam in his face . but he understand the circumstance 
 nearly as they have happened,--except that he be not aware how far 
 the door have be slam by Lady Tringle without any concurrence 
 on the part of Sir Thomas . but the door have , at any rate , not be 
 slam by Lucy . the only person he have really wish to see within 
 that house have be Lucy Dormer ; and he have hitherto no reason for 
 supposing that she would be unwilling to receive he . her face have 
 be sweet and gracious when she see he in the Park . be he to deny 
 himself all hope of any future intercourse with she because Lady 
 Tringle have choose to despise he ? he must make some attempt . it be 
 more than probable , no doubt , that this attempt would be futile . 
 the servant at Glenbogie would probably be as well instruct as 
 the servant in Queen 's Gate . but still a man have to go on and do 
 something , if he mean to do anything . there could be no good in 
 sit up at Drumcaller , at one side of the lake , and think of 
 Lucy Dormer far away , at the other side . he have not at all make up 
 his mind that he would ask Lucy to be his wife . his professional 
 income be still poor , and she , as he be aware , have nothing . but 
 he feel it to be incumbent upon he to get near to she if it be 
 possible , and to say something to she if the privilege of speech 
 should be accord to he . 
 he walk down to Callerfoot , refuse the loan of the Colonel 's pony 
 carriage , and thence have himself carry across the lake in a hire 
 boat to a place call Sandy 's Quay . that , he be assure , be the 
 spot on the other side from whence the near road would be find 
 to Glenbogie . but nobody on the Callerfoot side could tell he what 
 would be the distance . at Sandy 's Quay he be assure that it be 
 twelve mile to Glenbogie House ; but he soon find that the man who 
 tell he have a pony for hire . " Ye'll nae get there under twalve 
 mile,--or maybe saxteen , if ye attampt to walk up the glin . " so say 
 the owner of the pony . but milder information come to he speedily . 
 a little boy would show he the way up the glen for sixpence , and 
 engage to bring he to the house in an hour and a half . so he start 
 with the little boy , and after a hot scramble for about two hour he 
 find himself within the demesne . poke their way up through thick 
 bush from a ravine , they show their two heads,--first the boy and 
 then the sculptor,--close by the side of the private road,--just as 
 Sir Thomas be pass , mount on his cob . " it be his ain sell , " say 
 the boy , drop his head again amongst the bush . 
 Hamel , when he have make good his footing , have first to turn round 
 so that the lad might not lose his wage . a dirty little hand come 
 up for the sixpence , but the head never appear again . it be well 
 know in the neighbourhood,--especially at Sandy 's Quay , where boat 
 be use to land,--that Sir Thomas be not partial to visitor who 
 make their way into Glenbogie by any but the authorised road . while 
 Hamel be pay his debt , he stand still on his steed wait to 
 see who might be the trespasser . " that be not a high road , " say Sir 
 Thomas , as the young man approach he . as the last quarter of an 
 hour from the bottom of the ravine have be occupy in very stiff 
 climbing among the rock the information convey appear to Hamel 
 to have be almost unnecessary . " your way up to the house , if you 
 be go there , would have be through the lodge down there . " 
 " perhaps you be Sir Thomas Tringle , " say Hamel . 
 " that be my name . " 
 " then I have to ask your pardon for my mode of ingress . I be go up 
 to the house ; but have cross the lake from Callerfoot I do not 
 know my way on this side , and so I have clamber up the ravine . " Sir 
 Thomas bow , and then wait for further tiding . " I believe Miss 
 Dormer be at the house ? " 
 " my niece be there . " 
 " my name be Hamel,--Isadore Hamel . I be a sculptor , and use to be 
 acquaint with her father . I have have great kindness from the whole 
 family , and so I be go to call upon she . if you do not object , I 
 will go on to the house . " 
 Sir Thomas sit upon his horse speechless for a minute . he have to 
 consider whether he do not object or not . he be well aware that 
 his wife objected,--aware also that he have decline to coincide with 
 his wife 's objection when it have be press upon he . why should 
 not his niece have the advantage of a lover , if a proper sort of a 
 lover come in her way ? as to the father 's moral or the son 's birth , 
 those matter to Sir Thomas be nothing . the young man , he be 
 tell , be good at make bust . would any one buy the bust when 
 they be make ? that be the question . his wife would certainly be 
 prejudiced,--would think it necessary to reject for Lucy any suitor 
 she would reject for her own girl . and then , as Sir Thomas feel , she 
 have not show great judgment in select suitor for her own girl . 
 " oh , Mr. Hamel , be you ? " he say at last . 
 " Isadore Hamel . " 
 " you call at Queen 's Gate once , not long ago ? " 
 " I do , " say Hamel ; " but see no one . " 
 " no , you do not ; I hear that . well , you can go on to the house if 
 you like , but you have well ask for Lady Tringle . after come over 
 from Callerfoot you will want some lunch . stop a moment . I do not mind 
 if I ride back with you . " and so the two start towards the house , 
 and Hamel listen whilst Sir Thomas expatiate on the beauty of 
 Glenbogie . 
 they have pass through one gate and be approach another , when , 
 away among the tree , there be a young lady see walk alone . 
 " there be Miss Dormer , " say Hamel ; " I suppose I may join she ? " Sir 
 Thomas could not quite make up his mind whether the meeting be to 
 be allow or not , but he could not bring himself at the spur of the 
 moment to refuse his sanction . so Hamel make his way across to Lucy , 
 while Sir Thomas ride on alone to the house . 
 Lucy have see her uncle on the cob , and , be accustom to see he 
 on the cob , know of course who he be . she have also see another man 
 with he , but not in the least expect that Hamel be in those 
 part , have never dream that he be her uncle 's companion . it be 
 not till Hamel be near to she that she understand that the man be 
 come to join herself ; and then , when she do recognise the man , she 
 be lose in amazement . " you hardly expect to see I here ? " say he . 
 " indeed ; no . " 
 " nor do I expect that I should find you in this way . " 
 " my uncle know it be you ? " ask Lucy . 
 " oh , yes . I meet he as I come up from the ravine , and he have ask 
 I to go on to the house to lunch . " then there be silence for a few 
 moment as they walk on together . " I hope you do not think that I 
 be persecute you in make my way over here . " 
 " oh , no ; not persecute ! " Lucy when she hear the sound of what she 
 herself have say , be angry with herself , feel that she have almost 
 declare he guilty of some wrong in have come thither . " of course 
 I be glad to see you , " she add , " for papa 's sake , but I be afraid-- " 
 " Afraid of what , Miss Dormer ? " 
 she look he full in the face as she answer he , collect she 
 courage to make the declaration which seem to be necessary . " my 
 Aunt Emmeline do not want you to come . " 
 " why should she not want I ? " 
 " that I can not tell . perhaps if I do know I should not tell . but 
 it be so . you call at Queen 's Gate , and I know that you be not 
 admit , though I be at home . of course , Aunt Emmeline have a right 
 to choose who shall come . it be not as though I have a house of my 
 own . " 
 " but Sir Thomas ask I in . " 
 " then you have well go in . after what Aunt Emmeline say , I do not 
 think that you ought to remain with I . " 
 " your uncle know I be with you , " say Hamel . then they walk on 
 towards the house together in silence for a while . " do you mean to 
 say , " he continue , " that because your aunt object you be never to 
 see I again ? " 
 " I hope I shall see you again . you be papa 's friend , and I should 
 be so very sorry not to see you again . " 
 " I suppose , " he say , slowly , " I can never be more than your papa 's 
 friend . " 
 " you be mine also . " 
 " I would be more than that . " then he pause as if wait for a 
 reply , but she of course have none to make . " I would be so much more 
 than that , Lucy . " still she have no answer to give he . but there 
 come a time when no answer be as excellent eloquence as any word 
 that can be speak . Hamel , who have probably not think much of this , 
 be nevertheless at once inform by his instinct that it be so . 
 " oh , Lucy , " he say , " if you can love I say so . " 
 " Mr. Hamel , " she whisper . 
 " Lucy . " 
 " Mr. Hamel , I tell you about Aunt Emmeline . she will not allow it . I 
 ought not to have let you speak to I like this , while I be stay 
 here . " 
 " but your uncle know I be with you . " 
 " my aunt do not know . we must go to the house . she expressly 
 desire that I would not speak to you . " 
 " and you will obey she -- always ? " 
 " no ; not always . I do not say that I should obey she always . some 
 day , perhaps , I shall do as I think fit myself . " 
 " and then you will speak to I ? " 
 " then I will speak to you , " she say . 
 " and love I ? " 
 " and love you , " she answer , again look he full in the face . 
 " but now pray , pray let we go on . " for he have stop she awhile 
 amidst the tree , and have put out his hand as though to take her , 
 and have open his arm as though he would embrace she . but she 
 pass on quickly , and hardly answer his further question till 
 they find themselves together in the hall of the house . 
 then they meet Lady Tringle , who be just pass into the room where 
 the lunch be lay , and follow she be Augusta , Gertrude , and the 
 Honourable Septimus Traffick . for , though Frank Houston have find 
 himself compel to go at the day name , the Honourable Septimus 
 have contrive to squeeze out another week . Augusta be indeed still 
 not without hope that the paternal hospitality of Glenbogie might be 
 prolong till dear Merle Park should once again open her portal . 
 Sir Thomas have already pass into the dining - room , have in gruff 
 voice inform his wife that he have invite Mr. Hamel to come in to 
 lunch . " Mr. Hamel ! " she have exclaim . " yes , Mr. Hamel . I could not 
 see the man starve when he have come all this way . I do not know 
 anything against he . " then he have turn away , and have go into 
 the dining - room , and be now stand with his back to the empty 
 fire - place , determine to take Mr. Hamel 's part if any want of 
 courtesy be show to he . 
 it certainly be hard upon Lady Tringle . she frown and be go to 
 walk on without any acknowledgment , when Lucy timidly go through 
 a form of introduction . " Aunt Emmeline , this be Mr. Hamel . Uncle 
 Tom meet he somewhere in the ground and have ask he to come to 
 luncheon . " then Lady Tringle curtsey and make a bow . the curtsey 
 and the bow together be sufficient to have crush the heart of any 
 young man who have not be comfort and exalt by such word as 
 Isadore have hear from Lucy 's lip not five minute since . " and love 
 you , " she have say . after that Lady Tringle might curtsey and bow 
 as she would , and he could still live uncrushed . after the curtsey 
 and the bow Lady Tringle pass on . Lucy fall into the rank behind 
 Gertrude ; and then Hamel afterwards take his place behind the 
 Honourable Septimus . " if you will sit there , Mr. Hamel , " say Lady 
 Tringle , point to a chair , across the table , obliquely , at the 
 great possible distance from that occupy by Lucy . there he 
 be station between Mr. Traffick and Sir Thomas . but now , in his 
 present frame of mind , his position at the table make very little 
 difference to he . 
 the lunch be eat in grim silence . Sir Thomas be not a man profuse 
 with conversation at his meal , and at this moment be ill - inclined 
 for any word except what he might use in scold his wife for be 
 uncivil to his guest . Lady Tringle sit with her head erect , hardly 
 open her mouth sufficiently to allow the food to enter it . it be 
 her purpose to show her displeasure at Mr. Hamel , and she show it . 
 Augusta take her mother 's part , thoroughly despise the two Dormer 
 girl and any lover that they might have . poor Gertrude have on that 
 morning be violently persecute by a lecture as to Frank Houston 's 
 impecuniosity . Lucy of course would not speak . the Honourable 
 Septimus be anxious chiefly about his lunch,--somewhat anxious also 
 to offend neither the master nor the mistress of Merle Park . Hamel 
 make one or two little effort to extract answer from Sir Thomas , 
 but soon find that Sir Thomas would prefer to be leave in silence . 
 what do it signify to he ? he have do all that he want , and much 
 more than he have expect . 
 the rise and get away from luncheon be always a difficulty,--so 
 great a difficulty when there be guest that lunch should never be 
 much a company festival . there be no provision for leave the table 
 as there be at dinner . but on this occasion Lady Tringle extemporise 
 provision the first moment in which they have all cease to eat . " Mr. 
 Hamel , " she say very loudly , " would you like some cheese ? " Mr. 
 Hamel , with a little start , declare that he want no cheese . " then , 
 my dear , I think we will go into my room . Lucy , will you come with 
 I ? " upon this the four lady all go out in procession , but her 
 ladyship be careful that Lucy should go first so that there might 
 be no possibility of escape . augusta and Gertrude follow she . the 
 mind of all the four be somewhat perturb ; but among the four 
 Lucy 's heart be by far the light . 
 " be you stay over with Stubbs at that cottage ? " ask the 
 Honourable Septimus . " a very queer fellow be Stubbs . " 
 " a very good fellow , " say Hamel . 
 " I dare say . he have not get any shooting ? " 
 " I think not . " 
 " not a head . Glentower would not let an acre of shoot over there 
 for any money . " this be the Earl of Glentower , to whom belong an 
 enormous tract of country on the other side of the lake . " what on 
 earth do he do with himself stick up on the top of those rock ? " 
 " he do shoot sometimes , I believe , when Lord Glentower be there . " 
 " that be a poor kind of fun , wait to be ask for a day , " say 
 the Honourable Septimus , who rarely wait for anything till he be 
 ask . " do he get any fishing ? " 
 " he catch a few trout sometimes in the tarn above . but I fancy 
 that Stubbs be not much devoted to shoot and fishing . " 
 " then what the d---- do he do with himself in such a country as 
 this ? " Hamel shrug his shoulder , not care to say that what with 
 walking , what with reading and writing , his friend could be as happy 
 as the day be long in such a place as Drumcaller . 
 " be he a Liberal ? " 
 " a what ? " ask Hamel . " oh , a Liberal ? upon my word I do not know what 
 he be . he be chiefly give to poetry , tobacco , and military matter . " 
 then the Honourable Septimus turn up his nose in disgust , and 
 cease his cross - examination as to the character and pursuit of 
 Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . 
 " Sir Thomas , I be very much oblige to you for your kindness , " say 
 Hamel , get up suddenly . " as it be a long way over to Drumcaller I 
 think I will make a start . I know my way down the Glen and should be 
 sure to miss it by any other route . perhaps you will let I go back as 
 I come . " Sir Thomas offer he the loan of a horse , but this be 
 refuse , and Hamel start on his return journey across the lake . 
 when he have go a few step from the portal he turn to look at 
 the house which contain one whom he now regard as belong 
 exclusively to himself ; perhaps he think that he might catch some 
 final view of Lucy ; or , not quite think it , fancy that some 
 such chance might at least be possible ; but he see nothing but the 
 uninteresting facade of the grand mansion . Lucy be employ quite 
 otherwise . she be listen to a lecture in which her aunt be 
 describe to she how very badly Mr. Hamel have behave in obtrude 
 himself on the shade of Glenbogie . the lecture be somewhat long , as 
 Aunt Emmeline find it necessary to repeat all the argument which 
 she have before use as to the miscreant 's birth , as to his want of 
 adequate mean , and as to the general iniquity of the miscreant 's 
 father . all this she repeat more than once with an energy that be 
 quite unusual to she . the flood of her eloquence be so great that 
 Lucy find no moment for an interpose word till all these evil 
 have be denunciate twice and thrice . but then she speak . " Aunt 
 Emmeline , " she say , " I be engage to Mr. Hamel now . " 
 " what ! " 
 " he have ask I to be his wife and I have promise . " 
 " and that after all that I have say to you ! " 
 " Aunt Emmeline , I tell you that I should not drop he . I do not bid 
 he come here . Uncle Tom bring he . when I see he I would have 
 avoid he if I could . I tell he he ought not to be here because 
 you do not wish it ; and then he answer that my uncle know that he 
 be with I . of course when he tell I that he -- love I , I could 
 not make he any other answer . " then Aunt Emmeline express the 
 magnitude of her indignation simply by silence , and Lucy be leave to 
 think of her lover in solitude . 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 " and how have you fare on your day 's journey ? " say the Colonel , 
 when Hamel find he still seat on the platform with a book in his 
 hand . 
 " much well than I think . Sir Thomas give I luncheon . " 
 " and the young lady ? " 
 " the young lady be gracious also ; but I be afraid that I can not 
 carry my praise of the family at Glenbogie any far . the three 
 Tringle lady look at I as I be sit at table as though I 
 certainly have no business in their august society . " 
 CHAPTER XX . 
 STUBBS upon MATRIMONY . 
 before that evening be over,--or in the course of the night , 
 it might be well say , as the two man sit up late with their 
 pipes,--hamel tell his friend the Colonel exactly what have take 
 place that morning over at Glenbogie . " you go for the purpose , of 
 course ? " ask the Colonel . 
 " for an off chance ? " 
 " I know that well enough . I never hear of a man 's walk twelve 
 mile to call upon a young lady merely because he know her father ; 
 and when there be to be a second call within a few week , the first 
 have not be take in very good part by the young lady 's friend , 
 my inquire mind tell I that there be something more than old 
 family friendship . " 
 " your inquire mind see into the truth . " 
 " and now look forward to further event . can she bake and can she 
 brew ? " 
 " I do not doubt that she could if she try . " 
 " and can she wash a shirt for a man ? do not suppose , my dear fellow , 
 that I intend to say that your wife will have to wash your . washing 
 a shirt , as read in the poem from which I be quote , be presume to 
 be simply emblematic of household duty in general . " 
 " I take all you say in good part,--as come from a friend . " 
 " I regard matrimony , " say the Colonel , " as be altogether the 
 happy state of life for a man,--unless to be engage to some 
 lovely creature , in whom one can have perfect confidence , may be a 
 thought happy . one can enjoy all the ecstatic mental reflection , 
 all the delight of conceit which come from be love , that feeling 
 of superiority to all the world around which illumine the bosom 
 of the favour lover , without have to put one 's hand into one 's 
 pocket , or have one 's pipe put out either morally or physically . 
 the next to this be matrimony itself , which be the only remedy for 
 that consciousness of disreputable debauchery , a savour of which 
 always cling , more or less strongly , to unmarried man in our rank 
 of life . the chime must be hear at midnight , let a young man be 
 ever so well give to the propriety , and he must have just a touch 
 of the swingebuckler about he , or he will seem to himself to be 
 deficient in virility . there be no get out of it until a man 
 marry . but then-- " 
 " well ; then ? " 
 " do you know the man whose long - preserve hat be always brush 
 carefully , whose coat be the pattern of neatness , but still a little 
 threadbare when you look at it,--in the colour of whose cheek there 
 be still some touch of juvenility , but whose step be ever heavy and 
 whose brow be always sad ? the seriousness of life have press the 
 smile out of he . he have learn hardly to want anything for himself 
 but outward decency and the common necessary of life . such little 
 personal indulgence as be common to you and to I be as strange to 
 he as ortolan or diamond . " 
 " I do not think I do know he . " 
 " I do;--well . I have see he in the regiment , I have meet he on 
 the step of a public office , I have watch he as he enter his 
 parsonage house . you shall find he come out of a lawyer 's office , 
 where he have sit for the last nine hour , have support nature 
 with two penny biscuit . he have always those few thin hair over his 
 forehead , he have always that well - brush hat , he have always that 
 load of care on his brow . he be generally think whether he shall 
 endeavour to extend his credit with the butcher , or resolve that the 
 supply of meat may be again curtail without injury to the health of 
 his five daughter . " 
 " that be an ugly picture . " 
 " but be it true ? " 
 " in some case , of course , it be . " 
 " and yet not ugly all round , " say the meditative Colonel , who have 
 just replenish his pipe . " there be , on the other side , the five 
 daughter , and the partner of this load of care . he know it be well 
 to have the five daughter , rather than to live with plenty of beef 
 and mutton,--even with the ortolan if you will,--and with no one to 
 care whether his body may be rack in this world or his spirit in 
 the next . I do not say whether the balance of good or evil be on one 
 side or the other ; but when a man be go to do a thing he should 
 know what it be he be go to do . " 
 " the reading of all this , " say Hamel , " be , that if I succeed in 
 marry Miss Dormer I must have thin lock , and a bad hat , and a 
 butcher 's bill . " 
 " other man do . " 
 " some , instead , have balance at their banker , and die worth thirty , 
 forty , or fifty thousand pound , to the great consolation of the five 
 daughter . " 
 " or a hundred thousand pound ! there be , of course , no end to 
 the amount of thousand which a successful professional man may 
 accumulate . you may be the man ; but the question be , whether you 
 should not have reasonable ground to suppose yourself the man , before 
 you encumber yourself with the five daughter . " 
 " it seem to I , " say Hamel , " that the need of such assurance be 
 cowardly . " 
 " that be just the question which I be always debate with myself . I 
 also want to rid myself of that swingebuckler flavour . I feel that 
 for I , like Adam , it be not good that I should be alone . I would 
 fain ask the first girl , that I could love well enough to wish 
 to make myself one with she , to be my wife , regardless of hat , 
 butcher , and daughter . it be a plucky and a fine thing for a man to 
 feel that he can make his back broad enough for all burden . but yet 
 what be the good of thinking that you can carry a sack of wheat when 
 you be sure that you have not , in truth , strength to raise it from 
 the ground ? " 
 " strength will come , " say Hamel . 
 " yes , and the bad hat . and , bad than the bad hat , the soiled gown ; 
 and perhaps with the soiled gown the altered heart;--and perhaps with 
 the altered heart an absence of all that tenderness which it be a 
 woman 's special right to expect from a man . " 
 " I should have think you would have be the last to be so 
 self - diffident . " 
 " to be so thoughtful , you mean , " say the Colonel . " I be unattached 
 now , and have have no special duty for the last three month I have 
 give myself over to think in a nasty morbid manner . it come , 
 I daresay , partly from tobacco . but there be comfort in this,--that 
 no such reflection fall out of one man 's mouth ever have the 
 slight effect in influence another man 's conduct . " 
 Hamel have tell his friend with great triumph of his engagement 
 with Lucy Dormer , but the friend do not return the confidence by 
 inform the sculptor that during the whole of this conversation , 
 and for many day previous to it , his mind have be concern with 
 the image of Lucy 's sister . he be aware that Ayala have be , as it 
 be , turn out from her rich uncle 's house , and give over to the 
 comparative poverty of Kingsbury Crescent . he himself , at the present 
 moment , be possess of what might be consider a comfortable 
 income for a bachelor . he have be accustom to live almost more 
 than comfortably ; but , have so live , be aware of himself that 
 he have not adapt himself for straiten circumstance . in spite 
 of that advice of his as to the brewing , bake , and washing 
 capability of a female candidate for marriage , he know himself well 
 enough to be aware that a wife red with a face from a kitchen fire 
 would be distasteful to he . he have often tell himself that to look 
 for a woman with money would be still more distasteful . therefore he 
 have think that for the present , at least , it would be well for he 
 to remain as he be . but now he have come across Ayala , and though in 
 the pursuance of his philosophy he have assure himself that Ayala 
 should be nothing to he , still he find himself so often revert 
 to this resolution that Ayala , instead of be nothing , be very 
 much indeed to he . 
 three day after this Hamel be prepare himself for his departure 
 immediately after breakfast . " what a beast you be to go , " say the 
 Colonel , " when there can be no possible reason for your going . " 
 " the five daughter and the bad hat make it necessary that a fellow 
 should do a little work sometimes . " 
 " why can not you make your image down here ? " 
 " with you for a model , and mud out of the Caller for clay . " 
 " I should not have the slight objection . in your art you can not 
 perpetuate the atrocity of my colour , as the fellow do who paint 
 my portrait last winter . if you will go , go , and make bust at 
 unheard - of price , so that the five daughter may live for ever on 
 the fat of the land . can I do any good for you by go over to 
 Glenbogie ? " 
 " if you could snub that Mr. Traffick , who be of all man the most 
 atrocious . " 
 " the power do not exist , " say the Colonel , " which could snub the 
 Honourable Septimus . that man be possess of a strength which I 
 thoroughly envy,--which be perhaps more enviable than any other gift 
 the god can give . word can not penetrate that skin of his . satire 
 flow off he like water from a duck . Ridicule do not touch he . 
 the fell abuse do not succeed in inflict the slight wound . 
 he have learn the great secret that a man can not be cut who will not 
 be cut . as it be worth no man 's while to protract an enmity with 
 such a one as he , he suffer from no prolonged enmity . he walk 
 unassailable by any dart , and be , I should say , the happy man in 
 London . " 
 " then I fear you can do nothing for I at Glenbogie . to mollify Aunt 
 Emmeline would , I fear , be beyond your power . Sir Thomas , as far as I 
 can see , do not require much mollifying . " 
 " Sir Thomas might give the young woman a thousand or two . " 
 " that be not the way in which I desire to keep a good hat on my 
 head , " say Hamel , as he seat himself in the little carriage which 
 be to take he down to Callerfoot . 
 the Colonel remain at Drumcaller till the end of September , when 
 his presence be require at aldershot,--dure which time he shoot 
 a good deal , in obedience to the good - natured behest of Lord 
 Glentower , and in spite of the up - turn nose of Mr. Traffick . he 
 read much , and smoke much,--so that as to the passing of his time 
 there be not need to pity he , and he consume a portion of his 
 spare hour in a correspondence with his aunt , the Marchesa , and with 
 his cousin Nina . one of his letter from each shall be given,--and 
 also one of the letter write to each in reply . 
    nina to she cousin the COLONEL . 
    MY DEAR JONATHAN , 
    Lady Albury say that you ought to be here , and so you 
    ought . it be ever so nice . there be a Mr. Ponsonby here , 
    and he and I can beat any other couple at lawn tennis . 
    there be an awning over the ground , which be such a 
    lounge . play lawn tennis with a parasol as those 
    Melcombe girl do be stupid . they be here , but have 
    go . one I be quite sure be over head and ear in love 
    with Mr. Ponsonby . these sort of thing be always all 
    on one side , you know . he be not very much of a man , but 
    he do play lawn tennis divinely . take it altogether , I 
    do not think there be anything out to beat lawn tennis . I 
    do not know about hunting,--and I do not suppose I ever 
    shall . 
    we try to have Ayala here , but I fear it will not come 
    off . Lady Albury be good - natured , but at last she do not 
    quite like write to Mrs. Dosett . so mamma write , but the 
    lady 's answer be very stiff . she think it well for 
    Ayala to remain among her own friend . poor Ayala ! it be 
    clear that a knight will be want to go in armour , and 
    get she out of prison . I will leave it to you to say who 
    must be the knight . 
    I hope you will come for a day or two before you go to 
    Aldershot . we stay till the 1st of October . you will be a 
    beast if you do not . Lady Albury say she never mean to 
    ask you again . " oh , Stubbs ! " say Sir Harry ; " stubbs be 
    one of those fellow who never come if they be ask . " of 
    course we all sit upon he . then he declare that you be 
    the dear friend he have in the world , but that he never 
    dare to dream that you would ever come to Stalham again . 
    perhaps if we can hit it off at last with Ayala , then you 
    would come . Mamma mean to try again.--your affectionate 
    cousin , 
    NINA . 
    the marchesa baldoni to her nephew , colonel STUBBS . 
    MY DEAR JONATHAN , 
    I do my good for my protégé , but I be afraid it will not 
    succeed . her aunt Mrs. Dosett seem to think that , as 
    Ayala be fat to live with she , Ayala have well take 
    her fate as she find it . the meaning of that be , that if 
    a girl be doom to have a dull life she have well not 
    begin it with a little pleasure . there be a good deal to 
    be say for the argument , but if I be the girl I should 
    like to begin with the pleasure and take my chance for 
    the reaction . I should perhaps be vain enough to think 
    that during the preliminary course I might solve all the 
    difficulty by my beaux yeux . I see Mrs. Dosett once , and 
    now I have have a letter from she . upon the whole , I be 
    inclined to pity poor Ayala . 
    we be very happy here . the Marchese have go to Como 
    to look after some property he have there . do not be 
    ill - natured enough to say that the two thing go 
    together;--but in truth he be never comfortable out of 
    Italy . he have a slice of red meat put before he the other 
    day , and that decide he to start at once . 
    on the first of October we go back to London , and shall 
    remain till the end of November . they have ask Nina to 
    come again in November in order that she may see a hunt . I 
    know that mean that she will try to jump over something , 
    and have her leg break . you must be here and not allow 
    it . if she do come here I shall perhaps go down to 
    Brighton for a fortnight . 
    yes;--i do think Ayala Dormer be a very pretty girl , and I 
    do think , also , that she be clever . I quite agree that she 
    be ladylike . but I do not therefore think that she be just 
    such a girl as such a man as Colonel Jonathan Stubbs ought 
    to marry . she be one of those human being who seem to 
    have be remove out of this world and bring up in 
    another . though she know ever so much that nobody else 
    know , she be ignorant of ever so much that everybody 
    ought to know . wander through a grove , or seat by a 
    brook , or shiver with you on the top of a mountain , she 
    would be charming . I doubt whether she would be equally 
    good at the top of your table , or look after your 
    child , or keep the week 's account . she would tease 
    you with poetry , and not even pretend to be instruct 
    when you tell she how an army ought to be move . I say 
    nothing as to the fact that she have not get a penny , though 
    you be just in that position which make it necessary 
    for a man to get some money with his wife . I therefore be 
    altogether indispose to any matrimonial outlook in that 
    direction.--your affectionate aunt , 
    beatrice baldoni . 
    COLONEL STUBBS to his COUSIN NINA . 
    DEAR NINA , 
    Lady Albury be wrong ; I ought not to be at Stalham . what 
    should I do at Stalham at this time of year , who never 
    shoot partridge , and what would be the use of attempt 
    lawn tennis when I know I should be cut out by Mr. 
    Ponsonby ? if that day in November be to come off then I will 
    come and coach you across the country . you tell Sir Harry 
    that I say so , and that I will bring three horse for one 
    week . I think it very hard about poor Ayala Dormer , but 
    what can any knight do in such a case ? when a young lady 
    be hand over to the custody of an uncle or an aunt , 
    she become that uncle 's and aunt 's individual property . 
    Mrs. Dosett may be the most noxious dragon that ever be 
    create for the mortification and general misery of an 
    imprison damsel , but still she be omnipotent . the only 
    knight who can be of any service be one who will go with a 
    ring in his hand , and absolutely carry the prisoner away 
    by force of the marriage service . your unfortunate cousin 
    be so exclusively devoted to the duty of fight his 
    country 's battle that he have not even time to think of a 
    step so momentous as that . 
    Poor Ayala ! do not be stupid enough to accuse I of 
    pity she because I can not be the knight to release she ; 
    but I can not but think how happy she would be at Stalham , 
    struggle to beat you and Mr. Ponsonby at lawn tennis , 
    and then risk a cropper when the happy day of November 
    should come round.--your love cousin , 
    J. S. 
    COLONEL STUBBS to the marchesa baldoni . 
    MY DEAR AUNT , 
    your letter be worthy of the Queen of Sheba , if , as be no 
    doubt the case , she correspond with King Solomon . as for 
    Ayala 's fate , if it be her fate to live with Mrs. Dosett , 
    she can only submit to it . you can not carry she over to 
    Italy , nor would the Marchese allow she to divide his 
    italian good thing with Nina . poor little bird ! she have 
    her chance of live amidst diamond and bank - note , with 
    the Tringle millionaire , but throw it away after some 
    fashion that I do not understand . no doubt she be a fool , 
    but I can not but like she the well for it . I hardly 
    think that a fortnight at Stalham , with all Sir Harry 's 
    luxury around she , would do her much service . 
    as for myself and the top of my table , and the future 
    companion who be to be doom to listen to my military 
    lucubration , I be altogether inclined to agree with you , 
    see that you write in a pure spirit of worldly good 
    sense . no doubt the Queen of Sheba give advice of the 
    same sort to King Solomon . I never know a woman to speak 
    confidentially of matrimony otherwise than as a matter of 
    pound , shilling , and penny . in counsel so give , no 
    word of love have ever be know to creep in . why should 
    it , see that love can not put a leg of mutton into the 
    pot ? do not imagine that I say this in a spirit either of 
    censure or satire . your idea be my own , and should I 
    ever marry I shall do so in strict accordance with your 
    tenet , think altogether of the weekly account , and 
    determine to eschew any sitting by the side of brooks . 
    I have tell Nina about my plan . I will be at Stalham in 
    November to see that she do not break she neck.--your 
    always , 
    J. S. 
 CHAPTER XXI . 
 AYALA 'S INDIGNATION . 
 perhaps Mrs. Dosett have some just cause for refuse her sanction for 
 the propose visit to Albury . if Fate do require that Ayala should 
 live permanently in Kingsbury Crescent , the gaiety of a very gay 
 house , and the wealth of a very wealthy house , would hardly be good 
 preparation for such a life . up to the time of she go to the 
 Marchesa in Brook Street , Ayala have certainly do she good to suit 
 herself to her aunt 's manners,--though she have do it with pain and 
 suffering . she have hem the towel and mend the sheet , and have 
 make the round to the shop . she have endeavour to attend to the 
 pound of meat and to sympathise with her aunt in the interest take 
 in the relic of the joint as they escape from the hungry treatment 
 of the two maiden in the kitchen . Ayala have be clever enough to 
 understand that her aunt have be wound by Lucy 's indifference , not 
 so much because she have desire to avail herself of Lucy 's labour 
 as from a feeling that that indifference have seem to declare that 
 her own pursuit be mean and vulgar . understand this she have 
 struggle to make those pursuit she own,--and have in part succeed . 
 her aunt could talk to she about the butter and the washing , matter 
 as to which her lip have be close in any conversation with Lucy . 
 that Ayala be struggle Mrs. Dosett have be aware;--but she have 
 think that such struggle be good and have not be hopeless . then 
 come the visit to Brook Street , and Ayala return quite an altered 
 young woman . it seem as though she neither could nor would struggle 
 any long . " I hate mutton - bone , " she say to her aunt one morning 
 soon after her return . 
 " no doubt we would all like meat joint the good , " say her aunt , 
 frown . 
 " I hate joint too . " 
 " you have , I dare say , be cocker up at the Marchesa 's with make 
 dish . " 
 " I hate dish , " say Ayala , petulantly . 
 " you do not hate eat ? " 
 " yes , I do . it be ignoble . nature should have manage it differently . 
 we ought to have suck it in from the atmosphere through our finger 
 and hair , as the tree do by their leaf . there should have be no 
 butcher , and no grease , and no nasty smell from the kitchen,--and 
 no gin . " 
 this be bad than all,--this allusion to the mild but unfashionable 
 stimulant to which Mr. Dosett have be reduce by his good nature . 
 " you be fly in the face of the Creator , Miss , " say Aunt 
 Margaret , in her most angry voice,--"in the face of the Creator who 
 make everything , and ordain what his creature should eat and drink 
 by his infinite wisdom . " 
 " nevertheless , " say Ayala , " I think we might have do without 
 boil mutton . " then she turn to some article of domestic 
 needlework which be in her lap so as to show that in spite of the 
 wickedness of her opinion she do not mean to be idle . but Mrs. 
 Dosett , in her wrath , snatch the work from her niece 's hand 
 and carry it out of the room , thus declare that not even a 
 pillow - case in her house should owe a stitch to the hand of a girl 
 so ungrateful and so blasphemous . 
 the wrath wear off soon . Ayala , though not contrite be meek , and 
 walk home with her aunt on the follow morning , patiently 
 carry a pound of butter , six egg , and a small lump of bacon in a 
 basket . after that the pillow - case be recommit to she . but there 
 still be leave evidence enough that the girl 's mind have be upset by 
 the luxury of Brook street,--evidence to which Aunt Margaret pay 
 very much attention , insist upon it in her colloquy with her 
 husband . " I think that a little amusement be good for young people , " 
 say Uncle Reginald , weakly . 
 " and for old people too . no doubt about it , if they can get it so as 
 not to do they any harm at the same time . nothing can be good for a 
 young woman which unfit she for that state of life to which it have 
 please God to call she . Ayala have to live with we . no doubt there 
 be a struggle when she first come from your sister , Lady Tringle , 
 but she make it gallantly , and I give she great credit . she be just 
 fall into a quiet mode of life when there come this invitation 
 from the Marchesa Baldoni . now she have come back quite an altered 
 person , and the struggle have to be make all over again . " Uncle 
 Reginald again express his opinion that young people ought to have 
 a little amusement , but he be not strong enough to insist very much 
 upon his theory . it certainly , however , be true that Ayala , though 
 she still struggle , have be very much disturb by the visit . 
 then come the invitation to Stalham . there be a very pretty note 
 from Lady Albury to Ayala herself , say how much pleasure she would 
 have in see Miss Dormer at her house , where Ayala 's old friend 
 the Marchesa and Nina be then stay . this be accompany by a 
 long letter from Nina herself , in which all the charm of Stalham , 
 include Mr. Ponsonby and lawn tennis , be set forth at full 
 length . Ayala have already hear much about Stalham and the Alburys 
 from her friend Nina , who have hint in a whisper that such an 
 invitation as this might perhaps be forthcoming . she be ready enough 
 for the visit , have look through her wardrobe , and resolve that 
 thing which have be good enough for Brook Street would still be 
 good enough for Stalham . but the same post have bring a letter for 
 Mrs. Dosett , and Ayala could see , that , as the letter be read , a 
 frown come upon her aunt 's brow , and that the look on her aunt 's 
 face be decidedly averse to Stalham . this take place soon after 
 breakfast , when Uncle Reginald have just start for his office , and 
 neither of they for awhile say a word to the other of the letter 
 that have be receive . it be not till after lunch that Ayala speak . 
 " Aunt , " she say , " you have have a letter from Lady Albury ? " 
 " yes , " say Mrs. Dosett , grimly , " I have have a letter from Lady 
 Albury . " 
 then there be another silence , till Ayala , whose mind be full of 
 promise delight , could not refrain herself long . " Aunt Margaret , " 
 she say , " I hope you mean to let I go . " for a minute or two there 
 be no reply , and Ayala again press her question . " Lady Albury 
 want I to go to Stalham . " 
 " she have write to I to say that she would receive you . " 
 " and I may go ? " 
 " I be strongly of opinion that you have well not , " say Mrs. Dosett , 
 confirm her decree by a nod which might have suit Jupiter . 
 " oh , Aunt Margaret , why not ? " 
 " I think it would be most prudent to decline . " 
 " but why,--why,--why , Aunt Margaret ? " 
 " there must be expense . " 
 " I have money enough for the journey leave of my own from what Uncle 
 Tom give I , " say Ayala , plead her cause with all her eloquence . 
 " it be not only the money . there be other reasons,--very strong 
 reason . " 
 " what reason , Aunt Margaret ? " 
 " my dear , it be your lot to have to live with we , and not with such 
 people as the Marchesa Baldoni and Lady Albury . " 
 " I be sure I do not complain . " 
 " but you would complain after have for a time be use to the 
 luxury of Albury Park . I do not say that as find fault , Ayala . 
 it be human nature that it should be so . " 
 " but I will not complain . have I ever complain ? " 
 " yes , my dear . you tell I the other day that you do not like bone 
 of mutton , and you be disgusted because thing be greasy . I do 
 not say this by way of scold you , Ayala , but only that you may 
 understand what must be the effect of your go from such a house as 
 this to such a house as Stalham , and then return back from Stalham 
 to such a house as this . you have well be content with your 
 position . " 
 " I be content with my position , " sob Ayala . 
 " and allow I to write to Lady Albury refuse the invitation . " 
 but Ayala could not be bring to look at the matter with her aunt 's 
 eye . when her aunt press she for an answer which should convey 
 her consent she would give none , and at last leave the room bitterly 
 sob . turn the matter over in her own bosom upstairs she 
 determine to be mutinous . no doubt she owe a certain amount of 
 obedience to her aunt ; but have she not be obedient , have she 
 not work hard and lug about that basket of provision , and 
 endeavour to take an interest in all her aunt 's concern ? be she 
 so absolutely the property of her aunt that she be bind to do 
 everything her aunt desire to the utter annihilation of all her 
 hope , to the extermination of her promise joy ? she feel that she 
 have succeed in Brook Street . she have meet no Angel of Light , but she 
 be associate with people whom she have like , and have be talk to 
 by those to whom it have be a pleasure to listen . that colonel with 
 the quaint name and the ugly face be still present to her memory 
 as he have lean over her shoulder at the theatre , make she now 
 laugh by his drollery , and now fill her mind with interest by his 
 description of the scene which she be see . she be sure that 
 all this , or something of the same nature , would be renew for her 
 delight at Stalham . and be she to be rob of this,--the only 
 pleasure which seem to remain to she in this world,--merely because 
 her aunt choose to entertain severe notion as to duty and pleasure ? 
 other girl go out when they be ask . at Rome , when that 
 question of the dance at the Marchesa 's have be discuss , she have 
 have her own way in opposition to her Aunt Emmeline and her cousin 
 Augusta . no doubt she have , in consequence partly of her conduct on 
 that occasion , be turn out of her Uncle Tom 's house ; but of that 
 she do not think at the present moment . she would be mutinous , and 
 would appeal to her Uncle Reginald for assistance . 
 but the letter which contain the real invitation have be address 
 to her aunt , and her aunt could in truth answer it as she please . 
 the answer might at this moment be in the act of be write , and 
 should it be averse Ayala know very well that she could not go in 
 opposition to it . and yet her aunt come to she in the afternoon 
 consult she again , quite unconquered as to her own opinion , but 
 still evidently unwilling to write the fatal letter without Ayala 's 
 permission . then Ayala assure herself that she have right of her 
 own , which her aunt do not care to contravene . " I think I ought to 
 be allow to go , " she say , when her aunt come to she during the 
 afternoon . 
 " when I think it will be bad for you ? " 
 " it will not be bad . they be very good people . I think that I ought to 
 be allow to go . " 
 " have you no reliance on those who be your natural guardian ? " 
 " Uncle Reginald be my natural guardian , " say Ayala , through her 
 tear . 
 " very well ! if you refuse to be guide by I as though I be not 
 your aunt , and as you will pay no attention to what I tell you be 
 proper for you and well , the question must be leave till your uncle 
 come home . I can not but be very much hurt that you should think so 
 little of I . I have always endeavour to do the good I could for 
 you , just as though I be your mother . " 
 " I think that I ought to be allow to go , " repeat Ayala . 
 as the first consequence of this , the reply to all the three 
 letter be delay for the next day 's post . Ayala have consider 
 much with what pretty word she might well answer Lady Albury 's kind 
 note , and she have settle upon a form of word which she have feel to 
 be very pretty . unless her uncle would support she , that would be of 
 no avail , and another form must be choose . to Nina she would tell the 
 whole truth , either how full of joy she was,--or else how cruelly 
 use and how thoroughly break - hearted . but she could not think 
 that her uncle would be unkind to she . her uncle have be uniformly 
 gentle . her uncle , when he should know how much her heart be set 
 upon it , would surely let she go . 
 the poor girl , when she tacitly agree that her uncle should be the 
 arbiter in the matter , thus pledge herself to abide by her uncle 's 
 decision , let it be what it might , do not think what great advantage 
 her aunt would have over she in that discussion which would be hold 
 upstairs while the master of the house be wash his hand before 
 dinner . nor do she know of how much strong will be her Aunt 
 Margaret than her Uncle Reginald . while he be wash his hand and 
 put on his slipper , the matter be settle in a manner quite 
 destructive of poor Ayala 's hope . " I will not have it , " say Mrs. 
 Dosett , in reply to the old argument that young people ought to have 
 some amusement . " if I be to be responsible for the girl I must be 
 allow my own way with she . it be trouble enough , and very little 
 thank I get for it . of course she hat I . nevertheless , I can 
 endeavour to do my duty , and I will . it be not thank , nor love , nor 
 even gratitude , that I look for . I be bind to do the good I can by 
 she because she be your niece , and because she have no other real 
 friend . I know what would come of it when she go to that house in 
 Brook Street . I be soft then and give way . the girl have mop about 
 like a miserable creature ever since . if I be not to have my way 
 now I will have do with she altogether . " have hear this very 
 powerful speech , Uncle Reginald be oblige to give way , and it be 
 settle that after dinner he should convey to Ayala the decision to 
 which they have come . 
 Ayala , as she sit at the dinner - table , be all expectation , but she 
 ask no question . she ask no question after dinner , while her 
 uncle slowly , solemnly , and sadly sip his one beaker of cold 
 gin - and - water . he sip it very slowly , no doubt because he be 
 anxious to postpone the evil moment in which he must communicate she 
 fate to his niece . but at last the melancholy glass be drain , and 
 then , accord to the custom of the family , Mrs. Dosett lead the way 
 up into the drawing - room , follow by Ayala and her husband . he , when 
 he be on the stair , and when the eye of his wife be not upon 
 he , tremulously put out his hand and lay it on Ayala 's shoulder , 
 as though to embrace she . the poor girl know well that mark of 
 affection . there would have be no need for such embracing have the 
 offer joy of Stalham be in store for she . the tear be already 
 in her eye when she seat herself in the drawing - room , as far 
 remove as possible from the arm - chair which be occupy by her 
 aunt . 
 then her uncle pronounce his judgment in a vacillate voice,--with 
 a vacillation which be ineffectual of any good to Ayala . " Ayala , " 
 he say , " your aunt and I have be talk over this invitation to 
 Stalham , and we be of opinion , my dear , that you have well not 
 accept it . " 
 " why not , Uncle Reginald ? " 
 " there would be expense . " 
 " I can pay for my own ticket . " 
 " there would be many expense , which I need not explain to you more 
 fully . the truth be , my dear , that poor people can not afford to live 
 with rich people , and have well not attempt it . " 
 " I do not want to live with they . " 
 " visit they be live with they for a time . I be sorry , Ayala , 
 that we be not able to put you in a position in which you might 
 enjoy more of the pleasure incidental to your age ; but you must take 
 the thing as they be . look at the matter all round , I be sure 
 that your aunt be right in advise that you should stay at home . " 
 " it be not advice at all , " say Ayala . 
 " Ayala ! " exclaim her aunt , in a tone of indignation . 
 " it be not advice , " repeat Ayala . " of course , if you will not let I 
 go , I can not . " 
 " you be a very wicked girl , " say Mrs. Dosett , " to speak to your 
 uncle like that , after all that he have do for you . " 
 " not wicked , " say the uncle . 
 " I say , wicked . but it do not matter . I shall at once write to 
 Lady Albury , as you desire , and of course there will be no further 
 question as to she go . " soon after that Mrs. Dosett sit down to 
 her desk , and write that letter to which the Marchesa have allude in 
 her to her nephew . no doubt it be stern and hard , and of a nature 
 to make such a woman as the Marchesa feel that Mrs. Dosett would not 
 be a pleasant companion for a girl like Ayala . but it be write 
 with a full conviction that duty require it ; and the word , though 
 hard and stiff , have be choose with the purpose of show that the 
 doing of this disagreeable duty have be feel to be imperative . 
 when the matter have be thus decide , Ayala soon retreat to her 
 own room . her very soul be burn with indignation at the tyranny 
 to which she think herself subject . the use of that weak word , 
 advice , have anger she more than anything . it have not be advice . 
 it have not be give as advice . a command have be lay upon she , a 
 most cruel and unjust command , which she be force to obey , because 
 she lack the power of escape from her condition of slavery . 
 Advice , indeed ! advice be a thing with which the advise one may or 
 may not comply , as that advise one may choose . a slave must obey an 
 order ! her own papa and her own mamma have always advise she , and the 
 advice have always be follow , even when read only in the glance of 
 an eye , in a smile , or a nod . then she have know what it be to be 
 advise . now she be ordered,--as slave be order ; and there be 
 no escape from her slavery ! 
 she , too , must write her letter , but there be no need now of that 
 pretty studied phrase , in which she have hop to thank Lady Albury 
 fitly for her great kindness . she find , after a vain attempt or two , 
 that it be hopeless to endeavour to write to Lady Albury . the word 
 would not come to her pen . but she do write to Nina;-- 
    DEAR , DEAREST NINA , 
    they will not let I go ! oh , my darling , I be so miserable ! 
    why should they not let I go , when people be so kind , so 
    very kind , as Lady Albury and your dear mamma ? I feel as 
    though I should like to run from the house , and never come 
    back , even though I have to die in the street . I be so 
    happy when I get your letter and Lady Albury 's , and now I 
    be so wretched ! I can not write to Lady Albury . you must 
    just tell she , with many thank from I , that they will 
    not let I go ! 
    your unhappy but affectionate friend , 
    AYALA . 
 CHAPTER XXII . 
 AYALA 's GRATITUDE . 
 there be much pity feel for Ayala among the folk at Stalham . the 
 sympathy of they all should have be with Mrs. Dosett . they ought 
 to have feel that the poor aunt be simply perform an unpleasant 
 duty , and that the girl be impracticable if not disobedient . but 
 Ayala be know to be very pretty , and Mrs. Dosett be suppose to 
 be plain . Ayala be interesting , while Mrs. Dosett , from the nature 
 of her circumstance , be most uninteresting . it be agree on all 
 side , at Stalham , that so pretty a bird as Ayala should not be 
 imprison for ever in so ugly a cage . such a bird ought , at least , 
 to be allow its chance of captivate some fitting mate by its 
 song and its plumage . that be Lady Albury 's argument,--a woman very 
 good - nature , a little give to match - making , a great friend to 
 pretty girls,--and whose eld son be as yet only nine , so that 
 there could be no danger to herself or her own flock . there be much 
 ridicule throw on Mrs. Dosett at Stalham , and many pretty thing 
 say of the bird who be so unworthily imprison in Kingsbury 
 Crescent . at last there be something like a conspiracy , the purport 
 of which be to get the bird out of its cage in November . 
 in this conspiracy it can hardly be say that the Marchesa take an 
 active part . much as she like Ayala , she be less prone than Lady 
 Albury to think that the girl be ill - used . she be more keenly 
 alive than her cousin,--or rather her cousin 's wife,--to the hard 
 necessity of the world . Ayala must be say to have make her own 
 bed . at any rate there be the bed and she must lie on it . it be not 
 the Dosetts ' fault that they be poor . accord to their mean they 
 be do the good they could for their niece , and be entitle to 
 praise rather than abuse . and then the Marchesa be afraid for her 
 nephew . Colonel Stubbs , in his letter to she , have declare that he 
 quite agree with her view as to matrimony ; but she be quite alive 
 to her nephew 's sarcasm . her nephew , though he might in truth agree 
 with she , nevertheless be sarcastic . though he be sarcastic , still 
 he might be make to accede to her view , because he do , in truth , 
 agree with she . she be eminently an intelligent woman , see far 
 into character , and she know pretty well the real condition of her 
 nephew 's mind , and could foresee his conduct . he would marry before 
 long , and might not improbably marry a girl with some money if one 
 could be make to come in his way , who would at the same time suit 
 his somewhat fastidious taste . but Ayala suit his taste , Ayala who 
 have not a shilling , and the Marchesa think it only too likely that 
 if Ayala be release from her cage , and bring to Albury , Ayala 
 might become Mrs. Jonathan Stubbs . that Ayala should refuse to become 
 Mrs. Jonathan Stubbs do not present itself as a possibility to the 
 Marchesa . 
 so the matter be when the Marchesa and Nina return from Stalham 
 to London , a promise have be give that Nina should go back to 
 Stalham in November , and be allow to see the glory of a hunt . she 
 be not to ride to hound . that be a matter of course , but she be 
 to be permit to see what a pack of hound be like , and of what 
 like be the man in their scarlet coat , and how the huntsman 's horn 
 would sound when it should be hear among the wood and field . it 
 be already decide that the Colonel should be there to meet she , and 
 the conspiracy be form with the object of get Ayala out of her 
 cage at the same time . Stalham be a handsome country seat , in the 
 county of Rufford , and Sir Harry Albury have lately take upon himself 
 the duty of Master of the Rufford and Ufford United Pack . Colonel 
 Stubbs be to be there with his horse in November , but have , in the 
 meantime , be see by Lady Albury , and have be instigate to do 
 something for the release of Ayala . but what could he do ? it be 
 at first suggest that he should call at Kingsbury Crescent , and 
 endeavour to mollify the stony heart of Aunt Dosett . but , as he have 
 say himself , he would be the bad person in the world to perform 
 such an embassy . " I be not an Adonis , I know , " he say , " nor do I 
 look like a Lothario , but still I be in some sort a young man , and 
 therefore certain to be regard as pernicious , as dangerous and 
 damnable , by such a dragon of virtue as Aunt Dosett . I do not see how 
 I could expect to have a chance . " this interview take place in London 
 during the latter end of October , and it be at last decide that the 
 mission should be make by Lady Albury herself , and make , not to Mrs. 
 Dosett , at Kingsbury Crescent , but to Mr. Dosett at his office in 
 Somerset House . " I do not think I could stand Mrs. D. , " say Lady 
 Albury . 
 Lady Albury be a handsome fashionable woman , rather tall , always 
 excellently dress , and possess of a personal assurance which 
 nothing could daunt . she have the reputation of an affectionate 
 wife and a good mother , but be nevertheless declare by some 
 of her friend to be " a little fast . " she certainly be fond of 
 comedy,--those who do not like she be apt to say that her comedy 
 be only fun,--and be much disposed to have her own way when she 
 could get it . she be now bent upon liberate Ayala from her cage , 
 and for this purpose have herself drive into the huge court belong 
 to Somerset House . 
 Mr. Dosett be dignified at his office with the use of a room to 
 himself , a small room look out upon the river , in which he spend 
 six hour on six day of the week in arrange the index of 
 a voluminous library of manuscript letter - book . it be rarely 
 indeed that he be disturb by the presence of any visitor . when , 
 therefore , his door be open by one of the messenger , and he be 
 inform that Lady Albury desire to see he , he be for the moment 
 a good deal disturb . no option , however , be give to he as to 
 refuse admission to Lady Albury . she be in the room before the 
 messenger have complete his announcement , and have seat herself in 
 one of the two spare chair which the room afford as soon as the 
 door be close . " Mr. Dosett , " she say , " I have take the great 
 liberty of call to say a few word about your niece , Miss Ayala 
 Dormer . " 
 when the lady be first announce , Mr. Dosett , in his confusion , have 
 fail to connect the name which he have hear with that of the lady 
 who have invite Ayala to her house . but now he recognise it , and 
 know who it be that have come to he . " you be kind enough , " he 
 say , " to invite my little girl to your house some week ago . " 
 " and now I have come to invite she again . " 
 Mr. Dosett be now more disturbed than ever . with what word be he 
 to refuse the request which this kind but very grand lady be about 
 to make ? how could he explain to she all those detail as to his own 
 poverty , and as to Ayala 's fate in have to share that poverty with 
 he ? how could he explain the unfitness of Ayala 's temporary sojourn 
 with people so wealthy and luxurious ? and yet be he to yield in the 
 least how could he face his wife on his return home to the Crescent ? 
 " you be very kind , Lady Albury , " he say . 
 " we particularly wish to have she about the end of the first week in 
 November , " say the lady . " her friend Nina Baldoni will be there , and 
 one or two other whom she know . we shall try to be a little gay for 
 a week or two . " 
 " I have no doubt it would be gay , and we at home be very dull . " 
 " do you not think a little gaiety good for young people ? " say she 
 ladyship , use the very argument which poor Mr. Dosett have so often 
 attempt to employ on Ayala 's behalf . 
 " yes ; a little gaiety , " he say , as though deprecate the excessive 
 amount of hilarity which he imagine to prevail at Stalham . 
 " of course you do , " say Lady Albury . " poor little girl ! I have hear 
 so much about she , and of all your goodness to she . Mrs. Dosett I 
 know be another mother to she ; but still a little country air could 
 not but be beneficial . do say that she shall come to we , Mr. Dosett . " 
 then Mr. Dosett feel that , disagreeable as it be , he must preach the 
 sermon which his wife have preach to he , and he do preach it . he 
 speak timidly of his own poverty , and the need which there be that 
 Ayala should share it . he speak a word of the danger which might come 
 from luxury , and of the discontent which would be feel when the girl 
 return to her own home . something he add of the propriety of like 
 live with like , and end by pray that Ayala might be excuse . 
 the word come from he with none of that energy which his wife could 
 have used,--were utter in a low melancholy drone ; but still they 
 be word hard to answer , and call upon Lady Albury for all her 
 ingenuity in find an argument against they . 
 but Lady Albury be strong - minded , and do find an argument . " you 
 musn't be angry with I , " she say , " if I do not quite agree with you . 
 of course you wish to do the good you can for this dear child . " 
 " indeed I do , Lady Albury . " 
 " how be anything then to be do for she if she remain shut up in 
 your house ? you do not , if I understand , see much company 
 yourself . " 
 " none at all . " 
 " you will not be angry with I for my impertinence in allude to it . " 
 " not in the least . it be the fact that we live altogether to 
 ourselves . " 
 " and the happy kind of life too for married people , " say Lady 
 Albury , who be accustom to fill her house in the country with a 
 constant succession of visitor , and to have engagement for every 
 night of the week in town . " but for young people it be not quite so 
 good . how be a young lady to get herself settle in life ? " 
 " settle ? " ask Mr. Dosett , vaguely . 
 " married , " suggest Lady Albury , more plainly . Mr. Dosett shake his 
 head . no idea on the subject have ever flash across his mind . to 
 provide bread and meat , a bed and clothe , for his sister 's child 
 he have feel to be a duty,--but not a husband . husband come , or do 
 not,--as the heavens might be propitious . that Ayala should go to 
 Stalham for the sake of find a husband be certainly beyond the 
 extent of his providing care . " in fact how be a girl to have a chance 
 at all unless she be allow to see some one ? of course I do not say 
 this with reference to our house . there will be no young man there , 
 or anything of that kind . but , take a broad view , unless you let a 
 girl like that have what chance come in her way how be she to get 
 on ? I think you have hardly a right to do it . " 
 " we have do it for the good . " 
 " I be sure of that , Mr. Dosett . and I hope you will tell Mrs. Dosett , 
 with my compliment , how thoroughly I appreciate her goodness . I 
 should have call upon she instead of come here , only that I 
 can not very well get into that part of the town . " 
 " I will tell she what you be good enough to say . " 
 " Poor Ayala ! I be afraid that her other aunt , Aunt Tringle , be not 
 as good to she as your wife . I have hear about how all that occur 
 in Rome . she be very much admire there . I be tell that she be 
 perfectly lovely . " 
 " pretty well . " 
 " a sort of beauty that we hardly ever see now,--and very , very 
 clever . " 
 " Ayala be clever , I think . " 
 " she ought to have her chance . she ought indeed . I do not think you 
 quite do your duty by such a girl as that unless you let she have a 
 chance . she be sure to get to know people , and to be ask from one 
 house to another . I speak plainly , for I really think you ought to 
 let she come . " 
 all this sink deeply into the heart of Uncle Reginald . whether it be 
 for good or evil it seem to he at the moment to be unanswerable . 
 if there be a chance of any good thing for Ayala , surely it could 
 not be his duty to bar she from that chance . a whole vista of new 
 view in reference to the treatment of young lady be open to he 
 by the word of his visitor . Ayala certainly be pretty . certainly 
 she be clever . a husband with an income would certainly be a good 
 thing . Embryo husband with income do occasionally fall in love with 
 pretty girl . but how can any pretty girl be fall in love with 
 unless some one be permit to see she ? at Kingsbury Crescent there 
 be not a man to be see from one end of the year to another . it 
 occur to he now , for the first time , that Ayala by her present 
 life be shut out from any chance of marriage . it be manifestly true 
 that he have no right to seclude she in that fashion . at last he make 
 a promise , rashly , as he feel at the very moment of make it , that 
 he would ask his wife to allow Ayala to go to Stalham . Lady Albury of 
 course accept this as an undertaking that Ayala should come , and 
 go away triumphant . 
 Mr. Dosett walk home across the park with a troubled mind , 
 think much of all that have pass between he and the lady of 
 fashion . it be with great difficulty that he could quite make up his 
 mind which be right,--the lady of fashion or his wife . if Ayala be 
 to live always as they live at Kingsbury Crescent , if it should in 
 process of time be her fate to marry some man in the same class as 
 themselves , if continue care as to small pecuniary need be to be 
 her future lot , then certainly her comfort would only be disturb by 
 such a visit as that now propose . and be it not probable that such 
 would be the destiny in store for she ? Mr. Dosett know the world 
 well enough to be aware that all pretty girl such as Ayala can not 
 find rich husband merely by exhibit their prettiness . Kingsbury 
 Crescent , unalloye by the danger of Stalham , would certainly be the 
 most secure . but then he have be tell that Ayala now have special 
 chance offer to she , and that he have no right to rob she of those 
 chance . he feel this the more strongly , because she be not his 
 daughter,--only his niece . with a daughter he and his wife might have 
 use their own judgment without check . but now he have be tell that 
 he have no right to rob Ayala of her chance , and he feel that he have 
 not the right . by the time that he reach Kingsbury Crescent he have , 
 with many misgiving , decide in favour of Stalham . 
 it be now some week since the first invitation have be refuse , 
 and during those week life have not be pleasant at the Crescent . 
 Ayala mop and pin as though some great misfortune have fall upon 
 she . when she have first come to the Crescent she have bear herself 
 bravely , as a man bear a trouble when he be conscious that he have 
 bring it on himself by his own act , and be proud of the act which 
 have do it . but when that excitement have go , and the trouble still 
 remain , the pride wear off , and the man be simply alive to his 
 suffering . so it have be with Ayala . then have come the visit to 
 Brook Street . when , soon after that , she be invite to Stalham , it 
 seem as though a new world be be open to she . there come a 
 moment when she could again rejoice that she have quarrel with her 
 Aunt Emmeline . this new world would be a much well world than the 
 Tringle world . then have come the great blow , and it have seem to she 
 as though there be nothing but Kingsbury Crescent before she for the 
 rest of her wretched life . 
 there be not a detail of all this hide from the eye of Aunt 
 Margaret . Stalham have decide that Aunt Margaret be ugly and 
 uninteresting . Stalham , accord to its own view , be right . 
 nevertheless the lady in Kingsbury Crescent have both eye to see and 
 a heart to feel . she be hot of temper , but she be forgive . she 
 like her own way , but she be affectionate . she consider it right 
 to teach her niece the unsavoury mystery of economy , but she be 
 aware that such mystery must be distasteful to one bring up as 
 Ayala . even when she have be loud in denounce Ayala 's mutiny , 
 her heart have melt in ruth because Ayala have be so unhappy . 
 she , too , have question herself again and again as to the justness 
 of her decision . be she entitle to rob Ayala of her chance ? in 
 her frequent discussion with her husband she still persist in 
 declare that Kingsbury Crescent be safe , and that Stalham would be 
 dangerous . but , nevertheless , in her own bosom she have misgiving . as 
 she see the poor girl mope and weary through one day after another , 
 she could not but have misgiving . 
 " I have have that Lady Albury with I at the office to - day , and have 
 almost promise that Ayala shall go to she on the 8th of November . " 
 it be thus that Mr. Dosett rush at once into his difficulty as 
 soon as he find himself up - stair with his wife . 
 " you have ? " 
 " well , my dear , I almost do . she say a great deal , and I could not 
 but agree with much of it . Ayala ought to have her chance . " 
 " what chance ? " demand Mrs. Dosett , who do not at all like the 
 expression . 
 " well ; see people . she never see anybody here . " 
 " nobody be well than some people , " say Mrs. Dosett , mean to be 
 severe on Lady Albury 's probable guest . 
 " but if a girl see nobody , " say Mr. Dosett , " she can have 
 no,--no,--no chance . " 
 " she have the chance of wholesome victual , " say Mrs. Dosett , " and I 
 do not know what other chance you or I can give she . " 
 " she might see -- a young man . " this Mr. Dosett say very timidly . 
 " a young fiddlestick ! a young man ! young man should be wait for 
 till they come naturally , and never think about if they do not come 
 at all . I hate this look after young man . if there be not a young 
 man for the next dozen year we should do better,--so as just to 
 get out of the way of think about they for a time . " this be Mrs. 
 Dosett 's philosophy ; but in spite of her philosophy she do yield , 
 and on that night it be decide that Ayala after all be to be 
 allow to go to Stalham . 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 to Mr. Dosett be depute the agreeable task of tell Ayala on the 
 next evening what be to befall she . if anything agreeable be to be 
 do in that sombre house it be always depute to the master . 
 " what ! " say Ayala , jump from her chair . 
 " on the eighth of November , " say Mr. Dosett . 
 " to Stalham ? " 
 " Lady Albury be with I yesterday at the office , and your aunt have 
 consent . " 
 " oh , Uncle Reginald ! " say Ayala , fall on her knee , and hiding 
 her face on his lap . Heaven have be once more open to she . 
 " I will never forget it , " say Ayala , when she go to thank she 
 aunt,--"never . " 
 " I only hope it may not do you a mischief . " 
 " and I beg your pardon , Aunt Margaret , because I was,--I 
 was,--because I was-- " she could not find the word which would 
 express her own delinquency , without admit more than she intend 
 to admit,--"too self - assert , consider that I be only a young 
 girl . " that would have be her meaning could she have find 
 appropriate word . 
 " we need not go back to that now , " say Aunt Margaret . 
 END of VOL . I. 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 AYALA 's angel 
 by 
 ANTHONY TROLLOPE , 
 author of " Doctor Thorne , " " the Prime Minister , " " Orley Farm , " 
 & c. , & c. 
 in Three Volumes . 
 VOL . II . 
 London : 
 Chapman and Hall ( Limited ) , 
 11 , Henrietta Street , Covent Garden . 
 1881 . 
 [ all Rights reserve . ] 
 Westminster : 
 J. B. Nichols and Sons , Printers . 
 25 , Parliament Street . 
 content of VOL . II . 
      XXIII . STALHAM PARK . 
       XXIV . RUFFORD CROSS - ROADS . 
        XXV . " you be not he . " 
       XXVI . " the FINEST HERO that I ever knew . " 
      XXVII . LADY ALBURY 's letter . 
     XXVIII . MISS DOCIMER . 
       XXIX . AT MERLE PARK . no . 1 . 
        XXX . AT MERLE PARK . no . 2 . 
       XXXI . the DIAMOND NECKLACE . 
      XXXII . TOM 's despair . 
     XXXIII . ISADORE HAMEL in LOMBARD STREET . 
      XXXIV . " I never threaten to turn you out . " 
       XXXV . TOM TRINGLE send a challenge . 
      xxxvi . TOM TRINGLE get an ANSWER . 
     XXXVII . GERTRUDE be UNSUCCESSFUL . 
    XXXVIII . FRANK HOUSTON be PENITENT . 
      XXXIX . CAPTAIN BATSBY . 
         XL . AUNT EMMELINE 's new PROPOSITION . 
        XLI . " a cold prospect ! " 
       XLII . another DUEL . 
      XLIII . once MORE ! 
 AYALA 's ANGEL . 
 CHAPTER XXIII . 
 STALHAM PARK . 
 on the day fix Ayala go down to Stalham . a few day before she 
 start there come to she a letter , or rather an envelope , from her 
 uncle Sir Thomas , enclose a cheque for £ 20 . the Tringle woman have 
 hear that Ayala have be ask to Stalham , and have mention the 
 visit disparagingly before Sir Thomas . " I think it very wrong of my 
 poor brother , " say Lady Tringle . " she can not have a shilling even to 
 get herself glove . " this have an effect which have not be intend , 
 and Sir Thomas send the cheque for £ 20 . then Ayala feel not only that 
 the heaven be open to she but that the sweetest zephyr be 
 blow she on upon her course . thought as to glove have disturb 
 she , and as to some shoe which be want , and especially as to 
 a pretty hat for winter wear . now she could get hat and shoe and 
 glove , and pay her fare , and go down to Stalham with money in her 
 pocket . before go she write a very pretty note to her Uncle Tom . 
 on her arrival she be make much of by everyone . Lady Albury call 
 she the cage bird , and congratulate she on her escape from the 
 bar . Sir Harry ask she whether she could ride to hound . Nina 
 give she a thousand kiss . but perhaps her great delight be 
 in find that Jonathan Stubbs be at Albury . she have become so 
 intimate with the Colonel that she regard he quite like an old 
 friend ; and when a girl have a male friend , though he may be much less 
 love , or not love at all , he be always more pleasant , or at any 
 rate more piquant , than a female friend . as for love with Colonel 
 Stubbs that be quite out of the question . she be sure that he would 
 never fall in love with herself . his manner to she be altogether 
 unlike that of a lover . a lover would be smooth , soft , poetic , 
 and flattering . he be always a little rough to her,--sometime 
 almost scold she . but then he scold she as she like to be 
 scolded,--with a dash of fun and a greatly predominate admixture 
 of good - nature . he be like a bear,--but a bear who would always 
 behave himself pleasantly . she be delighted when Colonel Stubbs 
 congratulate she on her escape from Kingsbury Crescent , and feel 
 that he be justify by his intimacy when he call Mrs. Dosett a 
 mollify she - Cerberus . 
 " be you go to make one of my team ? " say the Colonel to she on 
 the morning after her arrival . it be a non - hunting morning , and the 
 gentleman be vacant about the house till they go out for a little 
 shooting later on in the day . 
 " what team ? " say Ayala , feel that she have suddenly receive a 
 check to her happiness . she know that the Colonel be allude to 
 those hunt joy which be to be prepare for Nina , and which be 
 far beyond her own reach . that question of rid gear be terrible to 
 young lady who be not properly supply . even have time admit 
 she would not have dare to use her uncle 's money for such a purpose , 
 in the hope that a horse might be lend to she . she have tell herself 
 that it be out of the question , and have declare to herself that she 
 be too thankful for her visit to allow any regret on such a matter 
 to cross her mind . but when the Colonel speak of his team there be 
 something of a pang . how she would have like to be one of such a 
 team ! 
 " my pony team . I mean to drive too . you must not think that I be 
 take a liberty when I say that they be to be call Nina and 
 Ayala . " 
 there be no liberty at all . have he call she simply Ayala she would 
 have feel it to be no more than pleasant friendship , come from he . 
 he be so big , and so red , and so ugly , and so friendly ! why should 
 he not call her Ayala ? but as to that team,--it could not be . " if 
 it be rid , " she say demurely , " I can not be one of the pony . " 
 " it be riding,--of course . now the Marchesa be not here , we mean to 
 call it hunt in a mild way . " 
 " I can not , " she say . 
 " but you have get to do it , Miss Dormer . " 
 " I have not get anything to do it with . of course , I do not mind 
 tell you . " 
 " you be to ride the sweet little horse that ever be 
 foaled,--just big than a pony . it belong to Sir Harry 's sister 
 who be away , and we have settle it all . there never be a safe little 
 beast , and he can climb through a fence without let you know that 
 it be there . " 
 " but I mean -- clothe , " say Ayala . then she whisper , " I have not get 
 a habit , or anything else anybody ought to have . " 
 " ah , " say the Colonel ; " I do not know anything about that . I should 
 say that Nina must have manage that . the horse department be leave 
 to I , and I have do my part . you will find that you will have to 
 go out next Tuesday and Friday . the hound will be here on Tuesday , 
 and they will be at Rufford on Friday . Rufford be only nine mile 
 from here , and it be all settle . " 
 before the day be over the difficulty have vanish . Miss Albury 's 
 horse be not only call into requisition but Miss Albury 's habit 
 also . Ayala have a little black hat of her own , which Lady Albury 
 assure she would do excellently well for the hunting field . there 
 be some fitting and some try on , and perhaps a few moment of 
 preliminary despair ; but on the Tuesday morning she ride away from 
 the hall door at eleven o'clock mount on Sprite , as the little 
 horse be call , and feel herself from head to foot to be one of 
 Colonel Stubbs 's team . when at Glenbogie she have ride a little , and 
 again in Italy , and , be fearles by nature , have no trepidation to 
 impair the fulness of her delight . 
 hunt from home covert rarely exact much jump from lady . 
 the wood be big , and the gate be numerous . it be when the 
 far - away home of wild fox be drawn,--those seclude brake 
 and gorse where the nobler animal be will not to live at a distance 
 from carriage - road and other weak refuge of civilization,--that 
 the rid capacity of lady must be equal to those of their 
 husband and brother . this present moment be an occasion for great 
 delight,--at least , so it be find by both Nina and Ayala . but it 
 be not an opportunity for great glory . till it be time for lunch 
 one fox after another run about the big wood of Albury in a fashion 
 that seem perfect to the two girl , but which nearly break the 
 heart of old Tony , who be still huntsman to the Ufford and Rufford 
 United Hunt . " Darm their nasty way , " say Tony to Mr. Larry 
 Twentyman , who be one of the popular habitue of the hunt ; " they 
 run one a top of another brush , till there be not a ' ound living 
 know t'other from which . there be always a many on them at Albury , 
 but I never know an Albury fox worth his grub yet . " but there be 
 gallop along road and through gate , and long string of horseman 
 follow each other up and down the ride , and an easy come back to 
 the place from which they start , which make the girl think that 
 the whole thing be divine . once or twice there be a little bank , 
 and once or twice a little ditch,--just sufficient to make Ayala feel 
 that no possible fence would be a difficulty to Sprite . she soon 
 learn that mode of govern her body which leap require , and 
 when she be bring into lunch at about two she be sure that she 
 could do anything which the art of hunting require . but at lunch an 
 edict go forth as to the two girl , against further hunting for 
 that day . Nina strove to rebel , and Ayala attempt to be eloquent 
 by a supplicate glance at the Colonel . but they be tell that as 
 the horse would be want again on Friday they have do enough . in 
 truth , Tony have already trot off with the hound to Pringle 's 
 Gorse , a distance of five mile , and the gentleman who have linger 
 over their lunch have to follow he at their good pace . " Pringle 's 
 Gorse be not just the place for young lady , " Sir Harry say , and so 
 the matter have be decide against Nina and Ayala . 
 at about six Sir Harry , Colonel Stubbs , and the other gentleman 
 return , declare that nothing quick than their run from 
 Pringle 's Gorse have ever be know in that country . " about six mile 
 straight on end in forty minute , " say the Colonel , " and then a kill 
 in the open . " 
 " he be lay up under a bank , " say young Gosling . 
 " he be so beat he could not carry on a field far , " say Captain 
 Batsby , who be stay in the house . 
 " I call that the open , " say Stubbs . 
 " I always think I kill a fox in the open , " say Sir Harry , " when the 
 hound run into he , because he can not run another yard with the 
 country there before he . " then there be a long discussion , as they 
 stand drink tea before the fire , as to what " the open " meant , from 
 which they go to other hunting matter . to all this Ayala listen 
 with attentive ear , and be aware that she have spend a great day . 
 oh , what a difference be there between Stalham and Kingsbury 
 Crescent ! 
 the next two day be almost equally full of delight . she be take 
 into the stable to see her horse , and as she pat his glossy coat 
 she feel that she love Sprite with all her heart . oh , what a world 
 of joy be this;--how infinitely superior even to Queen 's Gate and 
 Glenbogie ! the gaudy magnificence of the Tringles have be altogether 
 unlike the luxurious comfort of Stalham , where everybody be at his 
 ease , where everybody be good - nature , where everybody seem to 
 acknowledge that pleasure be the one object of life ! on the evening 
 before the Friday she be take out to dinner by Captain Batsby . 
 she be not sure that she like Captain Batsby , who make little 
 complimentary speech to she . but her neighbour on the other side 
 be Colonel Stubbs , and she be quite sure that she like Colonel 
 Stubbs . 
 " I know you will go like a bird to - morrow , " say Captain Batsby . 
 " I should not like that , because there would be no jumping , " say 
 Ayala . 
 " but you would be such a beautiful bird . " the Captain , as he drawl out 
 his word , make an eye at she , and she be sure that she do not like 
 the Captain . 
 " at what time be we to start to - morrow ? " she say , turn to the 
 Colonel . 
 " ten , sharp . mind you be ready . Sir Harry take we on the drag , and 
 would not wait for Venus , though she want five minute more for her 
 back hair . " 
 " I do not suppose she ever want any time for her back hair . I 
 would not if I be a goddess . " 
 " then you would be a very untidy goddess , that be all . I wonder whether 
 you be untidy . " 
 " well;--yes;--sometime . " 
 " I hate untidy girl . " 
 " thank you , Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " what I like be a nice prim little woman , who never have a pin in the 
 wrong place in her life . her cuff and collar be always as stiff 
 as steel , and she never rub the sleeve of her dress by lean 
 about , like some young lady . " 
 " that be what I do . " 
 " my young woman never sit down lest she should crease her dress . my 
 young woman never let her ribbon get tangle . my young woman can 
 dress upon £ 40 a - year , and always look as though she come out of a 
 band - box . " 
 " I do not believe you have get a young woman , Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " well ; no ; I haven't,--except in my imagination . " 
 if so , he too must have his Angel of Light ! " do you ever dream about 
 she ? " 
 " oh dear , yes . I dream that she do scold so awfully when I have she 
 to myself . in my dream , you know , I be married to she , and she always 
 want I to eat hashed mutton . now , if there be one thing that make 
 I more sick than another it be hashed mutton . of course I shall 
 marry she in some of my wake moment , and then I shall have to eat 
 hash mutton for ever . " 
 then Captain Batsby put in another word . " I should so like to be 
 allow to give you a lead to - morrow . " 
 " oh , thank you,--but I would rather not have it , " say Ayala , who be 
 altogether in the dark , think that " a lead " might be some present 
 which she would not wish to accept from Captain Batsby . 
 " I mean that I should like to show you a line if we get a run . " 
 " what be a line ? " ask Ayala . 
 " a line ? why a line be just a lead;--keep your eye on I and I will 
 take the fence where you can follow without come to grief . " 
 " oh , " say Ayala , " that be a lead be it ? Colonel Stubbs be go to 
 give my friend and I a lead , as long as we stay here . " 
 " no man ever ought to coach more than one lady at once , " say the 
 Captain , show his erudition . " you be sure to come on top of one 
 another if there be two . " 
 " but Colonel Stubbs be especially tell by the Marchesa to look after 
 both of we , " say Ayala almost angrily . then she turn her shoulder 
 to he , and be soon intent upon further instruction from the 
 Colonel . 
 the follow morning be fine , and all the lady in the house be 
 pack on to the top of Sir Harry 's drag . the Colonel sit behind Sir 
 Harry on the plea that he be want to take care of the two girl . 
 Captain Batsby and three other gentleman be put inside , where they 
 console themselves with unlimited tobacco . in this way they be 
 drive to a spot call Rufford Cross Roads , where they find Tony 
 Tappett sit perfectly quiescent on his old mare , while the hound 
 be seat around he on the grassy side of the road . with he be 
 talk a stout , almost middle - aged gentleman , in a scarlet coat , and 
 natty pink - top boot , who be the owner of all the country around . 
 this be Lord Rufford , who a few year since be know as one of the 
 hard rider in those part ; but he have degenerate into matrimony , 
 be now the happy father of half - a - dozen baby , and be hardly ever 
 see to jump over a fence . but he still come out when the meet 
 be not too distant , and carefully perform that first duty of an 
 english country gentleman,--the preservation of fox . though he do 
 not ride much , no one like a little hunt gossip well than Lord 
 Rufford . it be , however , observe that even in regard to hunt he 
 be apt to quote the authority of his wife . 
 " oh , yes , my Lord , " say Tony , " there will sure to be a fox at 
 Dillsborough . but we will find one afore we get to Rufford , my Lord . " 
 " Lady Rufford say there have not be a fox see in the home wood 
 this week . " 
 " her ladyship will be sure to know , " say Tony . 
 " do you remember that fence where poor Major Caneback get his fall 
 six year ago ? " ask the Lord . 
 " seven year next Christmas , my Lord , " say Tony . " he never put a leg 
 across a saddle again , poor fellow ! I remember he well , my Lord ; a 
 man who could ' andle a ' orse wonderful , though he do not know ' ow to 
 ride to ' ound ; not accord to my idea . to get your animal to carry 
 you through , never mind ' ow long the thing be ; that be my idea of 
 rid to ' ound , my Lord . the major be for always make a ' orse 
 jump over everything . I never want them to jump over nothing I can not 
 help;--i do not , my Lord . " 
 " that be just what her ladyship be always say to I , " say Lord 
 Rufford , " and I do pretty much what her ladyship tell I . " 
 on this occasion Lady Rufford have be quite right about the home 
 cover . no doubt she generally be right in any assertion she make as 
 to her husband 's affair . after draw they Tony trot on towards 
 Dillsborough , run his hound through a few little spring , which 
 lie near his way . as they go Colonel Stubbs ride between the two 
 girl . " whenever I see Rufford , " say the Colonel , " he do I a 
 world of good . " 
 " what good can a fat man like that do to you ? " say Nina . 
 " he be a continual sermon against marriage . if I could see Rufford 
 once a week I know that I should be safe . " 
 " he seem to I to be a very comfortable old gentleman , " say Ayala . 
 " Old ! seven year ago he be acknowledge to be the one undisputed 
 paragon of a young man in this county . no one else dream of look 
 at a young lady if he choose to turn his eye in that direction . he 
 be handsome as apollo-- " 
 " he an Apollo ! " say Nina . 
 " the good Apollo there then be in these part , and every one know 
 that he have forty thousand a - year to spend . now he be suppose to be 
 the good hand in the house at rock the cradle . " 
 " do you mean to say that he nurse the baby ? " ask Ayala . 
 " he look as if he do at any rate . he never go ten mile away 
 from his door without have Lady Rufford with he , and be always 
 tuck up at night just at half - past ten by her ladyship 's own maid . 
 ten year ago he would generally have be find at midnight with 
 card in his hand and a cigar in his mouth . now he be allow two 
 cigarette a - day . well , Mr. Twentyman , how be you get on ? " this 
 he say to a good look well sort of farmer , who come up , rid 
 a remarkably strong horse , and dress in pink and white cord . 
 " thank ye , Colonel , pretty well , consider how hard the time be . 
 a man who own a few acre and try to farm they must be on the road 
 to ruin now - a - day . that be what I be always tell my wife , so that 
 she may know what she have get to expect . " Mr. Twentyman have be 
 marry just twelve month . 
 " she be not much frightened , I daresay , " say the Colonel . 
 " she be young , you see , " continue the farmer , " and have not settle 
 herself down yet to the sorrow of life . " this be that Mr. Lawrence 
 Twentyman who marry Kate Masters , the young daughter of old 
 Masters , the attorney at Dillsborough , and sister of Mrs. Morton , 
 wife of the squire of Bragton . " by the holy , " say Twentyman , 
 suddenly , " the hound have put a fox out of that little spinney . " 
 CHAPTER XXIV . 
 RUFFORD CROSS - ROADS . 
 Ayala , who have be listen attentively to the conversation of Mr. 
 Twentyman , and be feel that she be be initiate every moment 
 into a new phase of life,--who have be endeavour to make some 
 connection in her mind between the new charm of the world around 
 she and that world of her dream that be ever present to she , and 
 have as yet simply determined that neither could Lord Rufford or Mr. 
 Twentyman have ever be an Angel of Light,--at once straighten 
 herself in her saddle , and prepare herself for the doing of 
 something memorable . it be evident to she that Mr. Twentyman 
 consider that the moment for action have come . he do not gallop 
 off wildly , as do four or five other , but stand still for a moment 
 look intently at a few hound who , with their tail feather 
 in the air and with their nose down , seem at the same time to be 
 irresolute and determine , know that the scent be there but not 
 yet quite fix as to its line . " half a moment , Colonel , " he say , 
 stand up in his stirrup , with his left hand raise , while his 
 right hold his rein and his whip close down on his horse 's neck . 
 " half a moment ! " he only whisper , and then shake his head angrily , 
 as he hear the ill - time shouting of one or two man who have already 
 reach the other side of the little skirting of tree . " I wish Fred 
 Botsey 's tongue be tie to his tooth , " he say , still whisper . 
 " now , Colonel , they have it . there be a little lane to the right , and 
 a gate . after that the country 's open , and there be nothing which the 
 lady ' nag can not do . I know the country so well , you would perhaps 
 well come with I for a bit . " 
 " he know all about it , " say the Colonel to Ayala . " do as he tell 
 you . " 
 Ayala and Nina both be quick enough to obey . Twentyman dash 
 along the lane , while the girl follow he with the Colonel after 
 they . when they be at the hunting - gate already speak of , old Tony 
 Tappett be with they , trot , impatient to get to the hound , 
 courteously give place to the ladies,--whom , however , in his heart , 
 he wish at home in bed,--and then thrust himself through the 
 gate in front of the Colonel . " D---- their pig - head folly , " he 
 say , as he come up to his friend twentyman--"they know no more 
 about it than if they would just come from be'ind a counter,--'olloae , 
 ' olloaing , ' olloaing,--as if ' olloaing'd make a fox break ! ' owsomever 
 ' e be off now , and they have get Cranbury Brook between they and his 
 line ! " this he say in a squeaking little voice , intend to be 
 jocose and satirical , shake his head as he ride . this last idea 
 seem to give he great consolation . 
 it be the consideration , deep and well - found , as to the Cranbury 
 which have induce Larry Twentyman to pause on the road when he have 
 pause , and then to make for the lane and the gate . the direction have 
 hardly seem to be that of the hound , but Larry know the spinney , 
 know the brook,--knew the fox , perhaps,--and be aware of the spot at 
 which the brute would cross the water if he do cross it . the brute 
 do cross the water , and therefore there be Cranbury Brook between 
 many of the forward rider and his line . 
 Sir Harry be then with they , and two or three other farmer . but 
 Larry have a lead , and the two girl be with he . Tony Tappett , 
 though he have get up to his hound , do not endeavour to ride 
 straight to they as do Larry Twentyman . he be old and unambitious , 
 very anxious to know where his hound be , so that he might be 
 with they should they want the assistance of his voice and counsel , 
 anxious to be near enough to take their fox from they should they run 
 into he , but take no glory in jump over a fence if he could 
 avoid it , creep about here and there , know from experience 
 nearly every turn in the animal 's mind , aware of every impediment 
 which would delay he , rid fast only when the impediment be far 
 between , take no amusement to himself out of the riding , but with 
 his heart cruelly , bloodily , ruthlessly set upon kill the animal 
 before he . to kill his fox he would imperil his neck , but for the 
 glory of rid he would not soil his boot if he could help it . 
 after the girl come the Colonel , somewhat shorn of his honour in 
 that he be no long give they a lead , but do his good to 
 maintain the pace , which Twentyman be make very good . " now , young 
 lady , " say Twentyman , " give they their head , and let they do it 
 just as they please,--alongside of each other , and not too near to 
 I . " it be a brook,--a confluent of Cranbury Brook , and be wide 
 enough to require a good deal of jumping . it may be suppose that the 
 two young lady do not understand much of the instruction give to 
 they . to hold their breath and be brave be the only idea present to 
 they . the rest must come from instinct and chance . the other side 
 of the brook be heaven;--this would be purgatory . Larry , fear 
 perhaps that the order as to their not be too near might not be 
 obey , add a little to his own pace so as to be clear of they . 
 nevertheless they be only a few stride behind , and have Larry 's 
 horse miss his footing there would have be a mess . as it be they 
 take the brook side by side close to each other , and land full of 
 delight and glory on the opposite bank . " Bravo ! young lady , " 
 shout Twentyman . 
 " oh , Nina , that be divine , " say Ayala . Nina be a little too much 
 out of breath for answering , but simply throw up her eye to Heaven 
 and make a flourish with her whip , intend to be expressive of her 
 perfect joy . 
 Away go Larry and away go the girl with he , quite unconscious 
 that the Colonel 's horse have balk the brook and then jump 
 into it,--quite unconscious that Sir Harry , see the Colonel 's 
 catastrophe , have follow Tony a quarter of a mile up the brook to 
 a ford . even in the soft bosom of young lady " the devil take the 
 hindmost " will be the motto most appropriate for hunting . Larry 
 Twentyman , of whom they have never hear before , be now the god of 
 their idolatry . where Larry Twentyman might go it be manifestly 
 their duty to follow , even though they should never see the poor 
 Colonel again . they recke nothing of the fox or of the hound or of 
 the master or even of the huntsman . they have a man before they to 
 show they the way , and as long as they could keep he in sight each 
 be determined to be at any rate as good as the other . to give Larry 
 his due it must be acknowledge that he be thoroughly thoughtful of 
 they . at every fence encounter he study the spot at which they 
 would be least likely to fall . he have to remember , also , that there 
 be two of they together , and that he have make himself in a way 
 responsible for the safety of both . all this he do , and do well , 
 because he know his business . with the exception of the water - jump , 
 the country over which they pass be not difficult . for a time 
 there be a run of gate , each of which their guide be able to open 
 for they , and as they come near to Dillsborough Wood there be gap 
 in most of the fence ; but it seem to the girl that they have 
 gallop over monstrous hedge and leapt over wall which it would 
 almost take a strong man to climb . the brook , however,--the river as 
 it seem to them,--had be the crown glory . Ayala be sure that 
 that brook would never be forget by she . even the Angel of Light 
 be hardly more heavenly than the brook . 
 that the fox be run for Dillsborough Wood be a fact well know 
 both to Tony Tappett and Mr. Larry Twentyman . a fox cross the 
 brook from the Rufford side would be sure to run to Dillsborough 
 Wood . when Larry , with the two girl , be just about to enter the 
 ride , there be old Tony stand up on his horse at the corner , 
 look into the covert . and now also a crowd of horseman come 
 rush up , who have make their way along the road , and have pass up 
 to the wood through Mr. Twentyman 's farm - yard;--for , as it happen , 
 here it be that Mr. Twentyman live and farm his own land . then 
 come Sir Harry , Colonel Stubbs , and some other who have follow the 
 line throughout,--the Colonel with his boot full of water , as he have 
 be force to get off his horse in the bed of the brook . Sir Harry , 
 himself , be not in the good of humours,--as will sometimes be the 
 case with master when they fail to see the cream of a run . " I never 
 see such riding in my life , " say Sir Harry , as though some great sin 
 have be commit by those to whom he be address himself . Larry 
 turn round , and wink at the two girl , know that , if sin have 
 be commit , they three be the sinner . the girl understand 
 nothing about it , but still think that Larry Twentyman be divine . 
 while they be stand about on the ride , Tony be still at 
 his work . the riding be over , but the fox have to be kill , and 
 Dillsborough Wood be a covert in which a fox will often require a 
 large amount of killing . no happy home for the vulpine deity exist 
 among the shire of England ! there be earth there deep , capacious , 
 full of nursery ; but these , on the present occasion , be debar 
 from the poor stranger by the wicked ingenuity of man . but there be 
 deep dell , in which the bramble and bracken be so thick that no 
 hound careful of his snout would penetrate they . the undergrowth of 
 the wood be so interwoven that no huntsman could see through its 
 depth . there be dark nook so impervious that any fox ignorant of 
 the theory of his own scent must have wonder why a hound should 
 have be induce to creep into space so narrow . from one side to 
 another of the wood the hunt brute would traverse , and always seem 
 to have at last succeed in put his persecutor at fault . so 
 it be on this occasion . the run , while it last , have occupy , 
 perhaps , three - quarter of an hour , and during a time equally long 
 poor old Tony be to be see scurry from one side of the wood to 
 another , and be to be hear loudly swear at his attendant whip 
 because the hound do not follow his footstep as quickly as his 
 soul desire . 
 " I never mean to put on a pair of top - boot again , as long as I 
 live , " say the Colonel . at this time a little knot of horseman 
 be station in a knoll in the centre of the wood , wait till 
 they should hear the fatal whoop . among they be Nina , Ayala , the 
 Colonel , Larry Twentyman , and Captain Batsby . 
 " give up top - boot ? " say Larry . " you do not mean to say you will ride 
 in black ! " 
 " top - boot , black boot , spur , breech , and red coat , I renounce 
 they all from this moment . if ever I be see in a hunting field again 
 it will be in a pair of trouser with overall . " 
 " now , you be joke , Colonel , " say Larry . 
 " why will not you wear a red coat any more ? " say Ayala . 
 " because I be disgrace for ever . I come out to coach two young woman , 
 and give they a lead , and all I have do be to tumble into a brook , 
 while a well man have take my charge away from I . " 
 " oh , Jonathan , I be so sorry , " say Nina , " particularly about your 
 get into the water . " 
 " oh , Colonel Stubbs , we ought to have stop , " say Ayala . 
 " it be my only comfort to see how very little I be want , " say 
 the Colonel . " if I have break my neck instead of wet my foot it 
 would have be just the same to some people . " 
 " oh , Jonathan ! " say Nina , really shocked . 
 " we ought to have stop . I know we ought to have stop , " say 
 Ayala , almost cry . 
 " nobody ever stop for any one out hunting , " say Twentyman , lay 
 down a great law . 
 " I should think not , " say Captain Batsby , who have hardly be off 
 the road all the time . 
 " I be sure the Colonel will not be angry with I because I take the 
 young lady on , " say Larry . 
 " the Colonel be such a muff , " say the Colonel himself , " that he 
 will never presume to be angry with anybody again . but if my cousin 
 and Miss Dormer be not very much oblige to you for what you have 
 do for they there will be nothing of gratitude leave in the female 
 british bosom . you have probably give to they the most triumphant 
 moment of their existence . " 
 " it be their own riding , Colonel ; I have nothing to do with it . " 
 " I be so much oblige to you , Sir , " say Nina . 
 " and so be I , " say Ayala , " though it be such a pity that Colonel 
 Stubbs get into the water . " 
 at that moment come the long expect call . Tony Tappett have kill 
 his fox , after crossing and re - cross through the wood half a score 
 of time . " be it all over ? " ask Ayala , as they hurry down the 
 knoll and scurry down the line to get to the spot outside the wood 
 to which Tony be drag the carcase of his defeated enemy . 
 " it be all over for he , " say Larry . " a good fox he be , but he will 
 never run again . he be one of they breed at Littlecotes . the fox 
 breed at Littlecotes always run . " 
 " and be he dead ? " ask Nina . " poor fellow ! I wish it be not 
 necessary to kill they . " then they stand by till they see the 
 body of the victim throw up into the air , and fall amongst the 
 blood - smirch upturned nose of the expectant pack . 
 " I call that a pretty little run , Sir Harry , " say Larry Twentyman . 
 " pretty well , " say Sir Harry ; " the pace be not very great , or that 
 pony of mine which Miss Dormer be rid could not have live with 
 it . " 
 " horse , Sir Harry , do not want so much pace , if they be allow to 
 go straight . it be when a man do not get well away , or have make a 
 mess with his fence , that he need an extra allowance of pace to 
 catch the hound . if you be once with they and can go straight you 
 may keep your place without such a deal of leg . " to this Sir Harry 
 reply only by a grunt , as on the present occasion he have " make a 
 mess with his fence , " as Larry Twentyman have call it . 
 " and now , young lady , " say Larry , " I hope you will come in and see 
 my missus and her baby , and have a little bit of lunch , such as it 
 be . " 
 Nina ask anxiously whether there would not be another fox . Ayala 
 also be anxious lest in accept the proffered hospitality she 
 should lose any of the delight of the day . but it be at length 
 arrange that a quarter of an hour should be allow before Tony take 
 his hound over to the Bragton covert . immediately Larry be off his 
 horse , rush into the house and order everyone about it to come 
 forth with bread and cheese and sherry and beer . in spite of what he 
 have say of his ruin it be know that Larry Twentyman be a warm 
 man , and that no man in Rufford give what he have to give with a 
 full heart . his house be in the middle of the Rufford and Ufford 
 hunt country , and the consumption there during the hunting 
 month of bread and cheese , sherry and beer , must have be immense . 
 everyone seem to be intimate with he , and all call for what they 
 want as if they be on their own premise . on such occasion as 
 these Larry be a proud man ; for no one in those part carry a 
 light heart or be more fond of popularity . 
 the parlour inside be by no mean big enough to hold the crowding 
 guest , who therefore munch their bread and cheese and drink their 
 beer round the front door , without dismount from their horse ; but 
 Nina and Ayala with their friend the Colonel be take inside to see 
 Mrs. Twentyman and her baby . " now , Larry , what sort of a run be it ? " 
 say the young mother . " where do you find he , and what line do he 
 take ? " 
 " I will tell you all about it when I come back ; there be two young 
 lady for you now to look after . " then he introduce his wife , and 
 the baby which be in her arm . " the little fellow be only six week 
 old , and yet she want to come to the meet . she would have be rid 
 to hound if I would let she . " 
 " why not ? " say Mrs. Twentyman . " at any rate I might have go in the 
 pony carriage and have baby with I . " 
 " only six week old ! " say Nina , stoop down and kiss the child . 
 " he be a darling ! " say Ayala . " I hope he will go out hunt some 
 day . " 
 " he will want to go six time a week if he be anything like his father , " 
 say Mrs. Twentyman . 
 " and seven time if he be like his mother , " say Larry . then again 
 they mount their nag , and trot off across the high road to the 
 Bragton covert . Mrs. Twentyman with her baby in her arm walk down 
 to the gate at the high road and watch they with long eye , till 
 Tony and the hound be out of sight . 
 nothing far in the way of hunting be do that day which 
 require to be record . they draw various covert and find a fox or 
 two , but the scent , which have be so strong in the morning , seem 
 to have go , and the glory of the day be over . the two girl and 
 the Colonel remain companion during the afternoon , and succeed 
 in make themselves merry over the incident of the brook . the 
 Colonel be in truth well please that Larry Twentyman should have 
 take his place , though he probably would not have be gratify have 
 he see Captain Batsby assume his duty . it have be his delight to 
 see the two girl ride , and he have be near enough to see they . he 
 be one of those man who , though fond of hunting , take no special 
 glory in it , and be devoid of the jealousy of riding . not to have 
 a good place in a run be no bad to he than to lose a game of 
 billiard or a rubber of whist . let the reader understand that this 
 trait in his character be not mention with approbation . " always 
 to excel and to go ahead of everybody " should , the present writer 
 think , be in the heart of every man who rid to hound . there be 
 in our Colonel a philosophical way of look into the thing which 
 perhaps become he as a man , but be deleterious to his character as 
 a sportsman . 
 " I do so hope you have enjoy yourself , Ayala ! " he say , as he lift 
 she from her horse . 
 " indeed,--indeed , I have ! " say Ayala , not notice the use of her 
 christian name . " I have be so happy , and I be so much oblige to 
 you ! " 
 CHAPTER XXV . 
 " you be not he . " 
 Ayala have be a week at Stalham , and accord to the understanding 
 which have exist she should now have return to Kingsbury Crescent . 
 she have come for a week , and she have have her week . oh , what a week 
 it have be , so thoroughly happy , without a cloud , fill full with 
 ecstatic pleasure ! Jonathan Stubbs have become to she the pleasantest 
 of friend . Lady Albury have cover she with caress and little 
 present . Nina be the most perfect of friend . Sir Harry have never 
 be cross , except for that one moment in the wood . and as for 
 Sprite,--Sprite have nearly realise her idea of an Angel of Light . 
 oh , how happy she have be ! she be to return on the Monday , have 
 thus comprise two sunday within her elongate week . she know 
 that her heaven be to be at an end ; but she be grateful , and be 
 determined in her gratitude to be happy and cheerful to the close . 
 but early on this Sunday morning Colonel Stubbs speak a word to Lady 
 Albury . " that little girl be so thoroughly happy here . can not you 
 prolong it for she just for another three day ? " 
 " be it to be for her,--or for Colonel Stubbs , who be enamour of the 
 little girl ? " ask Lady Albury . 
 " for both , " say the Colonel , rather gravely . 
 " be you in earnest ? " 
 " what do you call earnest ? I do love to see a pretty creature enjoy 
 herself thoroughly as she do . if you will make her stay till 
 Thursday Albury will let she ride the little horse again at Star 
 Cross on Wednesday . " 
 " of course she shall stay,--all the season if you wish it . she be 
 indeed a happy girl if you be in earnest . " 
 then it be settle , and Lady Albury in her happy manner inform 
 Ayala that she be not to be allow to take her departure till after 
 she have ride Sprite once again . " Sir Harry say that you have give 
 the little horse quite a name , and that you must finish off his 
 character for he at Star Cross . " as be the heart of the Peri when 
 the gate of Paradise be open for she so be the heart of Ayala . 
 there be to be four day , with the fourth as a hunting - day , before 
 she need think of go ! there be an eternity of bliss before she . 
 " but Aunt Margaret ! " she say , not , however , doubt for a moment 
 that she would stay . who care for a frowning aunt at the distance of 
 an eternity . I fear that in the ecstacy of her joy she have forget 
 the promise make , that she would always remember her aunt 's goodness 
 to she . " I will write a note to Mrs. Dosett , and make it all 
 straight , " say Lady Albury . the note be write , and , whether 
 matter be straight or crooked at Kingsbury Crescent , Ayala 
 remain at Albury . 
 Colonel Stubbs have think about the matter , and determine that he 
 be quite in earnest . he have , he tell himself , enough for modest 
 living,--for modest living without poverty . More would come to he 
 when old General Stubbs , his uncle , should die . the general be 
 already past seventy . what be the use of independence if he could 
 not allow himself to have the girl whom he really love ? have any 
 human being so perfectly lovely as Ayala ever flash before his eye 
 before ? be there ever a sweet voice hear from a woman 's mouth ? 
 and then all her little way and motions,--her very tricks,--how full 
 of charm they be ! when she would open her eye and nod her head , 
 and pout with her lip , he would declare to himself that he could no 
 long live without she . and then every word that fall from her lip 
 seem to have something in it of pretty humour . in fact the Colonel 
 be in love , and have now resolve that he would give way to his 
 love in spite of his aunt , the Marchesa , and in spite of his own 
 philosophy . 
 he feel by no mean sure of success , but yet he think that he might 
 succeed . from the moment in which , as the reader may remember , he 
 have accost she at the ball , and desire she to dance with he in 
 obedience to his aunt 's behest , it have be understand by everyone 
 around he that Ayala have like he . they have become fast friend . 
 Ayala allow he to do many little thing which , by some feminine 
 instinct of her own , would have be put altogether beyond the reach 
 of Captain Batsby . the Colonel know all this , and know at the same 
 time that he should not trust to it only . but still he could not but 
 trust to it in some degree . Lady Albury have tell he that Ayala would 
 be a happy girl if he be in earnest , and he himself be well aware 
 of Ayala 's dependent position , and of the discomfort of Kingsbury 
 Crescent . Ayala have speak quite openly to he of Kingsbury Crescent 
 as to a confidential friend . but on all that he do not lean much 
 as be in his favour . he could understand that such a girl as 
 Ayala would not accept a husband merely with the object of avoid 
 domestic poverty . little qualm of doubt come upon he as he 
 remember the nature of the girl , so that he confess to himself 
 that Lady Albury know nothing about it . but , nevertheless , he hop . 
 his red hair and his ugly face have never yet stand against he among 
 the woman with whom he have live . he have be teach by popularity to 
 think himself a popular man;--and then Ayala have show so many sign 
 of her friendship ! 
 there be shoot on Saturday , and he go out with the shooter , 
 say nothing to any one of an intended early return ; but at three 
 o'clock he be back at the house . then he find that Ayala be out 
 in the carriage , and he wait . he sit in the library pretend to 
 read , till he hear the sound of the carriage - wheel , and then he 
 meet the lady in the hall . " be they all home from shoot ? " ask 
 Lady Albury . the Colonel explain that no one be home but himself . 
 he have miss three cock - pheasant run , and have then come away in 
 disgust . " I be the most ignominious creature in existence , " he say , 
 laugh ; " one day I tumble into a ditch three foot wide-- " 
 " it be ten yard at least , " say Nina , jealous as to the glory of 
 her jump . 
 " and to - day I can not hit a bird . I shall take to write a book and 
 leave the severer pursuit of sport to more enterprising person . " 
 then suddenly turn round he say to Ayala , " be you good - nature 
 enough to come and take a walk with I in the shrubbery ? " 
 Ayala , take somewhat by surprise at the request , look up into 
 Lady Albury 's face . " go with he , my dear , if you be not tired , " 
 say Lady Albury . " he deserve consolation after all his good deed 
 to you . " Ayala still doubt . though she be on term of pleasant 
 friendship with the man , yet she feel almost awestruck at this sudden 
 request that she should walk alone with he . but not to do so , 
 especially after Lady Albury 's injunction , would have be peculiar . 
 she certainly be not tired , and have such a walk come naturally it 
 would have be an additional pleasure to she ; but now , though she 
 go she hesitate , and show her hesitation . 
 " be you afraid to come with I ? " he say , as soon as they be out 
 on the gravel together . 
 " Afraid ! oh , dear no , I should not be afraid to go anywhere with you , 
 I think ; only it seem odd that you do not ask Nina too . " 
 " shall I tell you why ? " 
 " why be it ? " 
 " because I have something to say to you which I do not want Nina 
 to hear just at this moment . and then I think that we be such 
 friend that you would not mind come with I . " 
 " of course we be , " say Ayala . 
 " I do not know why it should be so , but I seem to have know you year 
 instead of day . " 
 " perhaps that be because you know papa . " 
 " more likely because I have learn to know your papa 's daughter . " 
 " do you mean Lucy ? " 
 " I mean Ayala . " 
 " that be say the same thing twice over . you know I because you 
 know I . " 
 " just that . how long do you suppose I have know that Mrs. Gregory , 
 who sit opposite to we yesterday ? " 
 " how can I tell ? " 
 " just fifteen year . I be go to Harrow when she come as a young 
 girl to stay with my mother . her people and my people have know 
 each other for the last fifty year . since that I have see she 
 constantly , and of course we be very intimate . " 
 " I suppose so . " 
 " I know as much about she after all that as if we have live in two 
 different hemisphere and could not speak a word of each other 's 
 language . there be not a thought or a feeling in common between we . I 
 ask after her husband and her child , and then tell she it be go 
 to rain . she say something about the old General 's health , and then 
 there be an end of everything between we . when next we meet we do it 
 all over again . " 
 " how very uninteresting ! " say Ayala . 
 " very uninteresting . it be because there be so many Mrs. Gregorys 
 about that I like to go down to Drumcaller and live by myself . 
 perhaps you be a Mrs. Gregory to somebody . " 
 " why should I be a Mrs. Gregory ? I do not think I be at all like Mrs. 
 Gregory . " 
 " not to I , Ayala . " now she hear the " Ayala , " and feel something 
 of what it mean . there have be moment at which she have almost 
 dislike to hear he call she Miss Dormer ; but now,--now she wish 
 that he have not call her Ayala . she strove to assume a serious 
 expression of face , but have do so she could not dare to turn 
 it up towards he . the glance of her little anger , if there be any , 
 fall only upon the ground . " it be because you be to I a creature so 
 essentially different from Mrs. Gregory that I seem to know you so 
 well . I never want to go to Drumcaller if you be near me;--or , if I 
 think of Drumcaller , it be that I might be there with you . " 
 " I be sure the place be very pretty , but I do not suppose I shall ever 
 see it . " 
 " do you know about your sister and Mr. Hamel ? " 
 " yes , " say Ayala , surprised . " she have tell I all about it . how do 
 you know ? " 
 " he be stay at Drumcaller,--he and I together with no one 
 else,--when he go over to ask she . I never see a man so happy as 
 when he come back from Glenbogie . he have get all that he want in 
 the world . " 
 " I do so love he because he love she . " 
 " and I love her,--because she love you . " 
 " it be not the same , you know , " say Ayala , try to think it all 
 out . 
 " may I not love she ? " 
 " he be to be my brother . that be why I love he . she can not be your 
 sister . " the poor girl , though she have try to think it all out , have 
 not think very far . 
 " can she not ? " he say . 
 " of course not . Lucy be to marry Mr. Hamel . " 
 " and whom be I to marry ? " then she see it all . " ayala,--ayala,--who 
 be to be my wife ? " 
 " I do not know , " she said,--speake with a gruff voice , but still in 
 a whisper , with a manner altogether different,--thinke how well it 
 would be that she should be take at once back into the house . 
 " do you not know whom I would fain have as my wife ? " then he feel 
 that it behove he to speak out plainly . he be already sure that 
 she would not at once tell he that it should be as he would have 
 it,--that she would not instantly throw herself into his arm . but he 
 must speak plainly to she , and then fight his cause as good he might . 
 " Ayala , I have ask you to come out with I that I might ask you to 
 be my wife . it be that that I do not wish Nina to hear at once . if 
 you will put out your hand and say that it shall be so , Nina and all 
 the world shall know it . I shall be as proud then as Hamel , and as 
 happy,--happier , I think . it seem to I that no one can love as I 
 do now , Ayala ; it have grow upon I from hour to hour as I have see 
 you . when I first take you away to that dance it be so already . do 
 you remember that night at the theatre,--when I have come away from 
 everything and striven so hard that I might be near to you before you 
 go back to your home ? Ayala , I love you then so dearly;--but not 
 as I love you now . when I see you rid away from I yesterday , when 
 I could not get over the brook , I tell myself that unless I might 
 catch you at last , and have you all to myself , I could never again be 
 happy . do you remember when you stoop down and kiss that man 's 
 baby at the farm - house ? oh , Ayala , I think then that if you would 
 not be my wife,--if you would not be my wife,--i should never have 
 wife , never should have baby , never should have home of my own . " 
 she walk on by his side , listen , but she have not a word to say 
 to he . it have be easy enough to she to reject and to rebuke and 
 to scorn Tom Tringle , when he have persist in his suit ; but she 
 know not with what word to reject this man who stand so high in 
 her estimation , who be in many respect so perfect , whom she so 
 thoroughly liked,--but whom , nevertheless , she must reject . he be 
 not the Angel of light,--could never be the Angel of Light . there 
 be nothing there of the azure wing upon which should soar the all 
 but celestial be to whom she could condescend to give herself and 
 her love . he be pleasant , good , friendly , kind - hearted,--all that 
 a friend or a brother should be ; but he be not the Angel of Light . 
 she be sure of that . she tell herself that she be quite sure of it , 
 as she walk beside he in silence along the path . " you know what 
 I mean , Ayala , when I tell you that I love you , " he continue . but 
 still she make no answer . " I have see at last the one human being 
 with whom I feel that I can be happy to spend my life , and , have 
 see she , I ask she to be my wife . the hope have be dwell with I 
 and grow since I first meet you . shall it be a vain hope ? Ayala , 
 may I still hope ? " 
 " no , " she say , abruptly . 
 " be that all ? " 
 " it be all that I can say . " 
 " be that one ' no ' to be the end of everything between we ? " 
 " I do not know what else I ought to say to you , Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " do you mean that you can never love I ? " 
 " never , " she say . 
 " that be a hard word,--and hardly friendly . be there to be no more 
 than one hard word between you and I ? though I do not venture 
 to think that you could tell I that you love I , I look for 
 something kinder , something gentle than that . " 
    " from such a sharp and waspish word as ' no , ' 
     to pluck the sting ! " 
 Ayala do not know the line I have quote , but the idea convey in 
 they be present clearly to her mind . she would fain have tell he , 
 have she know how to do so , that her heart be very gentle towards 
 he , be very kind , gentle and kind as a sister's;--but that she 
 could not love he , so as to become his wife . " you be not he,--not 
 he , not that Angel of Light , which must come to I , radiant with 
 poetry , beautiful to the eye , full of all excellence of art , lift 
 above the earth by the quality of his mind,--such a one as must 
 come to I if it be that I be ever to confess that I love . you be 
 not he , and I can not love you . but you shall be the next to he in my 
 estimation , and you be already so dear to I that I would be tender 
 to you , would be gentle,--if only I know how . " it be all there , 
 clear enough in her mind , but she have not the word . " I do not know 
 what it be that I ought to say , " she exclaim through her sob . 
 " the truth , at any rate , " he answer , sternly , " but not the truth , 
 half and half , after the fashion of some young lady . do not think 
 that you should palter with the truth either because it may not be 
 palatable to I , or seem decorous to yourself . to my happiness this 
 matter be all important , and you be something to my happiness , if 
 only because I have risk it on your love . tell me;--why can not you 
 love I ? " 
 the altered tone of his voice , which now have in it something of 
 severity , seem to give she more power . 
 " it be because-- " then she pause . 
 " because why ? out with it , whatever it be . if it be something that 
 a man may remedy I will remedy it . do not fear to hurt I . be it 
 because I be ugly ? that I can not remedy . " she do not dare to tell 
 he that it be so , but she look up at he , not dissent by any 
 motion of her head . " then God help I , for ugly I must remain . " 
 " it be not that only . " 
 " be it because my name be Stubbs -- Jonathan Stubbs ? " now she do 
 assent , nod her head at he . he have bid she tell he the truth , 
 and she be so anxious to do as he bid she ! " if it be so , Ayala , I 
 must tell you that you be wrong,--wrong and foolish ; that you be 
 carry away by a feeling of romance , which be a false romance . far 
 be it from I to say that I could make you happy , but I be sure that 
 your happiness can not be make and can not be mar by such accident 
 as that . do you think that my mean be not sufficient ? " 
 " No;--no , " she cry ; " I know nothing of your mean . if I could love 
 you I would not condescend to ask,--even to hear . " 
 " there be no other man , I think ? " 
 " there be no other man . " 
 " but your imagination have depict to you something grander than I 
 am,"--then she assent quickly , turn round and nod her head 
 to him,--"some one who shall well respond to that spirit of poetry 
 which be within you ? " again she nod her head approvingly , as 
 though to assure he that now he know the whole truth . " then , Ayala , 
 I must strive to soar till I can approach your dream . but , if you 
 dare to desire thing which be really grand , do not allow yourself 
 to be mean at the same time . do not let the sound of a name move you , 
 or I shall not believe in your aspiration . now shall I take you back 
 to the house ? " 
 back to the house they go , and there be not another word speak 
 between they . by those last word of his she have feel herself to be 
 rebuke . if it be possible that he could ask she again whether that 
 sound , Jonathan Stubbs , have anything to do with it , she would let he 
 know now , by some signal , that she no long find a barrier in the 
 name . but there be other barriers,--barriers which he himself have 
 not pretend to call vain . as to his ugliness , that he have confess 
 he could not remedy ; call on God to pity he because he be so . 
 and as for that something grander which he have describe , and for 
 which her soul sigh , he have simply say that he would seek for it . 
 she be sure that he would not find it . it be not to such as he that 
 the something grander,--which be to be the peculiar attribute of 
 the Angel of light,--could be accord . but he have own that the 
 something grander might exist . 
 CHAPTER XXVI . 
 " the FINEST HERO that I ever knew . " 
 the Colonel and Ayala return to the house without a word . when they 
 be pass through the hall she turn to go at once up the stair 
 to her own room . as she do so he put out his hand to she , and she 
 take it . but she pass on without speak , and when she be alone 
 she consider it over all in her own mind . there could be no doubt 
 that she be right . of that she be quite sure . it be certainly a 
 fix law that a girl should not marry a man unless she love he . 
 she do not love this man , and therefore she ought not to marry he . 
 but there be some qualm at her heart as to the possible reality 
 of the image which she have create for her own idolatry . and she have 
 be wound when he tell she that she should not allow herself to be 
 mean amidst her soaring . she have be wound , and yet she know that 
 he have be right . he have intend to teach she the same lesson when 
 he tell she the absurd story of the woman who have be fling out of 
 the window . she could not love he ; but that name of his should never 
 again be a reason for not do so . let the Angel of Light come to 
 she with his necessary angelic quality , and no want of euphony in 
 a sound should be a barrier to he . nor in truth could any outside 
 appearance be an attribute of angelic light . the Angel of Light might 
 be there even with red hair . something as to the truth of this also 
 come across she , though the Colonel have not rebuke she on that head . 
 but how should she carry herself now during the four day which 
 remain to she at Stalham Park ? all the loveliness seem to depart 
 from her prospect . she would hardly know how to open her mouth before 
 her late friend . she suspect that Lady Albury know with what 
 purpose the Colonel have take she out into the shrubbery , and she 
 would not dare to look Lady Albury in the face . how should she answer 
 Nina if Nina be to ask her question about the walk . the hunt 
 for next Wednesday be no long a delight to which she could look 
 forward . how would it be possible that Colonel Stubbs should direct 
 she now as to her riding , and instruct she as to her conduct in the 
 hunting - field ? it would be well for she that she should return at 
 once to Kingsbury Crescent . 
 as she think of this there do come upon she a reflection that have 
 she be able to accept Colonel Stubbs 's offer there would have be 
 an end for ever to the misery of her aunt 's house . she would have 
 be lift at once into the mode of life in which the man live . 
 instead of be a stranger admit by special grace into such an 
 Elysium as that of Stalham Park , she would become one of those to 
 whom such an Elysium belong almost of right . by her own gift she 
 would have win her way into that upper and bright life which seem 
 to she to be all smile and all joy . as to his income she think 
 nothing and care nothing . he live with man who have horse and 
 carriage , and who spend their time in pleasurable pursuit . and she 
 would live amidst lady who be always array in bright garment , 
 who , too , have horse and carriage at their command , and be never 
 trouble by those sordid care which make life at Kingsbury Crescent 
 so sad and tedious . one little word would have do it all for she , 
 would have enable she to take the step by which she would be place 
 among the bright one of the earth . 
 but the remembrance of all this only make she firm in her 
 resolution . if there be any law of right and wrong fix absolutely 
 in her bosom , it be this,--that no question of happiness or 
 unhappiness , of suffering or joy , would affect her duty to the Angel 
 of Light . she owe herself to he should he come to seek she . she 
 owe herself to he no less , even should he fail to come . and she 
 owe herself equally whether he should be rich or poor . as she be 
 fortify herself with these assurance , Nina come to ask she 
 whether she would not come down to tea . Ayala plead headache , and 
 say that she would rest till dinner . " have anything happen ? " ask 
 Nina . Ayala simply beg that she might be ask no question then , 
 because her head be ache . " if you do not tell I everything , I 
 shall think you be no true friend , " say Nina , as she leave the room . 
 as evening draw on she dress for dinner , and go down into the 
 drawing - room . in do so it be necessary to pass through the 
 billiard - room , and there she find Colonel Stubbs , knock about the 
 ball . " be you dressed for dinner ? " he exclaim ; " I have not begin 
 to think of it yet , and Sir Harry hat a man when he come in late . 
 that wretch Batsby have beat I four game . " with that he rush 
 off , put down the cue with a rattle , and seem to Ayala to have 
 recover altogether from the late prostration of his spirit . 
 in the drawing - room Ayala be for a few minute alone , and then , as 
 she be glad to see , three or four lady all come in at once , so 
 that no question could be ask she by Lady Albury . they go into 
 dinner without the Colonel , who be in truth late , and she be take 
 in by Mr. Gosling , whose pretty little wife be just opposite to she . 
 on the other side of she sit Lord Rufford , who have come to Stalham 
 with his wife for a day or two , and who immediately begin to 
 congratulate she on the performance of the day before . " I be tell 
 you jump the Cranbury Brook , " he say . " I should as soon think of 
 jump the Serpentine . " 
 " I do it because somebody tell I . " 
 " ah , " say Lord Rufford , with a sigh , " there be nothing like 
 ignorance , innocence , and youth combine . but why do not colonel 
 Stubbs get over after you ? " 
 " because Colonel Stubbs could not , " say that gentleman , as he take 
 his seat in the vacant chair . 
 " it may be possible , " say Sir Harry , " that a gentleman should not be 
 able to jump over Cranbury Brook ; but any gentleman , if he will take 
 a little trouble , may come down in time for dinner . " 
 " now that I have be duly snub right and leave , " say the Colonel , 
 " perhaps I may eat my soup . " 
 Ayala , who have expect she hardly know what further trouble , and 
 who have almost fear that nobody would speak to she because she have 
 misbehave herself , endeavour to take heart of grace when she find 
 that all around she , include the Colonel himself , be as pleasant 
 as ever . she have fancy that Lady Albury have look at she specially 
 when Colonel Stubbs take his seat , and she have specially notice the 
 fact that his chair have not be next her own . these little matter 
 she be aware Lady Albury manage herself , and be aware also that in 
 accordance with the due rotation of thing she and the Colonel should 
 have be place together . she be glad that it be not so , but at 
 the same time she be confident that Lady Albury know something of 
 what have pass between herself and her suitor . the evening , however , 
 go off easily , and nothing occur to disturb she except that 
 the Colonel have call she by her christian name , when as usual he 
 bring to she a cup of tea in the drawing - room . oh , that he would 
 continue to do so , and yet not demand from she more than their old 
 friendship ! 
 the next morning be Sunday , and they all go to church . it be a 
 law at Stalham that everyone should go to church on Sunday morning . 
 Sir Harry himself , who be not suppose to be a peculiarly religious 
 man , be always angry when any male guest do not show himself in the 
 enormous family pew . " I call it d---- indecent , " he have be hear 
 to say . but nobody be expect to go twice,--and consequently 
 nobody ever do go twice . Lunch be protract later than usual . the 
 man would roam about the ground with cigar in their mouth , and 
 lady would take to reading in their own room , in follow which 
 occupation they would spend a considerable part of the afternoon 
 asleep . on this afternoon Lady Albury do not go to sleep , but 
 contrive to get Ayala alone upstairs into her little sitting - room . 
 " Ayala , " she say , with something between a smile and a frown , " I be 
 afraid I be go to be angry with you . " 
 " please do not be angry , Lady Albury . " 
 " if I be right in what I surmise , you have an offer make to you 
 yesterday which ought to satisfy the heart of almost any girl in 
 England . " here she pause , but Ayala have not a word to say for 
 herself . " if it be so , the good man I know ask you to share his 
 fortune with he . " 
 " have he tell you ? " 
 " but he do ? " 
 " I shall not tell , " say Ayala , proudly . 
 " I know he do . I know that it be his intention before . be you 
 aware what kind of man be my cousin , Jonathan Stubbs ? have it occur 
 to you that in truth and gallantry , in honour , honesty , courage , and 
 real tenderness , he be so perfect as to be quite unlike to the crowd 
 of man you see ? " 
 " I do know that he be good , " say Ayala . 
 " good ! where will you find any one good like he ? compare he to the 
 other man around he , and then say whether he be good ! can it be 
 possible that you should refuse the love of such a man as that ? " 
 " I do not think I ought to be make to talk about it , " say Ayala , 
 hesitating . 
 " my dear , it be for your own sake and for his . when you go away from 
 here it may be so difficult for he to see you again . " 
 " I do not suppose he will ever want , " say Ayala . 
 " it be sufficient that he want it now . what well can you expect 
 for yourself ? " 
 " I expect nothing , " say Ayala , proudly . " I have get nothing , and I 
 expect nothing . " 
 " he will give you everything , simply because he love you . my dear , 
 I should not take the trouble to tell you all this , do I not know 
 that he be a man who ought to be accept when he ask such a request 
 as that . your happiness would be safe in his hand . " she pause , but 
 Ayala have not a word to say . " and he be not a man likely to renew 
 such a request . he be too proud for that . I can conceive no possible 
 reason for such a refusal unless it be that you be engaged . if there 
 be some one else , then of course there must be an end of it . " 
 " there be no one else . " 
 " then , my dear , with your prospect it be sheer folly . when the 
 General die he will have over two thousand a year . " 
 " as if that have anything to do with it ! " say Ayala , hold herself 
 aloft in her wrath , and throw angry glance at the lady . 
 " it be what I call romance , " say Lady Albury . " romance can never 
 make you happy . " 
 " at any rate it be not rich . what you call romance may be what I 
 like well . at any rate if I do not love Colonel Stubbs I be sure I 
 ought not to marry him;--and I will not . " 
 after this there be nothing further to be say . Ayala think that 
 she would be turn out of the room,--almost out of the house , in 
 disgrace . but Lady Albury , who be simply play her part , be 
 not in the least angry . " well , my dear , " she say , " pray,--pray , 
 think well of it . I be in earnest , of course , because of my 
 cousin,--because he seem to have put his heart upon it . he be just 
 the man to be absolutely in love when he be in love . but I would 
 not speak as I do unless I be sure that he would make you happy . 
 my cousin Jonathan be to I the fine hero that I know . when a 
 man be a hero he should not be break - hearted for want of a woman 's 
 smiles,--should he ? " 
 " she ought not to smile unless she love he , " say Ayala , as she 
 leave the room . 
 the Monday and Tuesday go very quietly . Lady Albury say nothing 
 more on the great subject , and the Colonel behave himself exactly 
 as though there have be no word of love at all . there be nothing 
 special say about the Wednesday 's hunt through the two day , till 
 Ayala almost think that there would be no hunt for she . nor , 
 indeed , do she much wish for it . it have be the Colonel who have 
 instigate she to deed of daring , and under his sanction that she 
 have venture to ride . she would hardly know how to go through the 
 wednesday,--whether still to trust he , or whether to hold herself 
 aloof from he . when nothing be say on the subject till late on 
 the evening of the Tuesday , she have almost resolve that she would 
 not put on her habit when the morning come . but just as she be about 
 to leave the drawing - room with her bed - candle Colonel Stubbs come to 
 she . " Most of we ride to the meet to - morrow , " he say ; " but you and 
 Nina shall be take in the waggonette so as to save you a little . 
 it be all arrange . " she bow and thank he , go to bed almost 
 sorry that it should have be so settle . when the morning come Nina 
 could not ride . she have hurt her foot , and , come early into Ayala 's 
 room , declare with tear that she could not go . " then neither shall 
 I , " say Ayala , who be at that moment prepare to put on her habit . 
 " but you must . it be all settle , and Sir Harry would be offend if 
 you do not go . what have Jonathan do that you should refuse to ride 
 with he because I be lame ? " 
 " nothing , " say Ayala . 
 " oh , Ayala , do tell I . I should tell you everything . of course you 
 must hunt whatever it be . even though he should have offer and you 
 refuse he , of course you must go . " 
 " must I ? " say Ayala . 
 " then you have refuse he ? " 
 " I have . oh , Nina , pray do not speak of it . do not think of it if you 
 can help it . why should everything be disturb because I have be a 
 fool ? " 
 " then you think you have be a fool ? " 
 " other people think so ; but if so I shall at any rate be constant to 
 my folly . what I mean be , that it have be do , and should be pass 
 over as do with . I be quite sure that I ought not to be scold ; 
 but Lady Albury do scold I . " then they go down together to 
 breakfast , Ayala have prepare herself properly for the 
 hunting - field . 
 in the waggonette there be with her Lady Albury , Mrs. Gosling , and 
 Nina , who be not prevent by her lameness from go to the meet . 
 the gentleman all ride , so that there be no immediate difficulty 
 as to Colonel Stubbs . but when she have be put on her horse by 
 his assistance and find herself compel to ride away from the 
 carriage , apparently under his especial guidance , her heart misgave 
 she , and she thoroughly wish that she be at home in the Crescent . 
 though she be specially under his guidance there be at first 
 other close around she , and , while they be on the road go to 
 the covert which they be to draw , conversation be keep up so that 
 it be not necessary for she to speak;--but what should she do when 
 she should find herself alone with he as would certainly soon be the 
 case ? it soon be the case . the hound be at work in a large wood 
 in which she be tell they might possibly pass the good part of the 
 day , and it be not long before the man have disperse themselves , 
 some on this side some on that , and she find herself with no one 
 near she but the Colonel . " Ayala , " he say , " of course you know that 
 it be my duty to look after you , and to do it well if I can than I 
 do on Friday . " 
 " I understand , " she say . 
 " do not let any remembrance of that walk on Saturday interfere with 
 your happiness to - day . who know when you may be out hunt again ? " 
 " never ! " she say ; " I do not suppose I shall ever hunt again . " 
 " carpe diem , " he say , laugh . " do you know what ' carpe diem ' 
 mean ? " 
 " it be Latin perhaps . " 
 " yes ; and therefore you be not suppose to understand it . this be 
 what it mean . as an hour for joy have come , do not let any trouble 
 interfere with it . let it all be , for this day at least , as though 
 there have be no walk in the Stalham Woods . there be Larry 
 Twentyman . if I break down as I do on Friday you may always trust to 
 he . Larry and you be old friend now . " 
 " carpe diem , " she say to herself . " oh , yes ; if it be only 
 possible . how be one to ' carpe diem ' with one 's heart full of 
 trouble ? " and it be the less possible because this man whom she 
 have reject be so anxious to do everything for her happiness . Lady 
 Albury have tell she that he be a hero,--that he be perfect in 
 honour , honesty , and gallantry ; and she feel inclined to own that 
 Lady Albury be almost right . Yet,--yet how far be he from that 
 image of manly perfection which her daily thought have create for 
 she ! could she have find an appropriate word with which to thank 
 he she would have do so ; but there be no such word , and Larry 
 Twentyman be now with they , take off his hat and overflow with 
 compliment . " oh , Miss Dormer , I be so delighted to see you out 
 again . " 
 " how be the baby , Mr. Twentyman ? " 
 " Brisk as a bee , and hungry as a hunter . " 
 " and how be Mrs. Twentyman ? " 
 " brisker and hungry than the baby . what do you think of the day , 
 Colonel ? " 
 " a very good sort of day , Twentyman , if we be anywhere out of these 
 big wood . " Larry shake his head solemnly . the Mudcombe Woods in 
 which they be now at work have be know to occupy Tony Tappett 
 and his whole pack from eleven o'clock till the dusk of evening . 
 " we have get to draw they , of course , " continue the Colonel . then Mr. 
 Twentyman discourse at some length on the excellence of Mudcombe 
 Woods . what would any county be without a nursery for young fox ? 
 Gorse - covert , hedge - row , and little spinney would be of no avail 
 unless there be some grandly wild domain in which maternal and 
 paternal fox could roam in comparative security . all this be just 
 as Ayala would have it , because it enable she to ask question , and 
 save she from subject which might be painful to she . 
 the day , in truth , be not propitious to hunt even . fox be 
 find in plenty , and two of they be kill within the recess of 
 the wood ; but on no occasion do they run a mile into the open . for 
 Ayala it be very well , because she be gallop hither and thither , 
 and because before the day be over she find herself able to talk to 
 the Colonel in her wonted manner ; but there be no great glory for 
 she as have be the glory of Little Cranbury Brook . 
 on the next morning she be take back to London and hand over 
 to her aunt in Kingsbury Crescent without another word have be 
 speak by Colonel Stubbs in reference to his love . 
 CHAPTER XXVII . 
 LADY ALBURY 's LETTER . 
 " I have have a letter from Lady Albury , " say Aunt Margaret , almost as 
 soon as Ayala have take off her hat and cloak . 
 " yes , I know , Aunt Margaret . she write to ask that I might stay for 
 four more day . I hope it be not wrong . " 
 " I have have another letter since that , on Monday , about it ; I have 
 determine to show it you . there it be . you have well read it by 
 yourself , and I will come to you again in half an hour . " then , very 
 solemnly , but with no trace of ill - humour , Mrs. Dosett leave the room . 
 there be something in her tone and gait so exceedingly solemn that 
 Ayala be almost frightened . of course , the letter must be about 
 Colonel Stubbs , and , of course , the writer of it would find fault 
 with she . she be conscious that she be add one to her terribly 
 long list of sin in not consent to marry Colonel Stubbs . it be 
 her misfortune that all her friend find fault with everything that 
 she do . among they there be not one , not even Nina , who fully 
 sympathise with she . not even to Lucy could she expatiate with a 
 certainty of sympathy in regard to the Angel of Light . and now , 
 though her aunt be apparently not angry,--only solemn,--she feel 
 already sure that she be to be tell that it be her duty to marry 
 Colonel Stubbs . it be only the other day that her aunt be preach 
 to she as to the propriety of marry her cousin Tom . it seem , she 
 say to herself , that people think that a girl be bind to marry 
 any man who could provide a house for she , and bread to eat , and 
 clothe to wear . all this pass through her mind as she slowly draw 
 Lady Albury 's letter from the envelope and prepare to read it . the 
 letter be as follows:-- 
    Stalham , Monday , 18th November , 18 - - . 
    DEAR MADAM , 
    your niece will return to you , as you request , on 
    Thursday , but before she reach you I think it my duty 
    to inform you of a little circumstance which have occur 
    here . my cousin , Colonel Jonathan Stubbs , who be also 
    the nephew of the Marchesa Baldoni , have make Miss Dormer 
    an offer . I be bind to add that I do not think it 
    improbable that it would be so , when I call on your 
    husband , and beg he to allow your niece to come to 
    we . I do not then know my cousin 's intention as a fact . 
    I doubt whether he know it himself ; but from what I have 
    hear I think it probable , and , as I conceive that any 
    young lady would be fortunate in become my cousin 's 
    wife , I have no scruple . 
    he have propose to she , and she have reject he . he have 
    set his heart upon the matter , and I be most anxious that 
    he should succeed , because I know he to be a man who 
    will not easily brook disappointment where he have set his 
    heart . of all man I know he be the most steadfast in his 
    purpose . 
    I take the liberty of speak to your niece on the 
    subject , and be disposed to think that she be defer 
    by some feeling of foolish romance , partly because she 
    do not like the name , partly because my cousin be not a 
    handsome man in a girl 's eyes;--more probably , however , 
    she have build up to herself some poetic fiction , and 
    dream of she know not what . if it be so , it be a pity 
    that she should lose an opportunity of settle herself 
    well and happily in life . she give as a reason that she 
    do not love he . my experience be not so long as your , 
    perhaps , but such as I have have teach I to think that 
    a wife will love her husband when she find herself use 
    well at all point . mercenary marriage be , of course , 
    bad : but it be a pity , I think , that a girl , such as your 
    niece , should lose the chance of so much happiness by a 
    freak of romance . 
    Colonel Stubbs , who be only twenty - eight year of age , have 
    a staff appointment at Aldershot . he have private mean of 
    his own , on which alone he would be justify in marry . 
    on the death of his uncle , General Stubbs , he will inherit 
    a considerable accession of fortune . he be not , of course , 
    a rich man ; but he have ample for the want of a family . 
    in all other good gift , temper , manliness , truth , and 
    tenderness , I know no one to excel he . I should trust any 
    young friend of my own into his hand with perfect safety . 
    I have think it right to tell you this . you will use 
    your own judgment in say what you think fit to your 
    niece . should she be make to understand that her own 
    immediate friend approve of the offer , she would probably 
    be induce to accept it . I have not hear my cousin say 
    what may be his future plan . I think it possible that , 
    as he be quite in earnest , he will not take one repulse . 
    should he ask again , I hope that your niece may receive 
    he with altered view . 
    Pray believe I to be , my dear Madam , 
    your sincerely , 
    ROSALINE ALBURY . 
 Ayala read the letter twice over before her aunt return to she , 
 and , as she read it , feel something of a feeling of renew kindness 
 come upon she in reference to the writer of it;--not that she be 
 in the least change in her own resolution , but that she like Lady 
 Albury for wish to change she . the reason give , however , be 
 altogether impotent with she . Colonel Stubbs have the mean of keep 
 a wife ! if that be a reason then also ought she to marry her 
 cousin , Tom Tringle . Colonel Stubbs be good and true ; but so also 
 very probably be Tom Tringle . she would not compare the two man . she 
 know that her cousin Tom be altogether distasteful to she , while she 
 take delight in the companionship of the Colonel . but the reason 
 for marry one be to her thinking as strong as for marry the 
 other . there could be only one valid excuse for marriage,--that of 
 adore the man;--and she be quite sure that she do not adore 
 Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . Lady Albury have say in her letter , that a 
 girl would be sure to love a man who treat she well after marriage ; 
 but that would not suffice for she . be she to marry at all , it 
 would be necessary that she should love the man before her marriage . 
 " have you read the letter , my dear ? " say Mrs. Dosett , as she enter 
 the room and close the door carefully behind she . she speak almost 
 in a whisper , and seem to be altogether change by the magnitude of 
 the occasion . 
 " yes , Aunt Margaret , I have read it . " 
 " I suppose it be true ? " 
 " true ! it be true in part . " 
 " you do meet this Colonel Stubbs ? " 
 " oh , yes ; I meet he . " 
 " and you have meet he before ? " 
 " yes , Aunt Margaret . he use to come to Brook Street . he be the 
 Marchesa 's nephew . " 
 " do he-- " this question Aunt Margaret ask in a very low whisper , 
 and her most solemn voice . " do he make love to you in Brook Street ? " 
 " no , " say Ayala , sharply . 
 " not at all ? " 
 " not at all . I never think of such a thing . I never dream of such 
 a thing when he begin talk to I out in the wood at Stalham on 
 Saturday . " 
 " have you be -- be on friendly term with he ? " 
 " very friendly term . we be quite friend , and use to talk about 
 all manner of thing . I be very fond of he , and never afraid of 
 anything that he say to I . he be Nina 's cousin and seem almost 
 to be my cousin too . " 
 " then you do like he ? " 
 " of course I do . everybody must like he . but that be no reason why I 
 should want to marry he . " 
 upon this Mrs. Dosett sit silent for awhile turn the great matter 
 over in her thought . it be quite clear to she that every word which 
 Ayala have speak be true ; and probable also that Lady Albury 's word 
 be true . in her inmost thought she regard Ayala as a fool . here 
 be a girl who have not a shilling of her own , who be simply a burden 
 on relative whom she do not especially love , who be doom to 
 a life which be essentially distasteful to her,--for all this in 
 respect to herself and her house Mrs. Dosett have sense enough to 
 acknowledge,--who seem devoted to the society of rich and gay 
 people , and yet would not take the opportunity that be offer 
 she of escape what she dislike and go to that which she 
 love ! two offer have now be make to she , both of they thoroughly 
 eligible , to neither of which would objection have be make by 
 any of the person concern . Sir Thomas have show himself to be 
 absolutely anxious for the success of his son . and now it seem that 
 the grand relation of this Colonel Stubbs be in favour of the 
 match . what it be in Ayala that entitle she to such promotion Mrs. 
 Dosett do not quite perceive . to her eye her niece be a fantastic 
 girl , pretty indeed , but not endow with that regular tranquil 
 beauty which she think to be of all feminine grace the most 
 attractive . why Tom Tringle should have be so deeply smite with 
 Ayala have be a marvel to she ; and now this story of Colonel Stubbs 
 be a great marvel . " Ayala , " she say , " you ought to think well 
 of it . " 
 " think well of what , Aunt Margaret ? " 
 " you have see what this Lady Albury say about her cousin , Colonel 
 Stubbs . " 
 " what have that to do with it ? " 
 " you believe what she say ? if so why should you not accept he ? " 
 " because I can not , " say Ayala . 
 " have you any idea what be to become of your future life ? " say Mrs. 
 Dosett , very gravely . 
 " not in the least , " say Ayala . but that be a fib , because she have 
 an idea that in the fullness of time it would be her heavenly fate to 
 put her hand into that of the Angel of Light . 
 " gentleman will not come run after you always , my dear . " 
 this be almost as bad as be tell by her Aunt Emmeline that she 
 have encourage her cousin Tom . " it be a great shame to say that . I 
 do not want anybody to run after I . I never do . " 
 " no , my dear ; no . I do not think that you ever do . " Mrs. Dosett , who 
 be justice itself , do acknowledge to herself that of any such fault 
 as that suggest , Ayala be innocent . her fault be quite in the 
 other direction , and consist of an unwillingness to settle herself 
 and to free her relation of the burden of maintain she when 
 proper opportunity arise for do so . " I only want to explain 
 to you that people must,--must,--must make their hay while the sun 
 shin . you be young now . " 
 " I be not one - and - twenty yet , " say Ayala , proudly . 
 " one - and - twenty be a very good time for a girl to marry,--that be to 
 say if a proper sort of gentleman ask she . " 
 " I do not think I ought to be scold because they do not seem to I to 
 be the proper sort . I do not want anybody to come . nobody ought to be 
 talk to about it at all . if I care about any one that you or Uncle 
 Reginald do not approve , then you might talk to I . but I do not 
 think that anything ought to be say about anybody unless I like he 
 myself . " so the conversation be over , and Mrs. Dosett feel that she 
 have be entirely vanquish . 
 Lady Albury 's letter be show to Mr. Dosett , but he refuse to say 
 a word to his niece on the subject . in the argument which follow 
 between he and his wife he take his niece 's part , oppose 
 altogether that idea that hay should be make while the sun shin . 
 " it simply mean sell herself , " say Mr. Dosett . 
 " that be nonsense , Reginald . of course such a girl as Ayala have to 
 do the good she can with her good look . what else have she to depend 
 upon ? " 
 " my brother - in - law will do something for she . " 
 " I hope he will,--though I do not think that a very safe reed to 
 depend upon as she have twice offend he . but of course a girl 
 think of marry . Ayala would be very much disgusted if she be 
 tell that she be to be an old maid , and live upon £ 100 a year 
 supply by Sir Thomas 's bounty . it might have be that she would 
 have to do it;--but now that chance be open she ought to take they . 
 she should choose between her cousin Tom and this Colonel Stubbs ; 
 and you should tell she that , if she will not , you will no long be 
 responsible for she . " 
 to this Mr. Dosett turn altogether a deaf ear . he be quite sure 
 that his responsibility must be continue till Ayala should marry , 
 or till he should die , and he would not make a threat which he would 
 certainly be unable to carry out . he would be very glad if Ayala 
 could bring herself to marry either of the young man . it be a pity 
 that she should feel herself compel to refuse offer so excellent . 
 but it be a matter for her own judgment , and one in which he would 
 not interfere . for two day this almost lead to a coldness between the 
 man and his wife , during which the suffering of poor Mrs. Dosett 
 be heartrende . 
 not many day after Ayala 's return her sister Lucy come to see she . 
 certain reason have cause Lady Tringle to stay at Glenbogie long 
 than usual , and the family be now pass through London on their 
 way to Merle Park . perhaps it be the fact that the Trafficks have 
 be effectually extrude from Glenbogie , but would doubtless turn up 
 at Merle Park , should Lady Tringle take up her residence there before 
 the autumn be over . that they should spend their Christmas at Merle 
 Park be an acknowledge thing;--to mamma Tringle an acknowledge 
 benefit , because she like to have her daughter with she ; to papa 
 Tringle an acknowledge evil , because he could not endure to be make 
 to give more than he intend to give . that they should remain there 
 afterwards through January , and till the meeting of Parliament , be 
 to be expect . but it be hop that they might be drive to find 
 some home for themselves if they be leave homeless by Sir Thomas for 
 awhile . the little plan be hardly successful , as Mr. Traffick have 
 put his wife into lodging at Hastings , ready to pounce down on Merle 
 Park as soon as Lady Tringle should have occupy the house a few 
 day . Lady Tringle be now go there with the rest of the family , 
 Sir Thomas have be in town for the last six week . 
 Lucy take advantage of the day which they pass in London , and 
 succeed in get across to the Crescent . at this time she have 
 hear nothing of Colonel Stubbs , and be full indeed of her own 
 trouble . 
 " you have not see he ? " she say to her sister . 
 " see who ? " ask Ayala , who have two " him " to her bow,--and think 
 at the moment rather of her own two " him " than of Lucy 's one . 
 " Isadore . he say that he would call here . " Ayala explain that she 
 have not see he , have be absent from town during the last ten 
 days,--dure which Mr. Hamel have in fact call at the house . 
 " Ayala , " continue Lucy , " what be I to do ? " 
 " Stick to he , " say Ayala , firmly . 
 " of course I shall . but Aunt Emmeline think that I ought to give he 
 up or-- " 
 " or what ? " 
 " or go away , " say Lucy , very gravely . 
 " where would you go to ? " 
 " oh , where indeed ? of course he would have I , but it would be ruin 
 to he to marry a wife without a penny when he earn only enough for 
 his own want . his father have quarrel with he altogether . he say 
 that nobody can prevent our being married if we please , and that he 
 be quite ready to make a home for I instantly ; but I know that last 
 year he hardly earn more than two hundred pound after pay all 
 his expense , and be I to take he at his word I should ruin he . " 
 " would Uncle Tom turn you out ? " 
 " he have be away almost ever since Mr. Hamel come to Glenbogie , and 
 I do not know what he will say . Aunt Emmeline declare that I can 
 only stay with they just as though I be her daughter , and that a 
 daughter would be bind to obey she . " 
 " do Gertrude obey she about Mr. Houston ? " 
 " Gertrude have her own way with her mother altogether . and of course a 
 daughter can not really be turn out . if she tell I to go I suppose 
 I must go . " 
 " I should ask Uncle Tom , " say Ayala . " she could not make you go out 
 into the street . when she have to get rid of I , she could send I 
 here in exchange ; but she can not say now that you do not suit , and have 
 I back again . " 
 " oh , Ayala , it be so miserable . I feel that I do not know what to do 
 with myself . " 
 " nor do I , " say Ayala , jump up from the bed on which she be 
 sit . " it do seem to be so cross - grained . nobody will let you 
 marry , and everybody will make I . " 
 " do they still trouble you about Tom ? " 
 " it be not Tom now , Lucy . another man have come up . " 
 " as a lover ? " 
 " oh , yes ; quite so . his name is,--such a name , Lucy,--his name be 
 Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . " 
 " that be Isadore 's friend,--the man who live at Drumcaller . " 
 " exactly . he tell I that Mr. Hamel be at Drumcaller with he . and 
 now he want I to be his wife . " 
 " do you not like he ? " 
 " that be the bad part of it all , Lucy . if I do not like he I 
 should not mind it half so much . it be just because I like he so 
 very much that I be so very unhappy . his hair be just the colour of 
 Aunt Emmeline 's big shawl . " 
 " what do that signify ? " 
 " and his mouth stretch almost from ear to ear . " 
 " I should not care a bit for his mouth . " 
 " I do not think I do much , because he do look so good - natured when 
 he laugh . indeed he be always the most good - natured man that ever 
 live . " 
 " have he get an income enough for marriage ? " ask Lucy , whose sorrow 
 be already spring from that most fertile source of sorrow . 
 " plenty they tell me,--though I do not in the least know what plenty 
 mean . " 
 " then Ayala why should you not have he ? " 
 " because I can not , " say Ayala . " how be a girl to love a man if she 
 do not love he . like have nothing to do with it . you do not think 
 liking ought to have anything to do with it ? " 
 this question have not be answer when Aunt Margaret come into the 
 room , declare that the Tringle man - servant , who have walk across 
 the park with Miss Dormer , be wax impatient . the sister , 
 therefore , be separate , and Lucy return to Queen 's Gate . 
 CHAPTER XXVIII . 
 MISS DOCIMER . 
 " I tell you fairly that I think you altogether wrong;--that it be 
 cowardly , unmanly , and disgraceful . I do not mean , you see , to put 
 what you call a fine point upon it . " 
 " no , you do not . " 
 " it be one of those matter on which a person must speak the truth or 
 not speak at all . I should not have speak unless you force it upon 
 I . you do not care for she in the least . " 
 " that be true . I do not know that I be especially quick at what you 
 call care for young lady . if I care for anybody it be for you . " 
 " I suppose so ; but that may as well be drop for the present . you 
 mean to marry this girl simply because she have get a lot of money ? " 
 " exactly that;--as you before long will marry some gentleman only 
 because he have get money . " 
 " you have no right to say so because I be engaged to no man . but if 
 I be so it be quite different . unless I marry I can be nobody . I 
 can have no existence that I can call my own . I have no other way of 
 push myself into the world 's notice . you be a man . " 
 " you mean to say that I could become a merchant or a lawyer,--be a 
 Lord Chancellor in time , or perhaps an Archbishop of Canterbury . " 
 " you can live and eat and drink and go where you wish without be 
 dependent on any one . if I have your freedom and your mean do you 
 think that I would marry for money ? " 
 in this dialogue the main part be take by Mr. Frank Houston , whose 
 ambition it be to marry Miss Gertrude Tringle , and the lady 's 
 part by his cousin and intimate friend , Miss Imogene Docimer . the 
 scene be a walk through a pine - forest on the southern slope of 
 the Tyrolean Alps , and the occasion have be make a little more 
 exhilarating than usual by the fact that Imogene have be strongly 
 advise both by her brother , Mr. Mudbury Docimer , and by her 
 sister - in law , Mrs. Mudbury Docimer , not to take any more distant 
 ramble with her far - away cousin Frank Houston . in the tooth of that 
 advice this walk be take , and the conversation in the pine - wood have 
 at the present moment arrive at the point above give . 
 " I do not know that any two person be ever far asunder in 
 an argument than you and I in this , " say Frank , not in the least 
 disconcert by the severe epithet which have be apply to he . 
 " I conceive that you be lead away by a desire to deceive yourself , 
 whereas hypocrisy should only be use with the object of deceive 
 other . " 
 " how do I deceive myself ? " 
 " in make believe that man be generally different from what they 
 are;--in try to suppose that I ought to be , if I be not , a hero . 
 you shall not find a man whose main object be not that of secure 
 an income . the clergyman who preach against gold lick the ground 
 beneath the minister 's foot in order that he may become a bishop . the 
 barrister care not with what case he may foul his hand so long as 
 he may become rich . the man in trade be so aware of his own daily 
 dishonesty that he make two separate existence for himself , and 
 endeavour to atone for his rascality in the City by his performance 
 of all duty at the West End . I regard myself to be so infinitely 
 clean in my conscience than other man that I could not bring myself 
 to be a bishop , an attorney - general , or a great merchant . of all the 
 way open to I this seem to I to be the least sordid . I give she 
 the only two thing which she desires,--myself and a position . she 
 will give I the only thing I desire , which be some money . when you 
 marry you will make an equally fine bargain,--only your ware will be 
 your beauty . " 
 " you will not give she yourself;--not your heart . " 
 " yes , I shall . I shall make the most of she , and shall do so by 
 become as fond of she as I can . of course I like breed . of 
 course I like beauty . of course I like that aroma of feminine charm 
 which can only be produce by a mixture of intellect , loveliness , 
 taste , and early association . I do not pretend to say that my future 
 would not be much sweet before I with you as my wife,--if only 
 either of we have a sufficiency of income . I acknowledge that . but 
 then I acknowledge also that I prefer Miss Tringle , with £ 100,000 , 
 to you with nothing ; and I do not think that I ought to be call 
 unmanly , disgraceful , and a coward , because I have courage enough 
 to speak the truth openly to a friend whom I trust . my theory of 
 life shock you , not because it be uncommon , but because it be not 
 commonly declare . " 
 they be silent for a while as they go on through the path , and 
 then Miss Docimer speak to he in an altered voice . " I must ask you 
 not to speak to I again as one who by any possibility could have 
 be your wife . " 
 " very well . you will not wish I to abandon the privilege of thinking 
 of past possibility ? " 
 " I would,--if it be possible . " 
 " quite impossible ! one 's thought , I imagine , be always suppose to 
 be one 's own . " 
 " you know what I mean . a gentleman will always spare a woman if he 
 can do so ; and there be case , such as have be ours , in which it 
 be a most imperative duty to do so . you should not have follow we 
 when you have make up your mind about this young lady . " 
 " I take care to let you know , beforehand , that I intend it . " 
 " you should not have throw the weight upon I . you should not even 
 have write to I . " 
 " I wonder what you would have say then,--how loudly you would have 
 abuse me,--had I not write ! would you not have tell I then that 
 I have not the courage to be open with you ? " he pause for an answer , 
 but she make none . " but I do recognise the necessity of my become 
 subject to abuse in this state of affair . I have be in no respect 
 false , nor in any way want in affection . when I suggest to you 
 that £ 600 a - year between we , with an increase family , and lodging 
 in Marylebone , would be uncomfortable , you shudder at the prospect . 
 when I explain to you that you would have the bad of it because 
 my club would be open to I , you be almost angry with I because I 
 seem to imply that there could be any other than one decision . " 
 " there could only be one decision,--unless you be man enough to 
 earn your bread . " 
 " but I be not . but I be not . you might as well let that accident pass , 
 san dire . be there ever a moment in which you think that I should 
 earn my bread ? " 
 " never for a moment do I endow you with the power of do anything 
 so manly . " 
 " then why throw it in my tooth now ? that be not fair . however , I do 
 own that I have to be abuse . I do not see any way in which you and I 
 be to part without it . but you need not descend to Billingsgate . " 
 " I have not descend to Billingsgate , Mr. Houston . " 
 " upper - world billingsgate ! Cowardice , as an accusation from a woman 
 to a man , be upper - world billingsgate . but it do not matter . of 
 course I know what it mean . do you think your brother want I to go 
 away at once ? " 
 " at once , " she say . 
 " that would be disagreeable and absurd . you mean to sit to I for 
 that head ? " 
 " certainly not . " 
 " I can not in the least understand why not . what have a question of 
 art to do with marriage or give in marriage ? and why should Mrs. 
 Docimer be so angry with I , when she have know the truth all along ? " 
 " there be question which it be of no avail to answer . I have come 
 out with you now because I think it well that we should have a 
 final opportunity of understand each other . you understand I at 
 any rate . " 
 " perfectly , " he say . " you have take especial care on this occasion 
 to make yourself intelligible . " 
 " so I intend . and as you do understand I , and know how far I be 
 from approve your philosophy , you can hardly wish to remain with we 
 long . " then they walk on together in absolute silence for above a 
 mile . they have come out of the wood , and be descend , by a steep 
 and narrow path , to the village in which stand the hotel at which the 
 party be stay . another ten minute would take they down to the 
 high road . the path here run by the side of a rivulet , the course 
 of which be so steep that the water make their way down in a 
 succession of little cataract . from the other side of the path be 
 a fence , so close to it , that on this particular spot there be room 
 only for one to walk . here Frank Houston step in front of his 
 companion , so as to stop she . " Imogene , " he say , " if it be intend 
 that I be to start by the diligence for Innspruck this evening , you 
 have well bid I farewell at once . " 
 " I have bid you farewell , " she say . 
 " then you have do it in so bitter a mood that you have well try 
 your hand at it again . Heaven only know in what manner you or I may 
 meet again . " 
 " what do it matter ? " she ask . 
 " I have always feel that the heart of man be soft than the heart 
 of woman . a woman 's hand be soft , but she can steel her heart when 
 she think it necessary , as no man can do . do it occur to you at 
 this moment that there have be some true affection between you and 
 I in former day ? " 
 " I wish it do not . " 
 " it may be so that I wish it also ; but there be the fact . no wishing 
 will enable I to get rid of it . no wishing will save I from the 
 memory of early dream and sweet longing and vain triumph . there be 
 the remembrance of bright glory make very sad to I by the meanness 
 of the exist truth . I do not say but that I would obliterate it if 
 I could ; but it be not to be obliterate ; the past will not be make 
 more pleasant to I by any pretence of present indignation . I should 
 have think that it would have be the same with you . " 
 " there have be no glory , " she say , " though I quite acknowledge the 
 meanness . " 
 " there have be at any rate some love . " 
 " misplace . you have well let I pass on . I have , as you say , 
 steel myself . I will not condescend to any tenderness . in my 
 brother 's presence and my sister 's I will wish you good - bye and 
 express a hope that you may be successful in your enterprise . here , 
 by the brook - side , out upon the mountain - path , where there be no one 
 to hear we but our two self , I will bid you no farewell soft than 
 that already speak . go and do as you propose . you have my leave . 
 when it shall have be do there shall never be a word speak by I 
 against it . but , when you ask I whether you be right , I will only 
 say that I think you to be wrong . it may be that you owe nothing to 
 I ; but you owe something to she , and something also to yourself . 
 now , Mr. Houston , I shall be glad to pass on . " 
 he shrug his shoulder and then step out of the path , think 
 as he do so how ignorant he have be , after all that have pass , of 
 much of the character of Imogene Docimer . it could not be , he have 
 think , but that she would melt into softness at last . " I will not 
 condescend to any tenderness , " she have say , and it seem that she 
 would be as good as her word . he then walk down before she in 
 silence , and in silence they reach the inn . 
 " Mr. Houston , " say Mrs. Docimer , before they sit down to dinner 
 together , " I think it be understand that you and Imogene should 
 not go out alone together again . " 
 " I have take my place to Innspruck by the diligence this evening , " 
 he answer . 
 " perhaps it will be well so , though both Mudbury and I will be 
 sorry to lose your company . " 
 " yes , Mrs. Docimer , I have take my place . your sister seem to 
 think that there would be great danger if I wait till to - morrow 
 morning when I could have get a pleasant lift in a return carriage . I 
 hate travel at night and I hate diligence . I be quite prepared 
 to post all the way , though it would have ruin me,--only for this 
 accurse diligence . " 
 " I be sorry you should be inconvenience . " 
 " it do not signify . what a man without a wife may suffer in that 
 way never do signify . it be just fourteen hour . you would not like 
 Docimer to come with I . " 
 " that be nonsense . you need not go the whole way unless you like . you 
 could sleep at Brunecken . " 
 " Brunecken be only twelve mile , and it might be dangerous . " 
 " of course you choose to turn everything into ridicule . " 
 " well that than tear , Mrs. Docimer . what be the good of cry ? I 
 can not make myself an eld son . I can not endow Imogene with a hundred 
 thousand pound . she tell I just now that I might earn my bread , but 
 she know that I can not . it be very sad . but what can be get by be 
 melancholy ? " 
 " at any rate you have well be away from she . " 
 " I be going,--this evening . shall I walk on , half a stage , at once , 
 without any dinner ? I wish you have hear the kind of thing she say 
 to I . you would not have think that I have go to walk with she 
 for my own pleasure . " 
 " have you not deserve they ? " 
 " I think not;--but nevertheless I bear they . a woman , of course , can 
 say what she please . there be docimer,--i hope he will not call I a 
 coward . " 
 Mr. Docimer come out on the terrace , on which the two be stand , 
 look as sour as death . " he be go by the diligence to Innspruck 
 this afternoon , " say Mrs. Docimer . 
 " why do he come ? a man with a grain of feeling would have remain 
 away . " 
 " now , Docimer , " say Frank , " pray do not make yourself unpleasant . 
 your sister have be abuse I all the morning like a pickpocket , 
 and your wife look at I as though she would say just as much if she 
 dare . after all , what be it I have do that you think so wicked ? " 
 " what will everybody think at home , " say Mrs. Docimer , " when they 
 know that you be with we again ? what chance be she to have if you 
 follow she about in this way ? " 
 " I shall not follow she very long , " say Frank . " my wing will soon 
 be cut , and then I shall never fly again . " they be at this time 
 walk up and down the terrace together , and it seem for awhile 
 that neither of they have another word to say in the matter of the 
 dispute between they . then Houston go on again in his own defence . 
 " of course it be all bad , " he say . " of course we have all be 
 fool . you know it , and allow it ; and have no right to say a word 
 to I . " 
 " we think that when your uncle die there would have be money , " 
 say Docimer , with a subdue growl . 
 " exactly ; and so do I. you do not mean to say that I deceive either 
 you or she ? " 
 " there should have be an end of it when that hope be over . " 
 " of course there should . there should never have be a dream that 
 she or I could marry on six hundred a year . have not all of we be 
 fool , we should have take our hat off and bade each other farewell 
 for ever when the state of the old man 's affair be know . we be 
 fool ; but we be fool together ; and none of we have a right to 
 abuse the other . when I become acquainted with this young lady at 
 Rome , it have be settle among we that Imogene and I must seek our 
 fortune apart . " 
 " then why do you come after she ? " again ask Mr. Docimer . 
 at this moment Imogene herself join they on the terrace . " Mary , " 
 she say to her sister - in - law , " I hope you be not carry on this 
 battle with Mr. Houston . I have say what there be to be say . " 
 " you should have hold your tongue and say nothing , " growl she 
 brother . 
 " be that as it may I have say it , and he quite understand what I 
 think about it . let we eat our dinner in peace and quietness , and 
 then let he go on his travel . he have the world free before he , 
 which he no doubt will open like an oyster , though he do not carry 
 a sword . " soon after this they do dine , and content themselves 
 with abuse the meat and the wine , and find fault with Tyrolese 
 cookery , just as though they have no deep care near their heart . 
 precisely at six the heavy diligence stop before the hotel door , 
 and Houston , who be then smoke with Docimer on the terrace , get 
 up to bid they adieu . Mrs. Docimer be kind and almost affectionate , 
 with a tear in her eye . " well , old fellow , " say Docimer , " take 
 care of yourself . perhaps everything will turn up right some of 
 these day . " " good - bye , Mr. Houston , " say Imogene , just give he 
 her hand to touch in the light manner possible . " God bless you , 
 Imogene , " say he . and there be a tear also in his eye . but there 
 be none in her , as she stand look at he while he prepare 
 himself for his departure ; nor do she say another word to he as he 
 go . " and now , " say she , when the three of they be leave upon the 
 terrace , " I will ask a great favour of you both . I will beg you not 
 to let there be another word about Mr. Houston among we . " after that 
 she ramble out by herself , and be not see again by either of they 
 that evening . 
 when she be alone she too shed her tear , though she feel impatient 
 and vex with herself as they come into her eye . it be not perhaps 
 only for her lose love that she weep . have no one know that her love 
 have be give and then lose she might have bear it without weep . 
 but now , in carry on this vain affair of her , in devote herself 
 to a lover who have , with her own consent , pass away from she , she 
 have spend the sweet fresh year of her youth , and all those who know 
 she would know that it have be so . he have tell she that it would be 
 her fate to purchase for herself a husband with her beauty . it might 
 be so . at any rate she do not doubt her own beauty . but , if it be 
 to be so , then the romance and the charm of her life be go . she 
 have quite agree that six hundred a year , and lodging in Marylebone , 
 would be quite unendurable ; but what be there leave for she that 
 would be endurable ? he could be happy with the prospect of Gertrude 
 Tringle 's money . she could not be happy , look forward to that 
 unloved husband who be to be purchase by her beauty . 
 CHAPTER XXIX . 
 AT MERLE PARK . no . 1 . 
 Sir Thomas take the real holiday of the year at Glenbogie,--where 
 he be too far remove from Lombard Street to be draw daily into 
 the vortex of his million . he would stay usually six week at 
 Glenbogie,--which be by no mean the happy week of the year . of 
 all the grand thing of the world which his energy and industry have 
 produce for he , he love his million the good . it be not because 
 they be his,--as indeed they be not . a considerable filing off 
 them,--what he regard as his percentage,--annually become his own ; 
 but it be not this that he love . in describe a man 's character it 
 be the author 's duty to give the man his due . Sir Thomas like his 
 own wealth well enough . where be the rich man who do not?--or where 
 be the poor man who do not wish that he have it to like ? but what he 
 love be the million with which Travers and Treason deal . he be 
 Travers and Treason , though his name do not even appear in the firm , 
 and he deal with the million . he could affect the rate of money 
 throughout Europe , and emissary from national treasury would 
 listen to his word . he have be Governor and Deputy - Governor of the 
 Bank of England . all the City respect he , not so much because he 
 be rich , as that he be one who thoroughly understand million . if 
 Russia require to borrow some infinite number of rouble , he know 
 how to arrange it , and could tell to a rouble at what rate money 
 could be make by it , and at what rate money would certainly be lose . 
 he like his million , and be therefore never quite comfortable at 
 Glenbogie . but at Merle Park he be within easy reach of London . at 
 Merle Park he be not oblige to live , from week 's end to week 's end , 
 without a sight of Lombard Street . the family might be at Merle Park , 
 while he might come down on a Friday and remain till Tuesday morning . 
 that be the plan propose for Merle Park . as a fact he would spend 
 four day in town , and only two down in the country . therefore , 
 though he spend his so - name holiday at Glenbogie , Merle Park be the 
 residence which he love . 
 in this autumn he go up to London long before his family , and then 
 find they at Merle Park on the Saturday after their arrival there . 
 they have go down on the previous Wednesday . on the Saturday , when 
 he enter the house , the first thing he see be Mr. Traffick 's hat 
 in the hall . this be Saturday , 23rd November , and there would be 
 three month before Parliament would meet ! a curse be not mutter , 
 but just form between his tooth , as he see the hat . Sir Thomas , in 
 his angriest mood , never go so far as quite to mutter his curse . 
 will one have to expiate the anathema which be well keep within 
 the barrier of the tooth , or only those which have achieve some 
 amount of utterance ? Sir Thomas go on , with a servant at his heel , 
 chuck about the door rather violently , till he find Mr. Traffick 
 alone in the drawing - room . Mr. Traffick have have a glass of sherry and 
 bitter bring in for his refreshment , and Sir Thomas see the glass 
 on the mantelpiece . he never take sherry and bitter himself . one 
 glass of wine , with his two o'clock mutton chop , suffice he till 
 dinner . it be all very well to be a Member of Parliament , but , after 
 all , Members of Parliament never do anything . man who work do not 
 take sherry and bitter ! man who work do not put their hat in other 
 people 's hall without leave from the master of the house ! " where be 
 your mistress ? " say Sir Thomas , to the man , without take any 
 notice of his son - in - law . the lady have only just come in from 
 driving , be very cold , and have go up to dress . Sir Thomas go 
 out of the room , again bang the door , and again take no notice 
 of Mr. Traffick . Mr. Traffick put his hand up to the mantelpiece , and 
 finish his sherry and bitter . 
 " my dear , " say Mr. Traffick to his wife , up in her bed - room , " your 
 father have come down in one of his tantrum . " 
 " I know he would , " say Augusta . 
 " but it do not signify the least . give he a kiss when you see he , 
 and do not seem to notice it . there be not a man in the world have a 
 high regard for I than your father , but if any one be to see he 
 in one of his tantrum they would suppose he mean to be uncivil . " 
 " I hope he will not be downright unkind , Septimus , " say his wife . 
 " never fear ! the kind - hearted man in the world be your father . " 
 " so he be here ! " that be the first word of greeting which Sir Thomas 
 address to his wife in her bed - room . 
 " yes , Tom;--they're here . " 
 " when do they come ? " 
 " Well;--to tell the truth , we find they here . " 
 " the ---- ! " but Sir Thomas restrain the word on the right , or 
 inside , of the tooth . 
 " they think we be to be here a day soon , and so they come on 
 the Wednesday morning . they be to come , you know . " 
 " I wish I know when they be to go . " 
 " you do not want to turn your own daughter out of your own house ? " 
 " why do not he get a house of his own for she ? for her sake why 
 do not he do it ? he have the spending of £ 6,000 a year of my money , 
 and yet I be to keep he ! No;--I do not want to turn my daughter out 
 of my house ; but it will end in my turn he out . " 
 when a week have pass by Mr. Traffick have not be as yet turn 
 out . Sir Thomas , when he come back to Merle Park on the follow 
 Friday , condescend to speak to his son - in - law , and to say something 
 to he as to the news of the day ; but this he do in an evident 
 spirit of preconceived hostility . " everything be down again , " he 
 say . 
 " fluctuation be always common at this time of the year , " say 
 Traffick ; " but I observe that trade always become brisk a little 
 before Christmas . " 
 " to a man with a fix income , like you , it do not much matter , " 
 say Sir Thomas . 
 " I be look at it in a public light . " 
 " exactly . a man who have an income , and never spend it , need not 
 trouble himself with private view as to the money market . " Mr. 
 Traffick rub his hand , and ask whether the new building at the 
 back of the Lombard Street premise be nearly finish . 
 Mr. Traffick 's economy have a deleterious effect upon Gertrude , which 
 she , poor girl , do not deserve . Sir Thomas , deeply resolve in his 
 mind that he would , at some not very distant date , find mean by 
 which he would rid himself of Mr. Traffick , declare to himself that 
 he would not , at any rate , burden himself with another son - in - law 
 of the same kind . Frank Houston be , to his thinking , of the same 
 kind , and therefore he harden his heart against Frank Houston . now 
 Frank Houston , could he have get his wife with £ 6,000 a year,--as Mr. 
 Traffick have done,--would certainly not have trouble the Tringle 
 mansion with too much of his presence . it would have be his object 
 to remove himself as far as possible from the Tringles , and to have 
 enjoy his life luxuriously with the proceed of his wife 's fortune . 
 but his hope in this respect be unjustly impede by Mr. Traffick 's 
 parsimony . soon after leave the hotel in the Tyrol at which we 
 lately see he , Frank Houston write to his lady - love , declare the 
 impatience of his ardour , and suggest that it would be convenient 
 if everything could be settle before Christmas . in his letter he 
 declare to gertrude how very uncomfortable it be to he to have to 
 discuss money matter with her father . it be so disagreeable that he 
 do not think that he could bring himself to do it again . but , if she 
 would only be urgent with her father , she would of course prevail . 
 act upon this Gertrude determine to be urgent with her father 
 on his second come to Merle Park , when , as have be explain , 
 Sir Thomas be in a frame of mind very much oppose to impecunious 
 son - in - law . previous to attack her father Gertrude have try 
 her hand again upon her mother , but Lady Tringle have decline . " if 
 anything be to be do you must do it yourself , " Lady Tringle have 
 say . 
 " Papa , " say Gertrude , have follow he into a little sitting - room 
 where he digest and arrange his telegram when at Merle Park , " I 
 wish something could be settle about Mr. Houston . " 
 Sir Thomas at this moment be very angry . Mr. Traffick have not only 
 ask for the loan of a carriage to take he into Hastings , but have 
 express a wish that there might be a peculiar kind of claret serve 
 at dinner with which he be conversant and to which he be much 
 attach . " then , " say he , " you may as well have it all settle at 
 once . " 
 " how , papa ? " 
 " you may understand for good and all that I will have nothing to do 
 with Mr. Houston . " 
 " Papa , that would be very cruel . " 
 " my dear , if you call I cruel I will not allow you to come and talk 
 to I at all . Cruel indeed ! what be your idea of cruelty ? " 
 " everybody know that we be attach to each other . " 
 " everybody know nothing of the kind . I know nothing of the kind . and 
 you be only make a fool of yourself . Mr. Houston be a penniless 
 adventurer and be only attach to my money . he shall never see a 
 penny of it . " 
 " he be not an adventurer , papa . he be much less like an adventurer 
 than Mr. Traffick . he have an income of his own , only it be not much . " 
 " about as much as would pay his bill at the club for cigar and 
 champagne . you may make your mind at rest , for I will not give 
 Mr. Houston a shilling . why should a man expect to live out of my 
 earning who never do a day 's work in his life ? " 
 Gertrude leave the room despondently , as there be nothing more to be 
 do on the occasion . but it seem to she as though she be be 
 use with the utmost cruelty . Augusta have be allow to marry her 
 man without a shilling , and have be enrich with £ 120,000 . why 
 should she be treat bad than Augusta ? she be very strongly 
 of opinion that Frank Houston be very much well than Septimus 
 Traffick . Mr. Traffick 's aptitude for save his money be already 
 know to the whole household . Frank would never wish to save . Frank 
 would spend her income for she like a gentleman . Frank would not hang 
 about Glenbogie or Merle Park till he should be turn out . everybody 
 be fond of Frank . but she , Gertrude , have already learn to despise 
 Mr. Traffick , Member of Parliament though he be . she have already 
 begin to think that have be choose by Frank Houston , who be 
 decidedly a man of fashion , she have prove herself to be of high 
 calibre than her sister Augusta . but her father 's refusal to she have 
 be not only very rough but very decide . she would not abandon her 
 Frank . such an idea never for a moment cross her mind . but what 
 step should she next take ? think over it during the whole of the 
 day she do at last form a plan . but she greatly fear that the plan 
 would not recommend itself to Mr. Frank Houston . she be not timid , 
 but he might be so . in spite of her father 's anger and roughness she 
 would not doubt his ultimate generosity ; but Frank might doubt it . if 
 Frank could be induce to come and carry she off from Merle Park and 
 marry she in some manner approve for such occasion , she would stand 
 the risk of get the money afterwards . but she be greatly afraid 
 that the risk would be too much for Frank . she do not , however , 
 see any other scheme before she . as to wait patiently till her 
 father 's obdurate heart should be soften by the great obduracy 
 of her own love , there be a tedium and a prolong dulness in such 
 a prospect which be anything but attractive to she . have it be 
 possible she would have make a bargain with her father . " if you will not 
 give we £ 120,000 let we begin with £ 60,000 . " but even this she fear 
 would not altogether be agreeable to Frank . let she think of it 
 how she would , that plan of be run away with seem alone to be 
 feasible -- and not altogether disagreeable . 
 it be necessary that she should answer her lover 's letter . no 
 embargo have as yet be put upon her correspondence , and therefore 
 she could send her reply without external difficulty . 
 " Dear Frank , " she say , 
    I quite agree with you about Christmas . it ought to be 
    settle . but I have very bad news to send to you . I have 
    be to papa as you tell I , but he be very unkind . 
    nothing could be bad . he say that you ought to earn 
    your bread , which be , of course , all humbug . he do not 
    understand that there ought to be some gentleman who never 
    earn their bread . I be sure , if you have be earn your 
    bread by go to Lombard Street every day , I should not 
    have ever care for you . 
    he say that he will not give a single shilling . I think 
    he be angry because Augusta 's husband will come and live 
    here always . that be disgusting , of course . but it be not 
    my fault . it be either that , or else some money have go 
    wrong;--or perhaps he have a very bad fit of indigestion . 
    he be , however , so savage , that I really do not know how 
    to go to he again . Mamma be quite afraid of he , and do 
    not dare say a word , because it be she who manage about 
    Mr. Traffick . 
    what ought to be do ? of course , I do not like to think 
    that you should be keep wait . I be not sure that I 
    quite like it myself . I will do anything you propose , and 
    be not afraid of run a little risk . if we could get 
    married without his know anything about it , I be sure 
    he would give the money afterwards,--because he be always 
    so good - natured in the long run , and so generous . he can 
    be very savage , but he would be sure to forgive . 
    how would it be if I be to go away ? I be of age , and 
    I believe that no one could stop I . if you could manage 
    that we should get marry in that way , I would do my 
    well . I know people can get themselves married at Ostend . 
    I do not see what else be to be do . you can write 
    to I at present here , and nothing wrong will come of 
    it . but Augusta say that if papa be to begin to 
    suspect anything about my go away he would stop my 
    letters.--Dear Frank , I be yours always , and always most 
    lovingly , 
    GERTRUDE . 
    you need not be a bit afraid but that I should be quite up 
    to go off if you could arrange it . 
 " I believe , papa , " say Mrs. Traffick , on the afternoon of the day on 
 which this be write , " that Gertrude be think of do something 
 wrong , and therefore I feel it to be my duty to bring you this 
 letter . " Augusta have not be enable to read the letter , but have 
 discuss with her sister the propriety of eloping . " I will not advise 
 it , " she have say , " but , if you do , Mr. Houston should arrange to be 
 marry at Ostend . I know that can be do . " some second thought have 
 perhaps tell she that any such arrangement would be injurious to the 
 noble blood of the Traffick family , and she have therefore " feel it to 
 be her duty " to extract the letter from the family letter - box , and 
 to give it to her father . a daughter who could so excellently do she 
 duty would surely not be turn out before Parliament meet . 
 Sir Thomas take the letter and say not a word to his eld child . 
 when he be alone he doubt . he be half - minded to send the letter 
 on . what harm could the two fool do by write to each other ? while 
 he hold the string of the purse there could be no marriage . then he 
 bethink himself of his paternal authority , of the right he have to 
 know all that his daughter did,--and he open the letter . " there 
 ought to be gentleman who do not earn their bread ! " " ought there ? " 
 say he to himself . if so these gentleman ought not to come to he 
 for bread . he be already support one such , and that be quite 
 enough . " Mamma be quite afraid of he , and do not dare say a word . " 
 that he rather like . " I be sure he would give the money afterwards . " 
 " I be sure he would do no such thing , " he say to himself , and he 
 reflect that in such a condition he should rather be delighted than 
 otherwise in watch the impecunious importunity of his baffle 
 son - in - law . the next sentence reconcile his girl to he almost 
 entirely . " he be always so good - natured in the long run , and so 
 generous ! " for " good - nature " he do not care much , but he like to 
 be think generous . then he calmly tear the letter in little bit , 
 and throw they into the waste - paper basket . 
 he sit for ten minute think what he have well do , find 
 the task thus impose upon he to be much more difficult than the 
 distribution of a loan . at last he determine that , if he do 
 nothing , thing would probably settle themselves . Mr. Houston , 
 when he receive no reply from his lady - love , would certainly be 
 quiescent , and Gertrude , without any assent from her lover , could 
 hardly arrange her journey to ostend . perhaps it might be well that 
 he should say a word of caution to his wife ; but as to that he do 
 not at present quite make up his mind , as he be grievously disturb 
 while he be consider the subject . 
 " if you please , Sir Thomas , " say the coachman , hurry into the 
 room almost without the ceremony of knocking,--"if you please , 
 Phoebe mare have be bring home with both her knee cut down to 
 the bone . " 
 " what ! " exclaim Sir Thomas , who indulge himself in a taste for 
 horseflesh , and pretend to know one animal from another . 
 " yes , indeed , Sir Thomas , down to the bone , " say the coachman , who 
 entertain all that animosity against Mr. Traffick which domestic 
 feel for habitual guest who omit the ceremony of tipping . " Mr. 
 Traffick bring she down on Windover Hill , Sir Thomas , and she will 
 never be worth a feed of oats again . I do not think a man be 
 bear who could throw that mare off her foot , Sir Thomas . " now Mr. 
 Traffick , when he have borrow the phaeton and pair of horse that 
 morning to go into Hastings , have dispense with the service of a 
 coachman , and have insist on drive himself . 
 CHAPTER XXX . 
 AT MERLE PARK . no . 2 . 
 have any irascible reader,--any reader who thoroughly enjoy the 
 pleasure of be in a rage,--encountere suddenly some grievance 
 which , heavy as it may be , have be more than compensate by the 
 privilege it have afford of blow - up the offender ? such be the 
 feeling of Sir Thomas as he quickly follow his coachman out of 
 the room . he have be very proud of his Phoebe mare , who could trot 
 with he from the station to the house at the rate of twelve mile 
 an hour . but in his present frame of mind he have like the mare 
 less than he dislike his son - in - law . Mr. Traffick have do he 
 this injury , and he now have Mr. Traffick on the hip . there be some 
 injury for which a host can not abuse his guest . if your good 
 venetian decanter be break at table you be bind to look as though 
 you like it . but if a horse be damage a similar amount of courtesy 
 be hardly require . the well - nurture gentleman , even in that case , 
 will only look unhappy and say not a word . Sir Thomas be hardly to 
 be call a well nurture gentleman ; and then it must be remember 
 that the offender be his son - in - law . " good heaven ! " he exclaim , 
 hurry into the yard . " what be this ? " 
 the mare be stand out on the pavement with three man around she , 
 of whom one be hold her head , another be down on his knee 
 wash her wound , and the third be describe the fatal nature of 
 the wound which she have receive . Traffick be stand at a little 
 distance , listen in silence to the imply rebuke of the groom . 
 " good heaven , what be this ? " repeat Sir Thomas , as he join the 
 conclave . 
 " there be a lot of loose stone on that hill , " say Traffick , " and 
 she trip on one and come down , all in a lump , before you could 
 look at she . I be awfully sorry , but it might have happen to any 
 one . " 
 Sir Thomas know how to fix his dart well than by throw they 
 direct at his enemy . " she have utterly destroy herself , " say he , 
 address himself to the head - groom , who be busily employ with 
 the sponge in his hand . 
 " I be afraid she have , Sir Thomas . the joint - oil will be sure to run on 
 both knee ; the gash be so mortal deep . " 
 " I have drive that mare hundred of time down that hill , " say Sir 
 Thomas , " and I never know she to trip before . " 
 " never , Sir Thomas , " say the groom . 
 " she would have come down with you to - day , " say Mr. Traffick , defend 
 himself . 
 " it be my own fault , Bunsum . that be all that can be say about it . " 
 Bunsum the groom , kneel as he be , express , by his grimace , his 
 complete agreement with this last opinion of his master . " of course I 
 ought to have know that he could not drive , " say Sir Thomas . 
 " a horse may fall down with anybody , " say Mr. Traffick . 
 " you would well take she and shoot she , " say Sir Thomas , still 
 address the groom . " she be the good thing we have in the stable , 
 but now she be do for . " with that he turn away from the yard 
 without have as yet address a word to his son - in - law . 
 this be so intolerable that even Mr. Traffick could not bear it in 
 silence . " I have tell you that I be very sorry , " say he , follow 
 Sir Thomas closely , " and I do not know what a man can do more . " 
 " nothing,--unless it be not to borrow a horse again . " 
 " you may be sure I will never do that . " 
 " I be not sure of it at all . if you want another to - morrow you would ask 
 for he if you think you could get he . " 
 " I call that very uncivil , Sir Thomas,--and very unkind . " 
 " Bother ! " say Sir Thomas . " it be no good in be kind to a fellow 
 like you . do you ever hear what the cabman do who have a sovereign 
 give to he for drive a mile . he ask the fool who give it he to 
 make it a guinea . I be the fool , and , by George , you be the cabman ! " 
 with this Sir Thomas turn into the house by a small door , leave 
 his son - in - law to wander round to the front by himself . 
 " your father have insult I horribly , " he say to his wife , whom he 
 find up in her bed - room . 
 " what be the matter now , Septimus ? " 
 " that little mare of his , which I have no doubt have come down half a 
 score of time before , fall with I and cut her knee . " 
 " that be Phoebe , " say Augusta . " she be his favourite . " 
 " it be a kind of thing that might happen to anyone , and no gentleman 
 think of mention it . he say such thing to I that upon my word 
 I do not think I can stop in the house any long . " 
 " oh , yes , you will , " say the wife . 
 " of course , it be a difference come from one 's father - in - law . it be 
 almost the same as from one 's father . " 
 " he do not mean it , Septimus . " 
 " I suppose not . if he have , I really could not have bear it . he do 
 become very rough sometimes , but I know that at bottom he have a 
 thorough respect for I . it be only that induce I to bear it . " then 
 it be settle between husband and wife that they should remain in 
 their present quarter , and that not a word far should be say 
 at any rate by they about the Phoebe mare . nor do Sir Thomas say 
 another word about the mare , but he add a note to those already 
 write in the tablet of his memory as to his son - in - law , and 
 the note declare that no hint , let it be ever so broad , would be 
 effectual with Mr. Traffick . 
 the next day be a Sunday , and then another trouble await Sir 
 Thomas . at this time it be not customary with Tom to come often to 
 Merle Park . he have his own lodging in London and his own club , and 
 do not care much for the rural charm of Merle Park . but on this 
 occasion he have condescend to appear , and on the Sunday afternoon 
 inform his father that there be a matter which he desire to 
 discuss with he . " Father , " say he , " I be get confoundedly sick 
 of all this . " 
 " confound , " say Sir Thomas , " be a stupid foolish word , and it 
 mean nothing . " 
 " there be a sort of comfort in it , Sir , " say Tom ; " but if it be 
 objectionable I will drop it . " 
 " it be objectionable . " 
 " I will drop it , Sir . but nevertheless I be very sick of it . " 
 " what be you sick of , Tom ? " 
 " all this affair with my cousin . " 
 " then , if you take my advice , you will drop that too . " 
 " I could not do that , father . a word be all very well . a man can drop 
 a word ; but a girl be a different sort of thing . one can not drop a 
 girl , even if one try . " 
 " have you try , Tom ? " 
 " yes , I have . I have do my good to try . I put it out of my mind for 
 a fortnight and would not think of she . I have a bottle of champagne 
 every day at dinner and then go to the theatre . but it be all of 
 no use . I have set my heart on it and I can not give she up . I will tell 
 you what I would like to do . I would like to give she a diamond necklace . " 
 " it would not be the slight use , " say Sir Thomas , shake his 
 head . 
 " why not ? it be what other man do . I mean it to be something 
 handsome;--about three hundred pound . " 
 " that be a large sum of money for a necklace . " 
 " some of they cost a deal more than that . " 
 " and you would only throw away your money . " 
 " if she take it , she would take I too . if she didn't,--why I should 
 still have the diamond . I mean to try any way . " 
 " then it be of no use your come to I . " 
 " I think you would let I have the money . it be no good run into 
 debt for they . and then if you would add something of your own,--a 
 locket , or something of that kind,--I think it would have an effect . 
 I have see a necklace at Ricolay 's , and if I could pay ready money 
 for it I could have 20 per cent . off it . the price name be three 
 hundred guineas . that would make it £ 254 5_s _ . £ 250 would buy it if 
 the cheque be offer . " 
 there be a spirit about the son which be not displease to the 
 father . that idea that the gift , if accept , would be efficacious , 
 or if not that it would be rejected,--so that Tom would not lose his 
 hope and his diamond together,--seeme to be sound . Sir Thomas , 
 therefore , promise the money , with the distinct understanding that 
 if the gift be not accept by Ayala it should be consign to 
 his own hand . but as for any present from himself , he feel that 
 this would not be the time for it . he have call upon his niece and 
 solicit she himself , and she have be deaf to his word . after that 
 he could not condescend to send her gift . " should she become my 
 promise daughter - in - law then I would send her present , " say Sir 
 Thomas . 
 the poor man certainly receive less pleasure from his wealth than 
 be credit to he by those who know his circumstance . yet he 
 endeavour to be good to those around he , and especially good to 
 his child . there have be present to he ever since the beginning 
 of his successes,--ever since his marriage,--a fix resolution that 
 he would not be a curmudgeon with his money , that he would endeavour 
 to make those happy who depend on he , and that he would be liberal 
 in such settlement for his child as might be conducive to their 
 happiness and fortune in life . in this way he have be very generous 
 to Mr. Traffick . the man be a Member of Parliament , the son of a 
 peer , and laborious . why should he expect more ? money be want , 
 but he could supply the money . so he have supply it , and have be 
 content to think that a good man should be prop up in the world 
 by his mean . what that have come to the reader know . he thoroughly 
 detest his son - in - law , and would have give much to have have his 
 money back again,--so that Mr. Traffick should have have no share in 
 it . 
 then there be his second daughter ! what should be do with 
 Gertrude ? the money should be forthcoming for she too if the fitting 
 man could be find . but he would have nothing furth to do with a 
 penniless lover , let his position in the world of fashion , or even in 
 the world of politic , be what it might . the man should either have 
 wealth of his own , or should be satisfied to work for it . Houston have 
 be unfortunate in the moment of his approach . Sir Thomas have be 
 drive by his angry feeling to use hard , sharp word , and now be 
 force to act up to his word . he declare roughly that Mr. Houston 
 should not have a shilling of his money,--as he have certainly 
 be justify for do ; and his daughter , who have always be 
 indulge in every kind of luxury , have at once concoct a plot for 
 run away from her home ! as he think of the plot it seem 
 to be wonderful to he that she should be willing to incur such a 
 danger,--to be ready without a penny to marry a penniless man,--till 
 he confess to himself that , be she to do so , she would certainly 
 have the money soon or later . he be capable of passion , capable 
 of fly out and say a very severe thing to Septimus Traffick or 
 another when his temper be hot ; but he be incapable of sustained 
 wrath . he be already aware that if Mr. Traffick choose to stay he 
 would stay;--that if Mr. Houston be brave enough to be persistent 
 he might have both the money and the girl . as he think of it all 
 he be angry with himself , wish that he be less generous , less 
 soft , less forgiving . 
 and now here be Tom,--whom at the present moment he like the good 
 of all his child , who of the three be the least inclined to run 
 counter to him,--ready to break his heart , because he could not get 
 a little chit of a girl of whom he would probably be tired in twelve 
 month after he possess she ! remember what Tom have be , he be 
 at a loss to understand how such a lad should be so thoroughly in 
 love . at the present moment , have Ayala be purchaseable , he would 
 have be willing to buy she at a great price , because he would fain 
 have please Tom have it be possible . but Ayala , who have not a penny 
 in the world,--who never would have a penny unless he should give it 
 her,--would not be purchase , and would have nothing to do with Tom ! 
 the world be run counter to he , so that he have no pleasure in 
 his home , no pleasure in his money , no pleasure in his child . the 
 little back - parlour in Lombard Street be sweet to he than Merle 
 Park , with all its charm . his daughter Gertrude want to run away 
 from he , while by no inducement could he get Mr. Traffick to leave 
 the house . 
 while he be in this humour he meet his niece Lucy roam about the 
 garden . he know the whole story of Lucy 's love , and have be induce 
 by his wife to acknowledge that her marriage with the sculptor be 
 not to be sanction . he have merely express his scorn when the 
 unfortunate circumstance of Hamel 's birth have be explain to he 
 again and again . he have ridicule the horror feel by his wife at the 
 equally ill - bear brother and sister in Rome . he have merely shake 
 his head when he be tell that Hamel 's father never go inside of 
 any place of worship . but when it be explain to he that the 
 young man have , so to say , no income at all , then he be force to 
 acknowledge that the young man ought not to be allow to marry his 
 niece . 
 to Lucy herself he have as yet say nothing on the subject since he 
 have ask the lover in to lunch at Glenbogie . he hear bad account 
 of she . he have be tell by his wife , on different occasions,--not 
 in the mere way of conversation , but with a premeditated energy of 
 fault - finding,--that Lucy be a disobedient girl . she be bad than 
 Ayala . she persist in say that she would marry the penniless 
 artist as soon as he should profess himself to be ready . it have be 
 different , she have try to explain to her aunt , before she have be 
 engage to he . now she consider herself to be altogether at his 
 disposal . this have be her plea , but her plea have be altogether 
 unacceptable to Aunt Emmeline . " she can do as she please , of 
 course , " Sir Thomas have say . that might be all very well ; but Aunt 
 Emmeline be strongly of opinion that an adopt daughter of Queen 's 
 Gate , of Glenbogie , and Merle Park , ought not to be allow to do as 
 she please with herself . a girl ought not to be allow to have the 
 luxury of palatial residence , and the luxury of free liberty of 
 choice at the same time . More than once it have occur to Sir Thomas 
 that he would put an end to all these misery by a mere scratch of 
 his pen . it need not be £ 120,000 , or £ 100,000 , as with a daughter . 
 a few modest thousand would do it . and then this man Hamel , though 
 the circumstance of his birth have be unfortunate , be not an idler 
 like Frank Houston . as far as Sir Thomas could learn , the man do 
 work , and be willing to work . the present small income earn would 
 gradually become more . he have a kindly feeling towards Lucy , although 
 he have be inclined to own that her marriage with Hamel be out of 
 the question . " my dear , " he say to she , " why be you walk about 
 alone ? " she do not like to say that she be walk alone because 
 she have no one to walk with her,--no such companion as Isadore would 
 be if Isadore be allow to come to Merle Park ; so she simply 
 smile , and go on by her uncle 's side . " do you like this place as 
 well as Glenbogie ? " he ask . 
 " oh ; yes . " 
 " perhaps you will be glad to get back to London again ? " 
 " oh ; no . " 
 " which do you like well , then ? " 
 " they be all so nice , if-- " 
 " if what , Lucy ? " 
 " cælum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt , " Lucy might have 
 say , have she know the passage . as it be she put the same feeling 
 into simple word , " I should like one as well as the other , Uncle 
 Tom , if thing go comfortably . " 
 " there be a great deal in that , " he say . " I suppose the meaning be , 
 that you do not get on well with your aunt ? " 
 " I be afraid she be angry with I , Uncle Tom . " 
 " why do you make she angry , Lucy ? when she tell you what be your 
 duty , why do you not endeavour to do it ? " 
 " I can not do what she tell I , " say Lucy ; " and , as I can not , I 
 think I ought not to be here . " 
 " have you anywhere else to go to ? " to this she make no reply , but 
 walk on in silence . " when you say you ought not to be here , what 
 idea have you form in your own mind as to the future ? " 
 " that I shall marry Mr. Hamel , some day . " 
 " do you think it would be well to marry any man without an income 
 to live upon ? would it be a comfort to he see that he have just 
 enough to maintain himself , and no more ? " these be terrible 
 question to her,--question which she could not answer , but yet as 
 to which her mind entertain an easy answer . a little help from he , 
 who be willing to indulge she with so many luxury while she be 
 under his roof , would enable she to be an assistance rather than a 
 burden to her lover . but of this she could not utter a word . " love 
 be all very well , " continue Sir Thomas , in his gruff voice ; 
 " but love should be regulate by good sense . it be a crime when 
 two beggar think of marry each other,--two beggar who be not 
 prepared to live as beggar do . " 
 " he be not a beggar , " say Lucy , indignantly . " he have beg nothing ; 
 nor have I. " 
 " Pshaw ! " say Sir Thomas ; " I be lay down a general rule . I do 
 not mean to call anybody a beggar . you should not take I up like 
 that . " 
 " I beg your pardon , Uncle Tom , " she say piteously . 
 " very well ; very well ; that will do . " but still he go on walk 
 with she , and she feel she could not leave he till he give she some 
 signal that she be to go . they continue in this way till they 
 have come nearly round the large garden ; when he stop , as he 
 be walk , and address she again . " I suppose you write to he 
 sometimes . " 
 " yes , " say Lucy , boldly . 
 " write to he at once , and tell he to come and see I in Lombard 
 Street on Tuesday , at two o'clock . give I the letter , and I will 
 take care it be send to he directly I get to town . now you have 
 well go in , for it be get very cold . " 
 CHAPTER XXXI . 
 the DIAMOND NECKLACE . 
 Tom go up to London intent upon his diamond . to tell the truth 
 he have already make the purchase subject to some question of ready 
 money . he now pay for it after considerable chaffering as to the odd 
 pound , which he succeed in bring to a successful termination . 
 then he carry the necklace away with he , revolve in his mind the 
 different mean of presentation . he think that a letter might be 
 good if only he be master of the language in which such a letter 
 should properly be write . but he entirely doubt his own power of 
 composition . he be so modest in this respect that he would not even 
 make an attempt . he know himself well enough to be aware that he be 
 in many respect ignorant . he would have endeavour to take the 
 bracelet personally to Ayala have he not be conscious that he could 
 not recommend his present with such romantic phrase and touch of 
 poetry as would be gratify to her fine sense . be he to find 
 himself in her presence with the necklace he must depend on himself 
 for his word ; but a letter might be send in his own handwriting , the 
 poetry and romance of which might be supply by another . 
 now it have happen that Tom have form a marvellous friendship in 
 Rome with Colonel Stubbs . they have be hunt together in the 
 Campagna , and Tom have be enable to accommodate the Colonel with 
 the loan of a horse when his own have be injure . they have since meet 
 in London , and Stubbs have declare to more than one of his friend 
 that Tom , in spite of his ring and his jewelry , be a very good 
 fellow at bottom . Tom have be greatly flatter by the intimacy , 
 and have lately be gratify by an invitation to Aldershot in order 
 that the military glory of the camp might be show to he . he 
 have accept the invitation , and a day in the present week have be 
 fix . then it occur to he suddenly that he know no one so 
 fit to write such a letter as that demand as his friend Colonel 
 Jonathan Stubbs . he have an idea that the Colonel , in spite of his red 
 hair and in spite of a certain aptitude for drollery which pervade 
 he , have a romantic side to his character ; and he feel confident 
 that , as to the use of language , the Colonel be very great indeed . 
 he therefore , when he go to Aldershot , carefully put the bracelet 
 in his breast - pocket and determine to reveal his secret and to ask 
 for aid . 
 the day of his arrival be devoted to the ordinary pursuit of 
 Aldershot and the evening to festivity , which be prolong too 
 late into the night to enable he to carry out his purpose before 
 he go to bed . he arrange to leave on the next morning by a train 
 between ten and eleven , and be tell that three or four man would 
 come in to breakfast at half - past nine . his project then seem to be 
 all but hopeless . but at last with great courage he make an effort . 
 " Colonel , " say he , just as they be go to bed , " I wonder if you 
 could give I half - an - hour before breakfast . it be a matter of great 
 importance . " Tom , as he say this , assume a most solemn face . 
 " an hour if you like , my dear boy . I be generally up soon after six , 
 and be always out on horseback before breakfast as soon as the light 
 serve . " 
 " then if you will have I call at half - past seven I shall be ever so 
 much oblige to you . " 
 the next morning at eight the two be closet together , and Tom 
 immediately extract the parcel from his pocket and open the 
 diamond to view . " upon my word that be a pretty little trinket , " 
 say the Colonel , take the necklace in his hand . 
 " three hundred guinea ! " say Tom , open his eye very wide . 
 " I daresay . " 
 " that be , it would have be three hundred guineas unless I have come 
 down with the ready . I make the fellow give I twenty per cent . off . 
 you should always remember this when you be buy jewelry . " 
 " and what be to be do with this pretty thing ? I suppose it be 
 intend for some fair lady 's neck . " 
 " oh , of course . " 
 " and why have it be bring down to Aldershot ? there be plenty of 
 fellow about this place who will get their hand into your pocket if 
 they know that you have such a trinket as that about you . " 
 " I will tell you why I bring it , " say Tom , very gravely . " it be , 
 as you say , for a young lady . I intend to make that young lady my 
 wife . of course this be a secret , you know . " 
 " it shall be sacred as the Pope 's toe , " say Stubbs . 
 " do not joke about it , Colonel , if you please . it be life and death to 
 I . " 
 " I will keep your secret and will not joke . now what can I do for you . " 
 " I must send this as a present with a letter . I must first tell you 
 that she has,--well , refuse I . " 
 " that never mean much the first time , old boy . " 
 " she have refuse I half - a - dozen time , but I mean to go on with it . 
 if she refuse I two dozen time I will try she a third dozen . " 
 " then you be quite in earnest ? " 
 " I be . it be a kind of thing I know that man laugh about , but I do not 
 mind tell you that I be downright in love with she . the governor 
 approve of it . " 
 " she have get money , probably ? " 
 " not a shilling;--not as much as would buy a pair of glove . but I 
 do not love she a bit the less for that . as to income , the governor 
 will stump up like a brick . now I want you to write the letter . " 
 " it be a kind of thing a third person can not do , " say the Colonel , 
 when he have consider the request for a moment . 
 " why not ? yes , you can . " 
 " do it yourself , and say just the simple word as they come up . 
 they be sure to go far with any girl than what another man may 
 write . it be impossible that another man should be natural on such a 
 task as that . " 
 " natural ! I do not know about natural , " say Tom , who be anxious now 
 to explain the character of the lady in question . " I do not know that 
 a letter that be particularly natural would please she . a touch of 
 poetry and romance would go far than anything natural . " 
 " who be the lady ? " ask the Colonel , who certainly be by this time 
 entitle to be so far inquisitive . 
 " she be my cousin,--Ayala Dormer . " 
 " who ? " 
 " Ayala Dormer;--my cousin . she be at Rome , but I do not think you 
 ever see she there . " 
 " I have see she since , " say the Colonel . 
 " have you ? I do not know . " 
 " she be with my aunt , the Marchesa Baldoni . " 
 " dear I ! so she be . I never put the two thing together . do not you 
 admire she ? " 
 " certainly I do . my dear fellow , I can not write this letter for you . " 
 then he put down the pen which he have take up as though he have 
 intend to comply with his friend 's request . " you may take it as 
 settle that I can not write it . " 
 " no ? " 
 " impossible . one man should never write such a letter for another 
 man . you have well give the thing in person,--that be , if you mean 
 to go on with the matter . " 
 " I shall certainly go on with it , " say Tom , stoutly . 
 " after a certain time , you know , reiterate offer do , you 
 know,--do,--do,--partake of the nature of persecution . " 
 " reiterated refusal be the sort of persecution I do not like . " 
 " it seem to I that Ayala,--Miss Dormer . I mean,--should be 
 protect by a sort of feeling,--feeling of -- of what I may perhaps 
 call her dependent position . she be peculiarly,--peculiarly 
 situate . " 
 " if she marry I she would be much well situate . I could give 
 she everything she want . " 
 " it be not an affair of money , Mr. Tringle . " 
 Tom feel , from the use of the word Mister , that he be in some way 
 give offence ; but feel also that there be no true cause for 
 offence . " when a man offer everything , " he say , " and ask for 
 nothing , I do not think he should be say to persecute . " 
 " after a time it become persecution . I be sure Ayala would feel it 
 so . " 
 " my cousin can not suppose that I be ill - use she , " say Tom , who 
 dislike the " Ayala " quite as much as he do the " Mister . " 
 " Miss Dormer , I mean . I can have nothing furth to say about it . I 
 can not write the letter , and I should not imagine that Ayala,--Miss 
 dormer,--would be move in the least by any present that could 
 possibly be make to she . I must go out now , if you do not mind , for 
 half - an - hour ; but I shall be back in time for breakfast . " 
 then Tom be leave alone with the necklace lie on the table before 
 he . he know that something be wrong with the Colonel , but could not 
 in the least guess what it might be . he be quite aware that early 
 in the interview the Colonel have encourage he to persevere with 
 the lady , and have then , suddenly , not only advise he to desist , 
 but have tell he in so many word that he be bind to desist out of 
 consideration for the lady . and the Colonel have speak of his cousin 
 in a manner that be distasteful to he . he could not analyse his 
 feeling . he do not exactly know why he be displeased , but he be 
 displeased . the Colonel , when ask for his assistance , be , of 
 course , bind to talk about the lady,--would be compel , by the 
 nature of the confidence , to mention the lady 's name;--would even 
 have be call on to write her christian name . but this he should 
 have do with a delicacy;--almost with a blush . instead of that 
 Ayala 's name have be common on his tongue . Tom feel himself to be 
 offend , but hardly know why . and then , why have he be call 
 Mister Tringle ? the breakfast , which be eat shortly afterwards 
 in the company of three or four other man , be not eat in 
 comfort;--and then Tom hurry back to London and to Lombard Street . 
 after this failure Tom feel it to be impossible to go to another 
 friend for assistance . there have be annoyance in describe his 
 love to Colonel Stubbs , and pain in the treatment he have receive . 
 even have there be another friend to whom he could have confide the 
 task , he could not have bring himself to encounter the repetition 
 of such treatment . he be as firmly fix as ever in his conviction 
 that he could not write the letter himself . and , as he think of the 
 word with which he should accompany a personal presentation of the 
 necklace , he reflect that in all probability he might not be able 
 to force his way into Ayala 's presence . then a happy thought strike 
 he . Mrs. Dosett be altogether on his side . everybody be on his 
 side except Ayala herself , and that pigheade Colonel . would it not 
 be an excellent thing to entrust the necklace to the hand of his 
 Aunt Dosett , in order that she might give it over to Ayala with all 
 the eloquence in her power . satisfy with this project he at once 
 write a note to Mrs. Dosett . 
    MY DEAR aunt , 
    I want to see you on _ most important business _ . if I shall 
    not be trouble you , I will call upon you to - morrow at 
    ten o'clock , before I go to my place of business . 
    your affectionately , 
    T. TRINGLE , Junior . 
 on the follow morning he apparelle himself with all his ring . 
 he be a good - hearted , well - intentione young man , with excellent 
 quality ; but he must have be slow of intellect when he have not 
 as yet learn the deleterious effect of all those ring . on this 
 occasion he put on his ring , his chain , and his bright waistcoat , 
 and make himself a thing disgusting to be look at by any 
 well - train female . as far as his aunt be concern he would have 
 be altogether indifferent as to his appearance , but there be 
 present to his mind some small hope that he might be allow to see 
 Ayala , as the immediate result of the necklace . should he see Ayala , 
 then how unfortunate it would be that he should present himself 
 before the eye of his mistress without those adornment which he do 
 not doubt would be grateful to she . he have hear from Ayala 's own 
 lip that all thing ought to be pretty . therefore he endeavour 
 to make himself pretty . of course he failed,--as do all man who 
 endeavour to make themselves pretty,--but it be out of the question 
 that he should understand the cause of his failure . 
 " Aunt Dosett , I want you to do I a very great favour , " he begin , 
 with a solemn voice . 
 " be you go to a party , Tom , " she say . 
 " a party ! No,--who give a party in London at this time of the day ? 
 oh , you mean because I have just get a few thing on . when I call 
 anywhere I always do . I have get another lady to see , a lady of rank , 
 and so I just make a change . " but this be a fib . 
 " what can I do for you , Tom ? " 
 " I want you to look at that . " then he bring out the necklace , and , 
 take it out of the case , display the gem tastefully upon the 
 table . 
 " I do believe they be diamond , " say Mrs. Dosett . 
 " yes ; they be diamond . I be not the sort of fellow to get anything 
 sham . what do you think that little thing cost , Aunt Dosett ? " 
 " I have not an idea . sixty pound , perhaps ! " 
 " sixty pound ! do you go into a jeweller 's shop and see what you 
 could do among diamond with sixty pound ! " 
 " I never do go into jeweller ' shop , Tom . " 
 " nor I , very often . it be a sort of place where a fellow can drop a 
 lot of money . but I do go into one after this . it do not look much , 
 do it ? " 
 " it be very pretty . " 
 " I think it be pretty . well , Aunt Dosett , the price for that little 
 trifle be three -- hundred -- guineas ! " as he say this he look into 
 his aunt 's face for increase admiration . 
 " you give three hundred guineas for it ! " 
 " I go with ready money in my hand , when I tempt the man with a 
 cheque to let I have it for two hundred and fifty pound . in buy 
 jewelry you should always do that . " 
 " I never buy jewelry , " say Mrs. Dosett , crossly . 
 " if you should , I mean . now , I will tell you what I want you to do . 
 this be for Ayala . " 
 " for Ayala ! " 
 " yes , indeed . I be not the fellow to stick at a trifle when I want to 
 carry my purpose . I buy this the other day and give ready money 
 for it,--two hundred and fifty pounds,--on purpose to give it to 
 Ayala . in name the value,--of course you will do that when you give 
 it her,--you might as well say three hundred guineas . that be the 
 price on the ticket . I see it myself,--so there will not be any untruth 
 you know . " 
 " be I to give it she ? " 
 " that be just what I want . when I talk to she she flare up , and , as 
 likely as not , she would fle the necklace at my head . " 
 " she would not do that , I hope . " 
 " it would depend upon how the thing go . when I do talk to she it 
 always seem that nothing I say can be right . now , if you will give 
 it she you can put in all manner of pretty thing . " 
 " this itself will be the prettiest thing , " say Mrs. Dosett . 
 " that be just what I be think . everybody agree that diamond will 
 go far with a girl than anything else . when I tell the governor 
 he quite jump at the idea . " 
 " Sir Thomas know you be give it ? " 
 " oh , dear , yes . I have to get the rhino from he . I do not go about 
 with two hundred and fifty pound always in my own pocket . " 
 " if he have send the money to Ayala how much well it would have 
 be , " say poor Mrs. Dosett . 
 " I do not think that at all . who ever hear of make a present to a 
 young lady in money . Ayala be romantic , and that would have be the 
 most unromantic thing out . that would not have do I the least good 
 in the world . it would simply have go to buy boot and petticoat 
 and such like . a girl would never be bring to think of her lover 
 merely by put on a pair of boot . when she fasten such a 
 necklace as this round her throat he ought to have a chance . do not 
 you think so , Aunt Dosett ? " 
 " Tom , shall I tell you something ? " say the aunt . 
 " what be it , Aunt Dosett ? " 
 " I do not believe that you have a chance . " 
 " do you mean that ? " he ask , sorrowfully . 
 " I do . " 
 " you think that the necklace will do no good ? " 
 " not the least . of course I will offer it to she if you wish it , 
 because her uncle and I quite approve of you as a husband for Ayala . 
 but I be bind to tell you the truth . I do not think the necklace 
 will do you any good . " then he sit silent for a time , meditate upon 
 his condition . it might be imprudent;--it might be a wrong do to 
 his father to jeopardise the necklace . how could it be if Ayala be 
 to take the necklace and not to take he ? " be I to give it ? " she 
 ask . 
 " yes , " say he , bravely , but with a sigh ; " give it she all the same . " 
 " from you or from Sir Thomas ? " 
 " oh , from me;--from I . if she be tell it come from the governor 
 she would keep it whether or no . I be sure I hope she will keep it , " he 
 say , try to remove the bad impression which his former word 
 might perhaps have leave . 
 " you may be sure she will not keep it , " say Mrs. Dosett , " unless she 
 should intend to accept your hand . of that I can hold out no hope to 
 you . there be a matter , Tom , which I think I should tell you as you 
 be so straightforward in your offer . another gentleman have ask she 
 to marry he . " 
 " she have accept he ! " exclaim Tom . 
 " no , she have not accept he . she have refuse he . " 
 " then I be just where I be , " say Tom . 
 " she have refuse he , but I think that she be in a sort of way 
 attach to he ; and though he too have be refuse I imagine that 
 his chance be well than your . " 
 " and who the d---- be he ? " say Tom , jump up from his seat in 
 great excitement . 
 " Tom ! " exclaim Mrs. Dosett . 
 " I beg your pardon ; but you see this be very important . who be the 
 fellow ? " 
 " he be one Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . " 
 " who ? " 
 " Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . " 
 " impossible ! it can not be Colonel Stubbs . I know Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " I can assure you it be true , Tom . I have have a letter from a 
 lady,--a relative of Colonel stubbs,--telle I the whole story . " 
 " Colonel Stubbs ! " he say . " that pass anything I ever hear . she 
 have refuse he ? " 
 " yes , she have refuse he . " 
 " and have not accept he since ? " 
 " she certainly have not accept he yet . " 
 " you may give she the bracelet all the same , " say Tom , hurry out 
 of the room . that Colonel Stubbs should have make an offer to Ayala , 
 and yet have accept his , Tom Tringle 's , confidence ! 
 CHAPTER XXXII . 
 TOM 's despair . 
 the reader will understand that the fate of the necklace be very 
 soon decide . Ayala declare that it be very beautiful . she have , 
 indeed , a pretty taste for diamond , and would have be proud enough 
 to call this necklace she own ; but , as she declare to her aunt , she 
 would not accept Tom though he be make of diamond from head to 
 foot . Accept Tom , when she could not even bring herself to think of 
 become the wife of Jonathan Stubbs ! if Colonel Stubbs could not be 
 receive by her imagination as an Angel of Light , how immeasurably 
 distant from anything angelic must be Tom Tringle ! " of course it must 
 go back , " she say , when the question have to be decide as to the 
 future fate of the necklace . as a consequence poor Mr. Dosett be 
 compel to make a special journey into the City , and to deposit a 
 well - seal parcel in the hand of Tom Tringle himself . " your cousin 
 send her kind regard , " he say , " but can not bring herself to accept 
 your magnificent present . " 
 Tom have be very much put about since his visit to the Crescent . have 
 his aunt merely tell he that his present would be inefficacious , 
 he would have take that assurance as be simply her opinion , and 
 would have still entertain some hope in the diamond . but these 
 tiding as to another lover crush he altogether . and such a lover ! 
 the very man whom he have ask to write his letter for he ! why 
 have not Colonel Stubbs tell he the truth when thus his own secret 
 have become reveal by an accident ? he understand it all now,--the 
 " Ayala , " and the " Mister , " and the reason why the Colonel could not 
 write the letter . then he become very angry with the Colonel , whom he 
 bitterly accuse of falsehood and treason . what right have the Colonel 
 to meddle with his cousin at all ? and how false he have be to say 
 nothing of what he himself have do when his rival have tell he 
 everything ! in this way he make up his mind that it be his duty 
 to hate Colonel Stubbs , and if possible to inflict some personal 
 punishment upon he . he be reckless of himself now , and , if he could 
 only get one good blow at the Colonel 's head with a thick stick , 
 would be indifferent as to what the law might do with he afterwards . 
 or perhaps he might be able to provoke Colonel Stubbs to fight with 
 he . he have an idea that duel at present be not in fashion . but 
 nevertheless , in such a case as this , a man ought to fight . he could 
 at any rate have the gratification of call the Colonel a coward if 
 he should refuse to fight . 
 he be the more wretched because his spirit within he be cow 
 by the idea of the Colonel . he do acknowledge to himself that his 
 chance could be but bad while such a rival as Colonel Stubbs stand in 
 his way . he try to argue with himself that it be not so . as far as 
 he know , Colonel Stubbs be and would remain a very much less rich 
 man than himself . he doubt very much whether Colonel Stubbs could 
 keep a carriage in London for his wife , while it have be already 
 arrange that he be to be allow to do so should he succeed in 
 marry Ayala . to be a partner in the house of Travers and Treason 
 be a much great thing than to be a Colonel . but , though he assure 
 himself of all this again and again , still he be cow . there be 
 something about the Colonel which do more than redeem his red 
 hair and ugly mouth . and of this something poor Tom be sensible . 
 nevertheless , if occasion should arise he think that he could 
 " punch the Colonel 's head";--not without evil consequence to 
 himself;--but still that he could " punch the Colonel 's head , " not 
 mind the consequence . 
 such have be his condition of mind when he leave the Crescent , and it 
 be not improve by the receipt of the parcel . he hardly say a word 
 when his uncle put it into his hand , merely mutter something and 
 consign the diamond to his desk . he do not tell himself that 
 Ayala must now be abandon . it would have be well for he if he 
 could have do so . but all real , springing , hopeful hope depart 
 from his bosom . this come from the Colonel , rather than from the 
 reject necklace . 
 " do you send that jewelry ? " his father ask he some day 
 afterwards . 
 " yes ; I send it . " 
 " and what have now become of it ? " 
 " it be in my desk there . " 
 " do she send it back again ? " 
 " it come back . my Uncle Dosett bring it . I do not want to say 
 anything more about it , if you please . " 
 " I be sorry for that , tom;--very sorry . as you have set your heart 
 upon it I wish it could have be as you would have it . but the 
 necklace should not be leave there . " Tom shake his head in despair . 
 " you have well let I have the necklace . it be not that I should 
 grudge it to you , Tom , if it could do you any good . " 
 " you shall have it , Sir . " 
 " it will be well so . that be the understanding . " then the necklace 
 be transfer to some receptacle belong to Sir Thomas himself , 
 the lock of which might probably be more secure than that of Tom 's 
 desk , and there it remain in its case , still fold in the various 
 paper in which Mrs. Dosett have encase it . 
 then Tom find it necessary to adopt some other mode of life for his 
 own consolation and support . he have tell his father on one occasion 
 that he have devote himself for a fortnight to champagne and the 
 theatre . but this have be take as a joke . he have be fairly 
 punctual at his place of business and have show no symptom of fast 
 living . but now it occur to he that fast living would be the only 
 thing for he . he have be quite willing to apply himself to marriage 
 and a steady life ; but fortune have not favour he . if he drank 
 too much now , and lie in bed , and become idle , it be not his fault . 
 there come into his head an idea that Ayala and Colonel Stubbs 
 between they must look to that . could he meet Ayala he would explain 
 to she how his character as a moral man have be altogether destroy 
 by she conduct;--and should he meet Colonel Stubbs he would explain 
 something to he also . 
 a new club have be establish in London lately call the 
 Mountaineers , which have secure for itself handsome lodging in 
 Piccadilly , and consider itself to be , among club , rather a 
 comfortable institution than otherwise . it do not as yet affect 
 much fashion , have hitherto secure among its member only two 
 lords,--and they be lord by courtesy . but it be a pleasant , 
 jovial place , in which the delight of young man be not impede 
 by the austerity of their elder . its name would be excuse only on 
 the plea that all other name available for a club have already be 
 appropriate in the metropolis . there be certainly nothing in the 
 club peculiarly applicable to mountain . but then there be other 
 club in London with name which might be open to similar criticism . 
 it be the case that many young man engage in the City have be 
 enrol among its member , and it be from this cause , no doubt , 
 that Tom Tringle be regard as be a lead light among the 
 Mountaineers . it be here that the champagne have be drunk to which 
 Tom have allude when talk of his love to his father . now , in his 
 despair , it seem good to he to pass a considerable portion of his 
 time among the Mountaineers . 
 " you will dine here , faddle ? " he say one evening to a special friend 
 of his , a gentleman also from the City , with whom he have be din 
 a good deal during the last week . 
 " I suppose I shall , " say Faddle , " but be not we come it a little 
 strong ? they want to know at the Gardens what the deuce it be I be 
 about . " the Gardens be a new row of house , latterly christen 
 Badminton Gardens , in which reside the father and mother of Faddle . 
 " I have give up all that kind of thing , " say Tom . 
 " your people be not in London . " 
 " it will make no difference when they do come up . I call an evening 
 in the bosom of one 's family about the slow thing there be . the 
 bosom must do without I for the future . " 
 " will not your governor cut up rough ? " 
 " he must cut up as he please . but I rather fancy he know all about 
 it . I shall not spend half as much money this way as if I have a house 
 and wife and family,--and what we may call a bosom of one 's own . " 
 then they have dinner and go to the theatre , and play billiard , 
 and have supper , and spend the night in a manner very delightful , no 
 doubt , to themselves , but of which their eld friend could hardly 
 have approve . 
 there be a good deal of this follow upon the episode of the 
 necklace , and it must be tell with regret that our young hero fall 
 into certain exploit which be by no mean creditable to he . More 
 than one good - humour policeman have help he home to his lodging ; 
 but alas , on Christmas Eve , he fall into the hand of some guardian 
 of the peace who be not quite sufficiently good - natured , and Tom 
 pass the night and the great part of the follow morning , 
 recumbent , he in one cell , and his friend faddle in the next , with an 
 intimation that they would certainly be take before a magistrate on 
 the day after Christmas Day . 
 oh , Ayala ! Ayala ! it must be acknowledge that you be in a measure 
 responsible;--and not only for the lamentable condition of your 
 lover , but also of that of his friend . for , in his soft moment , 
 Tom have tell every thing to faddle , and Faddle have declare that 
 he would be true to the death to a friend suffer such unmerited 
 misfortune . perhaps the fidelity of Faddle may have owe something 
 to the fact that Tom 's pecuniary allowance be more generous than 
 those accord to himself . to Ayala must be attribute the occurrence 
 of these misfortune . but Tom in his more fiery moments,--those 
 moment which would come between the subsidence of actual sobriety 
 and the commencement of intoxication,--attributed all his misfortune 
 to the Colonel . " faddle , " he would say in these moment , " of course 
 I know that I be a ruin man . of course I be aware that all this be 
 only a prelude to some ignominious end . I have not sink to this 
 kind of thing without feel it . " " you will be right enough some day , 
 old fellow , " faddle would reply . " I shall live to be godfather to 
 the first boy . " " never , faddle ! " Tom reply . " all those hope have 
 vanish . you will never live to see any child of mine . and I know well 
 where to look for my enemy . Stubbs indeed ! I will stubbs he . if I can 
 only live to be revenge on that traitor then I shall die content . 
 though he shoot I through the heart , I should die content . " 
 this have happen a little before that unfortunate Christmas Eve . up 
 to this time Sir Thomas , though he have know well that his son have 
 not be live as he should do , have be mild in his remonstrance , 
 and have say nothing at Merle Park to frighten Lady Tringle . but the 
 affair of Christmas Eve come to his ear with all its horror . a 
 policeman whom Tom have strike with his fist in the pit of the stomach 
 have not be civil enough to accept this mark of familiarity with 
 good humour . he have be much inconvenience by the blow , and have 
 insist upon give testimony to this effect before the magistrate . 
 there have be half - an - hour , he say , in which he have hang dubious 
 between this world and the next , so great have be the violence of 
 the blow , and so deadly its direction ! the magistrate be one of 
 those just man who find a pleasure and a duty in protect the 
 police of the metropolis . it be no case , he declare , for a fine . 
 what would be a fine to such a one as Thomas Tringle , junior ! and 
 Tom,--Tom Tringle , the only son of Sir Thomas Tringle , the senior 
 partner in the great house of Travers and treason,--wa ignominiously 
 lock up for a week . faddle , who have not strike the blow , be 
 allow to depart with a fine and a warning . oh , Ayala , Ayala , this 
 be thy do ! 
 when the sentence be know Sir Thomas use all his influence to 
 extricate his unfortunate son , but in vain . Tom go through his 
 penalty , and , have no help from champagne , doubtless have a bad time 
 of it . Ayala , Stubbs , the policeman , and the magistrate , seem to 
 have conspire to destroy he . but the week at last drag itself 
 out , and then Tom find himself confront with his father in the 
 back - parlour of the house in Queen 's Gate . " Tom , " he say , " this be 
 very bad ! " 
 " it be bad , Sir , " say Tom . 
 " you have disgrace I , and your mother , and yourself . you have 
 disgrace Travers and Treason ! " Poor Tom shake his head . " it will be 
 necessary , I fear , that you should leave the house altogether . " Tom 
 stand silent without a word . " a young man who have be lock up in 
 prison for a week for maltreat a policeman can hardly expect to be 
 entrust with such concern as those of Travers and Treason . I and 
 your poor mother can not get rid of you and the disgrace which you 
 have entail upon we . traver and Treason can easily get rid of 
 you . " Tom know very well that his father be , in fact , Travers and 
 Treason , but he do not yet feel that an opportunity have come in 
 which he could wisely speak a word . " what have you get to say for 
 yourself , Sir ? " demand Sir Thomas . 
 " of course , I be very sorry , " mutter Tom . 
 " sorry , Tom ! a young man hold your position in Travers and Treason 
 ought not to have to be sorry for have be lock up in prison for 
 a week for maltreat a policeman ! what do you think must be do , 
 yourself ? " 
 " the man have be haul I about in the street . " 
 " you be drunk , no doubt . " 
 " I have be drink . I be not go to tell a lie about it . but he 
 need not have do as he do . Faddle know that , and can tell you . " 
 " what can have drive you to associate with such a young man as 
 Faddle ? that be the bad part of it . do you know what Faddle and 
 Company are,--stock jobber , who ten year ago have not a thousand 
 pound in the way of capital among they ! they have be connect with 
 a dozen company , none of which be float now , and have make 
 money out of they all ! do you think that Travers and Treason will 
 accept a young man as a partner who associate with such people as 
 that ? " 
 " I have see old Faddle 's name and yours on the same prospectus 
 together , Sir . " 
 " what have that to do with it ? you never see he inside our counter . 
 what a name to appear along with yours in such an affair as this ! if 
 it have not be for that , you might have get over it . young man will 
 be young man . faddle ! I think you will have to go abroad for a time , 
 till it have be forget . " 
 " I should like to stay , just at present , Sir , " say Tom . 
 " what good can you do ? " 
 " all the same , I should like to stay , Sir . " 
 " I be think that , if you be to take a tour through the United 
 States , go across to San Francisco , then up to Japan , and from thence 
 through some of the chinese city down to Calcutta and Bombay , 
 you might come back by the Euphrates Valley to Constantinople , see 
 something of Bulgaria and those country , and so home by Vienna and 
 Paris . the Euphrates Valley Railway will be finish by that time , 
 perhaps , and Bulgaria will be as settle as Hertfordshire . you would see 
 something of the world , and I could let it be understand that you 
 be travel on behalf of Travers and Treason . by the time that 
 you be back , people in the City would have forget the policeman , 
 and if you could manage to write home three or four letter about our 
 trade with Japan and China , they would be willing to forget faddle . " 
 " but , sir-- " 
 " should not you like a tour of that kind ? " 
 " very much indeed , Sir;--only-- " 
 " only what , Tom ? " 
 " Ayala ! " say Tom , hardly able to suppress a sob as he utter the 
 fatal name . 
 " Tom , do not be a fool . you can not make a young woman have you if she 
 do not choose . I have do all that I could for you , because I see 
 that you would set your heart upon it . I go to she myself , and then I 
 give two hundred and fifty pound for that bauble . I be tell I shall 
 have to lose a third of the sum in get rid of it . " 
 " ricolay tell I that he would take it back at two hundred and twenty , " 
 say Tom , whose mind , prostrate as it be , be still alive to 
 consideration of profit and loss . 
 " never mind that for the present , " say Sir Thomas . " do not you 
 remember the old song?--'if she will , she will , you may depend on't . 
 and if she will not she will not ; and there be an end on't . ' you ought to be 
 a man and pluck up your spirit . be you go to allow a little girl 
 to knock you about in that way ? " Tom only shake his head , and look 
 as if he be very ill . in truth , the champagne , and the imprisonment , 
 and Ayala together , have altogether alter his appearance . " we have 
 do what we could about it , and now it be time to give it over . let 
 I hear you say that you will give it over . " Tom stand speechless 
 before his father . " speak the word , and the thing will be do , " 
 continue Sir Thomas , endeavour to encourage the young man . 
 " I can not , " say Tom , sigh . 
 " nonsense ! " 
 " I have try , and I can not . " 
 " Tom , do you mean to say that you be go to lose everything 
 because a chit of a girl like that turn up her nose at you ? " 
 " it be no use my going while thing be like this , " say Tom . " if I 
 be to get to New York , I should come back by the next ship . as for 
 letter about business , I could not settle my mind to anything of the 
 kind . " 
 " then you be not the man I take you to be , " say the father . 
 " I could be man enough , " say Tom , clench his fist , " if I could 
 get hold of Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " Colonel who ? " 
 " Stubbs ! Jonathan Stubbs ! I know what I be talk about . I be not 
 go to America , nor China , nor anything else , till I have polish 
 he off . it be all very well your abuse I , but you do not know what 
 it be I have suffer . as for be call a man I do not care about 
 it . what I should like well would be to get Ayala on one side and 
 Stubbs on the other , and then all three to go off the Duke of York 's 
 Column together . it be no good talk about Travers and Treason . I 
 do not care for Travers and Treason as I be now . if you will get Ayala 
 to say that she will have I , I will go to the shop every morning at 
 eight and stay till nine ; and as for the Mountaineers it may all go 
 to the d---- for I . " then he rush out of the room , bang the 
 door after he . 
 Sir Thomas , when he be thus leave , stand for awhile with his hand 
 in his trouser ' pocket , contemplate the condition of his son . it 
 be wonderful to he that a boy of his should be afflict in this 
 manner . when he have be strike by the juvenile beauty of Emmeline 
 Dosett he have at once ask the young lady to share his fortune with 
 he , and the young lady have speedily accede to his request . then he 
 have be marry , and that be all he have ever know of the trouble 
 of love . he could not but think , look back at it as he do now 
 from a distance , that have Emmeline be hard - hearted he would have 
 endure the repulse and have pass on speedily to some other 
 charmer . but Tom have be wound after a fashion which seem 
 to he to have be very uncommon . it might be possible that he 
 should recover in time , but while undergo recovery he would be 
 ruined;--so great be the young man 's suffering ! now Sir Thomas , 
 though he have speak to Tom with all the severity which he have be 
 able to assume , though he have abuse faddle , and have vindicate the 
 injure dignity of Travers and Treason with all his eloquence ; though 
 he have tell Tom it be unmanly to give way to his love , yet , of 
 living creature , Tom be at this moment the dear to his heart . he 
 have never for an instant entertain the idea of expel Tom from 
 Travers and Treason because of the policeman , or because of faddle . 
 what should he do for the poor boy now ? be there any argument , any 
 mean of persuasion , by which he could induce that foolish little 
 girl to accept all the good thing which he be ready to do for she ? 
 could he try yet once again himself , with any chance of success ? 
 think of all this , he stand there for an hour alone with his hand 
 in his trouser ' pocket . 
 CHAPTER XXXIII . 
 ISADORE HAMEL in LOMBARD street . 
 in follow the result of Tom 's presentation of the necklace we 
 have get beyond the period which our story be presume to have 
 reach . Tom be in durance during the Christmas week , but we must go 
 back to the promise which have be make by her uncle , Sir Thomas , to 
 Lucy about six week before that time . the promise have extend only 
 to an undertaking on the part of Sir Thomas to see Isadore Hamel if 
 he would call at the house in Lombard Street at a certain hour on a 
 certain day . Lucy be overwhelm with gratitude when the promise be 
 make . a few moment previously she have be indignant because her 
 uncle have appear to speak of she and her lover as two beggars,--but 
 Sir Thomas have explain and in some sort apologise , and then have 
 come the promise which to Lucy seem to contain an assurance of 
 effectual aid . Sir Thomas would not have ask to see the lover have 
 he intend to be hostile to the lover . something would be do to 
 solve the difficulty which have seem to Lucy to be so grave . she 
 would not any long be make to think that she should give up either 
 her lover or her home under her uncle 's roof . this have be terribly 
 distress to she because she have be well aware that on leave 
 her uncle 's house she could be take in only by her lover , to whom an 
 immediate marriage would be ruinous . and yet she could not undertake 
 to give up her lover . therefore her uncle 's promise have make her very 
 happy , and she forgive the ungenerous allusion to the two beggar . 
 the letter be write to Isadore in high spirit . " I do not know 
 what Uncle Tom intend , but he mean to be kind . of course you must 
 go to he , and if I be you I would tell he everything about 
 everything . he be not strict and hard like Aunt Emmeline . she mean 
 to be good too , but she be sometimes so very hard . I be happy 
 now because I think something will be do to relieve you from the 
 terrible weight which I be to you . I sometimes wish that you have 
 never come to I in Kensington Gardens , because I have become such a 
 burden to you . " 
 there be much more in which Lucy no doubt go on to declare that , 
 burden as she be , she intend to be persistent . Hamel , when he 
 receive this letter , be resolve to keep the appointment make for 
 he , but his hope be not very high . he have be angry with Lady 
 Tringle,--in the first place , because of her treatment of himself at 
 Glenbogie , and then much more strongly , because she have be cruel 
 to Lucy . nor do he conceive himself to be under any strong debt 
 of gratitude to Sir Thomas , though he have be invite to lunch . 
 he be aware that the Tringles have despise he , and he repay 
 the compliment with all his heart by despise the Tringles . they 
 be to he sample of the sort of people which he think to be of 
 all the most despicable . they be not only vulgar and rich , but 
 purse - proud and conceited as well . to his thinking there be nothing 
 of which such people be entitle to be proud . of course they 
 make money,--money out of money , an employment which he regard 
 as vile,--create nothing either useful or beautiful . to create 
 something useful be , to his thinking , very good . to create something 
 beautiful be almost divine . to manipulate million till they should 
 breed other million be the mean occupation for a life 's energy . 
 it be thus , I fear , that Mr. Hamel look at the business carry on 
 in Lombard Street , be as yet very young in the world and see 
 many thing with distorted eye . 
 he be aware that some plan would be propose to he which might 
 probably accelerate his marriage , but be aware also that he would be 
 very unwilling to take advice from Sir Thomas . Sir Thomas , no doubt , 
 would be coarse and rough , and might perhaps offer he pecuniary 
 assistance in a manner which would make it impossible for he to 
 accept it . he have tell himself a score of time that , poor as he be , 
 he do not want any of the Tringle money . his father 's arbitrary 
 conduct towards he have cause he great misery . he have be bring 
 up in luxury , and have feel it hard enough to be deprive of his 
 father 's mean because he would not abandon the mode of life that 
 be congenial to he . but have be thus , as it be , cast off 
 by his father , he have resolve that it behove he to depend only 
 on himself . in the matter of his love he be specially prone to be 
 indignant and independent . no one have a right to dictate to he , 
 and he would follow the dictation of none . to Lucy alone do he 
 acknowledge any debt , and to she he owe everything . but even for 
 her sake he could not condescend to accept Sir Thomas 's money , and 
 with his money his advice . Lucy have beg he in her letter to tell 
 everything to her uncle . he would tell Sir Thomas everything as to 
 his income , his prospect , and his intention , because Sir Thomas as 
 Lucy 's uncle would be entitle to such information . but he think it 
 very improbable that he should accept any counsel from Sir Thomas . 
 such be the condition of Hamel 's mind it be to be fear that but 
 little good would come from his visit to Lombard Street . Lucy have 
 simply think that her uncle , out of his enormous store , would 
 provide an adequate income . Hamel think that Sir Thomas , out of his 
 enormous impudence , would desire to dictate everything . Sir Thomas 
 be , in truth , anxious to be good - natured , and to do a kindness to 
 his niece ; but be not willing to give his money without be sure 
 that he be put it into good hand . 
 " oh , you be hamel , " say a young man to he , speak to he across 
 the counter in the Lombard Street office . this be Tom , who , as the 
 reader will remember , have not yet get into his trouble on account of 
 the policeman . 
 Tom and Hamel have never meet but once before , for a few moment in the 
 Coliseum at Rome , and the artist , not remember he , do not know 
 by whom he be accost in this familiar manner . " that be my name , 
 Sir , " say Hamel . " here be my card . perhaps you will do I the 
 kindness to take it to Sir Thomas Tringle . " 
 " all right , old fellow ; I know all about it . he have get Puxley with 
 he from the Bank of England just at this moment . come through into 
 this room . he will soon have polish off old Puxley . " Tom be no more 
 to Hamel than any other clerk , and he feel himself to be aggrieve ; 
 but he follow Tom into the room as he be tell , and then prepare 
 to wait in patience for the convenience of the great man . " so you and 
 Lucy be go to make a match of it , " say Tom . 
 this be terrible to Hamel . could it be possible that all the clerk 
 in Lombard Street talk of his Lucy in this way , because she be the 
 niece of their senior partner ? be all the clerk , as a matter of 
 course , instruct in the most private affair of the Tringle family ? 
 " I be here in obedience to direction from Sir Thomas , " say Hamel , 
 ignore altogether the impudent allusion which the young man have 
 make . 
 " of course you be . perhaps you do not know who I be ? " 
 " not in the least , " say Hamel . 
 " I be Thomas Tringle , junior , " say Tom , with a little accession of 
 dignity . 
 " I beg your pardon ; I do not know , " say Hamel . 
 " you and I ought to be thick , " rejoin Tom , " because I be go in 
 for Ayala . perhaps you have hear that before ? " 
 Hamel have hear it and be well aware that Tom be to Ayala an 
 intolerable burden , like the old man of the sea . he have hear of Tom 
 as poor Ayala 's pet aversion,--as a lover not to be shake off though 
 he have be refuse a score of time . Ayala be to the sculptor only 
 second in sacredness to Lucy . and now he be tell by Tom himself that 
 he was--"goe in for Ayala . " the expression be so distressing to 
 his feeling that he shudder when he hear it . be it possible that 
 any one should say of he that he be " go in " for Lucy ? at that 
 moment Sir Thomas open the door , and grasp Hamel by the hand lead 
 he away into his own sanctum . 
 " and now , Mr. Hamel , " say Sir Thomas , in his cheery voice , " how 
 be you ? " Hamel declare that he be very well , and express a hope 
 that Sir Thomas be the same . " I be not so young as I be , Mr. Hamel . 
 my year be heavy and so be my work . that be the bad of it . when 
 one be young and strong one very often have not enough to do . I daresay 
 you find it so sometimes . " 
 " in our profession , " say Hamel , " we go on work , though very often 
 we do not sell what we do . " 
 " that be bad , " say Sir Thomas . 
 " it be the case always with an artist before he have make a name for 
 himself . it be the case with many up to the last day of a life of 
 labour . an artist have to look for that , Sir Thomas . " 
 " dear I ! that seem very sad . you be a sculptor , I believe ? " 
 " yes , Sir Thomas . " 
 " and the thing you make must take a deal of room and be very heavy . " 
 at this Mr. Hamel only smile . " do not you think if you be to call 
 an auction you would get something for they ? " at this suggestion the 
 sculptor frown but condescend to make no reply . Sir Thomas go 
 on with his suggestion . " if you and half - a - dozen other beginner make 
 a sort of gallery among you , people would buy they as they do those 
 thing in the Marylebone Road and stick they up somewhere about their 
 ground . it would be well than keep they and get nothing . " 
 Hamel have in his studio at home an allegorical figure of Italia 
 United , and another of a Prostrate Roman Catholic Church , which 
 in his mind 's eye he see for a moment stick here or there about 
 the garden of some such place as Glenbogie ! into they have be 
 infuse all the poetry of his nature and all the conviction of his 
 intelligence . he have never dream of sell they . he have never 
 dare to think that any lover of Art would encourage he to put into 
 marble those conception of his genius which now adorn his studio , 
 stand there in plaster of Paris . but to he they be so valuable , 
 they contain so much of his thought , so many of his aspiration , 
 that even have the marble counterpart be order and pay for 
 nothing would have induce he to part with the original . now he be 
 advise to sell they by auction in order that he might rival those 
 grotesque tradesman whose business it be to populate the garden of 
 wealthy but tasteless Britons ! it be thus that the idea represent 
 itself to he . he simply smile ; but Sir Thomas do not fail to 
 appreciate the smile . 
 " and now about this young lady ? " say Sir Thomas , not altogether in 
 so good a humour as he have be when he begin his suggestion . " it be a 
 bad look out for she when , as you say , you can not sell your work when 
 you have do it . " 
 " I think you do not quite understand the matter , Sir Thomas . " 
 " perhaps not . it certainly do seem unintelligible that a man should 
 lumber himself up with a lot of thing which he can not sell . a 
 tradesman would know that he must get into the bankruptcy court if 
 he be to go on like that . and what be sauce for the goose will 
 be sauce for the gander also . " Mr. Hamel again smile but hold his 
 tongue . " if you can not sell your ware how can you keep a wife ? " 
 " my ware , as you call they , be of two kind . one , though no doubt 
 make for sale , be hardly saleable . the other be do to order . such 
 income as I make come from the latter . " 
 " head , " suggest Sir Thomas . 
 " bust they be generally call . " 
 " well , bust . I call they head . they be head . a bust , I take it , 
 be -- well , never mind . " Sir Thomas find a difficulty in define his 
 idea of a bust . " a man want to have something more or less like some 
 one to put up in a church and then he pay you . " 
 " or perhaps in his library . but he can put it where he like when he 
 have buy it . " 
 " just so . but there be not many of those come in your way , if I 
 understand right . " 
 " not as many as I would wish . " 
 " what can you net at the end of the year ? that be the question . " 
 Lucy have recommend he to tell Sir Thomas everything ; and he have 
 come there determined to tell at any rate everything refer to 
 money . he have not the slight desire to keep the amount of his 
 income from Sir Thomas . but the question be put to he in so 
 distasteful a way that he could not bring himself to be confidential . 
 " it vary with various circumstance , but it be very small . " 
 " very small ? five hundred a year ? " this be ill - natured , because Sir 
 Thomas know that Mr. Hamel do not earn five hundred a year . but he 
 be become acerbate by the young man 's manner . 
 " oh dear , no , " say Hamel . 
 " four hundred ? " 
 " nor four hundred,--nor three . I have never net three hundred in 
 one year after pay the incidental expense . " 
 " that seem to I to be uncommonly little for a young man who be 
 think of marry . do not you think you have well give it up ? " 
 " I certainly think nothing of the kind . " 
 " do your father do anything for you ? " 
 " nothing at all . " 
 " he also make head ? " 
 " heads,--and other thing . " 
 " and sell they when he have make they . " 
 " yes , Sir Thomas ; he sell they . he have a hard time once , but now he 
 be run after . he refuse more order than he can accept . " 
 " and he will not do anything for you . " 
 " nothing . he have quarrel with I . " 
 " that be very bad . well now , Mr. Hamel , would you mind tell I 
 what your idea be ? " Sir Thomas , when he ask the question , still 
 intend to give assistance , be still minded that the young people 
 should by his assistance be enable to marry . but he be strongly of 
 opinion that it be his duty , as a rich and protect uncle , to say 
 something about imprudence , and to magnify difficulty . it certainly 
 would be wrong for an uncle , merely because he be rich , to give 
 away his money to dependent relative without any reference to those 
 hard principle which a possessor of money always feel it to be his 
 business to inculcate . and up to this point Hamel have do nothing 
 to ingratiate himself . Sir Thomas be begin to think that the 
 sculptor be an impudent prig , and to declare to himself that , should 
 the marriage ever take place , the young couple would not be make 
 welcome at Glenbogie or Merle Park . but still he intend to go on 
 with his purpose , for Lucy 's sake . therefore he ask the sculptor as 
 to his idea generally . 
 " my idea be that I shall marry Miss Dormer , and support she on the 
 earning of my profession . my idea be that I shall do so before long , 
 in comfort . my idea also be , that she will be the last to complain 
 of any discomfort which may arise from my straiten circumstance 
 at present . my idea be that I be prepare for myself a happy 
 and independent life . my idea also is,--and I assure you that of 
 all my idea this be the one to which I cling with the fond 
 assurance,--that I will do my very good to make her life happy when 
 she come to grace my home . " 
 there be a manliness in this which would have touch Sir Thomas 
 have he be in a well humour , but , as it be , he have be so much 
 irritate by the young man 's manner , that he could not bring himself 
 to be just . " be I to understand that you intend to marry on something 
 under three hundred a year ? " 
 Hamel pause a moment before he make his reply . " how be I to answer 
 such a question , " he say , at last , " see that Miss Dormer be in 
 your hand , and that you be unlikely to be influence by anything 
 that I may say ? " 
 " I shall be very much influence , " say Sir Thomas . 
 " be her father still alive , I think we should have put our head 
 together , and between we decide on what might have be good for 
 Lucy 's happiness . " 
 " do you think that I be indifferent to her happiness ? " demand Sir 
 Thomas . 
 " I should have suggest to he , " continue Hamel , not notice the 
 last question , " that she should remain in her own home till I could 
 make one for her worthy of her acceptance . and then we should have 
 arrange among we what would have be good for her happiness . I 
 can not do this with you . if you tell she to - morrow that she must give 
 up either your protection or her engagement with I , then she must 
 come to I , and make the good of all the little that I can do for 
 she . " 
 " who say that I be go to turn she out ? " say Sir Thomas , rise 
 angrily from his chair . 
 " I do not think that any one have say this of you . " 
 " then why do you throw it in my tooth ? " 
 " because your wife have threaten it . " 
 then Sir Thomas boil over in his anger . " no one have threaten it . 
 it be untrue . you be guilty both of impertinence and untruth in 
 say so . " here Hamel rise from his chair , and take up his hat . 
 " stop , young man , and hear what I have to say to you . I have do 
 nothing but good to my niece . " 
 " nevertheless , it be true , Sir Thomas , that she have be tell by your 
 wife that she must either abandon I or the protection of your roof . 
 I find no fault with Lady Tringle for say so . it may have be the 
 natural expression of a judicious opinion . but when you ask after my 
 intention in reference to your niece I be bind to tell you that I 
 propose to subject she to the undoubted inconvenience of my poor 
 home , simply because I find she to be threaten with the loss of 
 another . " 
 " she have not be threaten , Sir . " 
 " you have well ask your wife , Sir Thomas . and , if you find that what 
 I have say be true , I think you will own that I have be oblige to 
 explain myself as I have do . as you have tell I to my face that 
 I have be guilty of untruth , I shall now leave you . " with this he 
 walk out of the room , and the word which Sir Thomas throw after 
 he have no effect in recall he . 
 it must be acknowledge that Hamel have be very foolish in refer 
 to Aunt Emmeline 's threat . who do not know that word be 
 constantly use which be intend to have no real effect ? who do 
 not know that an angry woman will often talk after this fashion ? 
 but it be certainly the fact that Aunt Emmeline have more than once 
 declare to Lucy that she could not be allow to remain one of 
 that family unless she would give up her lover . Lucy , in her loyal 
 endeavour to explain to her lover her own position , have tell he of 
 the threat , and he , from that moment , have hold himself prepared to 
 find a home for his future wife should that threat be carry into 
 execution . Sir Thomas be well aware that such word have be speak , 
 but he know his wife , and know how little such word signify . his 
 wife , without his consent , would not have the power to turn a dog 
 from Merle Park . the threat have simply be an argument intend to 
 dissuade Lucy from her choice ; and now it have be throw in his 
 tooth just when he have intend to make provision for this girl , who 
 be not , in truth , relate to he , in order that he might ratify she 
 choice ! he be very angry with the young prig who have thus rush out 
 of his presence . he be angry , too , with his wife , who have bring 
 he into his difficulty by her foolish threat . but he be angry , 
 also , with himself , know that he have be wrong to accuse the man 
 of a falsehood . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV . 
 " I never threaten to turn you out . " 
 then there be write the following letter , which be send and 
 receive before Sir Thomas go to Merle Park , and therefore , also , 
 before he again see Lucy . 
    DEAREST , DEAREST LOVE , 
    I have be , as desire , to Lombard Street , but I fear 
    that my embassy have not lead to any good . I know myself 
    to be about as bad an ambassador as any one can send . an 
    ambassador should be soft and gentle,--wille to make 
    the good of everything , and never prone to take offence , 
    nor should he be addict specially to independence . I 
    be ungentle , and apt to be suspicious,--especially if 
    anything be say derogatory to my art . I be proud of be 
    an artist , but I be often ashamed of myself because I 
    exhibit my pride . I may say the same of my spirit of 
    independence . I be determined to be independent if I 
    live,--but I find my independence sometimes kick up its 
    heel , till I hate it myself . 
    from this you will perceive that I have not have a success 
    in Lombard Street . I be quite willing to answer your 
    uncle any question he could ask about money . indeed , 
    I have no secret from he on any subject . but when he 
    subject I to cross - examination , force I into a 
    bathos of poverty , as he think , I break down . " not five 
    hundred a - year ! " " not four ! ! " " not three ! ! ! " " oh , heaven ! 
    and you propose to take a wife ! " you will understand how I 
    writhe and wriggle under the scorn . 
    and then there come something bad than this,--or rather , 
    if I remember rightly , the bad thing come first . you 
    be over in my studio , and will remember , perhaps , 
    some of my own abortive treasure , those melancholy but 
    soul - inspire creation of which I have think so much , 
    and other have think so little ? that no one else should 
    value they be natural , but to I it seem unnatural , 
    almost cruel , that any one should tell I to my face that 
    they be valueless . your uncle , of course , have never see 
    they , but he know that sculptor be generally burden 
    with these " ware , " as he call they ; and he suggest 
    that I should sell they by auction for what they might 
    fetch,--in order that the corner which they occupy might 
    be vacant . he think that , perhaps , they might do for 
    country gentleman to stick about among their shrub . 
    you , know my foolish soreness on the subject , will 
    understand how well I must have be prepare by this to 
    endure your uncle 's cross - examination . 
    then he ask I as to my ideas,--not art idea , but idea 
    as to bread and cheese for the future . I tell he as 
    exactly as I could . I explain to he that if you be 
    leave in possession of a comfortable home , such as would 
    have be that of your father , I should think it well for 
    your sake to delay our marriage till I should be prepare 
    to do something well for you than I can at present ; 
    but that I hold myself ready to give you all that I have 
    to give at a moment 's notice , should you be require to 
    leave his house . and , Lucy , speak in your name , I say 
    something far , and declare my belief that you , for 
    my sake , would bear the inconvenience of so poor a home 
    without complain . 
    then there arise anger both on his side and on mine ; and I 
    must say , insult on his . he tell I that I have no business 
    to suggest that you would be expel from his house . I 
    reply that the threat have come , if not from he , then 
    from Lady Tringle . upon this he accuse I of positive 
    falsehood , assert that your aunt have say nothing of 
    the kind . I then refer he to Lady Tringle herself , but 
    refuse to stay any long in the room with he , because 
    he have insult I . 
    so you will see that I do less than nothing by my 
    embassy . I tell myself that it would be so as I descend 
    into the underground cavern at the Gloucester Road 
    Station . you be not to suppose that I blame he more , or , 
    indeed , so much as I do myself . it be not to be expect 
    that he should behave as a gentleman of fine feeling . but , 
    perhaps , it ought to have be expect that I should 
    behave as a man of common sense . I ought to have take 
    his advice about the auction , apparently , in good part . 
    I ought not to have writhe when he scorn my poor 
    earning . when he ask as to my idea , I should not have 
    allude to your aunt 's threat as to turn you out . I 
    should have be placid and humble ; and then his want of 
    generous feeling would have matter nothing . but spilt 
    milk and broken egg be past saving . whatever good thing 
    may have come from your uncle 's generosity have I brush 
    his hair for he aright , be now clean gone , see that I 
    scrub he altogether the wrong way . 
    for myself , I do not know that I should regret it very 
    much . I have an idea that no money should be sweet to a 
    man except that which he earn . and I have enough belief 
    in myself to be confident that soon or later I shall 
    earn a sufficiency . but , dearest , I own that I feel 
    disgusted with myself when I think that I have diminish 
    your present comfort , or perhaps lessen for the future 
    resource which would have be yours rather than mine . 
    but the milk have be spill , and now we must only think 
    what we can well do without it . it seem to I that only 
    two home be possible for you,--one with Sir Thomas 
    as his niece , and the other with I as my wife . I be 
    conceited enough to think that you will prefer the latter 
    even with many inconvenience . neither can your uncle 
    or your aunt prevent you from marry at a very early 
    day , should you choose to do so . there would be some 
    preliminary ceremony , of the nature of which I be 
    thoroughly ignorant , but which could , I suppose , be 
    achieve in a month . I would advise you to ask your aunt 
    boldly whether she wish you to go or to stay with she , 
    explaining , of course , that you intend to hold to your 
    engagement , and explain at the same time that you be 
    quite ready to be marry at once if she be anxious to be 
    quit of you . that be my advice . 
    and now , dear , one word of something soft ! for do any 
    lover ever write to the lady of his heart so long a letter 
    so abominably stuff with matter of business ? how shall 
    I well tell you how dearly I love you ? perhaps I may do it 
    by show you that as far as I myself be concern I long 
    to hear that your Aunt Emmeline and your Uncle Tom be 
    more hard - hearted and obdurate than be ever uncle and 
    aunt before they . I long to hear that you have be turn 
    out into the cold , because I know that then you must come 
    to I , though it be even less than three hundred a - year . 
    I wish you could have see your uncle 's face as those 
    terribly mean figure reach his ear . I do not for a 
    moment fear that we should want . order come slow enough , 
    but they come a little quick than they do . I have never 
    for a moment doubt my own ultimate success , and if 
    you be with I I should be more confident than ever . 
    nevertheless , should your aunt bid you to stay , and should 
    you think it right to comply with her desire , I will not 
    complain . 
    Adieu ! this come from one who be altogether happy in his 
    confidence that at any rate before long you will have 
    become his wife . 
    ISADORE HAMEL . 
    I quite expect to be scold for my awkwardness . indeed I 
    shall be disappoint if I be not . 
 the same post which bring Hamel 's long letter to Lucy bring also 
 a short but very angry scrawl from Sir Thomas to his wife . no eye 
 but those of Lady Tringle see this epistle , and no other eye shall 
 see it . but the few word which it contain be full of marital 
 wrath . why have she threaten to turn her own niece out of his door ? 
 why have she subject he to the necessity of defend she by a 
 false assertion ? those Dormer niece of her be give he an 
 amount of trouble and annoyance which he certainly have not deserve . 
 Lucy , though not a word be say to she of this angry letter , be 
 conscious that something have be add to her aunt 's acerbity . 
 indeed , for the last day or two her aunt 's acerbity towards she 
 have be much diminish . Lady Tringle have know that her husband 
 intend to do something by which the Hamel marriage would be 
 render possible ; and she , though she altogether disapprove of 
 the Hamel marriage , would be oblige to accede to it if Sir Thomas 
 accede to it and encourage it by his money . let they be marry , 
 and then , as far as the Tringles be concern , let there be an end 
 of these Dormer trouble for ever . to that idea Lady Tringle have 
 reconcile herself as soon as Sir Thomas have declare his purpose , 
 but now,--as she declare to herself,--"all the fat be again in the 
 fire . " she receive Lucy 's salutation on that morning with a very 
 bad grace . 
 but she have be desire to give no message , and therefore she be 
 silent on the subject to Lucy . to the Honourable Mrs. Traffick she 
 say a few word . " after all Ayala be not half as bad as Lucy , " say 
 Lady Tringle . 
 " there , mamma , I think you be wrong , " say the Honourable Mrs. 
 Traffick . " of all the upsetting thing I ever know Ayala be the 
 bad . think of her conduct with Septimus . " Lady Tringle make a 
 little grimace , which , however , her daughter do not see . " and then 
 with that Marchesa ! " 
 " that be the Marchesa 's fault . " 
 " and with Tom ! " 
 " I do not think she be so much to blame with Tom . if she be , why 
 do not she take he now she can have he ? he be just as foolish 
 about she as ever . upon my word I think Tom will make himself ill 
 about it . " 
 " you have not hear it all , mamma . " 
 " what have not I hear ? " 
 " Ayala have be down with the Alburys at Stalham . " 
 " I do hear that . " 
 " and another man have turn up . what on earth they see in she be what 
 I can not understand . " 
 " another man have offer to she ! who be he ? " 
 " there be a Colonel Stubbs down there . Septimus hear it all from 
 young Batsby at the club . she get this man to ride about the country 
 with she everywhere , go to the meet with he and come home . and 
 in this way she get he to propose to she . I do not suppose he mean 
 anything ; but that be why she will not have anything to do with Tom now . 
 do you mean to say she do not do all she could to catch Tom down at 
 Glenbogie , and then at Rome ? everybody see it . I do not think Lucy have 
 ever be so bad as that . " 
 " it be quite different , my dear . " 
 " she have come from a low father , " say the Honourable Mrs. Traffick , 
 proudly , " and therefore she have naturally attach herself to a low 
 young man . there be nothing to be wonder at in that . I suppose they 
 be fond of each other , and the soon they be marry the well . " 
 " but he can not marry she because he have get nothing . " 
 " papa will do something . " 
 " that be just what your papa will not . the man have be to your father 
 in the City and there have be ever such a row . he speak ill of I 
 because I endeavour to do my duty by the ungrateful girl . I be 
 sure I have get a lesson as to take up other people 's child . I 
 endeavour to do an act of charity , and see what have come of it . I 
 do not believe in charity . " 
 " that be wicked , mamma . Faith , Hope , and Charity ! but you have get to 
 be charitable before you begin the other . " 
 " I do not think it be wicked . People would do good if they be make 
 to go along on what they have get of their own . " this seem to Augusta 
 to be a direct blow at Septimus and herself . " of course I know what 
 you mean , mamma . " 
 " I do not mean anything . " 
 " but , if people can not stay for a few week in their own parent ' 
 house , I do not know where they be to stay . " 
 " it be not week , Augusta ; it be month . and as to parent , Lord 
 Boardotrade be Mr. Traffick 's parent . why do not he go and stay with 
 Lord Boardotrade ? " then Augusta get up and march with stately step 
 out of the room . after this it be not possible that Lucy would find 
 much immediate grace in her aunt 's eye . 
 from the moment that Lucy have receive her letter there come upon she 
 the great burden of answer it . she be very anxious to do exactly 
 as Hamel have counsel she . she be quite alive to the fact that 
 Hamel have be imprudent in Lombard Street ; but not the less be she 
 desirous to do as he bid her,--thinke it right that a woman should 
 obey some one , and that her obedience could be due only to he . but 
 in order to obey he she must consult her aunt . " Aunt Emmeline , " she 
 say that afternoon , " I want to ask you something ? " 
 " what be it now ? " say Aunt Emmeline , crossly . 
 " about Mr. Hamel . " 
 " I do not want to hear any more about Mr. Hamel . I have hear quite 
 enough of Mr. Hamel . " 
 " of course I be engaged to he , Aunt Emmeline . " 
 " so I hear you say . I do not think it very dutiful of you to come and 
 talk to I about he , know as you do what I think about he . " 
 " what I want to ask be this . ought I to stay here or ought I to go 
 away ? " 
 " I never hear such a girl ! where be you to go to ? what make you 
 ask the question ? " 
 " because you say that I ought to go if I do not give he up . " 
 " you ought to give he up . " 
 " I can not do that , aunt . " 
 " then you have well hold your tongue and say nothing far about 
 it . I do not believe he earn enough to give you bread to eat and 
 decent clothe to wear . what would you do if child be to come 
 year after year ? if you really love he I wonder how you can think of 
 be such a millstone round a man 's neck ! " 
 this be very hard to bear . it be so different from the delicious 
 comfort of his letter . " I do not for a moment believe that we should 
 want . " " I have never for one moment doubt my own ultimate success . " 
 but after all be there not more of truth in her aunt 's word , hard 
 and cruel as they be ? and on these word , such as they be , she 
 must found her answer to her lover ; for he have bid she ask she 
 aunt what she be to do as to stay or prepare herself for an 
 immediate marriage . then , before the afternoon be over , she write to 
 Hamel as follows;-- 
    DEAR ISADORE , 
    I have get ever so much to say , but I shall begin by do 
    as you tell I in your postscript . I will not quite scold 
    you , but I do think you might have be a little gentle 
    with poor Uncle Tom . I do not say this because I at all 
    regret anything which perhaps he might have do for we . 
    if you do not want assistance from he certainly I do 
    not . but I do think that he mean to be kind ; and , though 
    he may not be quite what you call a gentleman of fine 
    feeling , yet he have take I into his house when I have no 
    other to go to , and in many respect have be generous to 
    I . when he say that you be to go to he in Lombard 
    Street , I be sure that he mean to be generous . and , 
    though it have not end well , yet he mean to be kind to 
    both of we . 
    there be what you will call my scolding ; though , indeed , 
    dearest , I do not intend to scold at all . nor be I in the 
    least disappoint except in regard to you . this morning 
    I have be to Aunt Emmeline , as you desire , and I must 
    say that she be very cross . of course I know that it be 
    because she be my own aunt that Uncle Tom have I here at 
    all ; and I feel that I ought to be very grateful to she . 
    but , in spite of all that you say , laugh at Uncle Tom 
    because he want you to sell your grand work by auction , 
    he be much more good - natured than Aunt Emmeline . I be 
    quite sure my aunt never like I , and that she will 
    not be comfortable till I be go . but when I ask she 
    whether I ought to stay , or to go , she tell I to hold my 
    tongue , and say nothing far about it . of course , by 
    this , she mean that I be to remain , at any rate for the 
    present . 
    my own dearest , I do think this will be good , though I 
    need not tell you how I look forward to leave this , and 
    be always with you . for myself I be not a bit afraid , 
    though Aunt Emmeline say dreadful thing about food 
    and clothe , and all the rest of it . but I believe much 
    more in what you say , that success will be sure to come . 
    but still will it not be wise to wait a little long ? 
    whatever I may have to bear here , I shall think that I be 
    bear it for your dear sake ; and then I shall be happy . 
    believe I to be always and always your own 
    LUCY . 
 this be write and send on a Wednesday , and nothing far be 
 say either by Lucy herself , or by her aunt , as to the lover , till 
 Sir Thomas come down to Merle Park on the Saturday evening . on his 
 arrival he seem inclined to be gracious to the whole household , 
 even include Mr. Traffick , who receive any attention of that kind 
 exactly as though the most amicable arrangement be always exist 
 between he and his father - in - law . Aunt Emmeline , when it seem that 
 she be to encounter no further anger on account of the revelation 
 which Hamel have make in Lombard Street , also recover her temper , 
 and the evening be spend as though there be no cause for serious 
 family discord . in this spirit , on the follow morning , they all 
 go to church , and it be delightful to hear the flattering word 
 with which Mr. Traffick praise Merle Park , and everything belong 
 to it , during the hour of lunch . he go so far as to make some 
 delicately laudatory hint in praise of hospitality in general , and 
 especially as to that so nobly exercise by London merchant - prince . 
 Sir Thomas smile as he hear he , and , as he smile , he resolve 
 that , as soon as the Christmas festivity should be over , the 
 Honourable Septimus Traffick should certainly be turn out of that 
 house . 
 after lunch there come a message to Lucy by a page - boy , who be 
 suppose to attend generally to the personal want of Aunt Emmeline , 
 say that her uncle would be glad of her attendance for a walk . " my 
 dear , " say he , " have you get your thick boot on ? then go and put 
 them on . we will go down to the Lodge , and then come home round by 
 Windover Hill . " she do as she be bade , and then they start . " I 
 want to tell you , " say he , " that this Mr. Hamel of yours come to I 
 in Lombard Street . " 
 " I know that , Uncle Tom . " 
 " he have write to you , then , and tell you all about it ? " 
 " he have write to I , certainly , and I have answer he . " 
 " no doubt . well , Lucy , I have intend to be kind to your Mr. Hamel , 
 but , as you be probably aware , I be not enable to carry out my 
 intention . he seem to be a very independent sort of young man . " 
 " he be independent , I think . " 
 " I have not a word to say against it . if a man can be independent it 
 be so much the well . if a man can do everything for himself , so 
 as to require neither to beg nor to borrow , it will be much well 
 for he . but , my dear , you must understand that a man can not be 
 independent with one hand , and accept assistance with the other , at 
 one and the same time . " 
 " that be not his character , I be sure , " say Lucy , strive to hide 
 her indignation while she defend her lover 's character . 
 " I do not think it be . therefore he must remain independent , and I 
 can do nothing for he . " 
 " he know that , Uncle Tom . " 
 " very well . then there be an end of it . I only want to make you 
 understand that I be willing to assist he , but that he be 
 unwilling to be assist . I like he all the well for it , but there 
 must be an end of it . " 
 " I quite understand , Uncle Tom . " 
 " then there be one other thing I have get to say . he accuse I of 
 have threaten to turn you out of my house . now , my dear-- " 
 Hereupon Lucy struggle to say a word , hardly know what word she 
 ought to say , but he interrupt her,--"just hear I out till I have 
 do , and then there need not be another word about it . I never 
 threaten to turn you out . " 
 " not you , Uncle Tom , " she say , endeavour to press his arm with 
 her hand . 
 " if your aunt say a word in her anger you should not have make 
 enough of it to write and tell he . " 
 " I think she mean I to go , and then I do not know whom else to 
 ask . " 
 " neither I nor she , nor anybody else , ever intend to turn you out . 
 I have mean to be kind to you both,--to you and Ayala ; and if thing 
 have go wrong I can not say that it have be my fault . now , you have 
 well stay here , and not say a word more about it till he be ready 
 to take you . that can not be yet for a long time . he be make , at 
 present , not more than two hundred a year . and I be sure it must be 
 quite as much as he can do to keep a coat on his back with such an 
 income as that . you must make up your mind to wait,--probably for 
 some year . as I tell you before , if a man choose to have the glory 
 of independence he must also bear the inconvenience . now , my dear , 
 let there be an end of this , and never say again that I want to turn 
 you out of my house . " 
 CHAPTER XXXV . 
 TOM TRINGLE send a challenge . 
 the next six week go on tranquilly at Merle Park without a word 
 speak about Hamel . Sir Thomas , who be in the country as little as 
 possible , show his scorn to his son - in - law simply by the paucity 
 of his word , speak to he , when he do speak to he , with 
 a deliberate courtesy which Mr. Traffick perfectly understand . 
 it be that dangerous serenity which so often presage a storm . 
 " there be something go to be up with your father , " he say to 
 Augusta . Augusta reply that she have never see her father so civil 
 before . " it would be a great convenience , " continue the Member of 
 Parliament , " if he could be make to hold his tongue till Parliament 
 meet ; but I be afraid that be too good to expect . " in other respect 
 thing be comfortable at Merle Park , though they be not always 
 comfortable up in London . Tom , as the reader know , be misbehave 
 himself sadly at the Mountaineers . this be the period of unlimited 
 champagne , and of almost total absence from Lombard Street . it be 
 seldom that Sir Thomas could get hold of his son , and when he do 
 that break - hearted youth would reply to his expostulation simply 
 by assert that if his father would induce Ayala to marry he 
 everything should go straight in Lombard Street . then come the final 
 blow . Tom be of course expect at Merle Park on Christmas Eve , 
 but do not make his appearance either then or on Christmas Day . 
 Christmas fall on a Wednesday , and it be intend that the family 
 should remain in the country till the following Monday . on the 
 Thursday Sir Thomas go up to town to make inquiry respect his 
 heir , as to whom Lady Tringle have then become absolutely unhappy . in 
 London he hear the disastrous truth . Tom , in his sportive mood , have 
 cause serious inconvenience to a most respectable policeman , and 
 be destine to remain another week in the hand of the Philistines . 
 then , for a time , all the other Tringle trouble be bury and 
 forget in this great trouble respect Tom . Lady Tringle be 
 unable to leave her room during the period of incarceration . Mr. 
 Traffick promise to have the victim liberate by the direct 
 interference of the Secretary of State , but fail to get anything 
 of the kind accomplish . the girl be completely cow by the 
 enormity of the misfortune ; so that Tom 's name be hardly mention 
 except in sad and confidential whisper . but of all the sufferer Sir 
 Thomas suffer the most . to he it be a positive disgrace , weigh 
 down every moment of his life . at Travers and Treason he could not 
 hold up his head boldly and open his mouth loudly as have always be 
 his will not . at Travers and Treason there be not a clerk who do not 
 know that " the governor " be an altered man since this misfortune have 
 happen to the hope of the firm . what pass between Sir Thomas and 
 his son on the occasion have already be tell in a previous chapter . 
 that Sir Thomas , on the whole , behave with indulgence must be 
 acknowledge ; but he feel that his son must in truth absent himself 
 from Lombard Street for a time . 
 Tom have be advise by his father to go forth and see the world . a 
 prolong tour have be propose to he which to most young man might 
 seem to have great attraction . to he it would have have attraction 
 enough , have it not be for Ayala . there would have be hardly any 
 limit to the allowance make to he , and he would have go forth 
 arm with introduction , which would have make every port a happy 
 home to he . but as soon as the tour be suggest he resolve at 
 once that he could not move himself to a distance from Ayala . what he 
 expected,--what he even hoped,--he could not tell himself . but while 
 Ayala be in London , and Ayala be unmarried , he could not be make to 
 take himself far away . 
 he be thoroughly ashamed of himself . he be not at all the man who 
 could bear a week of imprisonment and not think himself disgrace . 
 for a day or two he shut himself up altogether in his lodging , and 
 never once show himself at the Mountaineers . faddle come to he , 
 but he snub Faddle at first , remember all the severe thing his 
 father have say about the Faddles in general . but he soon allow 
 that feel to die away when the choice seem to be between faddle 
 and solitude . then he creep out in the dark and eat his dinner with 
 Faddle at some tavern , generally pay the bill for both of they . 
 after dinner he would play half - a - dozen game of billiard with his 
 friend at some unknown billiard - room , and then creep home to his 
 lodgings,--a blighted human being ! 
 at last , about the end of the first week in January , he be induce 
 to go down to Merle Park . there Mr. and Mrs. Traffick be still 
 sojourning , the real grief which have afflict Sir Thomas have 
 cause he to postpone his intention in regard to his son - in - law . 
 at Merle Park Tom be cosset and spoil by the woman very 
 injudiciously . it be not perhaps the fact that they regard he 
 as a hero simply because he have punch a policeman in the stomach 
 and then be lock up in vindication of the injured law of his 
 country ; but that incident in combination with his unhappy love do 
 seem to make he heroic . even Lucy regard he with favour because 
 of his constancy to her sister ; whereas the other lady measure 
 their admiration for his persistency by the warmth of their anger 
 against the silly girl who be cause so much trouble . his mother 
 tell he over and over again that his cousin be not worth his 
 regard ; but then , when he would throw himself on the sofa in an agony 
 of despair,--weakened perhaps as much by the course of champagne as 
 by the course of his love,--then she , too , would bid he hope , and at 
 last promise that she herself would endeavour to persuade Ayala to 
 look at the matter in a more favourable light . " it would all be right 
 if it be not for that accurse Stubbs , " poor Tom would say to his 
 mother . " the man whom I call my friend ! the man I lend a horse to 
 when he could not get one anywhere else ! the man to whom I confide 
 everything , even about the necklace ! if it have not be for Stubbs 
 I never should have hurt that policeman ! when I be strike he 
 I think that it be Stubbs ! " then the mother would heap feminine 
 malediction on the poor Colonel 's head , and so together they would 
 weep and think of revenge . 
 from the moment Tom have hear Colonel Stubbs 's name mention as that 
 of his rival he have meditate revenge . it be quite true when he say 
 that he have be think of Stubbs when he strike the policeman . he 
 have consume the period of his confinement in gnash his tooth , all 
 in regard to our poor friend Jonathan . he tell his father that he 
 could not go upon his long tour because of Ayala . but in truth his 
 love be now so mix up with idea of vengeance that he do not 
 himself know which prevail . if he could first have slaughter 
 Stubbs then perhaps he might have start ! but how be he to 
 slaughter Stubbs ? various idea occur to his mind . at first 
 he think that he would go down to Aldershot with the big 
 cutting - whip he could find in any shop in Piccadilly ; but then it 
 occur to he that at Aldershot he would have all the british army 
 against he , and that the british army might do something to he 
 worse even than the London magistrate . then he would wait till the 
 Colonel could be meet elsewhere . he ascertain that the Colonel be 
 still at Stalham , where he have pass the Christmas , and he think 
 how it might be if he be to attack the Colonel in the presence of 
 his friend , the Alburys . he assure himself that , as far as personal 
 injury go , he fear nothing . he have no disinclination to be hit 
 over the head himself , if he could be sure of hit the Colonel 
 over the head . if it could be manage that they two should fly at 
 each other with their fist , and be allow to do the bad they 
 could to each other for an hour , without interference , he would be 
 quite satisfied . but down at Stalham that would not be allow . all 
 the world would be against he , and nobody there to see that he get 
 fair play . if he could encounter the man in the street of London it 
 would be well ; but be he to seek the man down at Stalham he would 
 probably find himself in the County Lunatic Asylum . what must he do 
 for his revenge ? he be surely entitle to it . by all the law of 
 chivalry , as to which he have his own idea , he have a right to inflict 
 an injury upon a successful -- even upon an unsuccessful -- rival . be it 
 not a shame that so excellent an institution as duelling should have 
 be stamp out ? wander about the lawn and shrubbery at Merle 
 Park he think of all this , and at last he come to a resolution . 
 the institution have be stamp out , as far as Great Britain be 
 concerned . he be aware of that . but it seem to he that it have not 
 be stamp out in other more generous country . he have happen to 
 notice that a certain enthusiastic politician in France have enjoy 
 many duel , and have never be severely repress by the law of his 
 country . newspaper writer be always fight in France , and be 
 never guillotine . the idea of be hang be horrible to him,--so 
 distasteful that he see at a glance that a duel in England be out 
 of the question . but to have his head cut off , even if it should 
 come to that , would be a much less affair . but in Belgium , in Italy , 
 in Germany , they never do cut off the head of the very numerous 
 gentleman who fight duel . and there be the Southern States of the 
 American Union , where he fancy that man might fight duel just as 
 they please . he would be ready to go even to New Orleans at a day 's 
 notice if only he could induce Colonel Stubbs to meet he there . and 
 he think that , if Colonel Stubbs really possess half the spirit 
 which seem to be attribute to he by the british army generally , 
 he would come , if properly invoke , and fight such a duel as this , 
 whether at New Orleans or at some other well - choose blood - allow 
 spot on the world 's surface . Tom be prepared to go anywhere for 
 blood . 
 but the invocation must be properly make . when he have want another 
 letter of another kind to be write for he , the Colonel himself 
 be the man to whom he have go for assistance . and , have his present 
 enemy be any other than the Colonel himself , he would have go 
 to the Colonel in preference to any one else for aid in this matter . 
 there be no one , in truth , in whom he believe so thoroughly as in 
 the Colonel . but that be out of the question . then he reflect 
 what friend might now stand he in stead . he would have go to 
 Houston , who want to marry his sister ; but Houston seem to have 
 disappear , and he do not know where he might be find . there be 
 his brother - in - law , Traffick,--but he fear lest Traffick might give 
 he over once more into the hand of the police . he think of Hamel , 
 as be in a way connect with the family ; but he have see so 
 little of Hamel , and have so much dislike what he have see , that he 
 be oblige to let that hope go by . there be no one leave but faddle 
 whom he could trust . faddle would do anything he be tell to do . 
 faddle would carry the letter , no doubt , or allow himself to be name 
 as a propose second . but faddle could not write the letter . he feel 
 that he could write the letter himself well than Faddle . 
 he go up to town , have send a mysterious letter to faddle , 
 bid his friend attend he in his lodging . he do not yet dare 
 to go to the Mountaineers , where Faddle would have be find . but 
 Faddle come , true to the appointment . " what be it , now ? " say the 
 faithful friend . " I hope you be go back to Travers and Treason 's . 
 that be what I should do , and walk in just as though nothing have 
 happen . " 
 " not if you be I , you would not . " 
 " that do make a difference , of course . " 
 " there be something else to be do before I can again darken the 
 door of Travers and Treason,--if I should ever do so ! " 
 " something particular ? " 
 " something very particular . faddle , I do think you be a true 
 friend . " 
 " you may say that . I have stick to you always,--though you do not know 
 the kind of thing my people say to I about it . they say I be go 
 to ruin myself because of you . the governor threaten to put I out 
 of the business altogether . but I be a man who will be true to my 
 friend , whatever happen . I think you have be a little cool to I , 
 lately ; but even that do not matter . " 
 " cool ! if you know the state that I be in you would not talk of a 
 fellow be cool ! I be so knocked about it all that I do not know what 
 I be do . " 
 " I do take that into consideration . " 
 " now , I will tell you what I be go to do . " then he stand still , and 
 look faddle full in the face . faddle , sit awe - strike on his 
 chair , return the gaze . he know that a moment of supreme importance 
 be at hand . " faddle , I will shoot that fellow down like a dog . " 
 " will you , indeed ? " 
 " like a dog;--if I can get at he . I should have no more compunction 
 in take his life than a mere worm . why should I , when I know that 
 he have sap the very juice of my existence ? " 
 " do you mean,--do you mean,--that you would -- murder he ? " 
 " it would not be murder . of course it might be that he would shoot I 
 instead . upon the whole , I think I should like that well . " 
 " oh ; a duel ! " say Faddle . 
 " that be what I mean . murder he ! certainly not . though I should like 
 nothing half so well as to thrash he within an inch of his life . 
 I would not murder he . my plan be this,--i shall write to he a 
 letter invite he to meet I in any corner of the globe that he 
 may select . torrid zone or Arctic circle will be all the same to I . 
 you will have to accompany I as my second . " Faddle shiver with 
 excitement and dread of come event . among other idea there come 
 the thought that it might be difficult to get back from the Arctic 
 circle without money if his friend Tom should happen to be shoot dead 
 in that locality . " but first of all , " continue Tom , " you will have 
 to carry a letter . " 
 " to the Colonel ? " suggest Faddle . 
 " of course . the man be now stay with friend of his name Albury 
 at a place call Stalham . from what I hear they be howl swell . 
 Sir Harry Albury be Master of the Hounds , and Lady Albury when she 
 be up in London have all the Royal Family constantly at her party . 
 Stubbs be a cousin of his ; but you must go right away up to he among 
 them all , and deliver the letter into his hand without mind them a 
 bit . " 
 " could not it go by post ? " 
 " no ; this kind of letter musn't go by post . you have to be able to 
 swear that you deliver it yourself into his own hand . and then you 
 must wait for an answer . even though he should want a day to think of 
 it , you must wait . " 
 " where be I to stay , Tom ? " 
 " well ; it may be they will ask you to the house , because , though you 
 carry the letter for I , you be not suppose to be his enemy . if so , 
 put a jolly face on it , and enjoy yourself as well as you can . you 
 must seem , you know , to be just as big a swell as anybody there . but 
 if they do not ask you , you must go to the near inn . I will pay the 
 bill . " 
 " shall I go to - day ? " ask Faddle . 
 " I have get to write the letter first . it will take a little time , so 
 that you would well put it off till to - morrow . if you will leave I 
 now I will write it , and if you will come back at six we will go and 
 have a bit of dinner at Bolivia 's . " this be an eating - house in the 
 neighbourhood of Leicester Square , to which the friend have become 
 partial during this troubled period of their existence . 
 " why not come to the Mountaineers , old boy ? " Tom shake his head , 
 show that he be not yet up to such festivity as that ; and then 
 Faddle take his departure . 
 Tom at once get out his pen and paper , and begin to write his letter . 
 it may be imagine that it be not write off - hand , or without many 
 struggle . when it be write it run as follows;-- 
    SIR , 
    you will not , I think , be surprised to hear from I in 
    anything but a friendly spirit . I go down to you at 
    Aldershot as to a friend whom I could trust with my 
    bosom 's dear secret , and you have betray I . I tell 
    you of my love , a love which have long burn in my heart , 
    and you receive my confidence with a smile , know all 
    the time that you be my rival . I leave it to you to 
    say what reply you can make as to conduct so damning , so 
    unmanly , so dastardly,--and so very unlike a friend as 
    this ! 
    however , there be no place here for word . you have 
    offer I the great insult and the great injury 
    which one man can inflict upon another ! there be no 
    possibility of an apology , unless you be inclined to 
    say that you will renounce for ever your claim upon the 
    hand of Miss Ayala Dormer . this I do not expect , and , 
    therefore , I call upon you to give I that satisfaction 
    which be all that one gentleman can offer to another . 
    after the injury you have do I I think it quite 
    impossible that you should refuse . 
    of course , I know that duel can not be fight in England 
    because of the law . I be sorry that the law should have 
    be alter , because it allow so many coward to escape 
    the punishment they deserve . 
 Tom , as he write this , be very proud of the keenness of the 
 allusion . " I be quite sure , however , that a man who bear the colour 
 of a colonel in the british army will not try to get off by such a 
 pretext . " he be proud , too , about the colour . 
    France , Belgium , Italy , the United States , and all the 
    world , be open ! I will meet you wherever you may choose 
    to arrange a meeting . I presume that you will prefer 
    pistol . 
    I send this by the hand of my friend , Mr. Faddle , who 
    will be prepare to make arrangement with you , or with 
    any friend on your behalf . he will bring back your reply , 
    which no doubt will be satisfactory.--I am , Sir , your most 
    obedient servant , 
    THOMAS TRINGLE , junior . 
 when , after make various copy , Tom at last read the letter as 
 finally prepare , he be much pleased with it , doubt whether the 
 Colonel himself could have write it well , have the task be 
 confide to his hand . when Faddle come , he read it to he with much 
 pride , and then commit it to his custody . after that they go out 
 and eat their dinner at Bolivia 's with much satisfaction , but still 
 with a bearing of deep melancholy , as be proper on such an occasion . 
 CHAPTER XXXVI . 
 TOM TRINGLE get an ANSWER . 
 faddle as he go down into the country make up his mind that the law 
 which require such letter to be deliver by hand be an absurd 
 law . the post would have do just as well , and would have save a 
 great deal of trouble . these gloomy thought be occasion by a 
 conviction that he could not carry himself easily or make himself 
 happy among such " howl swell " as these Alburys . if they should 
 invite he to the house the matter would be bad that way than the 
 other . he have no confidence in his dress coat , which he be aware 
 have be damage by nocturnal orgy . it be all very well to tell a 
 fellow to be as " big a swell " as anybody else , as Tom have tell he . 
 but Faddle acknowledge to himself the difficulty of act up to 
 such advice . even the eye of Colonel Stubbs turn upon he after 
 receipt of the letter would oppress he . 
 nevertheless he must do his good , and he take a gig at the station 
 near to Albury . he be careful to carry his bag with he , but 
 still he live in hope that he would be able to return to London the 
 same day . when he find himself within the lodge of Stalham Park 
 he could hardly keep himself from shiver , and , when he ask the 
 footman at the door whether Colonel Stubbs be there , he long to 
 be tell that Colonel Stubbs have go away on the previous day to 
 some -- he do not care what -- distant part of the globe . but Colonel 
 Stubbs have not go away . Colonel Stubbs be in the house . 
 our friend the Colonel have not suffer as Tom have suffer since his 
 rejection;--but nevertheless he have be much concerned . he have set 
 his heart upon Ayala before he have ask she , and could not bring 
 himself to change his heart because she have refuse he . he have 
 go down to Aldershot and have perform his duty , abstain for 
 the present from repeat his offer . the offer of course must be 
 repeat , but as to the when , the where , and the how , he have not as 
 yet make up his mind . then Tom Tringle have come to he at Aldershot 
 communicating to he the fact that he have a rival;--and also the 
 other fact that the other rival like himself have hitherto be 
 unsuccessful . it seem improbable to he that such a girl as 
 Ayala should attach herself to such a man as her cousin Tom . but 
 nevertheless he be uneasy . he regard Tom Tringle as a miracle of 
 wealth , and feel certain that the united effort of the whole family 
 would be use to arrange the match . Ayala have refuse he also , and 
 therefore , up to the present moment , the chance of the other man 
 be no well than his own . when Tom leave he at Aldershot he hardly 
 remember that Tom know nothing of his secret , whereas Tom have 
 communicate to he his own . it never for a moment occur to he 
 that Tom would quarrel with he ; although he have see that the poor 
 fellow have be disgusted because he have refuse to write the letter . 
 on Christmas Eve he have go down to Stalham , and there he have 
 remain discuss the matter of his love with Lady Albury . to no 
 one else in the house have the affair be mention , and by Sir Harry 
 he be suppose to remain there only for the sake of the hunting . 
 with Sir Harry he be of all guest the most popular , and thus it 
 come to pass that his prolonged presence at Stalham be not matter 
 of special remark . much of his time he do devote to hunting , but 
 there be half hour devote in company with Lady Albury to Ayala 's 
 perfection and Ayala 's obstinacy . 
 Lady Albury be almost inclined to think that Ayala should be give 
 up . married lady seldom estimate even the girl they like well at 
 their full value . it seem to such a one as Lady Albury almost a 
 pity that such a one as Colonel Stubbs should waste his energy upon 
 anything so insignificant as Ayala Dormer . the speciality of the 
 attraction be of course absent to the woman , and unless she have 
 consider the matter so far as to be able to clothe her thought in 
 male vestment , as some woman do , she can not understand the longing 
 that be feel for so small a treasure . Lady Albury think that young 
 lady be very well , and that Ayala be very well among young 
 lady ; but Ayala in get Colonel Stubbs for a husband would , as 
 Lady Albury think , have receive so much more than her desert that 
 she be now almost inclined to be angry with the Colonel . " my dear 
 friend , " he say to her one day , " you might as well take it for 
 grant . I shall go after my princess with all the energy which a 
 princess merit . " 
 " the question be whether she be a princess , " say Lady Albury . 
 " allow I to say that that be a point on which I can not admit a 
 doubt . she be a princess to I , and just at present I must be 
 regard as the only judge in the matter . " 
 " she shall be a goddess , if you please , " say Lady Albury . 
 " goddess , princess , pink , or pearl;--any name you please suppose to 
 convey perfection shall be the same to I . it may be that she be in 
 truth no well , or more lovely , or divine , than many another young 
 lady who be at the present moment exercise the heart of many 
 another gentleman . you know enough of the world to be aware that 
 every Jack have his Gill . she be my Gill , and that be an end of it . " 
 " I hope then that she may be your Gill . " 
 " and , in order that she may , you must have she here again . I should 
 absolutely not know how to go to work be I to find myself in the 
 presence of Aunt Dosett in Kingsbury Crescent . " in answer to this 
 Lady Albury assure he that she would be quite willing to have the 
 girl again at Stalham if it could be manage . she be remind he , 
 however , how difficult it have be on a previous occasion to overcome 
 the scruple of Mrs. Dosett , when a servant bring in word to 
 Colonel Stubbs that there be a man in the hall desirous of see 
 he immediately on particular business . then the servant present 
 our friend Faddle 's card . 
    MR . SAMUEL FADDLE , 
    1 , Badminton Gardens . 
 " yes , Sir ; " say the servant . " he say he have a letter which he must 
 put into your own particular hand . " 
 " that look like a bailiff , " say Lady Albury , laugh . Colonel 
 Stubbs , declare that he have no special reason to be afraid of any 
 bailiff , leave the room and go down into the hall . 
 at Stalham the real hall of the house be use as a billiard - room , 
 and here , lean against the billiard table , the Colonel find 
 poor faddle . when a man be compel by some chance circumstance to 
 address another man whom he do not know , and whom by inspection he 
 feel he shall never wish to know , he always harden his face , and 
 sometimes also his voice . so it be with the Colonel when he look 
 at Faddle . a word he do say , not in word absolutely uncivil , as to 
 the nature of the business in hand . then Faddle , show his emotion 
 by a quaver in his voice , suggest that as the matter be one of 
 extreme delicacy some more private apartment might be provide . upon 
 this Stubbs lead the way into a little room which be for the most 
 part fill with hunting - gear , and offer the stranger one of the 
 three chair which it contain . Faddle sit down , find himself 
 so compel , though the Colonel still remain stand , and then 
 extract the fatal epistle from his pocket . " Colonel Stubbs , " say 
 he , hand up the missive , " I be direct by my friend , Mr. Thomas 
 Tringle , junior , to put this letter into your own hand . when you have 
 read it I shall be ready to consult with you as to its content . " 
 these few word he have learn by heart on his journey down , have 
 practise they continually . 
 the Colonel take the letter , and turn to the window read it with 
 his back to the visitor . he read it twice from begin to end in 
 order that he might have time to resolve whether he would laugh aloud 
 at both Faddle and Tringle , or whether it might not be well to 
 endeavour to soften the anger of poor Tom by a message which should 
 be at any rate kindly word . " this be from my friend , Tom Tringle , " 
 he say . 
 " from Mr. Thomas Tringle , junior , " say Faddle , proudly . 
 " so I perceive . I be sorry to think that he should be in so much 
 trouble . he be one of the good fellow I know , and I be really 
 grieve that he should be unhappy . this , you know , be all nonsense . " 
 " it be not nonsense at all , Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " you must allow I to be the judge of that , Mr. Faddle . it be at 
 any rate nonsense to I . he want I to go somewhere and fight a 
 duel,--which I should not do with any man under any circumstance . 
 here there be no possible ground for any quarrel whatsoever,--as 
 I will endeavour to explain , myself , to my friend , Mr. Tringle . I 
 shall be sure to write to he at once,--and so I will bid you good 
 afternoon . " 
 but this do not at all suit poor faddle after so long a journey . 
 " I think it probable that you would write , Colonel Stubbs , and 
 therefore I be prepared to wait . if I can not be accommodate here I 
 will wait,--will wait elsewhere . " 
 " that will not be at all necessary . we have a post to London twice a 
 day . " 
 " you must be aware , Colonel Stubbs , that letter of this sort should 
 not be send by post . " 
 " the kind of letter I shall write may be send by post very well . it 
 will not be bellicose , and therefore there can be no objection . " 
 " I really think , Colonel Stubbs , that you be make very little of a 
 very serious matter . " 
 " Mr. Faddle , I really must manage my own affair after my own way . 
 would you like a glass of sherry ? if not , I need hardly ask you to 
 stay here any long . " upon that he go out into the billiard - room 
 and ring the bell . poor faddle would have like the glass of sherry , 
 but he feel that it would be incompatible with the angry dignity 
 which he assume , and he leave the house without another word or even 
 a gesture of courtesy . then he return to London , have take his 
 bag and dress coat all the way to Stalham for nothing . 
 Tom 's letter be almost too good to be lose , but there be no one to 
 whom the joke could be make know except Lady Albury . she , he be 
 sure , would keep poor Tom 's secret as well as his own , and to she he 
 show the letter . " I pity he from the bottom of my heart , " he say . 
 Lady Albury declare that the writer of such a letter be too absurd 
 for pity . " not at all . unless he really love she he would not have 
 be so enraged . I suppose he do think that I injure he . he do 
 tell I his story , and I do not tell he mine . I can understand it 
 all , though I do not imagine he be such a fool as to invite I 
 to travel all round the world because of the harsh law of Great 
 Britain . nevertheless , I shall write to he quite an affectionate 
 letter , remember that , should I succeed myself , he will be my 
 first cousin by marriage . " 
 before he go to bed that night he write his letter , and the reader 
 may as well see the whole correspondence;-- 
    MY DEAR TRINGLE , 
    if you will think of it all round you will see that you 
    have get no cause of quarrel with I any more than I have 
    with you . if it be the case that we be both attach to 
    your cousin , we must abide her decision whether it be in 
    favour of either of we , or , as may be too probably the 
    case , equally adverse to both of we . if I understand your 
    letter rightly , you think that I behave unfairly when I 
    do not tell you of my own affair upon hear yours from 
    your own lip . why should I ? why should I have be hold 
    to be constrain to tell my secret because you , for 
    your own sake , have tell I your ? have I be engage to 
    your cousin,--which I regret to say be very far from the 
    case,--i should have tell you , naturally . I should have 
    regard the matter as settle , and should have acquaint 
    you with a fact which would have concern you . but as 
    such be not a fact , I be by no mean bind to tell you 
    how my affair stand . this ought to be clear to you , and I 
    hope will be when you have read what I say . 
    I may as well go on to declare that under no circumstance 
    should I fight a duel with you . if I think I have do 
    wrong in the matter I would beg your pardon . I can not 
    do that as it is,--though I be most anxious to appease 
    you,--because I have do you no wrong . 
    pray forget your animosity,--which be in truth 
    unfounded,--and let we be friend as we be before . 
    your very sincerely , 
    JONATHAN STUBBS . 
 Faddle reach London the evening before the Colonel 's letter , and 
 again din with his friend at Bolivia 's . at first they be both 
 extremely angry , acerbate each other 's wrath . now that he be safe 
 back in London Faddle think that he would have enjoy an evening 
 among the " swell " of Stalham , and feel himself to be injure by the 
 inhospitable treatment he have received--"after go all the way down 
 there , hardly to be ask to sit down ! " 
 " not ask to sit down ! " 
 " well , yes , I was;--on a miserable cane - bottom chair in a sort of 
 cupboard . and he do not sit down . you may call they swell , but I 
 think your Colonel Stubbs be a very vulgar sort of fellow . when I 
 tell he the post be not the proper thing for such a letter , he only 
 laugh . I suppose he do not know what be the kind of thing among 
 gentleman . " 
 " I should think he do know , " say Tom . 
 " then why do not he act accordingly ? would you believe it ; he never 
 so much as ask I whether I have a mouth on . it be just luncheon 
 time , too . " 
 " I suppose they lunch late . " 
 " they might have ask I . I should not have take it . he do say 
 something about a glass of sherry , but it be in that sort of tone 
 which tell a fellow that he be expect not to take it . and then 
 he pretend to laugh . I could see that he be shake in his shoe 
 at the idea of have to fight . he go to the torrid zone ! he would 
 much rather go to a police office if he think that there be any 
 fighting on hand . I should dust his jacket with a stick if I be 
 you . " 
 later on in the evening Tom declare that this be what he would 
 do , but , before he come to that , a third bottle of Signor Bolivia 's 
 champagne have be make to appear . the evening pass between they 
 not without much enjoyment . on the opening of that third cork the 
 wine be declare to be less excellent than what have go before , and 
 Signor Bolivia be evoke in person . a gentleman name Walker , who 
 look after the establishment , make his appearance , and with many 
 smile , have be induce to swallow a bumper of the compound 
 himself , declare , with a knowing shake of the head and an astute 
 twinkle of the eye , that the wine be not equal to the last . he take 
 a great deal of trouble , he assure they , to import an article which 
 could not be surpass , if it could be equal , in London , always 
 visit Epernay himself once a - year for the purpose of go through 
 the wine - vault . let he do what he would an inferior bottle,--or , 
 rather , a bottle somewhat inferior,--would sometimes make its way 
 into his cellar . would Mr. Tringle let he have the honour of draw 
 another cork , so that the exact amount of difference might be 
 ascertain ? Tom give his sanction ; the fourth cork be draw ; and 
 Mr. Walker , sit down and consume the wine with his customer , 
 be enable to point out to a hair 's breadth the nature and the 
 extent of the variation . Tringle still think that the difference 
 be considerable . faddle be , on the whole , incline to agree with 
 Signor Bolivia . it need hardly be say that the four bottle be 
 pay for,--or rather score against Tringle , who at the present time 
 have a little account at the establishment . 
 " show a fellar fellar 's letter morrer . " such or something like it 
 be Faddle 's last request to his friend as they bid each other 
 farewell for the night in Pall Mall . but Faddle be never destine 
 to see the Colonel 's epistle . on his attempting to let himself in at 
 Badminton Gardens , he be kidnap by his father in his night - shirt 
 and dressing - gown ; and be send out of London on the following 
 morning by long sea down to Aberdeen , whither he be intrust to 
 the charge of a stern uncle . our friend Tom see nothing more of his 
 faithful friend till year have roll over both their head . 
 by the morning post , while Tom be still lie sick with 
 headache,--for even with Signor Bolivia 's wine the pulling of many 
 cork be apt to be dangerous,--there come the letter from the 
 Colonel . bad as Tom be , he feel himself constrain to read it at 
 once , and learn that neither the Torrid zone or Arctic circle 
 would require his immediate attendance . he be very sick , and 
 perhaps , therefore , less high in courage than on the few previous 
 day . partly , perhaps , from that cause , but partly , also , from the 
 Colonel 's logic , he do find that his wrath be somewhat abate . 
 not but what it be still present to his mind that if two man love 
 the same girl as ardently , as desperately , as eternally as he love 
 Ayala , the good thing for they would be to be put together like the 
 kilkenny cat , till whatever remnant should be leave of one might have 
 its chance with the young lady . he still think that it would be 
 well that they should fight to the death , but a glimmering of light 
 fall upon his mind as to the Colonel 's abnegation of all treason in 
 the matter . " I suppose it be not to be expect that he should tell , " 
 he say to himself . " perhaps I should not have tell in the same place . 
 but as to forget animosity that be out of the question ! how be 
 a man to forget his animosity when two man want to marry the same 
 girl ? " 
 about three o'clock on that day he dress himself , and sit wait 
 for faddle to come to he . he know how anxious his friend would be 
 to see the Colonel 's letter . but faddle by this time have pass 
 the Nore , and have add sea - sickness to his other malady . faddle 
 come to he no more , and the tedious hour of the afternoon wear 
 themselves away in his lodging till he find his solitude to be 
 almost more unbearable than his previous misfortune . at last come 
 the time when he must go out for his dinner . he do not dare to 
 attempt the Mountaineers . and as for Bolivia , Bolivia with his cork , 
 and his eating - house , and his vintage , be abominable to he . about 
 eight o'clock he slunk into a quiet little house on the north side of 
 Oxford Street , and there have two mutton chop , some butter toast , 
 and some tea . as he drink his tea he tell himself that on the morrow 
 he would go back to his mother at Merle Park , and get from her such 
 consolation as might be possible . 
 CHAPTER XXXVII . 
 GERTRUDE be UNSUCCESSFUL . 
 it be now the middle of January , and Gertrude Tringle have receive 
 no reply from her lover to the overture which she have make he . nor , 
 indeed , have she receive any letter from he since that to which 
 this overture have be a reply . it be now two month since her 
 proposition have be make , and during that time her anger have wax 
 very hot against Mr. Houston . after all , it might be a question 
 whether Mr. Houston be worth all the trouble which she , with she 
 hundred thousand pound , be take on his behalf . she do not like 
 the idea of abandon he , because , by do so , she would seem to 
 yield to her father . have have a young man of her own , it behove 
 she to stick to her young man in spite of her parent . but what be 
 a girl to do with a lover who , at the end of two month , have make 
 no reply to an offer from herself that he should run away with she , 
 and take she to ostend ? she be in this frame of mind when , lo 
 and behold , she find her own letter , still inclose in her own 
 envelope,--but open , and thrust in amongst some of her father 's 
 paper . it be evident enough that the letter have never pass from 
 out of the house . there have be treachery on the part of some 
 servant;--or perhaps her father might have condescend to search the 
 little box;--or , more probable still , Augusta have betray she ! then 
 she reflect that she have communicate her purpose to her sister , 
 that her sister have abstain from any question since the letter 
 have be write , and that her sister , therefore , no doubt , be the 
 culprit . there , however , be the letter , which have never reach she 
 lover 's hand , and , as a matter of course , her affection return 
 with all their full ardour to the unfortunate ill - use man . that her 
 conduct be now watch would , she think , be a matter of course . 
 her father know her purpose , and , like stern parent in general , 
 would use all his energy to thwart it . Sir Thomas have , in truth , 
 thought but little about the matter since he have first thrust the 
 letter away . Tom 's trouble , and the disgrace bring by they upon 
 Travers and Treason generally , have so occupy his mind that he care 
 but little for Gertrude and her lover . but Gertrude have no doubt 
 that she be closely watch , and in these circumstance be drive 
 to think how she could well use her wit so as to countermine she 
 father . to run away from Queen 's Gate would , she think , be more 
 difficult , and more uncomfortable , than to perform the same operation 
 at Merle Park . it be intend that the family should remain in the 
 country , at any rate , till Easter , and Gertrude resolve that there 
 might yet be time for another effort before Easter should be past , if 
 only she could avoid those hundred Argus eye , which be , no doubt , 
 fix upon she from all side . 
 she prepare another letter to her lover , which she address to he 
 at his club in London . in this she tell he nothing of her former 
 project , except that a letter write by she in November have fall 
 into the hand of enemy . then she give he to understand that there 
 be need of the utmost caution ; but that , if adequate caution be 
 use , she do not doubt they might succeed . she say nothing about 
 her great project , but suggest to he that he should run down 
 into Sussex , and meet she at a certain spot indicate , outside 
 the Park - paling , half - an - hour after dusk . it might be , she say , 
 impossible that the meeting should be effect , but she think that 
 she could so manage as to leave the house unwatche at the appoint 
 hour . with the object of be especially safe she begin and 
 conclude her letter without any name , and then manage to deposit 
 it herself in the box of the village post - office . 
 Houston , when he receive this letter , at once make up his mind that 
 he would not be find on the outer side of the Park - paling on the 
 evening name . he tell himself that he be too old for the romance 
 of love - making , and that should he be receive , when hang about 
 in the dark , by some custodian with a cudgel , he would have nothing 
 to thank but his own folly . he write back therefore to say that he 
 regard the outside of the Park - paling as indiscreet , but that he 
 would walk up through the lodge - gate to the house at three o'clock in 
 the afternoon of the day name , and he would take it as an additional 
 mark of her favour if she would meet he on the road . Gertrude 
 have send he a mysterious address ; he be to direct the letter to 
 " O. P. Q. , Post Office , Hastings , " and she be prepared to hire a 
 country boy to act as Love 's messenger on the occasion . but of this 
 instruction Frank take no notice , address the letter to Merle Park 
 in the usual way . 
 Gertrude receive her letter without notice from any one . on that 
 occasion Argus , with all his eye , be by chance asleep . she be very 
 angry with her lover,--almost determine to reject he altogether , 
 almost disposed to yield to her angry parent and look out for some 
 other lover who might be accept in well part ; but still , when 
 the day come she put on her hat and walk down the road towards the 
 lodge . 
 as Fortune have it,--fortune altogether unfavourable to those peril 
 for which her soul be longing,--no one watch she , no one dog 
 her step , no one take any notice of she , till she meet Frank Houston 
 when he have pass about a hundred yard on through the gate . " and 
 so you have come , " she say . 
 " oh , yes ; I have come . I be sure to come when I say so . no man 
 be more punctual than I be in these matter . I should have come 
 before,--only I do not get your letter . " 
 " oh , Frank ! " 
 " well , my darling . you be look uncommonly well , and I be so glad 
 to see you . how be they all ? " 
 " Frank ! " 
 " what be it ? " 
 " oh , Frank , what be we to do ? " 
 " the governor will give way at last , I should say . " 
 " never;--that be while we be as we be now . if we be married-- " 
 " ah,--i wish we be ! would not it be nice ? " 
 " do you really think so ? " 
 " of course I do . I be ready to - morrow for the matter of that . " 
 " but could you do something great ? " 
 " something great ! as to earn my bread , you mean ? I do not think I 
 could do that . I do not turn my hand to it early enough . " 
 " I be not think of -- your bread . " 
 " you said,--could I do something great ? " 
 " Frank , I write you a letter and describe it all . how I get the 
 courage to do it I do not know . I feel as though I could not bring 
 myself to say it now . I wonder whether you would have the courage . " 
 " I should say so . I do not know quite what sort of thing it be ; but I 
 generally have pluck enough for anything in a common way . " 
 " this be something in an uncommon way . " 
 " I could not break open Travers and Treason , and get at the safe , or 
 anything in that way . " 
 " it be another sort of safe of which you must break the lock , Frank ; 
 another treasure you must steal . do you not understand I ? " 
 " not in the least . " 
 " there be Tom , " say Gertrude . " he be always wander about the 
 place now like a ghost . let we go back to the gate . " then Frank 
 turn . " you hear , I suppose , of that dreadful affair about the 
 policeman . " 
 " there be a row , I be tell . " 
 " do you feel that the family be disgrace ? " 
 " not in the least . he have to pay five shillings,--hadn't he,--for 
 tell a policeman to go about his business ? " 
 " he be -- lock up , " say Gertrude , solemnly . 
 " it be just the same . nobody think anything about that kind of thing . 
 now , what be it I have get to do ? we have well turn back again as 
 soon as we can , because I must go up to the house before I go . " 
 " you will ? " 
 " certainly . I will not leave it to your father to say that I come 
 skulk about the place , and be ashamed to show my face . that would 
 not be the way to make he give you your money . " 
 " I be sure he would give it,--if we be once marry . " 
 " if we be married without have it assure before hand we should 
 look very blue if thing go wrong afterwards . " 
 " I ask you whether you have courage . " 
 " courage enough , I think , when my body be concern ; but I be an 
 awful coward in regard to money . I would not mind hashed mutton and 
 baked potato for myself , but I should not like to see you eat 
 they , dearest , after all the luxury to which you have be 
 accustom . " 
 " I should think nothing of it . " 
 " do you ever try ? I never come absolutely to hashed mutton , but I have 
 know how very uncomfortable it be not to be able to pay for the hot 
 joint . I be willing to own honestly that married life without an 
 income would not have attraction for I . " 
 " but if it be sure to come ? " 
 " ah , then indeed,--with you ! I have just say how nice it would be . " 
 " have you ever be at Ostend ? " she ask , suddenly . 
 " Ostend . oh , yes . there be a man there who use to cheat horribly at 
 écarté . he do I out of nearly a hundred pound one night . " 
 " but there be a clergyman there , I be tell . " 
 " I do not think this man be in order . but he might have be . 
 parson come out in so many shape ! this man call himself a count . 
 it be seven year ago . " 
 " I be speak of to - day . " 
 " I have not be there since . " 
 " would you like to go there,--with I ? " 
 " it be not a nice sort of place , I should say , for a honeymoon . but 
 you shall choose . when we be married you shall go where you like . " 
 " to be marry ! " she exclaim . 
 " marry at Ostend ! would your mother like that ? " 
 " Mother ! oh , dear ! " 
 " I will be shoot if I know what you be after , Gertrude . if you have get 
 anything to say you would well speak out . I want to go up to the house 
 now . " 
 they have now take one or two turn between the lodge and a point in 
 the road from which the house could be observe , and at which Tom 
 could still be see wander about , think no doubt of Ayala . here 
 Frank stop as though determine not to turn to the lodge again . it 
 be wonderful to Gertrude that he should not have understand what she 
 have already say . when he talk of her mother go with they to the 
 Ostend marriage she be almost beside herself . this lover of hers be 
 a man of the world and must have hear of elopement . but now have 
 come a time in which she must be plain , unless she make up her mind 
 to abandon her plan altogether . " Frank , " she say , " if you be to 
 run away with I , then we could be marry at Ostend . " 
 " run away with you ! " 
 " it would not be the first time that such a thing have be do . " 
 " the commonest thing in the world , my dear , when a girl have get she 
 money in her own hand . nothing I should like so much . " 
 " money ! it be always money . it be nothing but the money , I believe . " 
 " that be unkind , Gertrude . " 
 " be not you unkind ? you will not do anything I ask . " 
 " my darling , that hash mutton and those baked potato be too 
 clear before my eye . " 
 " you think of nothing , I believe , but your dinner . " 
 " I think , unfortunately , of a great many other thing . hashed mutton 
 be simply symbolical . under the head of hashed mutton I include poor 
 lodging , growler when we get ourselves ask to eat a dinner at 
 somebody 's table , limited washing - bill , table - napkin roll up in 
 their dirt every day for a week , antimacassar to save the back of 
 the chair , a picture of you darn my sock while I be read 
 a newspaper hire at a halfpenny from the public - house round the 
 corner , a pint of beer in the pewter between us,--and perhaps two 
 baby in one cradle because we can not afford to buy a second . " 
 " do not , Sir . " 
 " in such an emergency I be bind to give you the advantage both of my 
 experience and imagination . " 
 " experience ! " 
 " not about the cradle ! that be imagination . my darling , it will not do . 
 you and I have not be bring up to make ourselves happy on a very 
 limited income . " 
 " papa would be sure to give we the money , " she say , eagerly . 
 " in such a matter as this , where your happiness be concern , my 
 dear , I will trust no one . " 
 " my happiness ! " 
 " yes , my dear , your happiness ! I be quite willing to own the truth . I 
 be not fit to make you happy , if I be put upon the hashed mutton 
 regime as I have describe to you . I will not run the risk,--for your 
 sake . " 
 " for your own , you mean , " she say . 
 " nor for my own , if you wish I to add that also . " 
 then they walk up towards the house for some little way in silence . 
 " what be it you intend , then ? " she ask . 
 " I will ask your father once again . " 
 " he will simply turn you out of the house , " she say . upon this 
 he shrug his shoulder , and they walk on to the hall - door in 
 silence . 
 Sir Thomas be not at Merle Park , nor be he expect home that 
 evening . Frank Houston could only therefore ask for Lady Tringle , 
 and her he see together with Mr. and Mrs. Traffick . in presence of 
 they all nothing could be say of love affair ; and , after sit 
 for half - an - hour , during which he be not entertain with much 
 cordiality , he take his leave , say that he would do himself the 
 honour of call on Sir Thomas in the City . while he be in the 
 drawing - room Gertrude do not appear . she have retire to her room , 
 and be there resolve that Frank Houston be not such a lover as 
 would justify a girl in break her heart for he . 
 and Frank as he go to town bring his mind to the same way of 
 think . the girl want something romantic to be do , and he be 
 not disposed to do anything romantic for she . he be not in the least 
 angry with she , acknowledge to himself that she have quite as much a 
 right to her way of look at thing as he have to his . but he feel 
 almost sure that the Tringle alliance must be regard as impossible . 
 if so , should he look out for another heiress , or endeavour to 
 enjoy life , stretch out his little income as far as might be 
 possible;--or should he assume altogether a new character , make a 
 hero of himself , and ask Imogene Docimer to share with he a little 
 cottage , in whatever might be the cheap spot to be find in the 
 civilised part of Europe ? if it be to be hash mutton and a united 
 cradle , he would prefer Imogene Docimer to Gertrude Tringle for his 
 companion . 
 but there be still open to he the one further chance with Sir 
 Thomas ; and this chance he could try with the comfortable feeling 
 that he might be almost indifferent as to what Sir Thomas might say . 
 to be prepare for either lot be very self - assure when any matter 
 of difficulty have to be take in hand . on arrive at the house in 
 Lombard Street he soon find himself usher once more into Sir 
 Thomas 's presence . " well , Mr. Houston , what can I do for you to - day ? " 
 ask the man of business , with a pleasant smile . 
 " it be the old story , Sir Thomas . " 
 " do not you think , Mr. Houston , that there be something,--a 
 little,--unmanly shall I call it , in come so often about the same 
 thing ? " 
 " no , Sir Thomas , I do not . I think my conduct have be manly 
 throughout . " 
 " weak , perhaps , would have be a well word . I do not wish to be 
 uncourteous , and I will therefore withdraw unmanly . be it not weak to 
 encounter so many refusal on the same subject ? " 
 " I should feel myself to have be very strong if after so many 
 refusal I be to be successful at last . " 
 " there be not the least chance of it . " 
 " why should there be no chance if your daughter 's happiness depend 
 upon it ? " 
 " there be no chance , because I do not believe that my daughter 's 
 happiness do depend upon it . she be foolish , and have make a foolish 
 proposition to you . " 
 " what proposition ? " ask Houston , in surprise , have hear nothing 
 of that intercept letter . 
 " that journey to Ostend , with the prospect of find a good - natured 
 clergyman in the town ! I hardly think you would be fool enough for 
 that . " 
 " no , Sir Thomas , I should not do that . I should think it wrong . " this 
 he say quite gravely , ask no question ; but be very much at a 
 loss to know where Sir Thomas have get his information . 
 " I be sure you would think it foolish : and it would be foolish . I 
 pledge you my word , that be you to do such a thing I should not 
 give you a shilling . I should not let my girl starve ; but I should 
 save she from suffer in such a manner as to let you have no share 
 of the sustenance I provide for she . " 
 " there be no question of that kind , " say Frank , angrily . 
 " I hope not;--only as I know that the suggestion have be make I 
 have think it well to tell you what would be my conduct if it be 
 carry out . " 
 " it will not be carry out by I , " say Frank . 
 " very well ; I be glad to hear it . to tell the truth , I never think 
 that you would run the risk . a gentleman of your sort , when he 
 be look for a wife with money , like to have the money quite 
 certain . " 
 " no doubt , " say Frank , determine not to be browbeaten . 
 " and now , Mr. Houston , let I say one word more to you and then we 
 may part , as I hope , good friend . I do not mean my daughter Gertrude 
 to marry any man such as you are;--by that I mean an idle gentleman 
 without mean . should she do so in my tooth she would have to bear 
 the punishment of share that poor gentleman 's idleness and poverty . 
 while I live she would not be allow absolutely to want , and when I 
 die there would be some trifle for she , sufficient to keep the wolf 
 from the door . but I give you my solemn word and honour that she 
 shall never be the mean of supply wealth and luxury to such a 
 husband as you would be . I have well purpose for my hard - earn 
 money . now , good - day . " with that he rise from his chair and put out 
 his hand . Frank rise also from his chair , take the hand that be 
 offer he , and step out of Travers and Treason into Lombard 
 Street , with no special desire to shake the dust off his foot as he 
 do so . he feel that Sir Thomas have be reasonable,--and he feel 
 also that Gertrude Tringle would perhaps have be dear at the money . 
 two or three day afterwards he despatch the follow little note 
 to poor Gertrude at Merle Park;-- 
    DEAR GERTRUDE , 
    I have see your father again , and find he to be 
    absolutely obdurate . I be sure he be quite in earnest 
    when he tell I that he will not give his daughter to an 
    impoverished idle fellow such as I be . who shall say that 
    he be wrong ? I do not dare to tell he so , anxious as I 
    be that he should change his purpose . 
    I feel myself bind in honour , believe , as I do , that he 
    be quite resolve in his purpose , to release you from your 
    promise . I should feel that I be only do you an injury 
    be I to ask you to be bind by an engagement which could 
    not , at any rate for many year , be bring to a happy 
    termination . 
    as we may part as sincere friend I hope you will consent 
    to keep the little token of my regard which I give you . 
    FRANK HOUSTON . 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 
 FRANK HOUSTON be PENITENT . 
 " and now the Adriatic 's free to we d another , " say Houston to 
 himself , as he put himself into a cab , and have himself carry to 
 his club . there he write that valedictory letter to Gertrude which 
 be give at the end of the last chapter . have he reason to complain 
 of his fate , or to rejoice ? he have look the question of an 
 establishment full in the face,--an establishment to be create by 
 Sir Thomas Tringle 's money , to be share with Sir Thomas Tringle 's 
 daughter , and have make up his mind to accept it , although the 
 prospect be not , as he tell himself , " altogether rosy . " when he 
 first make up his mind to marry Gertrude,--on condition that Gertrude 
 should bring with she , at any rate , not less than three thousand 
 a - year,--he be quite aware that he would have to give up all his 
 old way of life , and all his little pleasure . he would become 
 son - in - law to Sir Thomas Tringle , with a comfortable house to live 
 in ; with plenty to eat and drink , and , probably , a horse or two to 
 ride . if he could manage thing at their good , perhaps he might be 
 able to settle himself at Pau , or some other place of the kind , so as 
 to be as far away as possible from Tringle influence . but his little 
 dinner at one club , his little rubber of whist at the other club , 
 his evening at the opera , the pleasant smile of the lady , whom he 
 love in a general way,--these would be do with for ever ! earn his 
 own bread ! why , he be go to earn his bread , and that in a most 
 disagreeable manner . he would set up an establishment , not because 
 such an establishment would have any charm for he , but because he 
 be compel by lack of money to make some change in his present 
 manner of life . and yet the time have be when he have look forward 
 to a marriage as the happy thing that could befall he . as far as 
 his nature could love , he have love Imogene Docimer . there have come a 
 glimpse upon he of something well than the little dinner and the 
 little rubber . there have be a prospect of an income,--not ample , 
 as would have be that forthcoming from Sir Thomas,--but sufficient 
 for a sweet and modest home , in which he think that it would have 
 suffice for his happiness to paint a few picture , and read a few 
 book , and to love his wife and child . even as to that there have 
 be a doubt . there be a regret as to the charm of London life . 
 but , nevertheless , he have make up his mind,--and she , without any 
 doubt , have make up her . then that wicked uncle have die , and be 
 find to have expend on his own pursuit the money which be to 
 have be leave to his nephew . upon that there be an explanation 
 between Frank and Imogene ; and it be agree that their engagement 
 should be over , while a doubtful and dangerous friendship be to be 
 encourage between they . 
 such be the condition of thing when Frank first meet Gertrude 
 Tringle at Rome , now considerably more than twelve month since . 
 when Gertrude have first receive his proposition favourably he have 
 write to Imogene a letter in that drolle spirit common to he , in 
 which he declare his purpose;--or rather , not his purpose , but his 
 untoward fate , should the god be unkind to he . she have answer he 
 after the same fashion , say , that in regard to his future welfare 
 she hop that the god would prove unkind . but have he know how to 
 read all that her letter express between the line , he would have 
 perceive that her heart be more strongly move than his own . since 
 that time he have learn the lesson . there have be a letter or two ; 
 and then there have be that walk in the wood on the italian side of 
 the Tyrolese Alps . the reader may remember how he be hurry away 
 in the diligence for Innspruck , because it be consider that his 
 further sojourn in the same house with Imogene be dangerous . he have 
 go , and even as he go have attempt to make a joke of the whole 
 affair . but it have not be quite a joke to he even then . there 
 be Imogene 's love and Imogene 's anger,--and together with these an 
 aversion towards the poor girl whom he intend to marry,--which 
 become the strong the more strongly he be convince both of 
 Imogene 's love and of her anger . 
 nevertheless , he persevered,--not with the good success , as have 
 already be tell . now , as he leave the house in Lombard Street , and 
 write what be intend to be his last epistle to Gertrude , he be 
 drive again to think of Miss Docimer . indeed , he have in his pocket , 
 as he sit at his club , a little note which he have lately receive 
 from that lady , which , in truth , have disturb he much when he make 
 his last futile effort at Merle Park and in Lombard Street . the 
 little note be as follows;-- 
    DEAR FRANK , 
    one little friendly word in spite of our storm on 
    the Tyrolese hill - side ! if Miss Tringle be to be the 
    arbiter of your fate;--why , then , let there be an end of 
    everything between we . I should not care to be call upon 
    to receive such a Mrs. Frank Houston as a dear friend . 
    but if Tringle père should at the last moment prove 
    hard - hearted , then let I see you again.--yours , 
    I. 
 with this letter in his pocket he have go down to Merle Park , 
 determine to put an end to the Tringle affair in one way or 
 the other . his duty , as he have plan it to himself , would not 
 be alter by Imogene 's letter ; but if that duty should become 
 impracticable , why , then , it would be open to he to consider 
 whatever Imogene might have to say to he . 
 the Docimers be now in London , where it be their custom to live 
 during six month of the year ; but Houston have not be at their 
 house since he have part from they in the Tyrol . he have spend but 
 little of his time in London since the autumn , and , when there , have 
 not be anxious to see people who have , at any rate , treat he 
 somewhat roughly . but now it would be necessary that he should 
 answer Imogene 's letter . what should be the nature of such answer he 
 certainly have not as yet decide , nor could he have decide before 
 those very convincing assurance of Sir Thomas Tringle . that matter 
 be at any rate over , and now the " adriatic might we d another,"--if 
 the adriatic thought well to do so . the matter , however , be one 
 which require a good deal of consideration . he give to it ten 
 minute of intense thought , during which he consume a cup of coffee 
 and a cigarette ; and then , throw away the burn end of the paper , 
 he hurry into the morning - room , and write to the lady as follows;-- 
    DEAR IMOGENE , 
    you will not have to press to your bosom as my wife the 
    second daughter of Sir Thomas Tringle , Bart . the high 
    honour of that alliance have at last be refuse by he in 
    very plain language . have she become Mrs. Frank Houston , I 
    do not doubt but you would have do your duty to your own 
    cousin . that lot , however , have not be write for I in 
    the Book of Fates . the father be persistent in look 
    upon I as an idle profligate adventurer ; and though he 
    have be kind enough to hint more than once that it might 
    be possible for I to achieve the young lady , he have 
    succeed in convince I that I never should achieve 
    anything beyond the barren possession of her beauty . a 
    wife and family on my present very moderate income would 
    be burdensome ; and , therefore , with infinite regret , I 
    have bid adieu to Miss Tringle . 
    I have not hitherto be to see either you or your brother 
    or Mrs. Docimer because I have be altogether unaware 
    whether you or your brother or Mrs. Docimer would be glad 
    to see I . as you say yourself , there be a storm on the 
    Tyrolese hill - side,--in which there be more than one 
    wind blow at the same time . I do not find fault with 
    anybody,--perhaps a storm be need to clear the air . but 
    I hate storm . I do not pretend to be a very grand fellow , 
    but I do endeavour not to be disagreeable . your brother , 
    if you remember , be a little hard . but , in truth , I say 
    this only to account for my apparent incivility . 
    and , perhaps , with another object;--to gain a little time 
    before I plunge into the stern necessity of answer all 
    that you say in your very comprehensive letter of five 
    line . the first four line I have answer . there will be 
    no such Mrs. Frank Houston as that suggest . and then , as 
    to the last line . of course , you will see I again , and 
    that very speedily . so it would seem that the whole letter 
    be answer . 
    but yet it be not answer . there be so much in it that 
    whole sheet would not answer it . a quire of note - paper 
    stuff full would hardly contain all that I might find 
    to say in answer to it,--on one side and the other . Nay , 
    I might fill as many ream of folio as be require for a 
    three - volume novel . and then I might call it by one of two 
    name , " the Doubts of Frank Houston , " or " the Constancy of 
    Imogene Docimer,"--as I should at last bring my story to 
    one ending or the other . but the novel would contain that 
    fault which be so prevalent in the novel of the present 
    day . the hero would be a very namby - mamby sort of a 
    fellow , whereas the heroine would be too perfect for human 
    nature . 
    the hero would be always repeat to himself a certain 
    line out of a latin poet , which , of all line , be the most 
    heart - breaking;-- 
       the well course I see and know;-- 
       the worse one be where I go . 
    but then in novel the most indifferent hero come out 
    right at last . some god come out of a theatrical cloud 
    and leave the poor devil ten thousand a - year and a title . 
    he be not much of a hero when he do go right under such 
    inducement , but he suffice for the plot , and everything 
    be rise - colour . I would be virtuous at a much cheap 
    rate;--if only a young man with his family might have 
    enough to eat and drink . what be your idea of the low 
    income at which a prudent,--say not idiotically - quixotic 
    hero,--might safely venture to be heroic ? 
    now I have write to you a long letter , and think 
    that I have indicate to you the true state of my 
    feeling . whatever may turn up I do not think I shall go 
    fortune - hunting again . if half - a - million in female hand 
    be to throw itself at my head , there be no saying 
    whether I might not yield . but I do not think that I shall 
    again make inquiry as to the amount of booty suppose 
    to be within the wall of a city , and then sit down to 
    besiege the city with regular line of approach . it be a 
    disgusting piece of work . I do not say but what I can lie , 
    and do lie foully on the last siege operation ; but I do 
    not like it . and then to be tell that one be unmanly by 
    the father , and a coward by the young lady , as occur to 
    I in this affair , be dishearten . they be both right , 
    though I repudiate their assertion . this might be bear 
    as a prelude to success ; but , as part of a failure , it be 
    disgusting . at the present moment I be consider what 
    economy might effect as to a future bachelor life , and 
    be meditate to begin with a couple of mutton chop and 
    half - a - pint of sherry for my dinner to - day . I know I shall 
    break down and have a woodcock and some champagne . 
    I will come to you about three on Sunday . if you can 
    manage that your brother should go out and make his call , 
    and your sister attend divine service in the afternoon , it 
    would be a comfort . 
    your always , 
    F. HOUSTON . 
 it be a long ramble letter , without a word in it of solid 
 clearly - express meaning ; but Imogene , as she read it , understand 
 very well its real purport . she understand more than its purport , for 
 she could see by it,--more clearly than the writer do himself,--how 
 far her influence over the man have be restore , and how far she 
 might be able to restore it . but be it well that she should regain 
 her influence ? her influence regain would simply mean a renew 
 engagement . no doubt the storm on the hill - side have come from the 
 violence of true love on her part ! no doubt her heart have be 
 outrage by the idea that he should give himself up to another woman 
 after all that have pass between they . she have be devoted to he 
 altogether ; but yet she have be teach by he to regard her love as 
 a passion which of its nature contain something of the ridiculous . 
 he have never cease gently to laugh at himself , even in her presence , 
 because he have subject himself to her attraction . she have catch 
 up the same spirit,--or at any rate the expression of spirit,--and , 
 deceive by that , he have think that to relieve herself from the 
 burden of her love would be as easy to she as to he . in make this 
 mistake he have be ignorant of the intrinsic difference in the 
 nature of a man 's and of a woman 's heart , and have be unaware that 
 that , which to a man at his good can only be a part of his interest 
 in his life 's concern , will to a woman be everything . she have 
 attempt to follow his lead when it do not seem that by do so 
 she would lose anything . but when the moment of trial come she have 
 not in truth follow his lead at all . she make the attempt , and in 
 make the attempt give he her permission to go from she ; but when 
 she realise the fact that he be gone,--or going,--then she break 
 down utterly . then there come these contention between she and her 
 brother , and that storm on the hill - side . 
 after that she pass some month of wretchedness . there be no 
 possibility for she to droll away her love . she have teach herself to 
 love the man whether he be good or whether he be bad,--whether 
 he be strong - hearted or whether he be fickle,--and the thing 
 be there present to she , either as a permanent blessing , or , much 
 more probably , a permanent curse . as the month go on she learn , 
 though she never see Frank himself , that his purpose of marry 
 Gertrude Tringle be not likely to be carry out . then at last she 
 write that comprehensive letter of five lines,--as Houston have call 
 it . it have be intend to be comprehensive , and do , in fact , 
 contain much more than it seem to say . " if you can bring yourself 
 to return to I , and to endure whatever inconvenience may be 
 incidental to your do so , I hereby declare that I will do the 
 same ; and I declare also that I can find for myself no other content 
 in the world except what may come to I from such an agreement 
 between we . " it be this that she say in that last line , in which 
 she have beg he to come to she , if at the last moment " Tringle 
 père " should prove to be hard - hearted . all trouble of poverty , all 
 the linger annoyance of waiting , all her possible doubt as to his 
 future want of persistency , would be preferable to the great loss 
 which she find herself unable to endure . 
 yes ; it would be very well that both her brother and her 
 sister - in - law should be absent when he come to she . to neither of 
 they have she say a word of her last correspondence;--to neither of 
 they a word of her renew hope . for the objection which might be 
 raise by either of they would she care little if she could succeed 
 with Frank . but while that success be still doubtful it would be 
 well to get at any rate the assistance of her sister - in - law . on the 
 Sunday afternoon Mr. Docimer would certainly be away from the house . 
 it be his custom to go off among his friend almost immediately 
 after lunch , and his absence might be count on as assure . but with 
 his wife it be different . that project of send she to church be 
 quite out of the question . Mrs. Docimer generally go to church of a 
 Sunday morning , and then always consider herself to have perform 
 the duty of the day . nor do Imogene like the idea of this 
 appointment with her lover without a word speak about it to her 
 sister - in - law . " Mary , " she say , " Frank Houston be come here on 
 Sunday . " 
 " Frank ! " exclaim Mrs. Docimer . " I think we be to consider 
 ourselves as altogether separate from that fortunate youth . " 
 " I do not see why . " 
 " well ; he leave we not with the kind possible feeling in the 
 Tyrol ; and he have allow ever so many month to pass by without 
 come to see we . I ask Mudbury whether we should have he to 
 dinner one day last week , and he say it would be well to let he 
 go his own way . " 
 " nevertheless , he be come here on Sunday . " 
 " have he write to you ? " 
 " yes , he have write to me,--in answer to a line from I . I tell he 
 that I wish to see he . " 
 " be that wise ? " 
 " wise or not , I do so . " 
 " why should you wish to see he ? " 
 " be I to tell you the truth or a lie ? " 
 " not a lie , certainly . I will not ask for the truth if the truth be 
 unpalatable to you . " 
 " it be unpalatable;--but yet I might as well tell it you . I write to 
 ask he to come and see I , because I love he so dearly . " 
 " oh , Imogene ! " 
 " it be the truth . " 
 " do you tell he so ? " 
 " no ; I tell he nothing . I merely say , that , if this match be over 
 between he and that girl of Sir Thomas Tringle , then he might come 
 and see I again . that be all that I say . his letter be very much 
 long , but yet it do not say much . however , he be to come , and I be 
 prepared to renew our engagement should he declare that he be willing 
 to do so . " 
 " what will Mudbury say ? " 
 " I do not care very much what he say . I do not know that I be 
 bind to care . if I have resolve to entangle myself with a long 
 engagement , and Mr. Houston be willing to do the same , I do not 
 think that my brother should interfere . I be my own mistress , and be 
 deal altogether with my own happiness . " 
 " Imogene , we have discuss this so often before . " 
 " not a doubt ; and with such effect that with my permission Frank be 
 enable to ask this young woman with a lot of money to marry he . have 
 it be arrange , I should have have no right to find fault with he , 
 however sore of heart I might have be . all that have fall through , 
 and I consider myself quite entitled to renew my engagement again . I 
 shall not ask he , you may be sure of that . " 
 " it come to the same thing , Imogene . " 
 " very likely . it often happen that lady mean that to be express 
 which it do not become they to say out loud . so it may be with I 
 on this occasion . nevertheless , the word , if it have to be speak , 
 will have to be speak by he . what I want you to do now be to let I 
 have the drawing - room alone at three o'clock on Sunday . if anything 
 have to be say it will have to be say without witness . " 
 with some difficulty Mrs. Docimer be induce to accede to the 
 request , and to promise that , at any rate for the present , nothing 
 should be say to her husband on the subject . 
 CHAPTER XXXIX . 
 CAPTAIN BATSBY . 
 in the meantime , poor Ayala , whose day be run on in a very 
 melancholy manner under her aunt 's wing in Kingsbury Crescent , be 
 create further havoc and disturb the bosom of another lover . at 
 Stalham she have meet a certain Captain Batsby , and have there attract 
 his attention . Captain Batsby have beg she to ride with he on one 
 of those hunting - day , and have offer to give she a lead,--having 
 be at the moment particularly jealous of Colonel Stubbs . on that 
 day both Ayala and Nina have achieve great honour;--but this , to the 
 great satisfaction of Captain Batsby , have not be achieve under the 
 leadership of Colonel Stubbs . Larry Twentyman , long famous among the 
 riding - man of the Ufford and Rufford United Hunt , have be the hero 
 of the hour . thus Captain Batsby 's feeling have be spar , and 
 after that he have imagine that any kindly feeling which Ayala might 
 have have for the Colonel have sink into abeyance . then he have seek 
 some opportunity to push himself into Ayala 's favour , but hitherto 
 his success in that direction have not be great . 
 Captain Batsby be regard by the inhabitant of Stalham as a 
 nuisance,--but as a nuisance which could not be avoid . he be 
 half - brother to Sir Harry , whose mother have marry , as her second 
 husband , a certain opulent Mr. Batsby out of Lancashire . they be 
 both dead now , and nothing of they remain but this captain . he 
 be good - nature , simple , and rich , and in the arrangement of the 
 Albury - cum - Batsby affair , which take place after the death of Mrs. 
 Batsby , make himself pleasant to everybody concern . Sir Harry , who 
 certainly have no particular affection for his half - brother , always 
 bear with he on this account ; and Lady Albury be equally gracious , 
 mindful of the wisdom of keep on good term with a rich relation . 
 it be as yet quite on the card that the Batsby money might come to 
 some of the Albury scion . 
 but the Captain be anxious to provide himself with a wife who might 
 be the mother of scion of his own . in fact he have fall fearfully 
 in love with Ayala , and be quite resolve to ask she to be his wife 
 when he find that she be just on the point of fly from Stalham . 
 he have intend to be quick in his operation , but have lack 
 opportunity . on that last hunting - day the Colonel have always be 
 still in his way , and circumstance have never seem to favour he 
 when he endeavour to have a few word in private with the young 
 lady . then she be go , and he could only learn respect she that 
 she live with her aunt , Mrs. Dosett , in Kingsbury Crescent . 
 " I be bless if Benjamin be not smite with that girl ! " Benjamin be 
 Captain Batsby , and that girl be of course Ayala Dormer . the man 
 who bless himself be Sir Harry Albury , and the observation be 
 address to his wife . this take place within an hour of Ayala 's 
 departure from Stalham . 
 " Benjamin in love with Ayala Dormer ! I do not believe a word of it , " 
 say Lady Albury . it be not surprising that she should not believe 
 it . there be her special favourite , Colonel Stubbs , infatuate 
 by the same girl ; and , as she be aware , Tom Tringle , the heir of 
 Travers and Treason , be in the same melancholy condition . and , after 
 all , accord to her thinking , there be nothing in the girl to 
 justify all this fury . in her eye Ayala be pretty , but no more . she 
 would have declare that Ayala have neither bear , nor beauty , nor 
 figure . a bright eye , a change colour , and something of vivacity 
 about her mouth , be all of which Ayala have to boast . yet here be 
 certainly the heir of the man of million , and that Crichton of a 
 Colonel , both knock off their leg . and now she be tell that 
 Captain Batsby , who always profess himself hard to please in the 
 matter of young lady , be in the same condition . " do you mean to 
 say he tell you ? " she ask . 
 " no , " say Sir Harry ; " he be not at all the man to do that . in such a 
 matter he be sure to have a great secret , and be sure also to let his 
 secret escape in every word that he speak . you will find that what I 
 say be truth . " 
 before the day be out Lady Albury do find her husband to be 
 correct . Captain Batsby , though he be very jealous of his secret , 
 acknowledge to himself the necessity of have one confidant . he 
 could hardly , he think , follow Ayala without some assistance . he 
 know nothing of Mrs. Dosett , nothing of Kingsbury Crescent , and very 
 little as to Ayala herself . he regard Lady Albury as his choose 
 friend , and generally communicate to she whatever trouble he might 
 have . these have consist chiefly of the persecution to which he have 
 be subject by the mother of portionless young lady . how not to 
 get marry off against his will have be the difficulty of his life . 
 his half sister - in - law have hitherto preserve he , and therefore to 
 she he now go for assistance in this opposite affair . " rosalind , " 
 he say in his grave voice , " what do you think I have to tell you ? " 
 Lady Albury know what be come , but of course she hide her 
 knowledge . " I hope Mrs. Motherly have not write to you again , " she 
 say . Mrs. Motherly be a lady who have be anxious that her daughter 
 should grace Captain Batsby 's table , and have write to he letter , 
 ask he his intention . 
 " oh , dear ; nothing of that kind . I do not care a straw for Mrs. 
 Motherly or the girl either . I never say a word to she that any one 
 could make a handle of . but I want to say a word to somebody now . " 
 " what sort of word be it to be , Ben ? " 
 " ah , " he groan . " rosalind , you must understand that I never be so 
 much in earnest in my life ! " 
 " you be always in earnest . " 
 then he sigh very deeply . " I shall expect you to help I through 
 this matter , rosalind . " 
 " do I not always help you ? " 
 " yes ; you do . but you must stick to I now like wax . what do you 
 think of that young lady , Miss Dormer ? " 
 " I think she be a pretty girl ; and the gentleman tell I that she 
 rid bravely . " 
 " do not you consider she divine ? " he ask . 
 " my dear Ben , one lady never consider another to be divine . among 
 ourselves we be terribly human , if not bad . do you mean to tell I 
 that you be in love with Ayala Dormer ? " 
 " you have guess it , " say he . " you always do guess everything . " 
 " I generally do guess as much as that , when young gentleman find 
 young lady divine . do you know anything about Miss Dormer ? " 
 " nothing but her beauty;--nothing but her wit;--nothing but her 
 grace ! I know all that , and I do not seem to want to know any more . " 
 " then you must be in love ! in the first place she have not get a 
 sixpence in the world . " 
 " I do not want sixpence , " say the Captain , proudly . 
 " and in the next place I be not at all sure that you would like her 
 people . Father and mother she have none . " 
 " then I can not dislike they . " 
 " but she have uncle and aunt , who be , I be afraid , objectionable . 
 she live with a Mr. Dosett , who be a clerk in Somerset House,--a 
 respectable man , no doubt , but one whom you would not perhaps want at 
 your house very often . " 
 " I do not care about uncle and aunt , " say Captain Batsby . " uncle 
 and aunt can always be drop much easy than father and mother . 
 at any rate I be determined to go on , and I want you to put I in the 
 way . how must I find she ? " 
 " go to no . 10 , Kingsbury Crescent , bayswater . ask for Mrs. Dosett and 
 tell she what you have come about . when she know that you be well 
 off she will not turn a deaf ear to you . what the girl may do it be 
 beyond I to say . she be very peculiar . " 
 " Peculiar ? " say the Captain with another sigh . 
 Lady Albury do , in truth , think Ayala be very peculiar , see that 
 she have refuse two such man as Tom Tringle in spite of his wealth , 
 and Colonel Stubbs in spite of his position . this she have do though 
 she have no prospect of her own before she , and no comfortable home 
 at the present . might it not be more than probable that she would 
 also refuse Captain Batsby , who be less rich than the one and 
 certainly less known to the world than the other ? but as to this it 
 be not necessary that she should say anything . to assist Colonel 
 Stubbs she be bind by true affection for the man . in regard to her 
 husband 's half - brother she be only bind to seem to assist he . " I 
 can write a line to Mrs. Dosett , if you wish it , " she say , " or to 
 Miss Dormer . " 
 " I wish you would . it would be good to the aunt , and just tell she 
 that I be fairly well off . she will tell Ayala I could make quite a 
 proper settlement on she . that kind of thing do go a long way with 
 young lady . " 
 " it ought to do at any rate , " say Lady Albury . " it certainly do 
 with the old lady . " then the matter be settle . she be to write 
 to Mrs. Dosett and inform that lady that Captain Batsby intend to 
 call in Kingsbury Crescent in the form of a suitor for Miss Ayala 
 Dormer 's hand . she would go on to explain that Captain Batsby be 
 quite in a position to marry and maintain a wife . 
 " and if she should accept I you will have she down here , rosalind ? " 
 here be a difficulty , as it be already understand that Ayala be to 
 be again bring down to Stalham on the Colonel 's account ; but Lady 
 Albury could make the promise , as , should the Captain be accept , 
 no harm would in that case be do to the Colonel . she be , however , 
 tolerably sure that the Captain would not be accept . " and , if she 
 should not take I all at once , still you might have she , " suggest 
 the lover . as to this , which be so probable , there would be a great 
 difficulty . Ayala be to be seduce into come again to Stalham if 
 possible,--but specially on the Colonel 's behoof . in such a case it 
 must be do behind the Captain 's back . Lady Albury see the trouble 
 which be come , but nevertheless she promise that she would see 
 what could be do . all this have be settle , Captain Batsby take 
 his leave and go off to London . 
 Mrs. Dosett , when she receive Lady Albury 's letter , be very much 
 surprised . she too fail to understand what there be in Ayala to 
 produce such a multiplicity of suitor , one after another . when 
 Lucy come to she and have begin to be objectionable , she have think 
 that she might some day be relieve from her trouble by the girl 's 
 marriage . Lucy , to her eye , be beautiful , and mistress of a manner 
 likely to be win in a man 's eye , though ungracious to herself . 
 but in regard to Ayala she have express nothing of the kind . Ayala 
 be little , and flighty , and like an elf,--as she have remark to her 
 husband . but now , within twelve month , three lover have appear , 
 and each of they suitable for matrimonial purpose . she could only 
 tell her husband , and then tell Ayala . 
 " Captain Batsby ! I do not believe it ! " say Ayala , almost cry . if 
 Colonel Stubbs could not be make to assume the garb of an Angel of 
 Light what be she to think of Captain Batsby ? 
 " you can read Lady Albury 's letter . " 
 " I do not want to read Lady Albury 's letter . I will not see he . I do not 
 care what my uncle say . I do not care what anybody say . yes , I do 
 know he . I remember he very well . I speak to he once or twice , and 
 I do not like he at all . " 
 " you say the same of Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " I do not say the same of Colonel Stubbs . he be a great deal bad 
 than Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " and you say just the same of Tom . " 
 " he be the same as tom;--just as bad . it be no good go on about 
 he , Aunt Margaret . I will not see he . if I be lock up in a room 
 with he I would not speak a word to he . he have no right to come . " 
 " a gentleman , my dear , have always a right to ask a lady to be his 
 wife if he have get mean . " 
 " you always say so , Aunt Margaret , but I do not believe it . there 
 should be,--there should have been,--i do not know what ; but I be 
 quite sure the man have no right to come to I , and I will not see he . " 
 to this resolution Ayala clung , and , as she be very firm about it , 
 Mrs. Dosett , after consultation with her husband , at last give way , 
 and consent to see Captain Batsby herself . 
 in due time Captain Batsby come . at any knock hear at the door 
 during this period Ayala fly out of the drawing - room into her own 
 chamber ; and at the Captain 's knock she fly with double haste , 
 feel sure that this be the special knock . the man be show 
 up , and in a set speech declare his purpose to Mrs. Dosett , and 
 express a hope that Lady Albury might have write on the subject . 
 might he be allow to see the young lady ? 
 " I fear that it would be of no service , Captain Batsby . " 
 " of no service ? " 
 " on receive Lady Albury 's letter I be of course oblige to tell my 
 niece the honour you propose to do she . " 
 " I be quite in earnest , you know , " say the Captain . 
 " so I suppose , as Lady Albury would not have write , nor would you 
 have come on such a mission . but so be my niece in earnest . " 
 " she will , at any rate , hear what I have get to say . " 
 " she would rather not , " say Mrs. Dosett . " she think that it would 
 only be painful to both of you . as she have quite make up her mind 
 that she can not accept the honour you propose to do she , what good 
 would it serve ? " 
 " be Miss Dormer at home ? " ask the Captain , suddenly . Mrs. Dosett 
 hesitate for a while , anxious to tell a lie on the matter , but 
 fear to do so . " I suppose she be at home , " continue the urgent 
 lover . 
 " Miss Dormer be at present in her own chamber . " 
 " then I think I ought to see she , " continue the Captain . " she can not 
 know at present what be my income . " 
 " Lady Albury have tell we that it be sufficient . " 
 " but that mean nothing . your niece can not be aware that I have a 
 very pretty little place of my own down in Berkshire . " 
 " I do not think it would make a difference , " say Mrs. Dosett . 
 " or that I shall be willing to settle upon she a third of my income . 
 it be not many gentleman who will do as much as that for a young 
 lady , when the young lady have nothing of her own . " 
 " I be sure you be very generous . " 
 " yes , I be . I always be generous . and I have no impediment to get 
 rid of ; not a trouble of that kind in all the world . and I do not owe 
 a shilling . very few young man , who have live as much in the world 
 as I have , can say that . " 
 " I be sure your position be all that be desirable . " 
 " that be just it . no position could be more desirable . I should 
 give up the service immediately as soon as I be marry . " at that 
 Mrs. Dosett bow , not know what word to find for further 
 conversation . " after that , " continue the Captain , " do you mean to 
 say that I be not to be allow to see the young lady ? " 
 " I can not force she to come down , Captain Batsby . " 
 " I would if I be you . " 
 " force a young lady ? " 
 " something ought to be do , " say he , begin almost to whine . 
 " I have come here on purpose to see she , and I be quite prepared to 
 do what be handsome . my half - sister , Lady Albury , have she down at 
 Stalham , and be quite anxious to have she there again . I suppose you 
 have no objection to make to I , Mrs. Dosett ? " 
 " oh , dear no . " 
 " or Mr. Dosett ? " 
 " I do not say that he have , Captain Batsby ; but this be a matter in 
 which a young lady 's word must be paramount . we can not force she to 
 marry you , or even to speak to you . " the Captain still go on with 
 entreaty , till Mrs. Dosett find herself so far compel to accede 
 to he as to go up to Ayala 's room and beg she to come down and 
 answer this third suitor with her own voice . but Ayala be immovable . 
 when her aunt come near she she take hold of the bed as though 
 fear an attempt would be make to drag she out of the room . she 
 again declare that if she be force into the room below nothing 
 could oblige she to speak even a word . 
 " as for thank he , " she say , " you can do that yourself , Aunt 
 Margaret , if you like . I be not a bit obliged to he ; but , if you 
 choose to say so , you may ; only pray do tell he to go away,--and 
 tell he never , never to come back any more . " then Mrs. Dosett 
 return to the drawing - room , and declare that her embassy have be 
 quite in vain . 
 " in all my life , " say Captain Batsby , as he take his leave , " I never 
 hear of such conduct before . " nevertheless , as he go away he make 
 up his mind that Lady Albury should get Ayala again down to Stalham . 
 he be very angry , but his love remain as hot as ever . 
 " as I do not succeed in see she , " he say , in a letter to his 
 half - sister , " of course I do not know what she might have say to 
 I herself . I might probably have induce she to give I another 
 hearing . I put it all down to that abominable aunt , who probably have 
 some scheme of her own , and would not let Miss Dormer come down to 
 I . if you will have she again at Stalham , everything may be make to 
 go right . " 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 at home , in Kingsbury Crescent , when Ayala have go to bed , both 
 Mr. and Mrs. Dosett express themselves as much trouble by the 
 peculiarity of Ayala 's nature . Mrs. Dosett declare she conviction 
 that that promise legacy from Uncle Tom would never be forthcoming , 
 because he have be so much offend by the rejection of his own son . 
 and even should the legacy remain write in Sir Thomas 's will , where 
 would Ayala find a home if Mr. Dosett be to die before the baronet ? 
 this rejection of suitors,--of fit , well - to - do , unobjectionable 
 suitors,--wa hold by Mrs. Dosett to be very wicked , and a direct 
 fly in the face of Providence . " do she think , " say Mrs. Dosett , 
 urge the matter with all her eloquence to her husband , " that young 
 man with income be to be come after she always like this ? " Mr. 
 Dosett shake his head and scratch it at the same time , which be 
 always a sign with he that he be not at all convince by the 
 argument use , but that he do not wish to incur further hostility 
 by answer they . " why should not she see an eligible man when he 
 come recommend like this ? " 
 " I suppose , my dear , she do not think he nice enough . " 
 " Nice ! pshaw ! I call it a direct flying in the face of Providence . if 
 he be ever so nasty and twice as old she ought to think twice about 
 it in her position . there be poor Tom , they say , absolutely ill . the 
 housekeeper be over here from Queen 's Gate the other day , and she 
 declare that that affair about the policeman all come from his being 
 in love . and now he have leave the business and have go to Merle Park , 
 because he be so knock in a heap that he can not hold up his head . " 
 " I do not see why love should make a man punch a policeman 's breath 
 out of he , " say Mr. Dosett . 
 " of course Tom be foolish ; but he would do very well if she would 
 have he . of course your sister , and Sir Thomas , and all of they , 
 will be very furious . what right will she have to expect money after 
 that ? " 
 " Tom be an ass , " say Mr. Dosett . 
 " I suppose Colonel Stubbs be an ass too . what I want to know be what 
 it be she look for . like any other girl , she expect to get marry 
 some day , I suppose ; but she have be read poetry , and novel , and 
 trash , till she have get her head so full of nonsense that she do not 
 know what it be she do want . I should like to shake she till I 
 shake all the romance out of she . if there be anything I do hate it 
 be romance , while bread and meat , and coal , and washing , be so 
 dear . " with this Mrs. Dosett take herself and her trouble up to her 
 bedroom . 
 Mr. Dosett sit for a while gaze with speculative eye at the ember 
 of the fire . he be conscious in his heart that some part of that 
 attack upon romance in general be intend for himself . though he 
 do not look to be romantic , especially when seat at his desk in 
 Somerset House , with his big index - book before he , still there be 
 leave about he some touch of poetry , and an appreciation of the finer 
 feeling of our nature . though he could have wish that Ayala should 
 have be able to take one of these three well - to - do suitor , who 
 be so anxious to obtain her hand , still he could not bring himself 
 not to respect she , still he be unable not to love she , because she 
 be steadfastly averse to accept as a husband a man for whom she have 
 no affection . as he look at the ember he ask himself how it 
 ought to be . here be a girl whose only gift in life be her own 
 personal charm . that that charm must be powerful be evident from the 
 fact that she could so attract such man as these . of the good thing 
 of the world , of a pleasant home , of ample mean , and of all that 
 absence of care which come from money , poor Mr. Dosett have by no 
 mean a poor appreciation . that man be justify in seek these 
 good thing by their energy , industry , and talent , he be quite 
 confident . how be it with a girl who have nothing else but she 
 beauty,--or , perhaps , her wit,--in lieu of energy and industry ? be 
 she justify in carry her ware also into the market , and make 
 the most of they ? the ember have burn so low , and he have become so 
 cold before he have settle the question in his own mind , that he be 
 oblige to go up to bed , leave it unsettled . 
 CHAPTER XL . 
 AUNT EMMELINE 's new PROPOSITION . 
 a few day after this , just as the bread and cheese have be put on 
 the table for the modest mid - day meal at Kingsbury Crescent , there 
 come a most unwonted honour on Mrs. Dosett . it be a call from no 
 less a person than Lady Tringle herself , who have come all the way up 
 from Merle Park on purpose . it be a Saturday . she have travel by 
 herself and intend to go back on the same day with her husband . 
 this be an amount of trouble which she very seldom give herself , 
 not often make a journey to London during the period of her rural 
 sojourn ; and , when she begin by assure her sister - in - law that she 
 make the journey with no object but that of come to Kingsbury 
 Crescent , Mrs. Dosett be aware that something very important be 
 to be communicate . Mrs. Dosett and Ayala be together in the 
 dining - room when Lady Tringle appear , and the embracing be very 
 affectionate . they be particularly affectionate towards Ayala , who 
 be kiss as though nothing have ever happen to interfere with 
 the perfect love exist between the aunt and the niece . they be 
 more than friendly , almost sisterly , towards Mrs. Dosett , whom in 
 truth Lady Tringle meet hardly more than once in a year . it be very 
 manifest that Aunt Emmeline want to have something do . " now , my 
 darling , " she say , turn to Ayala , " if you would not mind go 
 away for ten minute , I could say a few word on very particular 
 business to your aunt . " then she give her niece a tender little 
 squeeze and assume her sweetest smile . 
 it will be as well to go back a little and tell the cause which have 
 produce this unexpected visit . there have be very much of real 
 trouble at Merle Park . everything be troublesome . Gertrude have 
 receive her final letter from her lover , have declare herself to be 
 break - hearted , and be evince her sorrow by lie in bed half the 
 day , abstain from her meal , and relieve herself from famine by 
 sly visit to the larder . it be suppose that her object be to bend 
 the stony heart of her father , but the process add an additional 
 trouble to her mother . then the Trafficks be a sore vexation . it 
 be now nearly the end of January and they be still at Merle Park . 
 there have be a scene in which Sir Thomas have be very harsh . " my 
 dear , " he have say to his wife , " I find that something must be do 
 to the chimney of the north room . the workman must be in it by the 
 first of February . see and have all the furniture take out before 
 they come . " now the north room be the chamber in which the Trafficks 
 sleep , and the Trafficks be present when the order be give . 
 no one believe the story of the chimney . this be the mode of 
 expulsion which Sir Thomas have choose on the spur of the moment . Mr. 
 Traffick say not a word , but in the course of the morning Augusta 
 expostulate with her mother . this be also disagreeable . then the 
 condition of Tom be truly pitiable . all his trust in champagne , all 
 his bellicose humour , have desert he . he mop about the place the 
 most miserable of human being , spend hour after hour in implore 
 his mother 's assistance . but Lucy with her quiet determination , and 
 mute persistency in waiting , be a source of almost great annoyance 
 to her aunt than even her own child . that Lucy should in any 
 degree have have her way with Mr. Hamel , have go against the grain 
 with she . Mr. Hamel , to her thinking , be a person to be connect 
 with whom would be a disgrace . she be always speak of his birth , 
 of his father 's life , and of those roman iniquity . she have give 
 way for a time when she have understand that her husband intend to 
 give the young people money enough to enable they to marry . in that 
 case Lucy would at once be take away from the house . but now all 
 that have come to an end . Sir Thomas have give no money , and have even 
 refuse to give any money . nevertheless he be peacefully indulgent 
 to Lucy , and be always scold his wife because she be hostile to 
 Lucy 's lover . 
 in this emergency she induce he to accede to a proposition , by 
 which one of her misery would be bring to an end and another 
 might perhaps be remedie . a second exchange should be make . Lucy 
 should be send back to Kingsbury Crescent , and Ayala should once more 
 be bring into favour at Merle Park , Queen 's Gate , and Glenbogie . 
 " your brother will never put up with it , " say Sir Thomas . Lady 
 Tringle be not afraid of her brother , and think that by soft word 
 she might even talk over her sister - in - law . Ayala , she know , have be 
 troublesome in Kingsbury Crescent . she be sure , she say , Ayala 's 
 whim would of their nature be more troublesome to such a woman as 
 Mrs. Dosett than Lucy 's obstinacy . Ayala have no doubt be pert and 
 disobedient at Glenbogie and at Rome , but there have be an unbending 
 obduracy about Lucy which have be more distasteful to Aunt Emmeline 
 than even Ayala 's pert disobedience . " it will be the only way , " she 
 have say to Sir Thomas , " to put Tom on his leg again . if the girl 
 come back here she will be sure to have he at last . " there be 
 much in this which to Sir Thomas be weak and absurd . that prolonged 
 journey round by San Francisco , Japan , and Pekin , be the remedy 
 which recommend itself to he . but he be less able to despatch 
 Tom at once to Japan than the eld Faddle have be to send off the 
 young Faddle to the stern reality of life in Aberdeen . he be 
 quite willing that Tom should marry Ayala if it could be arrange , 
 and therefore he give his consent . 
 so armed , Lady Tringle have come up to Kingsbury Crescent , and be 
 now about to undertake a task , which she acknowledge to herself to 
 be difficult . she , in the first place , have have her choice and have 
 select a niece . then she have quarrel with her own selection , and 
 have change niece . this have be do to accommodate her own fancy ; 
 and now she want to change the niece back again ! she feel aware 
 that her request be unreasonable , and come , therefore , determine to 
 wrap it up in her blandest smile . 
 when Ayala have leave the room Mrs. Dosett sit mute in attention . she 
 be quite aware that something very much out of the ordinary way be 
 to be ask of she . in her ordinary way Lady Tringle never do smile 
 when she come to Kingsbury Crescent . she would be profuse in finery , 
 and would seem to throw off spark of wealth at every word she speak . 
 now even her dress have be tone down to her humbler manner , and 
 there be no touch of her husband 's purse in her gait . " Margaret , " 
 she say , " I have a proposition of great importance to make to you . " 
 Mrs. Dosett open her eye wider and sit still mute . " that poor girl 
 be not,--is not,--is not do perhaps the very good for herself here 
 at Kingsbury Crescent . " 
 " why be she not do the good for herself ? " ask Mrs. Dosett , 
 angrily . 
 " do not for a moment suppose that I be find fault either with you 
 or my brother . " 
 " you would be very wrong if you do . " 
 " no doubt;--but I be not find fault . I know how very generous you 
 have both be . of course Sir Thomas be a rich man , and what he give 
 to one of the girl come to nothing . of course it be different with 
 you . it be hard upon my brother to have any such burden put upon he ; 
 and it be very good both in he and you to bear it . " 
 " what be it you want we to do now , Emmeline ? " 
 " Well;--I be go to explain . I do think it a great pity that Tom 
 and Ayala should not become man and wife . if ever any young man ever 
 do love a girl I believe that he love she . " 
 " I think he do . " 
 " it be dreadful . I never see anything like it . he be just for all the 
 world like those young man we read of who do all manner of horrible 
 thing for love,--smothere themselves and their young woman with 
 charcoal , or throw they into the Regent 's Canal . I be constantly 
 afraid of something happen . it be all because of Ayala that he 
 get into that terrible row at the police court,--and then we be 
 afraid he be go to take to drink . he have give all that up now . " 
 " I be very glad he have give drink up . that would not do he any 
 good . " 
 " he be quite different now . the poor fellow hardly take anything . he 
 will sit all the afternoon smoke cigarette and sip tea . it be 
 quite sad to see he . then he come and talk to I , and be always 
 ask I to make Ayala have he . " 
 " I do not think that anybody can ever make Ayala do anything . " 
 " not quite by talk to she . I dare say not . I do not mean to say a 
 word to she about it just now . " 
 " we can do nothing , I fear , " say Mrs. Dosett . 
 " I be go to suggest something . but I want first to say a word 
 or two about poor Lucy . " they be just at present all " poor " to 
 Lady Tringle,--Ayala , Lucy , Tom , and Gertrude . even Augusta be poor 
 because she be to be turn out of her bedroom . 
 " be she in trouble ? " 
 " oh , dear , yes . but , " she add , think well to correct herself , 
 so that Mrs. Dosett might not imagine that she would have to look 
 forward to trouble with Lucy , " she could arrange her affair , no 
 doubt , if she be not with we . she be engage to that Mr. Isadore 
 Hamel , the sculptor . " 
 " so I have hear . " 
 " he do not earn very much just at present , I fear . Sir Thomas do 
 offer to help he , but he be perhaps a little hoity - toity , give 
 himself air . that , however , do not come off , and there they be , 
 wait . I do not mean to say a word against poor Lucy . I think it a 
 pity , you know ; but perhaps it be natural enough . he be not what I 
 should have like for a niece who be live with I just as though 
 she be my daughter ; but I could not help that . " 
 " but what be we to do , Emmeline ? " 
 " let they just change place again . " 
 " change again ! Ayala go to you and Lucy come back here ! " 
 " just that . if Ayala be with we she would be sure to get use to 
 Tom at last . and then Lucy could manage her affair with Mr. Hamel so 
 much well if she be with you . " 
 " why should she manage her affair well if she be with we ? " 
 Lady Tringle be aware that this be the weak part of her case . on 
 the poor Ayala and poor Tom side of the question there be a good 
 deal which might be say . then , though she might not convince , she 
 might be eloquent . but , touch Lucy , she could say nothing which 
 do not simply signify that she want to get rid of the girl . now , 
 Mrs. Dosett have also want to get rid of Lucy when the former 
 exchange have be make . " what I mean be , that , if she be away , Sir 
 Thomas would be more likely to do something for she . " this be an 
 invention at the spur of the moment . 
 " do you not feel that the girl should not be chuck about like 
 ball from a battledore ? " ask Mrs. Dosett . 
 " for their own good , Margaret . I only propose it for their own good . 
 you can not but think it would be a good thing for Ayala to be marry 
 to our Tom . " 
 " if she like he . " 
 " why should not she like he ? you know what that mean . Poor Ayala be 
 young , and a little romantic . she would be a great deal happy if 
 all that could be knock out of she . she have to marry somebody , and 
 the soon she settle down the well . Sir Thomas will do anything 
 for them;--a horse and carriage , and anything she could set her heart 
 upon ! there be nothing Sir Thomas would not do for Tom so as to get 
 he put upon his leg again . " 
 " I do not think Ayala would go . " 
 " she must , you know , " whisper Lady Tringle , " if we both tell she . " 
 " and Lucy ? " 
 " she must too , " again whisper Lady Tringle . " if they be tell they 
 be to go , what else can they do ? why should not Ayala wish to come ? " 
 " there be quarrel before . " 
 " yes;--because of Augusta . Augusta be marry now . " Lady Tringle 
 could not quite say that Augusta be go . 
 " will you speak to Ayala ? " 
 " perhaps it would come well from you , Margaret , if you agree with 
 I . " 
 " I be not sure that I do . I be quite sure that your brother would not 
 force she to go , whether she wish it or not . no doubt we should be 
 glad if the marriage could be arrange . but we can not force a girl to 
 marry , and her aversion in this case be so strong-- " 
 " Aversion ! " 
 " aversion to be marry , I mean . it be so strong that I do not 
 think she will go of her own accord to any house where she be likely 
 to meet her cousin . I dare say she may be a fool . I say nothing about 
 that . of course , she shall be ask ; and , if she wish to go , then 
 Lucy can be ask too . but of course it must all depend upon what 
 your brother say . " 
 then Lady Tringle take her leave without again see Ayala herself , 
 and as she go declare her intention of call at Somerset 
 House . she would not think it right , she say , in a matter of such 
 importance , to leave London without consult her brother . it might 
 be possible , she think , that she would be able to talk her brother 
 over ; whereas his wife , if she have the first word , might turn he the 
 other way . 
 " be Aunt Emmeline go ? " ask Ayala , when she come down . " I be glad 
 she have go , because I never know how to look when she call I 
 dear . I know she hat I . " 
 " I hope not , Ayala . " 
 " I be sure she do , because I hat Augusta . I do hate Augusta , and 
 my aunt hat I . the only one of the lot I like be Uncle Tom . " 
 then the proposition be make , Ayala sit with her mouth wide open 
 as the detail , one after another , be open out to she . her aunt 
 do it with exquisite fairness , abstain from open out some 
 of the detail which might be clear enough to Ayala without any 
 explanation . her Aunt Emmeline be very anxious to have she back 
 again,--the only reason for her former expulsion have be the 
 enmity of Augusta . her Uncle Tom and her aunt , and , no doubt , 
 Gertrude , would be very glad to receive she . not a word be say 
 about Tom . then something be urge as to the material comfort of 
 the Tringle establishment , and of the necessary poverty of Kingsbury 
 Crescent . 
 " and Lucy be to have the poverty ? " say Ayala , indignantly . 
 " I think it probable , my dear , that before long Lucy will become the 
 wife of Mr. Hamel . " 
 " and you want to get rid of I ? " demand Ayala . 
 " no , my dear ; not so . you must not think that for a moment . the 
 proposition have not originate with I at all . I be endeavour to 
 do my duty by explain to you the advantage which you would enjoy 
 by go to your Aunt Emmeline , and which you certainly can not have 
 if you remain here . and I must tell you , that , if you return to Sir 
 Thomas , he will probably provide for you . you know what I mean by 
 provide for you ? " 
 " no , I do not , " say Ayala , who have in her mind some dim idea that her 
 cousin Tom be suppose to be a provision . she be quite aware that 
 her Aunt Margaret , in her explanation as hitherto give , have not 
 mention Tom 's name , and be sure that it have not be omit 
 without reason . 
 " by provide , I mean that if you be live in his house he will 
 leave you something in his will;--as would be natural that he should 
 do for a child belong to he . your Uncle reginald"--this she say 
 in a low and very serious tone--"will , I fear , have nothing to leave 
 to you . " then there be silence for some minute , after which Mrs. 
 Dosett ask the important question , " well , Ayala , what do you think 
 about it ? " 
 " must I go ? " say Ayala . " may I stay ? " 
 " yes , my dear ; you may certainly stay if you wish it . " 
 " then I will stay , " say Ayala , jump up on to her foot . " you do 
 not want to turn I out , Aunt Margaret ? " then she go down on her 
 knee , and , lean on her aunt 's lap , look up into her face . " if 
 you will keep I I will try to be good . " 
 " my dear , you be good . I have nothing to complain of . of course we 
 will keep you . nobody have think for a moment of bidding you go . but 
 you should understand that when your aunt make the proposition I be 
 bind to tell it you . " then there be great embracing and kissing , 
 and Ayala feel that she be relieve from a terrible danger . she have 
 often declare that no one could make she marry her cousin Tom ; but 
 it have seem to she for a moment that if she be give up bodily to 
 the Tringles no mode of escape would be open to her short of suicide . 
 there have be a moment almost of regret that she have never bring 
 herself to regard Jonathan Stubbs as an Angel of Light . 
 at Somerset House Lady Tringle make her suggestion to her brother 
 with even more flowery assurance of general happiness than she have 
 use in endeavour to persuade his wife . Ayala would , of course , 
 be married to Tom in the course of the next six month , and during 
 the same period Lucy , no doubt , would be married to that very 
 enterprising but somewhat obstinate young man , Mr. Hamel . thus there 
 would be an end to all the Dormer trouble ; " and you , Reginald , " she 
 say , " will be relieve from a burden which never ought to have be 
 lay upon your shoulder . " 
 " we will think of it , " he say very gravely , over and over again . 
 beyond that " we will think of it " he could not be induce to utter a 
 word . 
 CHAPTER XLI . 
 " a cold prospect ! " 
 three day be allow to Frank Houston to consider within his own 
 mind what he would say for himself and what he would propose finally 
 to do when he should see Miss Docimer on the appoint Sunday . he be 
 call upon to decide whether , after so many resolution make to the 
 contrary , he would now at last bring himself to encounter poverty 
 and a family,--genteel poverty with about seven hundred and fifty 
 pound a - year between himself and his wife . he have hitherto be very 
 staunch on the subject , and have unfortunately think that Imogene 
 Docimer have be as firmly fix in her determination . his theory have 
 in itself be good . if two people marry they be likely , accord 
 to the law of nature , to have very soon more than two . in the 
 process of a dozen year they may not improbably become ever so many 
 more than two . fund which be barely enough , if enough , for two , 
 would certainly fail to be enough for half - a - dozen . his mean be 
 certainly not enough for himself , as he have hitherto find they . 
 Imogene 's mean be less even than his own . therefore , it be clear 
 that he and Imogene ought not to marry and encounter the danger of 
 all those embryo mouth . there be a logic about it which have seem 
 to he to be unanswerable . it be a logic which apply to his case 
 above all other . the man who have a hope of earn money need not 
 be absolutely bind by it . to he the money might come as quickly 
 as the mouth . with the cradle would arrive the mean of buy 
 the cradle . and to the man who have much more than enough for 
 himself,--to such a man as he have expect to be while he be look 
 forward to the coffin of that iniquitous uncle,--the logic do 
 not apply at all . in defend himself , both to himself and to 
 Imogene , he be very strong upon that point . a man who have plenty 
 and would not divide his plenty with another might with truth be 
 call selfish . rich old bachelor might with propriety be call 
 curmudgeon . but be it right that a man should be abused,--even by 
 a young lady to whom , under more propitious circumstance , he have 
 offer his heart,--when he declare himself unwilling to multiply 
 suffering by assist to bring into the world human being whom he 
 would be unable to support ? he have feel himself to be very strong in 
 his logic , and have unfortunately make the mistake of suppose that 
 it be as clear to Imogene as to himself . 
 then he have determine to rectify the inconvenience of his position . 
 it have become manifest to he whilst he be wait for his uncle 's 
 money that not only be his own mean insufficient for married life 
 but even for single comfort . it would always come to pass that when 
 he have resolve on two mutton chop and half - a - pint of sherry the 
 humble little meal would spread itself into woodcock and champagne . 
 he regard it as an unkindness in Providence that he should not have 
 be gift with economy . therefore , he have to look about he for a 
 remedy ; and , as Imogene be out of the question , he find a remedy in 
 Gertrude Tringle . he have then believe that everything be settle 
 for him,--not , indeed , in a manner very pleasant , but after a fashion 
 that would make life possible to he . Sir Thomas have give one of 
 his daughter , with a large sum of money , to such a man as Septimus 
 Traffick,--a man more impecunious than himself , one whom Frank do 
 not hesitate to pronounce to be much less of a gentleman . that seat 
 in the House of Commons be to he nothing . there be many man in 
 the House of Commons to whom he would hardly condescend to speak . 
 to be the young son of a latter - day peer be to he nothing . he 
 consider himself in all respect to be a more eligible husband than 
 Septimus Traffick . therefore he have entertain but little doubt when 
 he find himself accept by Gertrude herself and her mother . then 
 by degree he have learn to know something of the young lady to whom 
 he intend to devote himself ; and it have come to pass that the 
 well he have know the less he have like she . nevertheless he have 
 persevere , groan in spirit as he think of the burden with which 
 he be about to inflict himself . then have come the release . Sir 
 Thomas have explain to he that no money would be forthcoming ; and 
 the young lady have make to he a foolish proposition , which , as he 
 think , fully justify he in regard the match as at an end . 
 and then he have three day in which to make up his mind . it may be a 
 question whether three day be ever much well than three minute 
 for such a purpose . a man 's mind will very generally refuse to make 
 itself up until it be drive and compel by emergency . the three 
 day be pass not in form but in postpone judgment . in nothing 
 be procrastination so tempting as in thought . so it come to pass , 
 that through the Thursday , the Friday , and the Saturday , Frank 
 Houston come to no conclusion , though he believe that every hour 
 of the time be devoted to form one . then , as he eat his dinner 
 on Saturday night at his club , a letter be bring to he , the 
 handwriting of which be familiar to he . this letter assist he 
 little in thinking . 
 the letter be from Gertrude Tringle , and need not be give in its 
 entirety . there be a good deal of reproach , in that he have be so 
 fickle as to propose to abandon she at the first touch of adversity . 
 then she have go on to say , that , know her father a great deal 
 well than he could do , she be quite satisfied that the money would 
 be all right . but the last paragraph of the letter shall be give . 
 " Papa have almost yield already . I have be very ill;"--here the 
 extent of her malady be show by the strength of the underscoring 
 with which the word be make significant;--"very ill indeed , " she 
 go on to say , " as you will understand if you have ever really love 
 I . I have keep my bed almost ever since I get your cruel letter . " 
 bed and cruel be again strenuously underscored . " it have make papa 
 very unhappy , and , though he have say nothing to myself , he have tell 
 mamma that if I be really in earnest he will do something for we . " 
 the letter be long , but this be all the reader need see of it . but 
 it must be explain that the young lady have greatly exaggerate her 
 mother 's word , and that her mother have exaggerate those which Sir 
 Thomas have speak . " she be a stupid idiot , " Sir Thomas have say to 
 his wife . " if she be obedient , and do her duty , of course I shall 
 do something for she some day . " this have be stretch to that 
 promise of concession which Gertrude communicate to her lover . 
 this be the assistance which Frank Houston receive in make up 
 his mind on Saturday night . if what the girl say be true , there 
 be still open to he the manner of life which he have prepare for 
 himself ; and he do believe the announcement to be true . though Sir 
 Thomas have be so persistent in his refusal , his experience in life 
 have teach he to believe that a parent 's sternness be never a match 
 for a daughter 's obstinacy . have there be a touch of tenderness in 
 his heart to the young lady herself he would not have abandon she 
 so easily . but he have find his consolation when give up his hope 
 of Sir Thomas 's money . now , should he again take to the girl , and 
 find his consolation in accept the money ? should he resolve upon 
 do so , this would materially affect any communication which he 
 might make to Imogene on the following day . 
 while thus in doubt he go into the smoking - room and there he find 
 any thinking to be out of the question . a great question be be 
 debate as to club law . one man have make an assertion . he have 
 declare that another man have be see play card in a third 
 man 's company . a fourth man have , thereupon , put his hat on his head , 
 and have declare contumaciously that the " assertion be not true . " 
 have so declare he have contumaciously stalk out of the room , 
 and have bang the door after him,--very contumaciously indeed . 
 the question be whether the contumacious gentleman have misbehave 
 himself in accordance with the rule of the club , and , if so , what 
 should be do to he . not true be as bad as " false . " " false , " 
 apply to a gentleman in a club , must be matter either of an apology 
 or expulsion . the objectionable word have , no doubt , be say in 
 defence of an absent man , and need not , perhaps , have be take up 
 have the speaker not at once put on his hat and stalk out of the 
 room , and bang the door . it be assert that a lie may be give 
 by the way in which a door be bang . and yet no club punish the 
 putting on of hat , or stalk off , or the banging of door . it be 
 a difficult question , and occupy Frank Houston till two o'clock 
 in the morning , to the exclusion of Gertrude Tringle and Imogene 
 Docimer . 
 on the Sunday morning he be not up early , nor do he go to church . 
 the contumacious gentleman be a friend of his , whom he know that no 
 argument would induce to apologise . he believe also that gentleman 
 no . 3 might have be see play card with gentleman No . 2,--so 
 that there be no valid excuse for the banging of the door . he be 
 much exercise by the point to be decide , so that when he get into 
 a cab to be take to Mrs. Docimer 's house he have hardly come to 
 any other conclusion than that one which have arise to he from a 
 comparison between the two young lady . Imogene be nearly perfect , 
 and Gertrude be as nearly the reverse as a young lady could be with 
 the proper number of eye in her head and a nose between they . the 
 style of her letter be abominable to he . " very ill indeed;--as you 
 will understand , if you ever really love I ! " there be a mawkish 
 clap - trap about it which thoroughly disgust he . everything from 
 Imogene be straightforward and downright whether it be love or 
 whether it be anger . but then to be settle with an income of 
 £ 3,000 a year would relieve he from such a load of care ! 
 " and so Tringle père do not see the advantage of such a 
 son - in - law , " say Imogene , after the first greeting be over 
 between they . the greeting have be very simple,--just a touch of 
 the hand , just a civil word,--civil , but not in the least tender , 
 just an inclination of the head , and then two seat occupy with all 
 the rug between they . 
 " yes , indeed ! " say Frank . " the man be a fool , because he will 
 probably get somebody who will behave less well to his daughter , and 
 make a bad use of his money . " 
 " just so . one can only be astonish at his folly . be there no hope 
 leave ? " 
 " a glimmer there be . " 
 " oh , indeed ! " 
 " I get a letter last night from my lady - love , in which she tell 
 I that she be very ill , and that her sickness be work upon her 
 father 's bowel . " 
 " Frank ! " 
 " it be the proper language;--working upon her father 's bowel of 
 compassion . father always have bowel of compassion at last . " 
 " you will return then , of course ? " 
 " what do you say ? " 
 " as for myself,--or as for you ? " 
 " as a discreet and trusty counsellor . to I you have always be a 
 trusty counsellor . " 
 " then I should put a few thing into a bag , go down to Merle Park , 
 and declare that , in spite of all the edict that ever come from a 
 father 's mouth , you can not absent yourself while you know that your 
 Gertrude be ill . " 
 " and so prepare a new cousin for you to press to your bosom . " 
 " if you can endure she for always , why should not I for an hour or 
 two , now and again ? " 
 " why not , indeed ? in fact , Imogene , this endure , and not 
 enduring,--even this living , and not living,--is , after all , but an 
 affair of the imagination . who can tell but , that as year roll on , 
 she may be well - look even than you . " 
 " certainly . " 
 " and have as much to say for herself ? " 
 " a great deal more that be worth hear . " 
 " and behave herself as a mother of a family with quite as much 
 propriety ? " 
 " in all that I do not doubt that she would be my superior . " 
 " More obedient I be sure she would be . " 
 " or she would be very disobedient . " 
 " and then she can provide I and my child with ample comfort . " 
 " which I take it be the real purpose for which a wife should be 
 marry . " 
 " therefore , " say he,--and then he stop . 
 " and therefore there should be no doubt . " 
 " though I hate she , " he say , clench his fist with violence as he 
 speak , " with every fibre of my heart,--still you think there should 
 be no doubt ? " 
 " that , Frank , be violent language,--and foolish . " 
 " and though I love you so intensely that whenever I see she the 
 memory of you become an agony to I . " 
 " such language be only more violent and more foolish . " 
 " surely not , if I have make up my mind at last , that I never will 
 willingly see Miss Tringle again . " here he get up , and walk across 
 the rug , stand over she , and wait as though expect some word 
 from she . but she , put she two hand up to her head , and brush 
 her hair away from her forehead , look up to he for what far 
 word might come to he . " surely not , " he continue , " if I have make 
 up my mind at last , that nothing shall ever again serve to rob I of 
 your love,--if I may still hope to possess it . " 
 " oh , Frank ! " she say , " how mean I be to be a creature obedient to 
 the whistle of such a master as you ! " 
 " but be you obedient ? " 
 " you know that well enough . I have have no Gertrude with whom I have 
 vacillate , whether for the sake of love or lucre . whatever you may 
 be,--whether mean or noble,--you be the only man with whom I can 
 endure to live , for whom I would endure to die . of course I have 
 not expect that your love should be like mine . how should it be 
 so , see that you be a man and that I be but a woman . " here he 
 attempt to seat himself by she on the sofa , which she occupy , but 
 she gently repulse he , motion he towards the chair which he have 
 occupy , " sit there , Frank , " she say , " so that we may look into 
 each other 's face and talk seriously . be it to come to this then , 
 that I be to ruin you at last ? " 
 " there will be no ruin . " 
 " but there will , if we be married now . shall I tell you the kind of 
 life which would satisfy I ? " 
 " some little place abroad ? " he ask . 
 " oh , dear , no ! no place to which you would be confine at all . if 
 I may remain as I be , know that you intend to marry no one else , 
 feel confident that there be a bond bind we together even 
 though we should never become man and wife , I should be , if not 
 happy , at least content . " 
 " that be a cold prospect . " 
 " cold;--but not ice - cold , as would have be the other . cold , but not 
 wretchedly cold , as would be the idea always present to I that I have 
 reduce you to poverty . Frank , I be so far selfish that I can not bear 
 to abandon the idea of your love . but I be not so far selfish as to 
 wish to possess it at the expense of your comfort . shall it be so ? " 
 " be how ? " say he , speak almost in anger . 
 " let we remain just as we be . only you will promise I , that as I 
 can not be your wife there shall be no other . I need hardly promise 
 you that there will be no other husband . " now he sit frown at 
 she , while she , still press back her hair with her hand , look 
 eagerly into his face . " if this will be enough for you , " she say , 
 " it shall be enough for I . " 
 " no , by G----d ! " 
 " Frank ! " 
 " it will certainly not be enough for I . I will have nothing to do 
 with so damnable a compact . " 
 " damnable ! " 
 " yes ; that be what I call it . that be what any man would call 
 it,--and any woman , too , who would speak her mind . " 
 " then , Sir , perhaps you will be kind enough to make your proposition . 
 I have make mine , such as it be , and be sorry that it should not have 
 be receive at any rate with courtesy . " but as she say this there 
 be a gleam of a bright spirit in her eye , such as he have not see 
 since first the name of Gertrude have be mention to she . 
 " yes , " say he . " you have make your proposition , and now it be only 
 fair that I should make mine . indeed , I make it already when I 
 suggest that little place abroad . let it be abroad or at home , or 
 of what nature it may,--so that you shall be there , and I with you , 
 it shall be enough for I . that be my proposition ; and , if it be not 
 accept , then I shall return to Miss Tringle and all the glory of 
 Lombard Street . " 
 " frank-- " she say . then , before she could speak another word , he have 
 rise from his seat , and she be in his arm . " Frank , " she continue , 
 push back his kiss , " how impossible it be that I should not be 
 obedient to you in all thing ! I know,--i know that I be agree to 
 that which will cause you some day to repent . " 
 " by heaven , no ! " say he . " I be change in all that . " 
 " a man can not change at once . your heart be soft , but your nature 
 remain the same . Frank , I could be so happy at this moment if I 
 could forget the picture which my imagination point to I of your 
 future life . your love , and your generous word , and the look out of 
 your dear eye , be sweet to I now , as when I be a child , whom you 
 first make so proud by tell she that she own your heart . if I 
 could only revel in the return of your affections-- " 
 " it be no return , " say he . " there have never be a moment in which 
 my affection have not be the same . " 
 " well , then,--in these permit sign of your affection,--if it be 
 not that I can not shut out the future ! do not press I to name any 
 early day , because no period of my future life will be so happy to I 
 as this . " 
 " be there any reason why I should not intrude ? " say Mrs. Docimer , 
 open the door when the above conversation have be extend for 
 perhaps another hour . 
 " not in the least , as far as I be concern , " say Frank . " a few word 
 have be speak between we , all of which may be repeat to you if 
 Imogene can remember they . " 
 " every one of they , " say Imogene ; " but I hardly think that I shall 
 repeat they . " 
 " I suppose they have be very much a matter of course , " say Mrs. 
 Docimer;--"the old story repeat between you two for the fourth 
 or fifth time . consider all thing , do you think that I should 
 congratulate you ? " 
 " I ask for no congratulation , " say Imogene . 
 " you may certainly congratulate I , " say Frank . after that the 
 conversation become tame , and the happy lover soon escape from the 
 house into the street . when there he find very much to occupy his 
 mind . he have certainly make his resolution at last , and have do so 
 in a manner which would now leave he no power of retrogression . the 
 whole theory of his life had,--with a vengeance,--been throw to the 
 wind . " the little place abroad,"--or elsewhere,--was now a settle 
 certainty . he have nearly get the well of she . he have all but 
 succeed in put down his own love and her by a little gentle 
 ridicule , and by a few half - wise phrase which she at the moment have 
 be unable to answer ; but she now have in truth vanquish he by the 
 absolute sincerity of her love . 
 CHAPTER XLII . 
 another DUEL . 
 Frank Houston on that Sunday afternoon become an altered man . the 
 reader be not to suppose by this that he be declare to have suddenly 
 throw off all his weakness , and to have succeed in clothing 
 himself in an armour of bright steel , proof for the rest of his life 
 against all temptation . such suit of armour be not to be have at 
 a moment 's notice ; nor , as I fear , can a man ever acquire one quite 
 perfect at all point who have not begin to make it for himself before 
 Houston 's age . but he do on that day dine off the two mutton chop , 
 and comfort himself with no more than the half - pint of sherry . it 
 be a great beginning . throughout the whole evening he could not be 
 get for a moment to join any of the club junta which be discuss 
 the great difficulty of the contumacious gentleman . " I think he 
 must really be go to be marry at last ! " one club pundit say 
 when a question be ask as to Houston 's singular behaviour on the 
 occasion . 
 he be indeed very sober,--so sober that he leave the smoking - room 
 as soon as his one silent cigar be finish , and go out alone in 
 order that he might roam the street in thoughtful solitude . it be 
 a clear frosty night , and as he button his great coat around he 
 he feel that the dry cold air would do he good , and assist his 
 meditation . at last then everything be arrange for he , and he be 
 to encounter exactly that mode of life which he have so often tell 
 himself to be most unfit for he . there be to be the cradle always 
 full , and his little coffer so nearly empty ! and he have do it 
 all for himself . she , Imogene , have propose a mode of life to he 
 which would at any rate have save he from this ; but it have be 
 impossible that he should accept a plan so cruel to she when the 
 proposition come from herself . it must all soon be do now . she have 
 ask that a distant day might be fix for their marriage . even 
 that request , come from she , make it almost imperative upon he 
 to insist upon an early day . it would be well for he to look upon 
 to - morrow , or a few morrow whose short distance would be immaterial 
 as the time fix . 
 no;--there should be no go back now ! so he declare to himself , 
 endeavour to prepare the suit of armour for his own wearing . Pau 
 might be the good place,--or perhaps one of those little town in 
 Brittany . Dresden would not do , because there would be society at 
 Dresden , and he must of course give up all idea of society . he 
 would have like Rome ; but Rome would be far too expensive , and then 
 resident in Rome require to be absent three or four month every 
 year . he and his wife and large family,--he have no doubt in life 
 as to the large family,--would not be able to allow themselves any 
 recreation such as that . he think he have hear that the ordinary 
 comfort of life be cheap in the west of Ireland,--or , if not 
 cheap , unobtainable , which would be the same thing . perhaps Castlebar 
 might be a good locality for his nursery . there would be nothing to 
 do at Castlebar,--no amusement whatever for such a one as himself , 
 no fitting companion for Imogene . but then amusement for himself 
 and companion for Imogene must of course be out of the question . 
 he think that perhaps he might turn his hand to a little useful 
 gardening,--parsnip instead of roses,--while Imogene would be at 
 work in the nursery . he would begin at once and buy two or three 
 dozen pipe , because tobacco would be so much cheap than cigar . he 
 know a shop at which be to be have some very pretty new - fashioned 
 meerschaum , which , he have be tell , smoker of pipe find to 
 be excellent . but , whether it should be Pau or whether it should 
 be Castlebar , whether it should be pipe or whether , in regard to 
 economy , no tobacco at all , the question now be at any rate settle 
 for he . he feel rather proud of his gallantry , as he take himself 
 home to bed , declare to himself that he would answer that last 
 letter from Gertrude in a very few word and in a very decide tone . 
 there would be many little trouble . on the Monday morning he get 
 up early thinking that as a family man such a practice would be 
 necessary for he . when he have disturb the house and nearly 
 drive his own servant mad by demand breakfast at an altogether 
 unaccustomed hour , he find that he have nothing to do . there be that 
 head of Imogene for which she have only once sit , and at which he have 
 occasionally work from memory because of her refusal to sit again ; 
 and he think for a moment that this might be good employment 
 for he now . but his art be only an expense to he . he could not 
 now afford for himself paint and brush and canvas , so he turn 
 the half - finish head round upon his easel . then he take out his 
 banker 's book , a bundle of bill and some blot scrap of rule 
 paper , with which he set himself to work to arrange his account . 
 when he do this he must certainly have be in earnest . but he have 
 not as yet succeed in see light through his figure when he be 
 interrupt by the arrival of a letter which altogether arrest his 
 attention . it be from Mudbury Docimer , and this be the letter;-- 
    DEAR HOUSTON , 
    of course I think that you and Imogene be two fool . 
    she have tell I what take place here yesterday , and I 
    have tell she the same as I tell you . I have no power to 
    prevent it ; but you know as well as I do that you and she 
    can not live together on the interest of sixteen thousand 
    pound . when you have pay everything that you owe I do not 
    suppose there will be so much as that . it have be 
    arrange between you that everything should be over ; and 
    if I have think that anything of the kind would have 
    occur again I would have tell they not to let you into 
    the house . what be the good of two such people as you 
    make yourself wretched for ever , just to satisfy the 
    romance of a moment ? I call it wicked . so I tell Imogene , 
    and so I tell you . 
    you have change your mind so often that of course you may 
    change it again . I be sure that Imogene expect that you 
    will . indeed I can hardly believe that you intend to be 
    such a Quixote . but at any rate I have do my duty . she 
    be old enough to look after herself , but as long as she 
    live with I as my sister I shall tell she what I think ; 
    and until she become your wife,--which I hope she never 
    will be,--I shall tell you the same . 
    your truly , 
    MUDBURY DOCIMER . 
 " he always be a hard , unfeele fellow , " say Frank to himself . then 
 he put the letter by with a crowd of other , assure himself that it 
 be one which require no answer . 
 on the afternoon he call at the house , as he do again on the 
 Tuesday ; but on neither day do he succeed in see Imogene . this he 
 think to be hard , as the pleasure of her society be as sweet to 
 he as ever , though he be doubtful as to his wisdom in marry she . 
 on the Wednesday morning he receive a note from she ask he not 
 to come at once , because Mudbury have choose to put himself into a 
 bad humour . then a few word of honey be add ; " of course you 
 know that nothing that he can say will make a change . I be too 
 well satisfied to allow of any change that shall not come from you 
 yourself . " he be quite alive to the sweetness of the honey , and 
 declare to himself that Mudbury Docimer 's ill - humour be a matter to 
 he of no concern whatever . 
 but on the Wednesday there come also another letter,--in regard to 
 which it will be well that we should travel down again to Merle Park . 
 an answer altogether averse to the propose change as to the niece 
 have be receive from Mrs. Dosett . " as Ayala do not wish it , of 
 course nothing can be do . " such be the decision as convey by 
 Mrs. Dosett . it seem to Lady Tringle that this be absurd . it be 
 all very well extend charity to the child of her deceased 
 sister , Mrs. Dormer ; but all the world be agree that beggar should 
 not be chooser . " as Ayala do not wish it . " why should not Ayala 
 wish it ? what a fool must Ayala be not to wish it ? why should not 
 Ayala be make to do as she be tell , whether she wish it or not ? 
 such be the indignant question which Lady Tringle ask of her 
 husband . he be become sick of the young lady altogether,--of she 
 own girl as well as the Dormer girl . " they be a pack of idiot 
 together , " he say , " and Tom be the bad of the lot . " with this he 
 rush off to London , and console himself with his million . 
 Mrs. Dosett 's letter have reach Merle Park on the Tuesday morning , 
 Sir Thomas have remain down in the country over the Monday . 
 Gertrude , have calculate the course of the post with exactness , 
 have hop to get a reply from Frank to that last letter of 
 hers,--date from her sick bed , but write in truth after a little 
 surreptitious visit to the larder after the servant ' dinner,--on 
 the Sunday morning . this have be possible , and would have evince a 
 charming alacrity on the part of her lover . but this she have hardly 
 venture to expect . then she have look with anxiety to the arrival 
 of letter on the Monday afternoon , but have look in vain . on the 
 Tuesday morning she have feel so certain that she have contrive to 
 open the post - bag herself in spite of illness;--but there have be 
 nothing for she . then she send the dispatch which reach Frank on 
 the Wednesday morning , and immediately afterwards take to her bed 
 again with such a complication of disorder that the mare with the 
 break knee be send at once into Hastings for the doctor . 
 " a little rice will be the good thing for she , " say the doctor . 
 " but the poor child take nothing,--literally nothing , " say Lady 
 Tringle , who be frightened for her child . then the doctor go on 
 to say that arrowroot would be good , and sago , but offer no other 
 prescription . Lady Tringle be disgust by his ignorance , and 
 think that it might be well to send up to London for some great 
 man . the doctor bow , and make up his mind that Lady Tringle be an 
 ass . but , be an honest man , and also tender - hearted , he contrive 
 to get hold of Tom before he leave the house . 
 " your sister 's health be generally good ? " he say . Tom assent . as 
 far as he know , Gertrude have always be as strong as a horse . " eat 
 well ? " ask the doctor . Tom , who occasionally see the family at 
 lunch , give a description of his sister 's general performance . 
 " she be a fine healthy young lady , " say the doctor . Tom give a 
 brother 's ready adhesion to the word healthy , but pass over the 
 other epithet as be superfluous . " now , I will tell you what it be , " 
 say the doctor . " of course I do not want to inquire into any family 
 secret . " 
 " my father , you know , " say Tom , " will not agree about the man she be 
 engage to . " 
 " that be it ? I know there be some little trouble , but I do not want 
 to ask any question . your mother be unnecessarily frightened , and 
 I have not wish to disturb she . your sister be take plenty of 
 nourishment ? " 
 " she do not come to table , nor yet have it in her own room . " 
 " she get it somehow . I can say that it be so . her vein be full , 
 and her arm be strong . perhaps she go into the kitchen . have a 
 little tray make ready for she , with something nice . she will be sure 
 to find it , and when she have find it two or three time she will 
 know that she have be discover . if Lady Tringle do send for 
 a physician from London you could perhaps find an opportunity of 
 tell he what I have suggest . her mamma need know nothing about 
 it . " this take place on the Tuesday , and on the Wednesday morning 
 Gertrude know that she have be discovered,--at any rate by Tom and 
 the doctor . " I take care to keep a wing for you , " say Tom ; " I carve 
 they myself at dinner . " as he so address she he come out from his 
 hiding - place in the kitchen about midnight , and surprise she in the 
 larder . she give a fearful scream , which , however , luckily be not 
 hear through the house . " you will not tell mamma , Tom , will you ? " Tom 
 promise that he would not , on condition that she would come down 
 to breakfast on the follow morning . this she do , and the London 
 physician be save a journey . 
 but , in the meantime , Gertrude 's second letter have go up to Frank , 
 and also a very heartrending epistle from Lady Tringle to her 
 husband . " poor Gertrude be in a very bad state . if ever there be 
 a girl really break - hearted on account of love , she be one . I do 
 not think she would ever set her heart upon a man with such violent 
 affection . I do think you might give way when it become a question 
 of life and death . there be not anything really against Mr. Houston . " 
 Sir Thomas , as he read this , be a little shaken . he have hitherto 
 be inclined to agree with Rosalind , " that man have die from time 
 to time , and worm have eat they , but not for love . " but now he do 
 not know what to think about it . there be Tom undoubtedly in a bad 
 way , and here be Gertrude bring to such a condition , simply by her 
 love , that she refuse to take her meal regularly ! be the world 
 come to such a pass that a father be compel to give his daughter 
 with a large fortune to an idle adventurer , or else to be responsible 
 for his daughter 's life ? would Augusta have pin away and die have 
 she not be allow to marry her Traffick ? would Lucy pine and die 
 unless money be give to her sculptor ? upon the whole , Sir Thomas 
 think that the care of his family be hard to bear than those 
 of his million . in regard to Gertrude , he almost think that he 
 would give way , if only that he might be rid of that trouble . 
 it must be acknowledge that Frank Houston , when he receive the 
 young lady 's letter , be less soft - hearted than her father . the 
 letter be , or should have be , heartrending;-- 
    you cruel MAN , 
    you must have receive my former letter , and though I tell 
    you that I be ill and almost die you have not heed 
    it ! three post have come , and I have not have a line from 
    you . in your last you be weak enough to say that you 
    be go to give it all up because you could not make 
    papa do just what you want all at once . do you know what 
    it be to have take possession of a young lady 's heart ; 
    or be it true , as Augusta say of you , that you care for 
    nothing but the money ? if it be so , say it at once and 
    let I die . as it be I be so very ill that I can not eat a 
    mouthful of anything , and have hardly strength leave to I 
    to write this letter . 
    but I can not really believe what Augusta say , though I 
    daresay it may have be so with Mr. Traffick . perhaps you 
    have not be to your club , and so you have not get my 
    former letter . or , it may be that you be ill yourself . 
    if so , I do wish that I could come and nurse you , though 
    indeed I be so ill that I be quite unable to leave my bed . 
    at any rate , pray write immediately;--and do come ! Mamma 
    seem to think that papa will give way because I be so 
    ill . if so , I shall think my illness the lucky thing 
    in the world.--you must believe , dear Frank , that I be 
    now , as ever , your most affectionately , 
    GERTRUDE . 
 Frank Houston be less credulous than Sir Thomas , and do not believe 
 much in the young lady 's sickness . it be evident that the young lady 
 be quite up to the work of deceive her father and mother , and 
 would no doubt be willing to deceive himself if anything could be get 
 by it . but , whether she be ill or whether she be well , he could 
 offer she no comfort . nevertheless , he be bind to send she some 
 answer , and with a troubled spirit he write as follows;-- 
    MY dear MISS TRINGLE , 
    it be to I a matter of inexpressible grief that I should 
    have to explain again that I be unable to persist in 
    seek the honour of your hand in opposition to the 
    absolute and repeat refusal which I have receive from 
    your father . it be so evident that we could not marry 
    without his consent that I need not now go into that 
    matter . but I think myself bind to say that , consider 
    the matter in all its bearing , I must regard our 
    engagement as finally at an end . be I to hesitate in 
    say this very plainly I think I should be do you an 
    injury . 
    I be sorry to hear that you be unwell , and trust that you 
    may soon recover your health . 
    your sincere friend , 
    FRANK HOUSTON . 
 on the next morning Gertrude be still in her bed , have there 
 receive her letter , when she send a message to her brother . would 
 Tom come and see she ? Tom attend to her behest , and then sit down 
 by her bedside on be tell in a mysterious voice that she have to 
 demand from he a great service . " Tom , " she say , " that man have 
 treat I most shamefully and most falsely . " 
 " what man ? " 
 " what man ? why , Frank Houston . there have never be any other man . 
 after all that have be say and do he be go to throw I over . " 
 " the governor throw he over , " say Tom . 
 " that amount to nothing . the governor would have give way , of 
 course , and if he have not that be no matter of his . after he have have 
 my promise he be bind to go on with it . do not you think so ? " 
 " perhaps he be , " say Tom , dubiously . 
 " of course he be . what else be the meaning of a promise ? now I will 
 tell you what you must do . you must go up to London and find he out . 
 you have well take a stick with you , and then ask he what he mean 
 to do . " 
 " and if he say he will do nothing ? " 
 " then , Tom , you should call he out . it be just the position in which 
 a brother be bind to do that kind of thing for his sister . when he 
 have be call out , then probably he will come round , and all will be 
 well . " 
 the prospect be one which Tom do not at all like . he have have one 
 duel on his hand on his own account , and have not as yet come through 
 it with fly colour . there be still moment in which he feel 
 that he would be compel at last to take to violence in reference 
 to Colonel Stubbs . he be all but convince that be he to do so 
 he would fall into some great trouble , but still it be more than 
 probable that his outraged feeling would not allow he to resist . 
 but this second quarrel be certainly unnecessary . " that be all 
 nonsense , Gertrude , " he say , " I can do nothing of the kind . " 
 " you will not ? " 
 " certainly not . it would be absurd . you ask Septimus and he will tell 
 you that it be so . " 
 " Septimus , indeed ! " 
 " at any rate , I will not . man do not call each other out now - a - day . 
 I know what ought to be do in these kind of thing , and such 
 interference as that would be altogether improper . " 
 " then , Tom , " say she , raise herself in bed , and look round upon 
 he , " I will never call you my brother again ! " 
 CHAPTER XLIII . 
 once MORE ! 
 " probably you be not aware , Sir , that I be not at present the young 
 lady 's guardian . " this be say at the office in Lombard Street by 
 Sir Thomas , in answer to an offer make to he by Captain Batsby for 
 Ayala 's hand . Captain Batsby have make his way boldly into the great 
 man 's inner room , and have there declare his purpose in a short and 
 business - like manner . he have an ample income of his own , he say , 
 and be prepared to make a proper settlement on the young lady . if 
 necessary , he would take she without any fortune;--but it would , of 
 course , be for the lady 's comfort and for his own if something in the 
 way of money be forthcoming . so much he add , have hear of this 
 uncle 's enormous wealth , and have also learn the fact that if Sir 
 Thomas be not at this moment Ayala 's guardian he have be not long 
 ago . Sir Thomas listen to he with patience , and then reply to 
 he as above . 
 " just so , Sir Thomas . I do hear that . but I think you be once ; and 
 you be still her uncle . " 
 " yes ; I be her uncle . " 
 " and when I be so ill - treat in Kingsbury Crescent I think 
 I would come to you . it could not be right that a gentleman 
 make an honourable proposition,--and very liberal , as you must 
 acknowledge,--should not be allow to see the young lady . it be not 
 as though I do not know she . I have be ten day in the same house 
 with she . do not you think , Sir Thomas , I ought to have be allow 
 to see she ? " 
 " I have nothing to do with she , " say Sir thomas;--"that be , in the 
 way of authority . " nevertheless , before Captain Batsby leave he , he 
 become courteous to that gentleman , and though he could not offer any 
 direct assurance he acknowledge that the application be reasonable . 
 he be , in truth , become tired of Ayala , and would have be glad 
 to find a husband whom she would accept , so that she might be out 
 of Tom 's way . he have be quite willing that Tom should marry the 
 girl if it be possible , but he begin to be convince that it be 
 impossible . he have offer again to open his house to she , with all 
 its wealth , but she have refuse to come into it . his wife have tell 
 he that , if Ayala could be bring back in place of Lucy , she would 
 surely yield . but Ayala would not allow herself to be bring back . 
 and there be Tom as bad as ever . if Ayala be once marry then Tom 
 could go upon his travel , and come back , no doubt , a sane man . Sir 
 Thomas think it might be well to make inquiry about this Captain , 
 and then see if a marriage might be arrange . Mrs. Dosett , he tell 
 himself , be a hard , stiff woman , and would never get the girl 
 married unless she allow such a suitor as this Captain Batsby to 
 have access to the house . he do make inquiry , and before the week 
 be over have determine that if Ayala would become Mrs. Batsby there 
 might probably be an end to one of his trouble . 
 as he go down to Merle Park he arrange his plan . he would , in the 
 first place , tell Tom that Ayala have as many suitor as Penelope , 
 and that one have come up now who would probably succeed . but when he 
 reach home he find that his son be go . Tom have take a sudden 
 freak , and have run up to London . " he seem quite to have get a 
 change , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " I hope it be a change for the well as to that stupid girl . " Lady 
 Tringle could not say that there have be any change for the well , 
 but she think that there have be a change about the girl . Tom 
 have , as she say , quite " brisk up , " have declare that he be not 
 go to stand this thing any long , have pack up three or four 
 portmanteau , and have have himself carry off to the near railway 
 station in time for an afternoon train up to London . " what be he 
 go to do when he get there ? " ask Sir Thomas . Lady Tringle have 
 no idea what her son intend to do , but think that something 
 special be intend in regard to Ayala . 
 " he be an ass , " say the father . 
 " you always say he be an ass , " say the mother , complain . 
 " no doubt I do . what else be I to call he ? " then he go on and 
 develop his scheme . " let Ayala be ask to Merle Park for a 
 week,--just for a week,--and assured that during that time Tom 
 would not be there . then let Captain Batsby also be invite . " upon 
 this there follow an explanation as to Captain Batsby and his 
 aspiration . Tom must be relieve after some fashion , and Sir Thomas 
 declare that no well fashion seem to present itself . Lady 
 Tringle receive her order with sundry murmuring , still grieve 
 for her son 's grief;--but she assent , as she always do assent , to 
 her husband 's proposition . 
 now we will accompany Tom up to London . the patient reader will 
 perhaps have understand the condition of his mind when in those 
 day of his sharp agony he have give himself up to faddle and 
 champagne . by these mean he have bring himself into trouble and 
 disgrace , of which he be fully conscious . he have fall into the 
 hand of the police and have be harass during the whole period by 
 headache and nausea . then have come the absurdity of his challenge 
 to Colonel Stubbs , the folly of which have be make plain to he by 
 the very letter which his rival have write to he . there be good 
 sense enough about the poor fellow to enable he to understand 
 that the police court , and the prison , that Faddle and the orgy 
 at Bolivia 's , that his challenge and the reply to it , be alike 
 dishonourable to he . then have come a reaction , and he spend a 
 miserable fortnight down at Merle Park , do nothing , resolve on 
 nothing , merely mop about and pour the oft - repeat tale of his 
 woe into his mother 's bosom . these day at Merle Park give he back 
 at any rate his health , and rescue he from the intense wretchedness 
 of his condition on the day after the comparison of Bolivia 's wine . 
 in this improved state he tell himself that it behove he even yet 
 to do something as a man , and he come suddenly to the bold resolution 
 of having,--as he call it to himself,--another " dash at Ayala . " 
 how the " dash " be to be make he have not determine when he leave 
 home . but to this he devote the whole of the following Sunday . he 
 have receive a lachrymose letter from his friend Faddle , at Aberdeen , 
 in which the unfortunate youth have tell he that he be destine to 
 remain in that wretched northern city for the rest of his natural 
 life . he have not as yet be to the Mountaineers since his mishap 
 with the police , and do not care to show himself there at present . 
 he be therefore altogether alone , and , walk all alone the entire 
 round of the park , he at last form his resolution . 
 on the following morning when Mr. Dosett enter his room at Somerset 
 House , a little after half - past ten o'clock , he find his nephew 
 Tom there before he , and wait for he . Mr. Dosett be somewhat 
 astonish , for he too have hear of Tom 's misfortune . some 
 ill - natured chronicle of Tom 's latter doing have spread itself among 
 the Tringle and Dosett set , and Uncle Reginald be aware that his 
 nephew have be force to relinquish his stool in Lombard Street . the 
 vice of the young be perhaps too often exaggerated , so that Mr. 
 Dosett have hear of an amount of champagne consume and a number 
 of policeman wound , of which his nephew have not be altogether 
 guilty . there be an idea at Kingsbury Crescent that Tom have go 
 nearly mad , and be now keep under paternal care at Merle Park . when , 
 therefore , he see Tom bloom in health , and bright than usual in 
 general appearance , he be no doubt rejoice , but also surprised , at 
 the change . " what , Tom ! " he say ; " I be glad to see you look so 
 well . be you up in London again ? " 
 " I be in town for a day or two , " say Tom . 
 " and what can I do for you ? " 
 " well , Uncle Reginald , you can do a great deal for I if you will . of 
 course you have hear of all those row of mine ? " 
 " I have hear something . " 
 " everybody have hear , " say Tom , mournfully . " I do not suppose anybody 
 be ever knock so much about as I have be for the last six month . " 
 " I be sorry for that , Tom . " 
 " I be sure you be , because you be always good - natured . now I wonder 
 if you will do a great thing to oblige I . " 
 " let we hear what it be , " say Uncle Reginald . 
 " I suppose you know that there be only one thing in the world that I 
 want . " Mr. Dosett think that it would be discreet to make no reply 
 to this , but , turn his chair partly round , he prepare to listen 
 very attentively to what his nephew might have to say to he . " all 
 this about the policeman and the rest of it have simply come from my 
 be so unhappy about Ayala . " 
 " it would not be take as a promise of your be a good husband , Tom , 
 when you get into such a mess as that . " 
 " that be because people do not understand , " say Tom . " it be because I 
 be so earnest about it , and because I can not bear the disappointment ! 
 there be not one at Travers and Treason who do not know that if I would 
 marry Ayala I should have settle down as quiet a young man as 
 there be in all London . you ask the governor else himself . as long as 
 I think there be any hope I use to be there steady as a rock at 
 half - past nine . everybody know it . so I should again , if she have only 
 come round . " 
 " you can not make a lady come round , as you call it . " 
 " not make she ; no . of course you can not make a girl . but persuade 
 go a long way . why should not she have I ? as to all these row , she 
 ought to feel at any rate that they be she do . and what she be do 
 it stand to reason she could undo if she would . it only want a word 
 from she to put I all right with the governor,--and to put I all 
 right with Travers and Treason too . nobody can love she as I do . " 
 " I do believe that nobody could love she well , " say Mr. Dosett , 
 who be begin to be melt by his nephew 's earnestness . 
 " ought not that to go for something ? and then she would have 
 everything that she wish . she might live anywhere she pleased,--so 
 that I might go to the office every day . she would have her own 
 carriage , you know . " 
 " I do not think that would matter much with Ayala . " 
 " it show that I be in a position to ask she , " say Tom . " if she could 
 only bring herself not to hate me-- " 
 " there be a difference , Tom , between hat and not love . " 
 " if she would only begin to make a little way , then I could hope 
 again . Uncle Reginald , could you not tell she that at any rate I 
 would be good to she ? " 
 " I think you would be good to she , " he say . 
 " indeed , I would . there be nothing I would not do for she . now will 
 you let I see she just once again , and have one other chance ? " 
 this be the great thing which Tom desire from his uncle , and Mr. 
 Dosett be so much soften by his nephew 's earnestness that he do 
 promise to do as much as this;--to do as much as this , at least , if 
 it be in his power . of course , Ayala must be tell . no good could 
 be do by surprise she by a visit . but he would endeavour so 
 to arrange it that , if Tom be to come to he on the follow 
 afternoon , they two should go to the Crescent together , and then Tom 
 should remain and dine there,--or go away before dinner , as he might 
 please , after the interview . this be settle , and Tom leave Somerset 
 House , rejoice greatly at his success . it seem to he that now at 
 last a way be open to he . 
 Uncle Reginald , on his return home , take his niece aside and talk 
 to she very gently and very kindly . " whether you like he or whether 
 you do not , my dear , he be so true to you that you be bind to see 
 he again when he ask it . " at first she be very stout , declare 
 that she would not see he . of what good could it be , see that she 
 would rather throw herself into the Thames than marry he ? have she 
 not tell he so over and over again , as often as he have speak to 
 she ? why would he not just leave she alone ? but against all this her 
 uncle plead gently but persistently . he have consider himself 
 bind to promise so much on her behalf , and for his sake she must do 
 as he ask . to this , of course , she yield . and then he say many 
 good thing of poor Tom . his constancy be a great virtue . a man so 
 thoroughly in love would no doubt make a good husband . and then there 
 would be the assent of all the family , and an end , as far as Ayala 
 be concern , of all pecuniary trouble . in answer to this she only 
 shake her head , promise , however , that she would be ready to give 
 Tom an audience when he should be bring to the Crescent on the 
 follow day . 
 punctually at four Tom make his appearance at Somerset House , and 
 start with his uncle as soon as the index - book have be put in 
 their place . Tom be very anxious to take his uncle home in a 
 cab , but Mr. Dosett would not consent to lose his walk . along the 
 Embankment they go , and across Charing Cross into St. James 's Park , 
 and then by Green Park , Hyde Park , and Kensington Gardens , all the 
 way to Notting Hill . Mr. Dosett do not walk very fast , and Tom 
 think they would never reach Kingsbury Crescent . his uncle would 
 fain have talk about the weather , or politic , or the hardship of 
 the Civil Service generally ; but Tom would not be divert from his 
 one subject . would Ayala be gracious to he ? Mr. Dosett have make up 
 his mind to say nothing on the subject . Tom must plead his own cause . 
 Uncle Reginald think that he know such pleading would be useless , 
 but still would not say a word to daunt the lover . neither could he 
 say a word expressive of hope . as they be fully an hour - and - a - half 
 on their walk , this reticence be difficult . 
 immediately on his arrival , Tom be take up into the drawing - room . 
 this be empty , for it have be arrange that Mrs. Dosett should be 
 absent till the meeting be over . " now I will look for this child , " 
 say Uncle Reginald , in his cheery voice as he leave Tom alone 
 in the room . Tom , as he look round at the chair and table , 
 remember that he have never receive as much as a kind word or look 
 in the room , and then great drop of perspiration break out all over 
 his brow . all that he have to hope for in the world must depend upon 
 the next five minutes;--might depend perhaps upon the very selection 
 of the word which he might use . 
 then Ayala enter the room and stand before he . 
 " Ayala , " he say , give she his hand . 
 " Uncle Reg say that you would like to see I once again . " 
 " of course I want to see you once , and twice,--and always . Ayala , if 
 you could know it ! if you could only know it ! " then he clasp his 
 two hand high upon his breast , not as though appeal to her heart , 
 but strike his bosom in very agony . " Ayala , I feel that , if I do 
 not have you as my own , I can only die for the want of you . Ayala , do 
 you believe I ? " 
 " I suppose I believe you , but how can I help it ? " 
 " try to help it ! try to try and help it ! say a word that you will 
 perhaps help it by - and - bye . " then there come a dark frown upon she 
 brow,--not , indeed , from anger , but from a feeling that so terrible a 
 task should be throw upon she . " I know you think that I be common . " 
 " I have never say a word , Tom , but that I could not love you . " 
 " but I be true,--true as the sun . would I come again after all if 
 it be not that I can not help come ? you have hear that I have 
 been,--been misbehave myself ? " 
 " I have not think about that . " 
 " it have be so because I have be so wretched . Ayala , you have make 
 I so unhappy . Ayala , you can make I the happy man there be in 
 London this day . I seem to want nothing else . as for drink , or club , 
 or billiard , and all that , they be nothing to me,--unless when I 
 try to forget that you be so -- so unkind to I ! " 
 " it be not unkind , not to do as you ask I . " 
 " to do as I ask you,--that would be kind . oh , Ayala , can not you be 
 kind to I ? " she shake her head , still stand in the place which 
 she have occupy from the beginning . " may I come again ? will you give 
 I three month , and then think of it ? if you would only say that , I 
 would go back to my work and never leave it . " but she still shake she 
 head . " must I never hope ? " 
 " not for that , Tom . how can I help it ? " 
 " not help it . " 
 " no . how can I help it ? one do not fall in love by trying,--nor by 
 try prevent it . " 
 " by degree you might love me,--a little . " she have say all that 
 she know how to say , and again shake her head . " it be that accurse 
 Colonel , " he exclaim , forget himself as he think of his 
 rival . 
 " he be not accurse , " say Ayala , angrily . 
 " then you love he ? " 
 " no ! but you should not ask . you have no right to ask . it be not 
 proper . " 
 " you be not engage to he ? " 
 " no ; I be not engaged to he . I do not love he . as you will ask , 
 I tell you . but you should not ask ; and he be not accurse . he be 
 well than you,--though I do not love he . you should not have 
 drive I to say this . I do not ask you question . " 
 " there be none that I would not answer . Stay , Ayala , " for now she be 
 go to leave the room . " stay yet a moment . do you know that you 
 be tear my heart in piece ? why be it that you should make I so 
 wretched ? dear Ayala;--dearest Ayala;--stay yet a moment . " 
 " Tom , there be nothing more that I can say . I be very , very sorry if 
 you be unhappy . I do think that you be good and true ; and if you 
 will shake hand with I , there be my hand . but I can not say what 
 you want I to say . " Tom take she by the hand and try to hold she , 
 without , however , speak to she again . but she slide away from he 
 and leave the room , not have for a moment sit down in his presence . 
 when the door be close he stand awhile look round he , try 
 to resolve what he might do or what he might say next . he be now 
 at any rate in the house with she , and do not know whether such 
 an opportunity as that might ever occur to he again . he feel that 
 there be word within his bosom which , if he could only bring they 
 up to his mouth , would melt the heart of a stone . there be his 
 ineffable love , his whole happiness at stake , his purpose,--his holy 
 purpose,--to devote himself , and all that he have , to her well - being . 
 of all this he have a full conception within his own heart , if only he 
 could express it so that other should believe he ! but of what use 
 be it now ? he have have this further liberty of speech accord to 
 he , and in it he have do nothing , make no inch of progress . she have 
 hardly speak a dozen word to he , but of those she have speak two 
 remain clear upon his memory . he must never hope , she have say ; and 
 she have say also that that other man be well than he . have she 
 say that he be dearer , the word would hardly have be more bitter . 
 all the old feeling come upon he of rage against his rival , and of 
 a desire that something desperate should be do by which he might 
 wreak his vengeance . 
 but there he be stand alone in Mrs. Dosett 's drawing - room , and it 
 be necessary that he should carry himself off . as for dining in that 
 house , sit down to eat and drink in Ayala 's presence after such a 
 conversation as that which be past , that he feel to be quite out of 
 the question . he cram his hat upon his head , leave the room , and 
 hurry down the stair towards the door . 
 in the passage he be meet by his uncle , come out of the 
 dining - room . " Tom , " he say , " you will stay and eat your dinner ? " 
 " no , indeed , " say Tom , angrily . 
 " you should not let yourself be disturb by little trifle such as 
 these , " say his uncle , try to put a good face upon the matter . 
 " Trifles ! " say Tom Tringle . " Trifles ! " and he bang the door after 
 he as he leave the house . 
 END of VOL . II . 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 AYALA 's angel 
 by 
 ANTHONY TROLLOPE , 
 author of " Doctor Thorne , " " the Prime Minister , " " Orley Farm , " 
 & c. , & c. 
 in Three Volumes . 
 VOL . III . 
 London : 
 Chapman and Hall ( Limited ) , 
 11 , Henrietta Street , Covent Garden . 
 1881 . 
 [ all Rights reserve . ] 
 Westminster : 
 J. B. Nichols and Sons , Printers . 
 25 , Parliament Street . 
 content of VOL . III . 
      XLIV . in the HAYMARKET . 
       XLV . there be something of the ANGEL about HIM . 
      XLVI . AYALA go again to stalham . 
     XLVII . CAPTAIN BATSBY AT MERLE PARK . 
    XLVIII . the JOURNEY to OSTEND . 
      XLIX . the new frock . 
         L. GOBBLEGOOSE wood on SUNDAY . 
        LI . " no ! " 
       LII . " I CALL it FOLLY . " 
     LIIII . how LUCY 's AFFAIRS ARRANGED THEMSELVES . 
       LIV . TOM 's last attempt . 
        LV . in the CASTLE there live a KNIGHT . 
       LVI . GOBBLEGOOSE WOOD again . 
      LVII . CAPTAIN BATSBY in LOMBARD street . 
     LVIII . MR . TRAFFICK in LOMBARD STREET . 
       LIX . TREGOTHNAN . 
        LX . AUNT ROSINA . 
       LXI . TOM TRINGLE go upon his travel . 
      LXII . how very much he love she . 
     LXIII . AYALA again in LONDON . 
      LXIV . AYALA 's marriage . 
 AYALA 's ANGEL . 
 CHAPTER XLIV . 
 in the haymarket . 
 it be now the beginning of February . as Tom and his uncle have walk 
 from Somerset House the street be dry and the weather fine ; but , 
 as Mr. Dosett have remark , the wind be change a little out of 
 the east and threatened rain . when Tom leave the house it be already 
 fall . it be then past six , and the night be very dark . he have 
 walk there with a top coat and umbrella , but he have forget 
 both as he bang the door after he in his passion ; and , though 
 he remember they as he hurry down the step , he would not turn 
 and knock at the door and ask for they . he be in that humour which 
 convert outward bodily suffering almost into a relief . when a 
 man have be thoroughly illuse in great matter it be almost a 
 consolation to he to feel that he have be turn out into the 
 street to get wet through without his dinner,--even though he may 
 have turn himself out . 
 he walk on foot , and as he walk become damp and dirty , till he 
 be soon wet through . as soon as he reach Lancaster Gate he go 
 into the park , and under the doubtful glimmer of the lamp trudge on 
 through the mud and slush , not regard his path , hardly think 
 of the present moment in the full appreciation of his real misery . 
 what should he do with himself ? what else be there now leave to 
 he ? he have try everything and have fail . as he endeavour to 
 count himself up , as it be , and tell himself whether he be 
 worthy of a happy fate than have be award to he , he be very 
 humble,--humble , though so indignant ! he know himself to be a poor 
 creature in comparison with Jonathan Stubbs . though he could not have 
 be Stubbs have he give his heart for it , though it be absolutely 
 beyond he to assume one of those trick of bearing , one of those 
 manly , win way , which in his eye be so excellent in the other 
 man , still he see they and acknowledge they , and tell himself that 
 they would be all powerful with such a girl as Ayala . though he 
 trust to his charm and his ring , he know that his charm and his 
 ring be abominable , as compare with that outside look and natural 
 garniture which belong to Stubbs , as though of right,--as though it 
 have be bear with he . not exactly in those word , but with a full 
 inward sense of the word , he tell himself that Colonel Stubbs be a 
 gentleman,--whereas he acknowledge himself to be a cad . how could 
 he have hop that Ayala should accept such a one , merely because he 
 would have a good house of his own and a carriage ? as he think of 
 all this , he hardly know which he hat most,--himself or Jonathan 
 Stubbs . 
 he go down to the family house in Queen 's Gate , which be close 
 and dark,--having come there with no special purpose , but have 
 find himself there , as though by accident , in the neighbourhood . 
 then he knock at the door , which , after a great undoing of chain , 
 be open by an old woman , who with her son have the custody of the 
 house when the family be out of town . Sir Thomas in these day have 
 room of his own in Lombard Street in which he love to dwell , and 
 would dine at a city club , never leave the precinct of the city 
 throughout the week . the old woman be an old servant , and her son 
 be a porter at the office . " Mr. Tom ! be that you ? why you be as wet 
 as a mop ! " he be wet as any mop , and much dirty than a mop should 
 be . there be no fire except in the kitchen , and there he be take . 
 he ask for a great coat , but there be no such thing in the house , 
 as the young man have not yet come home . nor be there any food that 
 could be offer he , or anything to drink ; as the cellar be lock 
 up , and the old woman be on board wage . but he sit crouch over 
 the fire , watch the steam as it come up from his damp boot and 
 trouser . " and be not you have no dinner , Mr. Tom ? " say the old woman . 
 Tom only shake his head . " and be not you go to have none ? " the poor 
 wretch again shake his head . " that be bad , Mr. Tom . " then she look 
 up into his face . " there be something wrong I know , Mr. Tom . I hear 
 that from Jem . of course he hear what they do be say in Lombard 
 Street . " 
 " what be it they say , Mrs. Tapp ? " 
 " well;--that you be not there as you use to be . thing be awk'ard , 
 and Sir Thomas , they say , be not well pleased . but of course it be not 
 no affair of mine , Mr. Tom . " 
 " do they know why ? " he ask . 
 " they do say it be some'at about a young lady . " 
 " yes ; by heaven ! " say Tom , jump up out of his chair . " oh , Mrs. 
 Tapp , you can not tell the condition I be in . a young lady indeed ! D---- 
 the fellow ! " 
 " do not ' ee now , Mr. Tom . " 
 " D---- the fellow ! but there be no good in my standing here curse . 
 I will go off again . you need not say that I have be here , Mrs. Tapp ? " 
 " but you will not go out into the rain , Mr. Tom ? " 
 " rain,--what matter the rain ? " then he start again , disregard 
 all her prayer , and go off eastward on foot , disdain the use 
 of a cab because he have settle in his mind on no place to which he 
 would go . 
 yes ; they know all about it , down to the very porter at the office . 
 everyone have hear of his love for Ayala ; and everyone have hear also 
 that Ayala have scorn he . not a man or woman connect by ever so 
 slight a tie to the establishment be unaware that he have be send 
 away from his seat because of Ayala ! all this might have be bear 
 easily have there be any hope ; but now he be force to tell himself 
 that there be none . he see no end to his misery,--no possibility of 
 escape . where be he to go in this moment of his misery for any shred 
 of comfort ? the solitude of his lodging be dreadful to he ; nor have 
 he heart enough leave to he to seek companionship at his club . 
 at about ten o'clock he find himself , as it be , by accident , close 
 to Mr. Bolivia 's establishment . he be thoroughly wet through , jade , 
 wretche , and in want of sustenance . he turn in , and find the 
 place desert . the diner have go away , and the hour have not come 
 at which man in quest of later refreshment be will not to make their 
 appearance . but there be still one or two gas - light burning ; and 
 he throw himself wearily into a little box or partition near 
 to the fire . here Signor Bolivia himself come to he , ask in 
 commiserate accent what have bring he thither in so wretched a 
 plight . " I have leave my coat and umbrella behind , " say Tom , try 
 to pluck up a little spirit,--"and my dinner too . " 
 " no dinner , Mr. Tringle ; and you wet through like that ! what shall I 
 get you , Mr. Tringle ? " but Tom declare that he would have no dinner . 
 he be off his appetite altogether , he say . he would have a bottle 
 of champagne and a devilled biscuit . Mr. Walker , who , as we be 
 aware , put himself forward to the world generally as Signor Bolivia , 
 feel for the moment a throb of pity , which overcome in his heart the 
 innkeeper 's natural desire to make the most he could of his customer . 
 " well have a mutton chop and a little drop of brandy - and - water 
 hot . " 
 " I be not up to it , Bolivia , " say the young man . " I could not swallow 
 it if I have it . give we the bottle of champagne and the devil 
 biscuit . " then Mr. Walker,--for Bolivia be in truth walker,--fetche 
 the wine and order the biscuit ; and poor Tom be again bring back 
 to the miserable remedy to which he have before apply himself in his 
 misfortune . there he remain for about an hour , during a part of 
 which he sleep ; but before he leave the house he finish the wine . 
 as he get up to take his departure Mr. Walker scan his gait and 
 bearing , have a friendly feeling for the young man , and not wish 
 he to fall again into the hand of the police . but Tom walk forth 
 apparently as sober as a judge , and as melancholy as a hangman . as 
 far as Mr. Walker could see the liquor have make no impression on he . 
 " if I be you , Mr. Tringle , " say the keeper of the eating - house , 
 " I would go home at once , because you be so mortal wet . " 
 " all right , " say Tom , go out into the pour rain . 
 it be then something after eleven , and Tom instead of take the 
 friendly advice which have be offer to he , walk , as fast as he 
 could , round Leicester Square ; and as he walk the fume of the wine 
 mount into his head . but he be not drunk,--not as yet so drunk as 
 to misbehave himself openly . he do not make his way round the square 
 without be address , but he simply shake off from he those who 
 speak to he . his mind be still intent upon Ayala . but now he be 
 revengeful rather than despondent . the liquor have fill he once 
 again with a desire to do something . if he could destroy himself and 
 the Colonel by one and the same blow , how fitting a punishment would 
 that be for Ayala ! but how be he to do it ? he would throw himself 
 down from the top of the Duke of York 's column , but that would be 
 nothing unless he could force the Colonel to take the jump with he ! 
 he have call the man out and he would not come ! now , with the alcohol 
 in his brain , he again think that the man be a coward for not 
 come . have not such a meeting be from time immemorial the resource 
 of gentleman injure as he now be injure ? the Colonel would not 
 come when called,--but could he not get at he so as to strike he ? 
 if he could do the man a real injury he would not care what amount of 
 punishment he might be call upon to bear . 
 he hurry at last out of the square into Coventry Street and down 
 the haymarket . his lodging be in Duke Street , turn out of 
 Piccadilly,--but he could not bring himself to go home to his bed . 
 he be unutterably wretched , but yet he keep himself go with some 
 idea of do something , or of fix some purpose . he certainly 
 be tipsy now , but not so drunk as to be unable to keep himself on 
 his leg . he glory in the wet , shout inwardly to himself that 
 he in his misery be superior to all accident of the weather . then 
 he stand for awhile watch the people as they come out of the 
 Haymarket Theatre . he be at this time a sorry sight to be see . his 
 hat be jammed on to his head and have be almost smash in the 
 jamming . his coat reek wet through be fasten by one button 
 across his chest . his two hand be thrust into his pocket , and the 
 bottle of champagne be visible in his face . he be such a one,--to 
 look at,--that no woman would have like to touch or any man to 
 address . in this guise he stand there amidst the crowd , foremost 
 among those who be watch the lady as they get into their 
 vehicle . " and she might be as good as the good of they , and I might 
 be here to hand she into her own carriage,"--said he to himself,--"if 
 it be not for that intruder ! " 
 at that moment the intruder be there before he , and on his arm be 
 a lady whom he be take across to a carriage , at the door of which 
 a servant in livery be stand . they be follow closely by a 
 pretty young girl who be pick her step after they alone . these 
 be Lady Albury and Nina , whom Colonel Stubbs have escort to the 
 play . 
 " you will be down by the twentieth ? " say the eld lady . 
 " Punctual as the day come , " say the Colonel . 
 " and mind you have Ayala with you , " say the young . 
 " if Lady Albury can manage it with her aunt of course I will wait 
 upon she , " say the Colonel . then the door of the carriage be shut , 
 and the Colonel be leave to look for a cab . he have on an overcoat and 
 an opera hat , but otherwise be dress as for dinner . on one side 
 a link - boy be offer he assistance , and on another a policeman 
 tender he some service . he be one of those who by their outward 
 appearance always extort respect from those around they . 
 as long as the lady have be there,--dure the two minute which 
 have be occupy while they get into the carriage,--Tom have be 
 restrain by their presence . he have be restrain by their 
 presence even though he have hear Ayala 's name and have understand the 
 commission give to the man whom he hat . have Colonel Stubbs luckily 
 follow the lady into the carriage Tom , in his fury , would have 
 take himself off to his bed . but now,--there be his enemy within 
 a yard of he ! here be the opportunity the lack of which seem , a 
 few moment since , to be so grievous to he ! he take two step out 
 from the row in which he stand and strike his rival high on his 
 breast with his fist . he have aim at the Colonel 's face but in his 
 eagerness have miss his mark . " there , " say he , " there ! you would 
 not fight I , and now you have get it . " Stubbs stagger , and would 
 have fall but for the policeman . Tom , though no hero , be a strong 
 young man , and have contrive to give his blow with all his force . the 
 Colonel do not at first see from whom the outrage have come , but at 
 once claim the policeman 's help . 
 " we have get he , Sir;--we've get he , " say the policeman . 
 " you have get I , " say Tom , " but I have have my revenge . " then , though 
 two policeman and one waterman be now hold he , he stretch 
 himself up to his full height and glare at his enemy in the face . 
 " it be the chap who give that hawful blow to Thompson in the bow'l ! " 
 say one of the policeman , who by this time have both Tom 's arm 
 lock behind his own . 
 then the Colonel know who have strike he . " I know he , " say the 
 Colonel to the policeman . " it be a matter of no consequence . " 
 " so do we , Sir . he be Thomas Tringle , junior . " 
 " he be a friend of mine , " say the Colonel . " you must let he come 
 with I . " 
 " a friend , be he ? " say an amateur attendant . the policeman , who 
 have remember the cruel onslaught make on his comrade , look very 
 grave , and still hold Tom tight by the arm . " a very hugly sort of 
 friend , " say the amateur . Tom only stretch himself still high , 
 but remain speechless . 
 " Tringle , " say the Colonel , " this be very foolish , you know,--a 
 most absurd thing to do ! come with I , and we will talk it all over . " 
 " he must come along with we to the watch - house just at present , " say 
 the policeman . " and you , Sir , if you can , have well please to come 
 with we . it be not far across to Vine Street , but of course you can 
 have a cab if you like it . " this be end by two policeman walk 
 off with Tom between they , and by the Colonel follow in a cab , 
 after have administer diver shilling to the amateur attendant . 
 though the journey in the cab do not occupy above five minute , it 
 suffice to enable he to determine what step he should take when he 
 find himself before the night officer of the watch . 
 when he find himself in the presence of the night officer he have 
 considerable difficulty in carry out his purpose . that Tom 
 should be lock up for the night , and be bring before the police 
 magistrate next morning to answer for the outrage he have commit , 
 seem to the officer to be a matter of course . it be long before 
 the Colonel could persuade the officer that this little matter 
 between he and Mr. Tringle be a private affair , of which he at 
 least wish to take no further notice . " no doubt , " he say , " he have 
 receive a blow on his chest , but it have not hurt he in the least . " 
 " ' e ' it the gen'leman with all his might and main , " say the 
 policeman . 
 " it be quite a private affair , " say the Colonel . " my name be Colonel 
 Stubbs ; here be my card . Sir ---- be a particular friend of mine . " 
 here he name a pundit of the peace , very high in the estimation of 
 all policeman . " if you will let the gentleman come away with I I 
 will be responsible for he to - morrow , if it should be necessary 
 to take any further step in the matter . " this he say very eagerly , 
 and with all the authority which he know how to use . Tom , in the 
 meantime , stand perfectly motionless , with his arm fold akimbo on 
 his breast , wet through , muddy , still tipsy , a sight miserable to 
 behold . 
 the card and the Colonel 's own name , and the name of the pundit of 
 the peace together , have their effect , and after a while Tom be 
 dismiss in the Colonel 's care . the conclusion of the evening 's 
 affair be , for the moment , one which Tom find very hard to bear . it 
 would have be well for he to have be drag off to a cell , 
 and there to have be leave to his miserable solitude . but as he go 
 down through the narrow way lead from the police - office out into 
 the main street he feel that he be altogether debar from make 
 any further attack upon his protector . he could not strike he again , 
 as he might have do have he escape from the police by his own 
 resource . his own enemy have save he from durance , and he could 
 not , therefore , turn again upon his enemy . 
 " in heaven 's name , my dear fellow , " say the Colonel , " what good do 
 you expect to get by that ? you have hit I a blow when you know that 
 I be unprepared , and , therefore , unarmed . be that manly ? " to this 
 Tom make no reply . " I suppose you have be drink ? " and Stubbs , as 
 he ask this question , look into his companion 's face . " I see you 
 have be drink . what a fool you be make of yourself ! " 
 " it be that girl , " say Tom . 
 " do that seem to you to be right ? can you do yourself any good by 
 that ? will she be more likely to listen to you when she hear that 
 you have get drunk , and have assault I in the street ? have I do 
 you any harm ? " 
 " she say that you be well than I , " reply Tom . 
 " if she do , be that my doing ? come , old fellow , try to be a man . 
 try to think of this thing rightly . if you can win the girl you love , 
 win she ; but , if you can not , do not be such an ass as to suppose that 
 she be to love no one because she will not love you . it be a thing 
 which a man must bear if it come in his way . as far as Miss Dormer 
 be concern , I be in the same condition as you . but do you think 
 that I should attack you in the street if she begin to favour you 
 to - morrow ? " 
 " I wish she would ; and then I should not care what you do . " 
 " I should think you a happy fellow , certainly ; and for a time I 
 might avoid you , because your happiness would remind I of my own 
 disappointment ; but I should not come behind your back and strike 
 you ! now , tell I where you live , and I will see you home . " then Tom 
 tell he where he live , and in a few minute the Colonel have leave 
 he within his own hall door . 
 CHAPTER XLV . 
 there be something of the ANGEL about HIM . 
 the little accident which be record at the close of the last 
 chapter occur on a Tuesday night . on the follow afternoon Tom 
 Tringle , again very much out of spirit , return to Merle Park . 
 there be now nothing further for he to do in London . he have have 
 his last chance with Ayala , and the last chance have certainly do 
 he no good . Fortune , whether kindly or unkindly , have give he an 
 opportunity of revenge himself upon the Colonel ; he have take 
 advantage of the opportunity , but do not find himself much relieve 
 by what he have do . his rival 's conduct have cause he to be 
 thoroughly ashamed of himself . it have at any rate take from he all 
 further hope of revenge . so that now there be nothing for he but to 
 take himself back to Merle Park . on the Wednesday he hear nothing 
 far of the matter ; but on the Thursday Sir Thomas come down from 
 London , and , show to poor Tom a paragraph in one of the morning 
 paper , ask whether he know anything of the circumstance to which 
 reference be make . the paragraph be as follows:-- 
    that very bellicose young City knight who at Christmas 
    time get into trouble by thrash a policeman within 
    an inch of his life in the street , and who be then 
    incarcerate on account of his performance , again 
    exhibit his prowess on Tuesday night by attack 
    Colonel ---- , an officer than whom none in the army be 
    more popular,--under the portico of the Haymarket theatre . 
    we abstain from mention the officer 's name,--which be , 
    however , know to we . the City knight again fall into the 
    hand of the police and be take to the watch - house . 
    but Colonel ---- , who know something of his family , 
    accompany he , and beg his assailant off . the officer 
    on duty be most unwilling to let the culprit go ; but the 
    Colonel use all his influence and be successful . this 
    may be all very well between the generous Colonel and the 
    valiant knight . but if the young man have any friend they 
    have well look to he . a gentleman with such a desire 
    for the glory of battle must be restrain if he can not 
    control his propensity when wander about the street 
    of the metropolis . 
 " yes , " say Tom,--who scorn to tell a lie in any matter concern 
 Ayala . " it be I . I strike Colonel Stubbs , and he get I off at the 
 police office . " 
 " and you be proud of what you have do ? " 
 " no , Sir , I be not . I be not proud of anything . whatever I do or 
 whatever I say seem to go against I . " 
 " he do not go against you as you call it . " 
 " I wish he have with all my heart . I do not ask he to get I off . I 
 strike he because I hat he ; and whatever might have happen I 
 would soon have bear it than be like this . " 
 " you would soon have be lock up again in prison ? " 
 " I would sooner anything than be as I be . " 
 " I tell you what it be , Tom , " say the father . " if you remain here 
 any long with this bee in your bonnet you will be lock up in a 
 lunatic asylum , and I shall not be able to get you out again . you 
 must go abroad . " to this Tom make no immediate answer . lamentable as 
 be his position , he still be unwilling to leave London while Ayala 
 be live there . be he to consent to go away for any lengthened 
 period , by do so he would seem to abandon his own claim . hope he 
 know there be none ; but yet , even yet , he regard himself as one of 
 Ayala 's suitor . " do you think it well , " continue the father , " that 
 you should remain in London while such paragraph as these be be 
 write about you ? " 
 " I be not in London now , " say Tom . 
 " no , you be not in London while you be at Merle Park,--of course . 
 and you will not go up to London without my leave . do you understand 
 that ? " here Tom again be silent . " if you do , " continue his father , 
 " you shall not be receive down here again , nor at Queen 's Gate , nor 
 will the cheque for your allowance be honour any long at the 
 bank . in fact if you do not obey I I will throw you off altogether . 
 this absurdity about your love have be carry on long enough . " and 
 so it come to be understand in the family that Tom be to be keep in 
 mild durance at Merle Park till everything should have be arrange 
 for his extended tour about the world . to this Tom himself give no 
 positive assent , but it be understand that when the time come he 
 would yield to his father 's command . 
 it have thus come to pass that the affray at the door of the haymarket 
 become know to so much of the world at large as interested itself 
 in the affair either of Colonel Stubbs or of the Tringles . other 
 paragraph be write in which the two hero of the evening be 
 designate as Colonel J---- S---- and as T---- T---- , junior , of the 
 firm of T---- and T---- , in the City . all who please could read 
 these initial , and thus the world be aware that our Colonel have 
 receive a blow , and have resent the affront only by rescue his 
 assailant from the hand of the police . a word be say at first 
 which seem to imply that the Colonel have not exhibit all the 
 spirit which might have be expect from he . have be strike 
 should he not have thrash the man who strike him;--or at any rate 
 have leave the ruffian in the hand of the policeman for proper 
 punishment ? but many day have not pass over before the Colonel 's 
 conduct have be view in a different light , and man and woman 
 be declare that he have do a manly and a gallant thing . the 
 affair have in this way become sufficiently well known to justify 
 the allusion make to it in the following letter from Lady Albury to 
 ayala;-- 
    Stalham , Tuesday , 11th February , 18 - - . 
    MY DEAR AYALA , 
    it be quite indispensable for the happiness of everybody , 
    particularly that of myself and Sir Harry , that you should 
    come down here on the twentieth . Nina will be here on 
    her farewell visit before her return to her mother . of 
    course you have hear that it be all arrange between 
    she and Lord George Bideford , and this will be the last 
    opportunity which any of we will have of see she once 
    again before her martyrdom . the world be to be tell 
    that he be to follow she to Rome , where they be to be 
    married,--no doubt by the Pope himself under the dome of 
    St. Peter 's . but my belief be that Lord George be go 
    to travel with she all the way . if he be the man I take 
    he to be he will do so , but of course it would be very 
    improper . 
    you , however , must of course come and say pretty thing 
    to your friend ; and , as you can not go to Rome to see she 
    married , you must throw your old shoe after she when she 
    take her departure from Stalham . I have write a line 
    to your aunt to press my request for this visit . this she 
    will no doubt show to you , and you , if you please , can 
    show her mine in return . 
    and now , my dear , I must explain to you one or two other 
    arrangement . a certain gentleman will _ certainly _ not be 
    here . it be not my fault that a certain gentleman go to 
    Kingsbury Crescent . the certain gentleman be , as you be 
    aware , a great friend of ours , and be entitle to explain 
    himself if it so seem good to he ; but the certain 
    gentleman be not favour in that enterprise by the 
    Stalham interest . at any rate , the certain gentleman 
    will not be at Stalham on this occasion . so much for the 
    certain gentleman . 
    Colonel Stubbs will be here , and , as he will be come 
    down on the twentieth , would be glad to travel by the same 
    train , so that he may look after your ticket and your 
    luggage , and be your slave for the occasion . he will leave 
    the Paddington Station by the 4 P.M. train if that will 
    suit you . 
    we all think that he behave beautifully in that little 
    affair at the Haymarket theatre . I should not mention it 
    only that everybody have hear of it . almost any other man 
    would have strike the poor fellow again ; but he be one 
    of the very few who always know what to do at the moment 
    without take time to think of it . 
    mind you come like a good girl.--Your affectionate friend , 
    ROSALINE ALBURY . 
 it be in this way that Ayala hear what have take place between her 
 cousin Tom and Colonel Stubbs . some hint of a fracas between the two 
 man have reach her ear ; but now she ask various question of her 
 aunt , and at last elicit the truth . Tom have attack her other 
 lover in the street,--had attack Colonel Stubbs because of his 
 injure love , and have grossly misbehave himself . as a consequence he 
 would have be lock up by the police have not the Colonel himself 
 interfere on his behalf . this to Ayala seem to be conduct worthy 
 almost of an Angel of Light . 
 then the question of the propose visit be discussed,--first with 
 her aunt , and then with herself . Mrs. Dosett be quite willing that 
 her niece should go to Stalham . to Mrs. Dosett 's thinking , a further 
 journey to Stalham would mean an engagement with Colonel Stubbs . when 
 she have read Lady Albury 's letter she be quite sure that that have 
 be Lady Albury 's meaning . Captain Batsby be not to receive the 
 Stalham interest;--but that interest be to be use on the part of 
 Colonel Stubbs . she have not the slight objection . it be clear to 
 she that Ayala would have to be marry before long . it be out of 
 the question that one man after another should fall in love with she 
 violently , and that nothing should come of it . Mrs. Dosett have become 
 quite despondent about Tom . there be an amount of dislike which it 
 would be impossible to overcome . and as for Captain Batsby there 
 could be no chance for a man whom the young lady could not be induce 
 even to see . but the other lover , whom the lady would not admit that 
 she loved,--as to whom she have declare that she could never love 
 him,--wa hold in very high favour . " I do think it be so noble not 
 to hit Tom again , " she have say . therefore , as Colonel Stubbs have a 
 sufficient income , there could be no reason why Ayala should not go 
 again to Stalham . so it be that Mrs. Dosett argue with herself , and 
 such be the judgment which she express to Ayala . 
 but there be difficulty . Ayala 's little stock of cash be all 
 go . she could not go to Stalham without money , and that money must 
 come out of her Uncle Reginald 's pocket . she could not go to Stalham 
 without some expenditure , which , as she well know , it would be hard 
 for he to bear . and then there be that terrible question of her 
 clothe ! when that suggestion have be make of a further transfer of 
 the niece a cheque have come from Sir Thomas . " if Ayala come to we 
 she will want a few thing , " Sir Thomas have say in a note to Mrs. 
 Dosett . but Mr. Dosett have choose that the cheque should be send back 
 when it be decide that the further transfer should not take place . 
 the cheque have be send back , and there have be an end of it . there 
 must be a morning dress , and there must be another hat , and there 
 must be boot . so much Mrs. Dosett acknowledge . let they do what 
 they might with the old thing , Mrs. Dosett acknowledge that so much 
 as that would at least be necessary . " we will both go to work , " Mrs. 
 Dosett say , " and we will ask your uncle what he can do for we . " I 
 think she feel that she have receive some recompense when Ayala 
 kiss she . 
 it be after this that Ayala discuss the matter with herself . she 
 have long to go once again to Stalham,--"dear Stalham , " as she 
 call it to herself . and as she think of the place she tell 
 herself that she love it because Lady Albury have be so kind to 
 she , and because of Nina , and because of the hunting , and because 
 of the general pleasantness and luxury of the big comfortable house . 
 and yes ; there be something to be say , too , of the pleasantness of 
 Colonel Stubbs . till he have make love to she he have be , perhaps , 
 of all these fine new friend the pleasantest . how joyous his voice 
 have sound to she ! how fraught with gratification to she have be 
 his bright ugly face ! how well he have know how to talk to she , and 
 to make her talk , so that everything have be easy with she ! how 
 thoroughly she remember all his drollery on that first night at 
 the party in London,--and all his keen saying at the theatre;--and 
 the way he have insist that she should hunt ! she think of little 
 confidence she have have with he , almost as though he have be her 
 brother ! and then he have destroy it all by become her lover ! 
 be he to be her lover still ; and if so would it be right that she 
 should go again to Stalham , know that she would meet he there ? 
 would it be right that she should consent to travel with him,--under 
 his special escort ? be she to do so would she not be force to do 
 more,--if he should again ask she ? it be so probable that he would 
 not ask she again ! it be so strange that such a one should have 
 ask she ! 
 but if he do ask she ? certainly he be not like that Angel of Light 
 whom she have never see , but of whom the picture in her imagination 
 be as clearly draw as though she be in his presence daily . 
 no;--there be a wave of hair and a shape of brow , and a peculiarity 
 of the eye , with a nose and mouth cut as sharp as chisel could cut 
 they out of marble , all of which grace the Angel but none of which 
 belong to the Colonel . nor be these the chief of the grace which 
 make the Angel so glorious to she . there be a depth of poetry about 
 he , deep and clear , pellucid as a lake among grassy bank , which 
 make all thing of the world mean when compare to it . the Angel of 
 Light live on the essence of all that be beautiful , altogether 
 unalloye by the grossness of the earth . that such a one should come 
 in her way ! oh , no ; she do not look for it ! but , have form such 
 an image of an angel for herself , would it be possible that she 
 should have anything less divine , less beautiful , less angelic ? 
 yes ; there be something of the Angel about he ; even about he , 
 Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . but he be so clearly an Angel of the earth , 
 whereas the other one , though live upon the earth , would be of the 
 air , and of the sky , of the cloud , and of the heaven , celestial . 
 such a one she know she have never see . she partly dream that 
 she be dream . but if so have not her dream spoil she for all 
 else ? oh , yes ; indeed he be good , this red - haired ugly Stubbs . how 
 well have he behave to Tom ! how kind he have be to herself ! how 
 thoughtful of she he be ! if it be not a question of downright 
 love,--of give herself up to he , body and soul , as it were,--how 
 pleasant would it be to dwell with he ! for herself she would confess 
 that she love earthly things,--such as jump over the brook with 
 Larry Twentyman before she to show she the way . but for her love , it 
 be necessary that there should be an Angel of Light . have she not 
 read that angel have come from heaven and take in marriage the 
 daughter of man ? 
 but be it right that she should go to Stalham , see that there 
 be two such strong reason against it ? she could not go without 
 cost her uncle money , which he could ill afford ; and if she do go 
 would she -- would she not confess that she have abandon her objection 
 to the Colonel 's suit . she , too , understand something of that which 
 have make itself so plain to her aunt . " your uncle think it be right 
 that you should go , " her aunt say to she in the drawing - room that 
 evening ; " and we will set to work to - morrow and do the good that we 
 can to make you smart . " 
 her uncle be sit in the room at the time , and Ayala feel herself 
 compel to go to he and kiss he , and thank he for all his 
 kindness . " I be so sorry to cost you so much money , Uncle Reginald , " 
 she say . 
 " it will not be very much , my dear , " he answer . " it be hard that 
 young people should not have some amusement . I only hope they will 
 make you happy at Stalham . " 
 " they always make people happy at Stalham , " say Ayala , 
 energetically . 
 " and now , Ayala , " say her aunt , " you can write your letter to Lady 
 Albury before we go out to - morrow . give she my compliment , and tell 
 she that as you be write I need not trouble she . " 
 Ayala , when she be alone in her bedroom , feel almost horrified as 
 she reflect that in this manner the question have be settle for 
 she . it have be impossible for she to reject her uncle 's liberal 
 offer when it have be make . she could not find the courage at that 
 moment to say that she have think well of it all , and would 
 decline the visit . before she be well aware of what she be do 
 she have assent , and have thus , as it be , throw over all the 
 creation of her dream . and yet , as she declare herself , not even 
 Lady Albury could make she marry this man , merely because she be 
 at her house . she think that , if she could only avoid that first 
 journey with Colonel Stubbs in the railway , still she might hold she 
 own . but , be she to travel with he of her own accord , would it not 
 be feel that she would be wilfully throw herself in his way ? then 
 she make a little plan for herself , which she attempt to carry out 
 when write her letter to Lady Albury on the following morning . what 
 be the nature of her plan , and how she effect it , will be see in 
 the letter which she wrote;-- 
    Kingsbury Crescent , Thursday . 
    DEAR LADY ALBURY , 
    it be so very good of you to ask I again , and I shall 
    be so happy to visit Stalham once more ! I should have 
    be very sorry not to see dear Nina before her return to 
    Italy . I have write to congratulate she of course , and 
    have tell she what a happy girl I think she be . though 
    I have not see Lord George I take all that from her 
    description . as she be go to be his wife immediately , 
    I do not at all see why he should not go back with she to 
    Rome . as for be marry by the Pope , I do not think he 
    ever do anything so useful as that . I believe he sit 
    all day and have his toe kiss . that be what they tell I 
    at Rome . 
    I be very glad of what you tell I about the certain 
    gentleman , because I do not think I could have be happy 
    at Stalham if he have be there . it surprise I so much 
    that I could not think that he mean it in earnest . we 
    never hardly speak to each other when we be in the house 
    together . 
    perhaps , if you do not mind , and I shall not be in the way , 
 --here she begin to display the little plan which she have make for 
 her own protection,-- 
    I will come down by an early train than you mention . 
    there be one at 2.15 , and then I need not be in the dark 
    all the way . you need not say anything about this to 
    Colonel Stubbs , because I do not at all mind travel by 
    myself.--Yours affectionately , 
    AYALA . 
 this be her little plan . but she be very innocent when she think 
 that Lady Albury would be blind to such a scheme as that . she get 
 three word from Lady Albury , say that the 2.15 train would do 
 very well , and that the carriage would be at the station to meet she . 
 Lady Albury do not also say in her note that she have communicate 
 with Colonel Stubbs on the subject , and inform he that he must 
 come up from Aldershot early than he intend in order that he 
 might adapt himself to Ayala 's whim . " foolish little child , " say 
 Lady Albury to herself ! " as if that would make any difference ! " it 
 be clear to Lady Albury that Ayala must surrender now that she be 
 come to Stalham a second time , know that the Colonel would be 
 there . 
 CHAPTER XLVI . 
 AYALA go again to stalham . 
 the correspondence between Lady Albury and Colonel Stubbs be close 
 and frequent , the friendship between they be very close . Ayala have 
 sometimes ask herself why Lady Albury should have be so kind and 
 affectionate to she , and have fail to find any sufficient answer . 
 she have be ask to Stalham at first,--so far as she knew,--because 
 she have be intimate at Rome with the Marchesa Baldoni . hence have 
 apparently rise Lady Albury 's great friendship , which have seem 
 even to herself to be strange . but in truth the Marchesa have have very 
 little to do with it,--nor have Lady Albury become attach to Ayala 
 for Ayala 's own sake . to Lady Albury Colonel Stubbs was,--as she 
 declare to herself very often,--"her own real brother . " she have 
 marry a man very rich , well know in the world , whom she love very 
 well ; and she be not a woman who in such a position would allow 
 herself to love another man . that there might certainly be no danger 
 of this kind she be continually impress on her friend the 
 expediency of marriage,--if only he could find some one good enough 
 to marry . then the Colonel have find Ayala . Lady Albury at the 
 beginning of all this be not inclined to think that Ayala be good 
 enough . judge at first from what she hear and then from what she 
 see , she have not be very favourable to Ayala . but when her friend 
 have insisted,--had declare that his happiness depend on it,--had 
 show by various sign that he certainly would carry out his 
 intention , if not at Stalham then elsewhere , Lady Albury have yield 
 herself to he , and have become Ayala 's great friend . if it be 
 write in the book that Ayala be to become Mrs. Stubbs then it 
 would certainly be necessary that she and Ayala should be friend . 
 and she herself have such confidence in Jonathan Stubbs as a man of 
 power , that she do not doubt of his success in any matter to which 
 he might choose to devote himself . the wonder have be that Ayala 
 should have reject the chance when it have come in her way . the girl 
 have be foolish , allow herself to be influence by the man 's red 
 hair and ill - sound name,--not know a real pearl when she see 
 it . so Lady Albury have thought,--having only be partially right 
 in so thinking,--not have go to the depth of Ayala 's power of 
 dream . she be very confident , however , that the girl , when once 
 again at Stalham , would yield herself easily ; and therefore she go 
 to work , do all that she could to smoothen love 's road for her 
 friend Jonathan . her woman 's mind have see all those difficulty 
 about clothe , and would have send what be needful herself have 
 she not fear to offend both the Dosetts and Ayala . therefore she 
 prepare a present which she could give to the girl at Stalham 
 without offence . if it be to be the girl 's high fate to become Mrs. 
 Jonathan Stubbs , it would be proper that she should be adorn and 
 deck , and make beautiful among other of her class,--as would 
 become the wife of such a hero . 
 of all that pass between she and Ayala word be send down to 
 Aldershot . " the stupid little wretch will throw you out , I know , " 
 write Lady Albury , " by make you start two hour before you have 
 do your work . but you must let your work do itself for this 
 occasion . there be nothing like a little journey together to make 
 people understand each other . " 
 the Colonel be clearly determined to have the little journey 
 together . whatever might be the present military duty at Aldershot , 
 the duty of love be for the nonce in the Colonel 's mind more 
 imperative . though his Royal Highness have be come that afternoon 
 to inspect all the troop , still he would have resolve so to have 
 arrange matter as to travel down with Ayala to Stalham . but not 
 only be he determined to do this , but he find it necessary also to 
 arrange a previous meeting with Lady Albury before that important 
 twentieth of the month . this he do by make his friend believe that 
 her presence in London for a few hour would be necessary for various 
 reason . she come up as he desire , and there he meet she at her 
 hotel in Jermyn Street . on his arrival here he feel that he be 
 almost make a fool of himself by the extent of his anxiety . in his 
 nervousness about this little girl he be almost as insane as poor 
 Tom Tringle , who , when she despise his love , be altogether unable 
 to control himself . " if I can not persuade she at last , I shall be 
 knock somebody over the head , as he do . " it be thus he be 
 talk to himself as he get out of the cab at the door of the hotel . 
 " and now , Jonathan , " say Lady Albury , " what can there possibly be to 
 justify you in give I all this trouble ? " 
 " you know you have to come up about that cook 's character . " 
 " I know that I have give that as a reason to Sir Harry ; but I know 
 also that I should have go without a cook for a twelvemonth have you 
 not summon I . " 
 " the truth be I could not get down to Stalham and back without lose 
 an additional day , which I can not possibly spare . with you it do 
 not very much matter how many day you spare . " 
 " nor how much money I spend , nor how much labour I take , so that I 
 obey all the command of Colonel Jonathan Stubbs ! what on earth be 
 there that I can say or do for you more ? " 
 " there be one or two thing , " say he , " that I want you to 
 understand . in the first place , I be quite in earnest about this . " 
 " do not I know that you be in earnest ? " 
 " but perhaps you do not understand the full extent of my earnestness . 
 if she be to refuse I ultimately I should go away . " 
 " go away ! go where ? " 
 " oh ; that I have not at all think of;--probably to India , as I 
 might manage to get a regiment there . but in truth it would matter 
 very little . " 
 " you be talk like a goose . " 
 " that be very likely , because in this matter I think and feel like 
 a goose . it be not a great thing in a man to be turn out of his 
 course by some undefined feeling which he have as to a young woman . 
 but the thing have occur before now , and will occur again , in my 
 case , if I be throw over . " 
 " what on earth be there about the girl ? " ask Lady Albury . " there 
 be that precious brother - in - law of our go to hang himself 
 incontinently because she will not look at he . and that unfortunate 
 friend of your , Tom Tringle , be , if possible , bad than Ben Batsby 
 or yourself . " 
 " if two other gentleman be in the same condition it only make it 
 the less singular that I should be the third . at any rate , I be the 
 third . " 
 " you do not mean to liken yourself to they ? " 
 " indeed I do . as to our connection with Miss Dormer , I can see no 
 difference . we be all in love with she , and she have refuse we 
 all . it matter little whether a man 's ugliness or his ring or his 
 natural stupidity may have bring about this result . " 
 " you be very modest , Jonathan . " 
 " I always be , only you never could see it . I be modest in this 
 matter ; but not for that reason the less persistent in do the 
 good I can for myself . my object now in see you be to let you 
 understand that it be -- well , not life and death , because she will 
 not suffice either to kill I or to keep I alive,--but one of those 
 matter which , in a man 's career , be almost as important to he as 
 life and death . she be very decide in her refusal . " 
 " so be every girl when a first offer be make to she . how be any girl 
 so to arrange her thought at a moment 's notice as to accept a man 
 off - hand ? " 
 " girl do do so . " 
 " very rarely , I think ; and when they do they be hardly worth 
 have , " say Lady Albury , lay down the law on the matter with 
 great precision . " if a girl accept a man all at once when she have 
 have , as it be , no preparation for such a proposal , she must always 
 surely be in a state of great readiness for matrimonial project . 
 when there have be a prolonged period of spoon then of course it 
 be quite a different thing . the whole thing have in fact be arrange 
 before the important word have be speak . " 
 " what a professor in the art you be ! " say he . 
 " the odd thing be , that such a one as you should be so ignorant . 
 can not you understand that she would not come to Stalham if her mind 
 be make up against you ? I say nothing of you as a lover , but I 
 take care to let she know that you be come . you be very ready 
 to put yourself in the same boat with poor Ben Batsby or that other 
 unfortunate wretch . would she , do you think , have consent to come 
 have she know that Ben would have be there , or your friend Tom 
 Tringle ? " 
 there be much more of it , but the upshot was,--as the Colonel have 
 intend that it should be,--that Lady Albury be make to understand 
 that Ayala 's good - will be essential to his happiness . " of course 
 I will do my good , " she say , as he part from she . " though I be 
 not quite as much in love with she myself as you be , yet I will 
 do my good . " then when she be leave alone , and be prosecute she 
 inquiry about the new cook , and travel back in the afternoon 
 to Stalham , she again consider how wonderful a thing it be such a 
 girl as Ayala , so small , apparently so unimportant , so childish in 
 her manner , with so little to say for herself , should become a person 
 of such terrible importance . 
 the twentieth come , and at ten minute before two Ayala be at the 
 Paddington Railway Station . the train , which be to start at 2.15 , 
 have be choose by herself so that she might avoid the Colonel , and 
 there she be , with her aunt , wait for it . Mrs. Dosett have think 
 it to be her duty to see she off , and have come with she in the cab . 
 there be the two box laden with her wardrobe , such as it be . 
 both she and her aunt have work hard ; for though,--as she have 
 declare to herself,--there be no special reason for it , still she 
 have wish to look she good . as she see the box put into the van , 
 and have tell herself how much shabby they be than the box of 
 other young lady who go visit to such house as Stalham , 
 she rejoice that Colonel Stubbs be not there to see they . and 
 she consider whether it be possible that Colonel Stubbs should 
 recognise a dress which she have wear at Stalham before , which be 
 now to appear in a quite altered shape . she wonder also whether it 
 would be possible that Colonel Stubbs should know how poor she be . 
 as she be think of all this there be Colonel Stubbs on the 
 platform . 
 she have never doubt but that little plan would be efficacious . nor 
 have her aunt doubted,--who have see through the plan , though not a 
 word have be speak between they on the subject . Mrs. Dosett have 
 consider it to be impossible that a Colonel engage on duty of 
 importance at Aldershot should run away from they to wait upon a 
 child like Ayala,--even though he have profess himself to be in love 
 with the child . she have never see the Colonel , and on this occasion 
 do not expect to see he . but there he be , all suddenly , shake 
 hand with Ayala . 
 " my aunt , Mrs. Dosett , " whisper Ayala . then the Colonel begin to 
 talk to the eld lady as though the young lady be a person of 
 very much less importance . yes ; he have run up from Aldershot a little 
 early than he have intend . there have be nothing particular to 
 keep he down at Aldershot . it have always be his intention to go to 
 Stalham on this day , and be glad of the accident which be bring 
 Miss Dormer there just at the same time . he spend a good deal of his 
 time at Stalham because Sir Harry and he , who be in truth cousin , 
 be as intimate as brother . he always live at Stalham when he 
 could get away from duty and be not in London . Stalham be a very 
 nice place certainly ; one of the most comfortable house he know in 
 England . so he go on till he almost make Mrs. Dosett believe , and 
 do make Ayala believe , that his visit to Stalham have nothing to 
 do with herself . and yet Mrs. Dosett know that the offer have be 
 make . Ayala bethink herself that she do not care so much for the 
 re - manufactured frock after all , nor yet for the shabby appearance 
 of the box . the real Angel of Light would not care for her frock 
 nor for her box ; and certainly would not be indifferent after the 
 fashion of,--of,-- ! then she begin to reflect that she be make a 
 fool of herself . 
 she be put into the carriage , Mr. Dosett have luckily decide 
 against the use of the second class . go to such a house as Stalham 
 Ayala ought , say Mr. Dosett , to go as any other lady would . have it 
 be himself or his wife it would have be very different ; but for 
 Ayala , on such an occasion as this , he would be extravagant . Ayala 
 be therefore put into her seat while the Colonel stand at the door 
 outside , still talk to Mrs. Dosett . " I do not think she will be 
 let to come away at the end of a week , " say the Colonel . " Sir 
 Harry do not like people to come away very soon . " Ayala hear this , 
 and think that she remember that Sir Harry himself be very 
 indifferent as to the coming and go of the visitor . " they go up 
 to London about the end of March , " say the Colonel , " and if Miss 
 Dormer be to return about a week before it would do very well . " 
 " oh , no , " say Ayala , put her head out of the window ; " I could not 
 think of stay so long as that . " then the last final bustle be 
 make by the guard ; the Colonel get in , the door be shut , and Mrs. 
 Dosett , stand on the platform , nod her head for the last time . 
 there be only four person in the carriage . in the opposite corner 
 there be two old person , probably a husband and wife , who have be 
 very careful as to a foot - warm apparatus , and be muffle up very 
 closely in woollen and fur . " if you do not mind shut the door , 
 Sir , " say the old gentleman , rather testily , " because my wife have a 
 pain in her face . " the door absolutely be shut when the word be 
 speak , but the Colonel make some sign of close all the aperture . 
 but there be a ventilator above , which the old lady spy . " if you 
 do not mind shut that hole up there , Sir , because my husband be 
 very bad with neuralgia . " the Colonel at once get up and find that 
 the ventilator be fast closed , so as not to admit a breath of air . 
 " there be draught come in everywhere , " say the old gentleman . " the 
 Company ought to be prosecute . " " I believe the more people they kill 
 the well they like it , " say the old lady . then the Colonel look 
 at Ayala with a very grave face , with no hint at a smile , with a face 
 which must have gratify even the old lady and gentleman . but Ayala 
 understand the face , and could not refrain from a little laugh . she 
 laugh only with her eyes,--but the Colonel see it . 
 " the weather have be very severe all day , " say the Colonel , in a 
 severe voice . 
 Ayala protest that she have not find it cold at all . " then , Miss , I 
 think you must be make of granite , " say the old lady . " I hope you will 
 remember that other people be not so fortunate . " Ayala again smile , 
 and the Colonel make another effort as though to prevent any possible 
 breath of air from make its way into the interior of the vehicle . 
 there be silence among they for some minute , and then Ayala be 
 quite surprised by the tone in which her friend address she . " what 
 an ill - natured girl you must be , " say he , " to have put I to such a 
 terrible amount of trouble all on purpose . " 
 " I do not , " say Ayala . 
 " yes , you do . why would not you come down by the four o'clock train 
 as I tell you ? now I have leave everything undo , and I should not 
 wonder if I get into such a row at the Horse Guards that I shall 
 never hear the end of it . and now you be not a bit grateful . " 
 " yes , I be grateful ; but I do not want you to come at all , " she say . 
 " of course I should come . I do not think you be so perverse . " 
 " I be not perverse , Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " when young person be perverse , it be my opinion they ought not to 
 be encourage , " say the old lady from her corner . 
 " my dear , you know nothing about it , " say the old gentleman . 
 " yes , I do , " say the old lady . " I know all about it . whatever she 
 do a young lady ought not to be perverse . I do hate perversity . I 
 be sure that hole up there must be open , Sir , for the wind do come 
 in so powerful . " Colonel Stubbs again jump up and poke at the 
 ventilator . 
 in the meantime Ayala be laugh so violently that she could with 
 difficulty prevent herself from make a noise , which , she fear , 
 would bring down increase wrath upon she from the old lady . that 
 feign scold from the Colonel at once bring back upon her the 
 feeling of sudden and pleasant intimacy which she have feel when he 
 have first come and order she to dance with he at the ball in 
 London . it be once again with she as though she know this man almost 
 more intimately , and certainly more pleasantly , than any of her other 
 acquaintance . whatever he say she could answer he now , and pretend 
 to scold he , and have her joke with he as though no offer have ever 
 be make . she could have tell he now all the story of that turn 
 dress , if that subject have come naturally to she , or have laugh 
 with he at her own old box , and confide to he any other of the 
 trouble of her poverty , as if they be joke which she could share 
 at any rate with he . then he speak again . " I do abominate a perverse 
 young woman , " he say . upon this Ayala could no long constrain 
 herself , but burst into loud laughter . 
 after a while the two old people become quite familiar , and there 
 arise a contest , in which the lady take part with the Colonel , and 
 the old man protect Ayala . the Colonel speak as though he be 
 quite in earnest , and go on to declare that the young lady of 
 the present time be allow far too much licence . " they never have 
 their own bread to earn , " he say , " and they ought to make themselves 
 agreeable to other people who have more to do . " 
 " I quite agree with you , Sir , " say the old lady . " they should run 
 about and be handy . I like to see a girl that can jump about the 
 house and make herself useful . " 
 " young lady ought to be young lady , " say the old man , put 
 his mouth for a moment up out of his comforter . 
 " and can not a young lady be useful and yet be a young lady ? " say the 
 Colonel . 
 " it be her special province to be ornamental , " say the old 
 gentleman . " I like to see young lady ornamental . I do not think 
 young lady ought to be scold , even if they be a little 
 fractious . " 
 " I quite agree with you , Sir , " say Ayala . and so the fight go on 
 with sundry break and change in the matter under discussion till 
 the station for Stalham have be reach . the old gentleman , indeed , 
 seem to lose his voice before the journey be half over , but 
 the lady persevere , so that she and the Colonel become such fast 
 friend that she insist on shake hand with he when he leave the 
 carriage . 
 " how could you be so wicked as to go on hoaxing she like that ? " say 
 Ayala , as soon as they be on the platform . 
 " there be no hoax at all . I be quite in earnest . be not every word 
 true that I say ? now come and get into the carriage quickly , or you 
 will be as bad as the old gentleman himself . " 
 Ayala do get into the carriage quickly , where she find Nina . 
 the two girl be full of conversation as they go to Stalham ; but 
 through it all Ayala could not refrain from think how the Jonathan 
 Stubbs of to - day have be exactly like that Jonathan Stubbs she have 
 first known,--and how very unlike a lover . 
 CHAPTER XLVII . 
 CAPTAIN BATSBY AT MERLE PARK . 
 when Ayala go to Stalham Captain Batsby go to Merle Park . they 
 have both be invite by Lady Tringle , and when the letter be 
 write to Ayala she be assure that Tom should not be there . at 
 that time Tom 's last encounter with the police have not as yet become 
 know to the Tringles , and the necessity of keep Tom at the house 
 in the country be not manifest . the idea have be that Captain 
 Batsby should have an opportunity of explain himself to Ayala . the 
 Captain come ; but , as to Ayala , Mrs. Dosett send word to say that she 
 have be invite to stay some day just at that time with her friend 
 Lady Albury at Stalham . 
 what to do with Captain Batsby have be feel to be a difficulty by 
 Lady Albury . it be his habit to come to Stalham some time in March 
 and there finish the hunting season . it might be hop that Ayala 's 
 little affair might be arrange early in March , and then , whether he 
 come or whether he do not , it would be the same to Ayala . but the 
 Captain himself would be grievously irate when he should hear the 
 trick which would have be play upon he . Lady Albury have already 
 desire he not to come till after the first week in March , have 
 fabricate an excuse . she have be bind to keep the coast clear both 
 for Ayala 's sake and the Colonel 's ; but she know that when her trick 
 should be discover there would be unmeasured wrath . " why the deuce 
 do not you let the two man come , and then the good man may win ! " 
 say Sir Harry , who do not doubt but that , in such a case , the 
 Colonel would prove to be the good man . here too there be another 
 difficulty . when Lady Albury attempt to explain that Ayala would 
 not come unless she be tell that she would not meet the Captain , 
 Sir Harry declare that there should be no such favour . " who the 
 deuce be this little girl , " he ask , " that everybody should be 
 knock about in this way for she ? " Lady Albury be able to pacify 
 the husband , but she fear that any pacifying of the Captain would 
 be impossible . there would be a family quarrel;--but even that must 
 be endure for the Colonel 's sake . 
 in the meantime the Captain be keep in absolute ignorance of Ayala 's 
 movement , and go down to Merle Park hop to meet she there . 
 he must have be very much in love , for Merle Park be by no 
 mean a spot well adapt for hunting . hound there be in the 
 neighbourhood , but he turn up his nose at the offer when Sir Thomas 
 suggest that he might bring down a hunter . Captain Batsby , when he 
 go on hunt exhibition , never stir without five horse , and 
 always confine his operation to six or seven favour county . but 
 Ayala just at present be more to he than hunt , and therefore , 
 though it be now the end of February , he go to Merle Park . 
 " it be all Sir Thomas 's doing . " it be thus that Lady Tringle 
 endeavour to console herself when discuss the matter with her 
 daughter . the honourable Septimus Traffick have now go up to 
 London , and be inhabit a single room in the neighbourhood of the 
 House . Augusta be still at Merle Park , much to the disgust of her 
 father . he do not like to tell she to be go ; and would indeed have 
 be glad enough of her presence have it not be embitter by the 
 feeling that he be be " do . " but there she remain , and in 
 discuss the affair of the Captain with her mother and Gertrude 
 be altogether averse to the suggest marriage for Ayala . to she 
 think Ayala be not entitle to a husband at all . Augusta have 
 never give way in the affair of Tom;--had declare she conviction 
 that Stubbs have never be in earnest ; and be of opinion that 
 Captain Batsby would be much well off at Merle Park without Ayala 
 than he would have be in that young lady 's presence . when he 
 arrive nothing be say to he at once about Ayala . Gertrude , 
 who recover from the great sickness occasion by Mr. Houston 's 
 misconduct , though the recovery be intend only to be temporary , 
 make herself as pleasant as possible . Captain Batsby be make 
 welcome , and remain three day before he seek an opportunity of 
 ask a question about Ayala . 
 during this time he find Gertrude to be a very agreeable companion , 
 but he make Mrs. Traffick his first confidant . " well , you know , 
 Captain Batsby , to tell you the truth , we be not very fond of our 
 cousin . " 
 " Sir Thomas tell I she be to be here . " 
 " so we know . my father be perhaps a little mistaken about Ayala . " 
 " be she not ask ? " demand Captain Batsby , begin to think that 
 he have be betray . 
 " oh , yes ; she be ask . she have be ask very often , because she 
 be mamma 's niece , and do live with we once for a short time . but she 
 do not come . in fact she will not go anywhere , unless-- " 
 " unless what ? " 
 " you know Colonel Stubbs ? " 
 " Jonathan Stubbs . oh dear , yes ; very intimately . he be a sort of 
 connection of mine . he be my half - brother 's second cousin by the 
 father 's side . " 
 " oh indeed ! do that make he very near ? " 
 " not at all . I do not like he , if you mean that . he always take 
 everything upon himself down at Stalham . " 
 " what we hear be that Ayala be always run after he . " 
 " Ayala run after Jonathan ? " 
 " have not you hear of that ? " ask Mrs. Traffick . " Why;--she be at 
 Stalham with the Alburys this moment , and I do not doubt that Colonel 
 Stubbs be there also . she would not have go have she not be sure 
 of meet he . " 
 this disturb the captain so violently that for two or three hour 
 he keep himself apart , not know what to do with himself or where 
 to betake himself . could this be true about Jonathan Stubbs ? there 
 have be moment of deep jealousy down at Stalham ; but then he have 
 recover from that , have assure himself that he be wrong . it 
 have be Larry Twentyman and not Jonathan Stubbs who have lead the two 
 girl over the brook,--into which Stubbs have simply fall , make 
 himself an object of pity . but now again the Captain believe it all . 
 it be on this account , then , that his half - sister - in - law , Rosaline , 
 have desire he to stay away from Stalham for the present ! he know 
 well how high in favour with Lady Albury be that traitor Stubbs ; 
 how it be by her favour that Stubbs , who be no more than a second 
 cousin , be allow to do just what he please in the stable , while 
 Sir Harry himself , the master of the hound , confine himself to 
 the kennel ! he be determine at first to leave Merle Park and 
 start instantly for Stalham , and have send for his servant to begin 
 the packing of his thing ; but as he think of it more maturely 
 he consider that his arrival at Stalham would be very painful 
 to himself as well as to other . for the other he do not much 
 care , but he see clearly that the pain to himself would be very 
 disagreeable . no one at Stalham would be glad to see he . Sir Harry 
 would be disturb , and the other three person with whom he be 
 concerned,--Lady Albury , Stubbs , and ayala,--would be band together 
 in hostility against he . what chance would he have under such 
 circumstance ? therefore he determine that he would stay at Merle 
 Park yet a little long . 
 and , after all , be Ayala worth the trouble which he have propose to 
 take for she ? how much have he offer she , how scornfully have his 
 offer be receive , and how little have she to give he in return ! 
 and now he have be tell that she be always run after Jonathan 
 Stubbs ! could it be worth his while to run after a girl who be 
 always run after Jonathan Stubbs ? be he not much high in the 
 world than Jonathan Stubbs , see that he have , at any rate , double 
 Stubbs 's income ? Stubbs be a red - haired , ugly , impudent fellow , who 
 make his way wherever he go simply by " cheek " ! upon reflection , he 
 find that it would be quite beneath he to run after any girl who 
 could so demean herself as to run after Jonathan Stubbs . therefore he 
 come down to dinner on that evening with all his smile , and say not 
 a word about Ayala to Sir Thomas , who have just return from London . 
 " be he very much provoke ? " Sir Thomas ask his wife that evening . 
 " provoke about what ? " 
 " he be expressly tell that he would meet Ayala here . " 
 " he seem to be make himself very comfortable , and have not say a 
 word to I about Ayala . I be sick of Ayala . poor Tom be go to be 
 really ill . " then Sir Thomas frown , and say nothing more on that 
 occasion . 
 Tom be certainly in an uncomfortable position , and never leave his 
 bed till after noon . then he would mope about the place , mop even 
 bad than he do before , and would spend the evening all alone in 
 the housekeeper 's room , with a pipe in his mouth , which he seem 
 hardly able to take the trouble to keep alight . there be three 
 or four other guest in the house , include two Honourable Miss 
 Trafficks , and a couple of young man out of the City , whom Lady 
 Tringle hop might act as antidote to Houston and Hamel . but with 
 none of they would Tom associate . with Captain Batsby he do form 
 some little intimacy ; drive to it , no doubt , by a community of 
 interest . " I believe you be acquaint with my cousin , Miss Dormer , 
 at Stalham ? " ask Tom . at the moment the two be sit over the 
 fire in the housekeeper 's room , and Captain Batsby be smoke a 
 cigar , while Tom be suck an empty pipe . 
 " oh , yes , " say Captain Batsby , prick up his ear , " I see a good 
 deal of she . " 
 " a wonderful creature ! " ejaculate Tom . 
 " yes , indeed ! " 
 " for a real romantic style of beauty , I do not suppose that the world 
 ever see she like before . do you ? " 
 " be you one among your cousin 's admirer ? " demand the Captain . 
 " be I ? " ask Tom , surprise that there should be anybody who have 
 not as yet hear his tragic story . " be I one of her admirer ? 
 why,--rather ! have not you hear about I and Stubbs ? " 
 " no , indeed . " 
 " I think that everybody have hear that . I challenge he , you 
 know . " 
 " to fight a duel ? " 
 " yes ; to fight a duel . I send my friend faddle down with a letter to 
 Stalham , but it be of no use . why should a man fight a duel when he 
 have get such a girl as Ayala to love he ? " 
 " that be quite true , then ? " 
 " I fear so ! I fear so ! oh , yes ; it be too true . then you know;"--and 
 as he come to this portion of his story he jump up from his chair 
 and frown fiercely;--"then , you know , I meet he under the portico 
 of the haymarket , and strike he . " 
 " oh,--wa that you ? " 
 " indeed it be . " 
 " and he do not do anything to you ? " 
 " he behave like a hero , " say Tom . " I do think that he behave like 
 a hero,--though of course I hate he . " the bitterness of expression 
 be here very great . " he would not let they lock I up . though , in 
 the matter of that , I should have be well pleased if they would 
 have lock I up for ever , and keep I from the sight of the world . 
 Admire that girl , Captain Batsby ! I do not think that I ever hear of 
 a man who love a girl as I love she . I do not hesitate to say that I 
 continue to walk the world,--in the way of not commit suicide , I 
 mean,--simply because there be still a possibility while she have not 
 as yet stand at the hymeneal altar with another man . I would have 
 shoot Stubbs willingly , though I know I be to be try for it at the 
 Old Bailey,--and hung ! I would have do it willingly,--willingly ; or 
 any other man . " after that Captain Batsby think it might be prudent 
 not to say anything especial as to his own love . 
 and how foolish would it be for a man like himself , with a good 
 fortune of his own , to marry any girl who have not a sixpence ! 
 the Captain be lead into this vain thought by the great civility 
 display to he by the lady of the house . with Lucy , whom he know 
 to be Ayala 's sister , he have not prosper very well . it come to 
 his ear that she be out of favour with her aunt , and he therefore 
 meddle with she but little . the Tringle lady , however , be very 
 kind to him,--so kind that he be tempt to think less than ever of 
 one who have be so little courteous to he as Ayala . Mrs. Traffick 
 be of course a married woman , and it amount to nothing . but 
 Gertrude-- ! all the world know that Septimus Traffick without a 
 shilling of his own have become the happy possessor of a very large 
 sum of money . he , Batsby , have more to recommend he than Traffick ! 
 why should not he also become a happy possessor ? he go away for a 
 week 's hunting into Northamptonshire , and then , at Lady Tringle 's 
 request , come back to Merle Park . 
 at this time Miss Tringle have quite recover her health . she have 
 drop all immediate speech as to Mr. Houston . have she not be 
 provoke , she would have allow all that to drop into oblivion . but 
 a married sister may take liberty . " you be well rid of he , I 
 think , " say Augusta . Gertrude heave a deep sigh . she do not wish 
 to acknowledge herself to be rid of he until another string be 
 well fit to her bow . " after all , a man with nothing to do in the 
 world , with no profession , no occupation , with no money-- " 
 " Mr. Traffick have not get very much money of his own . " 
 " he have a seat in Parliament , which be very much more than fortune , 
 and will undoubtedly be in power when his party come in . and he be a 
 man of birth . but Frank Houston have nothing to recommend he . " 
 " Birth ! " say Gertrude , turn up her nose . 
 " the Queen , who be the fountain of honour , make his father a 
 nobleman , and that constitute birth . " this the married sister 
 say with stern severity of manner , and perfect reliance on the 
 constitutional privilege of her Sovereign . 
 " I do not know that we need talk about it , " say Gertrude . 
 " not at all . Mr. Houston have behave very badly , and I suppose there 
 be an end of he as far as this house be concern . Captain Batsby 
 seem to I to be a very nice young man , and I suppose he have get 
 money . a man should certainly have get money,--or an occupation . " 
 " he have get both , " say Gertrude , which , however , be not true , as 
 Captain Batsby have leave the service . 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 " have you forget my cousin so soon ? " Gertrude ask one day , as 
 she be walk with the happy Captain in the park . the Captain , no 
 doubt , have be say soft thing to she . 
 " do you throw that in my tooth as an offence ? " 
 " inconstancy in man be generally consider as an offence , " say 
 Gertrude . what it might be in woman she do not just then declare . 
 " after all I have hear of your cousin since I have be here , I 
 should hardly have think that it would be reckon so in this 
 case . " 
 " you have hear nothing against she from I . " 
 " I be tell that she have treat your brother very badly . " 
 " Poor Tom ! " 
 " and that she be flirt with a man I particularly dislike . " 
 " I suppose she do make herself rather peculiar with that Colonel 
 Stubbs . " 
 " and , after all , only think how little I see of she ! she be pretty . " 
 " so some people think . I never see it myself , " say Gertrude . " we 
 always think she a mass of affectation . we have to turn she out of 
 the house once you know . she be live here , and then it be that 
 her sister have to come in her place . it be not their fault that they 
 have get nothing;--poor girl ! they be mamma 's niece , and so papa 
 always have one of they . " after that forgiveness be accord to the 
 Captain on account of his fickle conduct , and Gertrude consent to 
 accept of his service in the guise of a lover . that this be so Mrs. 
 Traffick be well aware . nor be Lady Tringle very much in the dark . 
 Frank Houston be to be consider as good as go , and if so it 
 would be well that her daughter should have another string . she 
 be tired of the trouble of the girl around she , and think 
 that as Captain Batsby be suppose to have an income he would do 
 as a son - in - law . but she have not hitherto be consult by the 
 young people , who feel among themselves that there still might be 
 a difficulty . the difficulty lie with Sir Thomas . Sir Thomas have 
 bring Captain Batsby there to Merle Park as Ayala 's lover , and as 
 he have be very little at home be unaware of the change which 
 have take place . and then Gertrude be still suppose to be engage 
 to Mr. Houston , although this lover have be so violently reject 
 by himself . the lady feel that , as he be make of sterner stuff 
 than they , so would it be more difficult to reconcile he to the 
 alteration which be now propose in the family arrangement . who 
 be to bell the cat ? " let he go to papa in the usual way , and ask 
 his leave , " say Mrs. Traffick . 
 " I do suggest that , " say Gertrude , " but he seem not to like to do 
 it quite yet . " 
 " be he such a coward as that ? " 
 " I do not know that he be more a coward than anybody else . I remember 
 when Septimus be quite afraid to go near papa . but then Benjamin have 
 get money of his own , which do make a difference . " 
 " it be quite untrue saying that Septimus be ever afraid of papa . of 
 course he know his position as a Member of Parliament too well for 
 that . I suppose the truth be , it be about Ayala . " 
 " it be a little odd about Ayala , " say Gertrude , resume her 
 confidential tone . " it be so hard to make papa understand about these 
 kind of thing . I declare I believe he think that I never ought to 
 speak to another man because of that scoundrel Frank Houston . " 
 all this be in truth so strange to Sir Thomas that he could not 
 understand any of the exist perplexity . why do Captain Batsby 
 remain as a guest at Merle Park ? he have no special dislike to the 
 man , and when Lady Tringle have tell he that she have ask the 
 Captain to prolong his visit he have make no objection . but why should 
 the man remain there , know as he do now that there be no chance 
 of Ayala 's come to Merle Park ? at last , on a certain Saturday 
 evening , he do make inquiry on the subject . " what on earth be that 
 man stay here for ? " he say to his wife . 
 " I think he like the place . " 
 " perhaps he like the place as well as Septimus Traffick , and mean 
 to live here always ! " such allusion as these be constant with Sir 
 Thomas , and be always receive by Lady Tringle with dismay and 
 grief . " when do he mean to go away ? " ask Sir Thomas , gruffly . 
 Lady Tringle have feel that the time have come in which some word 
 should be say as to the Captain 's intention ; but she fear to 
 say it . she dread to make the clear explanation to her husband . 
 " perhaps , " say she , " he be become fond of some of the young 
 lady . " 
 " young lady ! what young lady ? do you mean Lucy ? " 
 " oh dear no ! " say Lady Tringle . 
 " then what the deuce do you mean ? he come here after Ayala , because 
 I want to have all that nonsense settle about Tom . Ayala be not 
 here , nor likely to be here ; and I do not know why he should stay here 
 philander away his time . I hate man in a country - house who be 
 thorough idler . you have well take an opportunity of let he 
 know that he have be here long enough . " 
 all this be repeat by Lady Tringle to Mrs. Traffick , and by Mrs. 
 Traffick to Gertrude . then they feel that this be no time for 
 Captain Batsby to produce himself to Sir Thomas as a suitor for his 
 young daughter . 
 CHAPTER XLVIII . 
 the JOURNEY to OSTEND . 
 " no doubt it will be very hard to make papa understand . " this be 
 say by Gertrude to her new lover a few day after that order have 
 be give that the lover should be send away from Merle Park . the 
 purport of the order in all its severity have not be convey 
 to Captain Batsby . the lady have felt,--gertrude have feel very 
 strongly,--that be he inform that the master of the house 
 demand his absence he would take himself off at once . but still 
 something have to be said,--and something do . Captain Batsby be , 
 just at present , in a matrimonial frame of mind . he have come to Merle 
 Park to look for a wife , and , as he have miss one , be , in his 
 present mood , incline to take another . but there be no knowing 
 how long this might last . Augusta have hint that " something must 
 be do , either with papa 's consent or without it . " then there have 
 come the conversation in which Gertrude acknowledge the exist 
 difficulty . " Papa , too probably , would not consent quite at once . " 
 " he must think it very odd that I be stay here , " say the Captain . 
 " of course it be odd . if you could go to he and tell he 
 everything ! " but the Captain , look at the matter all round , 
 think that he could not go to Sir Thomas and tell he anything . 
 then she begin gently to introduce the respectable clergyman at 
 Ostend . it be not necessary that she should refer at length to the 
 circumstance under which she have study the subject , but she give 
 Captain Batsby to understand that it be one as to which she have 
 pick up a good deal of information . 
 but the money ! " if Sir Thomas be make really angry , the 
 consequence would be disastrous , " say the Captain . but Gertrude be 
 of a different way of thinking . her father be , no doubt , a man who 
 could be very imperious , and would insist upon have his own way 
 as long as his own way be profitable to he . but he be a man who 
 always forgave . 
 " if you mean about the money , " say Gertrude , " I be quite sure 
 that it would all come right . " he do mean about the money , and 
 be evidently uneasy in his mind when the suggest step be make 
 manifest to he . Gertrude be astonish to see how long and 
 melancholy his face could become . " Papa be never unkind about money 
 in his life , " say Gertrude . " he could not endure to have any of we 
 poor . " 
 on the next Saturday Sir Thomas again come down , and still find his 
 guest at Merle Park . we be now a little in advance of our special 
 story , which be , or ought to be , devote to Ayala . but , with the 
 affair of so many lover and their love , it be almost impossible to 
 make the chronicle run at equal period throughout . it be now more 
 than three week since Ayala go to Stalham , and Lady Albury have 
 write to the Captain confess something of her sin , and beg 
 to be forgive . this she have do in her anxiety to keep the captain 
 away . he have not answer his sister - in - law 's letter , but , in his 
 present frame of mind , be not at all anxious to finish up the 
 hunting - season at Stalham . Sir Thomas , on his arrival , be very full 
 of Tom 's project tour . he have arrange everything,--except in 
 regard to Tom 's own assent . he have write to New York , and have 
 receive back a reply from his correspondent assure he that Tom 
 should be make most heartily welcome . it might be that Tom 's fighting 
 propensity have not be make known to the people of New York . Sir 
 Thomas have take a berth on board of one of the Cunard boat , and have 
 even go so far as to ask the Captain to come down for a day or two 
 to Merle Park . he be so much employ with Tom that he could hardly 
 afford time and consideration to Captain Batsby and his affair . 
 nevertheless he do ask a question , and receive an answer with which 
 he seem to be satisfied . " what on earth be that man stay here 
 for ? " he say to his wife . 
 " he be go on Friday , " reply Lady Tringle , doubtingly;--almost 
 as though she think that she would be subject to further anger 
 because of this delay . but Sir Thomas drop the subject , and pass 
 on to some matter affect Tom 's outfit . Lady Tringle be very 
 glad to change the subject , and promise that everything should be 
 supply befit the hot and cold climate on the earth 's 
 surface . 
 " she sail on the nineteenth of April , " say Sir Thomas to his son . 
 " I do not think I could go as soon as that , Sir , " reply Tom , 
 whine . 
 " why not ? there be more than three week yet , and your mother will 
 have everything ready for you . what on earth be there to hinder you ? " 
 " I do not think I could go -- not on the nineteenth of April . " 
 " well then , you must . I have take your place , and Firkin expect you 
 at New York . they will do everything for you there , and you will find 
 quite a new life . I should have think you would have be delighted to 
 get away from your wretched condition here . " 
 " it be wretche , " say Tom ; " but I would rather not go quite so soon . " 
 " why not ? " 
 " well , then-- " 
 " what be it , Tom ? it make I unhappy when I see you such a fool . " 
 " I be a fool ! I know I be a fool ! " 
 " then make a new start of it . cut and run , and begin the world again . 
 you be young enough to forget all this . " 
 " so I would , only-- " 
 " only what ? " 
 " I suppose she be engaged to that man Stubbs ! if I know it for 
 certain then I would go . if I go before , I should only come back as 
 soon as I get to New York . if they be once married and it be all 
 do with I think I could make a new start . " 
 in answer to this his father tell he that he must go on the 
 nineteenth of April , whether Ayala be engage or disengage , 
 married or unmarried;--that his outfit would be buy , his cabin 
 would be ready , circular note for his use would be prepare , 
 and everything would be arrange to make his prolong tour as 
 comfortable as possible ; but that if he do not start on that day 
 all the Tringle house would be close against he , and he would be 
 turn penniless out into the world . " you will have to learn that I be 
 in earnest , " say Sir Thomas , as he turn his back and walk away . 
 Tom take himself off to reflect whether it would not be a grand thing 
 to be turn penniless out into the world,--and all for love ! 
 by the early train on Monday Sir Thomas return to London , have 
 take little or no heed of Captain Batsby during his late visit to 
 the country . even at Merle Park Captain Batsby 's presence be less 
 important than it would otherwise have be to Lady Tringle and Mrs. 
 Traffick , because of the serious nature of Sir Thomas 's decision as 
 to his son . Lady Tringle perhaps suspect something . Mrs. Traffick , 
 no doubt , have her own idea as to her sister 's position ; but nothing 
 be say and nothing be do . both on the Wednesday and on the 
 Thursday Lady Tringle go up to town to give the require order on 
 Tom 's behalf . on the Thursday her eld daughter accompany she , and 
 return with she in the evening . on their arrival they learn that 
 neither Captain Batsby nor Miss Gertrude have be see since ten 
 o'clock ; that almost immediately after Lady Tringle 's departure in 
 the morning Captain Batsby have cause all his luggage to be send into 
 Hastings ; and that it have since appear that a considerable number 
 of Miss Gertrude 's thing be miss . there could be no doubt that 
 she have cause they to be pack up with the Captain 's luggage . " they 
 have go to Ostend , mamma , " say Augusta . " I be sure of it , because 
 I have hear Gertrude say that people can always get themselves marry 
 at Ostend . there be a clergyman there on purpose to do it . " 
 it be at this time past seven o'clock , and Lady Tringle when she 
 hear the news be so astounded that she do not at first know how 
 to act . it be not possible for she to reach Dover that night before 
 the night - boat for Ostend should have started,--even could she have 
 do any good by go there . Tom be in such a condition that she 
 hardly dare to trust he ; but it be settle at last that she should 
 telegraph at once to Sir Thomas , in Lombard Street , and that Tom 
 should travel up to London by the night train . 
 on the following morning Lady Tringle receive a letter from 
 Gertrude , post by that young lady at Dover as she pass through on 
 her road to Ostend . it be as follows;-- 
    DEAR MAMMA , 
    you will be surprised on your return from London to 
    find that we have go . after much think about it we 
    determine it would be good , because we have quite make 
    up our mind _ not to be keep separate _ . Ben be so eager 
    about it that I be oblige to yield . we be afraid that 
    if we ask papa at once he would not have give his 
    consent . pray give he my most dutiful love , and tell he 
    that I be sure he will never have occasion to be ashamed 
    of his son - in - law . I do not suppose he know , but it be 
    the fact that Captain Batsby have about three thousand a 
    year of his own . it be very different from have nothing , 
    like that wretch Frank Houston , or , for that matter , Mr. 
    Traffick . Ben be quite in a position to ask papa , but 
    thing have happen which make we both feel that papa 
    would not like it just at present . we mean to be marry 
    at Ostend , and then will come back as soon as you and papa 
    say that you will receive we . in the meantime I wish you 
    would send some of my clothe after I . of course I have to 
    come away with very little luggage , because I be oblige 
    to have my thing mix up with Ben 's . I do not dare to 
    have my box bring down by the servant . could you send 
    I the green silk in which I go to church the last two 
    Sundays , and my pink gauze , and the grey poplin ? please 
    send two or three flannel petticoat , as I could not put 
    they among his thing , and as many cuff and collar as 
    you can cram in . I suppose I can get boot at Ostend , 
    but I should like to have the hat with the little brown 
    feather . there be my silk jacket with the fur trimming ; 
    I should like to have that . I suppose I shall have to be 
    married without any regular dress , but I be sure papa will 
    make up my trousseau to I afterwards . I lend a little 
    lace fichu to Augusta ; tell she that I shall so like to 
    have it . 
    give papa my good love , and Augusta , and poor Tom , and 
    accept the same from your affectionate daughter , 
    GERTRUDE . 
    I suppose I must not add the other name yet . 
 Sir Thomas do not receive the telegram till eleven o'clock , when he 
 return from dinner , and could do nothing that night . on the next 
 morning he be disturb soon after five o'clock by Tom , who have come 
 on the same errand . " idiot ! " exclaim Sir Thomas , " what on earth 
 can they have go to ostend for ? and what can you do by come up ? " 
 " my mother think that I might follow they to Ostend . " 
 " they would not care for you . no one will care for you until you have 
 get rid of all this folly . I must go . idiot ! who be to marry they at 
 Ostend ? if they be fool enough to want to be marry , why should not 
 they get marry in England ? " 
 " I suppose they think you would not consent . " 
 " of course I shall not consent . but why should I consent a bit more 
 because they have go to Ostend ? I do not suppose anybody ever have 
 such a set of fool about he as I have . " this would have be hard 
 upon Tom have it not be that he have get beyond the feeling of any 
 hardness from contempt or contumely . as he once say of himself , 
 all sense of other injury have be wash out of he by Ayala 's 
 unkindness . 
 on that very day Sir Thomas start for Ostend , and reach the place 
 about two o'clock . Captain Batsby and Gertrude have arrive only 
 during the previous night , and Gertrude , as she have be very sick , 
 be still in bed . Captain Batsby be not in bed . Captain Batsby have 
 be engage since an early hour in the morning look for that 
 respectable clergyman of the Church of England of whose immediate 
 service he stand in need . by the time that Sir Thomas have reach 
 ostend he have find that no such clergyman be know in the place . 
 there be a regular english clergyman who would be very happy to 
 marry him,--and to accept the usual fees,--after the due performance 
 of certain preliminary as ordain by the law , and as usual at 
 Ostend . the lady , no doubt , could be marry at Ostend , after such 
 preliminaries,--as she might have be marry also in England . all 
 this be communicate by the Captain to Gertrude,--who be still very 
 unwell,--at her bedroom door . her conduct during this try time be 
 quite beyond reproach,--and also his,--as Captain Batsby afterwards 
 take an opportunity of assure her father . 
 " what on earth , Sir , be the meaning of all this ? " say Sir Thomas , 
 encounter the man who be not his son - in - law in the sitting - room 
 of the hotel . 
 " I have just run away with your daughter , Sir Thomas . that be the 
 simple truth . " 
 " and I have get the trouble of take she back again . " 
 " I have behave like a gentleman through it all , Sir Thomas , " say 
 the Captain , thus defend his own character and the lady 's . 
 " you have behave like a fool . what on earth be I to think of 
 it , Sir ? you be ask down to my house because you give I to 
 understand that you propose to ask my niece , Miss Dormer , to be your 
 wife ; and now you have run away with my daughter . be that behaviour 
 like a gentleman ? " 
 " I must explain myself ? " 
 " well , Sir ? " Captain Batsby find the explanation very difficult ; and 
 hum and haw a great deal . " do you mean to say that it be a lie 
 from begin to end about Miss Dormer ? " great liberty of speech 
 be allow to gentleman whose daughter have be run away with , and 
 whose hospitality have be outrage . 
 " oh dear no . what I say then be quite true . it be my intention . 
 but -- but-- . " the perspiration break out upon the unhappy man 's brow 
 as the great immediate trouble of his situation become clear to he . 
 " there be no lie,--no lie at all . I beg to assure you , Sir Thomas , 
 that I be not a man to tell a lie . " 
 " how have it all be , then ? " 
 " when I find how very superior a person your daughter be ! " 
 " it be not a month since she be engaged to somebody else , " say the 
 angry father , forget all propriety in his indignation . 
 " Gertrude ? " demand Captain Batsby . 
 " you be two fool . so you give up my niece ? " 
 " oh dear yes , altogether . she do not come to Merle Park , you know . 
 how be I to say anything to she when you do not have she there ? " 
 " why do not you go away then , instead of remain under a false 
 pretence ? or why , at any rate , do not you tell I the truth ? " 
 " and what would you have I to do now ? " ask Captain Batsby . 
 " go to the d---- , " say Sir Thomas , as he leave the room , and go to 
 his daughter 's chamber . 
 Gertrude have hear that her father be in the house , and endeavour 
 to hurry herself into her clothe while the interview be go on 
 between he and her father . but she be not yet perfectly array 
 when her father burst into her room . " oh , papa , " she say , go down 
 on her knee , " you do mean to forgive we ? " 
 " I mean to do nothing of the kind . I mean to carry you home and have 
 you lock up . " 
 " but we may be marry ! " 
 " not with my leave . why do not you come and ask if you want to get 
 yourself marry ? why do not you tell I ? " 
 " we be ashamed . " 
 " what have become of Mr. Houston , whom you love so dearly ? " 
 " oh , papa ! " 
 " and the Captain be so much attach to Ayala ! " 
 " oh , papa ! " 
 " get up , you stupid girl . why be it that my child be so much more 
 foolish than other people 's ? I do not suppose you care for the man in 
 the least . " 
 " I do , I do . I love he with all my heart . " 
 " and as for him,--how can he care for you when it be but the other 
 day he be in love with your cousin ? " 
 " oh , papa ! " 
 " what he want be my money , of course . " 
 " he have get plenty of money , papa . " 
 " I can understand he , fool as he be . there be something for he to 
 get . he will not get it , but he might think it possible . as for you , 
 I can not understand you at all . what do you expect ? it can not be for 
 love of a hatchet - face fellow like that , whom you have never see a 
 fortnight ago . " 
 " it be more than a month ago , papa . " 
 " Frank Houston be , at any rate , a manly - look fellow . " 
 " he be a scoundrel , " say Gertrude , now stand up for the first 
 time . 
 " a good - look fellow be Frank Houston ; that at least may be say 
 for he , " continue the father , determine to exasperate his daughter 
 to the utmost . " I have half a mind to give way about he , because he 
 be a manly , outspoken fellow , though he be such an idle dog . if 
 you would go off with he , I could have understand it;--and perhaps 
 forgive it , " he add . 
 " he be a scoundrel ! " scream Gertrude , remember her ineffectual 
 attempt to make her former lover perform this same journey . 
 " but this fellow ! I can not bring myself to believe that you really 
 care for he . " 
 " he have a good income of his own , while Houston be little well 
 than a beggar . " 
 " I be glad of that , " say Sir Thomas , " because there will be something 
 for you to live upon . I can assure you that Captain Batsby will never 
 get a shilling of my money . now , you have well finish dress 
 yourself , and come down and eat your dinner with I if you have get any 
 appetite . you will have to go back to Dover by the boat to - night . " 
 " May Ben dine with we ? " ask Gertrude , timidly . 
 " Ben may go to the d---- . at any rate he have well not show himself 
 to I again , " say Sir Thomas . 
 the lover , however , do get an opportunity of exchange a few 
 word , during which it be settle between they that as the young 
 lady must undoubtedly obey her father 's behest , and return to Dover 
 that night , it would be well for Captain Batsby to remain behind at 
 Ostend . indeed , he speak of make a little tour as far as Brussels , 
 in order that he might throw off the melancholy feeling which have 
 be engender . " you will come to I again , Ben , " she say . upon 
 this he look very grave . " you do not mean to say that after all 
 this you will desert I ? " 
 " he have insult I so horribly ! " 
 " what do that signify ? of course he be angry . if you could only 
 hear how he have insult I . " 
 " he say that you be in love with somebody else not a month since . " 
 " so be you , Ben , for the matter of that . " he do , however , before 
 they part , make she a solemn promise that their engagement should 
 remain an establish fact , in spite both of father and mother . 
 Gertrude , who have now recover the effect of her 
 sea - sickness,--which , however , she would have to encounter again 
 so very quickly,--contrive to eat a hearty dinner with her father . 
 there , however , arise a little trouble . how should she contrive to 
 pack up the clothe which she have bring with she , and which have 
 till lately be mix with the Captain 's garment . she do , however , 
 at last succeed in persuade the chamber - maid to furnish she with 
 a carpet - bag , with which in her custody she arrive safely on the 
 follow day at Merle Park . 
 CHAPTER XLIX . 
 the new frock . 
 Ayala 's arrival at Stalham be full of delight to she . there be 
 Nina with all her new - fledge hope and her perfect assurance in the 
 absolute superiority of Lord George Bideford to any other man either 
 alive or dead . Ayala be quite willing to allow this assurance to 
 pass current , as her Angel of Light be as yet neither alive nor 
 dead . but she be quite certain,--wholly certain,--that when the 
 Angel should come forth he would be superior to Lord George . the 
 first outpouring of all this take place in the carriage as Nina and 
 Ayala be drive from the station to the house , while the Colonel 
 go home alone in a dog - cart . it have be arrange that nothing 
 should be say to Ayala about the Colonel , and in the carriage the 
 Colonel 's name be not mention . but when they be all in the 
 hall at Stalham , take off their cloak and deposit their wrap , 
 stand in front of the large fire , Colonel Stubbs be there . Lady 
 Albury be present also , welcome her guest , and Sir Harry , who 
 have already come home from hunting , with one or two other man in red 
 coat and top breech , and a small bevy of lady who be stay 
 in the house . Lady Albury be anxious to know how her friend have 
 speed with Ayala , but at such a moment no question could be ask . 
 but Ayala 's spirit be so high that Lady Albury be at a loss to 
 understand whether the whole thing have be settle by Jonathan with 
 success,--or whether , on the other hand , Ayala be so happy because 
 she have not be trouble by a word of love . 
 " he have behave so badly , Lady Albury , " say Ayala . 
 " What;--Stubbs ? " ask Sir Harry , not quite understand all the in 
 and out of the matter . 
 " yes , Sir Harry . there be an old lady and an old gentleman . they 
 be very funny and he would laugh at they . " 
 " I deny it , " say the Colonel . 
 " why should not he laugh at they if they be funny ? " ask Lady 
 Albury . 
 " he know it would make I laugh out loud . I could not help myself , but 
 he could be as grave as a judge all the time . so he go till the old 
 woman scold I dreadfully . " 
 " but the old man take your part , " say the Colonel . 
 " Yes;--he do . he say that I be ornamental . " 
 " a decent and truth - speak old gentleman , " say one of the 
 sportsman in top - boot . 
 " quite so;--but then the old lady say that I be perverse , and 
 Colonel Stubbs take her part . if you have be there , Lady Albury , you 
 would have think that he have be in earnest . " 
 " so I be , " say the Colonel . 
 all this be very pleasant to Ayala . it be a return to the old 
 joyousness when she have first discover the delight of have such a 
 friend as Colonel Stubbs . have he flatter she , pay her compliment , 
 be soft and delicate to her,--as a lover might have been,--she 
 would have be trouble in spirit and heavy at heart . but now it 
 seem as though all that love - making have be an episode which have 
 pass away , and that the old pleasant friendship still remain . 
 as yet , while they be stand there in the hall , there have come 
 no moment for she to feel whether there be anything to regret in 
 this . but certainly there have be comfort in it . she have be able 
 to appear before all her Stalham friend , in the presence even of 
 the man himself , without any of that consciousness which would have 
 oppress she have he come there simply as her acknowledge lover , and 
 have she come there conscious before all the guest that it be so . 
 then they sit for a while drink tea and eat butter toast in 
 the drawing - room . a supply of butter toast fully to gratify the 
 want of three or four man just home from hunting have never yet be 
 create by the resource of any establishment . but the great marvel 
 be that the butter toast have never the slight effect on the 
 dinner which be to follow in an hour or two . during this period the 
 conversation turn chiefly upon hunting,--which be of all subject 
 the most imperious . it never occur to a hunting - man to suppose 
 that either a lady , or a bishop , or a political economist , can be 
 indifferent to hunting . there be something beyond millinery,--beyond 
 the interest of the church,--beyond the price of wheat,--in that 
 great question whether the hound do or do not change their fox in 
 Gobblegoose Wood . on the present occasion Sir Harry be quite sure 
 that the hound do carry their fox through Gobblegoose Wood , whereas 
 Captain Glomax , who have formerly be master of the pack which now 
 obey Sir Harry , be perfectly certain that they have get upon 
 another animal , who go away from Gobblegoose as fresh as paint . he 
 pretend even to ridicule Sir Harry for suppose that any fox could 
 have run at that pace up Buddlecombe Hill who have travel all the 
 way from Stickborough Gorse . to this Sir Harry reply resentfully 
 that the Captain do not know what be the run power of a 
 dog - fox in March . then he tell various story of what have be do 
 in this way at this special period of the year . Glomax , however , 
 declare that he know as much of a fox as any man in England , and 
 that he would eat both the fox , and the wood , and Sir Harry , and , 
 finally , himself , if the animal which have run up Buddlecombe Hill be 
 the same which they bring with they from Stickborough Gorse into 
 Gobblegoose Wood . so the battle rag , and the lady no doubt be 
 much interested;--as would have be the bishop have he be there , or 
 the political economist . 
 after this Ayala be take up into her room , and leave to sit there by 
 herself for a while till Lady Albury should send she maid . " my dear , " 
 say Lady Albury , " there be something on the bed which I expect you 
 to wear to - night . I shall be break - hearted if it do not fit you . 
 the frock be a present from Sir Harry ; the scarf come from I . do not 
 say a word about it . Sir Harry always like to make present to young 
 lady . " then she hurry out of the room while Ayala be still 
 thank she . Lady Albury have at first intend to say something 
 about the Colonel as they be sit together over Ayala 's fire , 
 but she have make up her mind against this as soon as she see their 
 manner towards each other on enter the house . if Ayala have 
 accept he at a word as they be travel together , then there 
 would be need of no further interference in the matter . but if not , 
 it would be well that she should hold her peace for the present . 
 Ayala 's first instinct be to look at the finery which have be 
 provide for she . it be a light grey silk , almost pearl colour , as 
 to which she think she have never see anything so lovely before . 
 she measure the waist with her eye , and know at once that it 
 would fit she . she throw the gauzy scarf over her shoulder and 
 turn herself round before the large mirror which stand near the 
 fire - place . " Dear Lady Albury ! " she exclaim ; " dear Lady Albury ! " 
 it be impossible that she should have understand that Lady Albury 's 
 affection have be show to Jonathan Stubbs much rather than to she 
 when those present be prepare . 
 she get rid of her travel dress and her boot , and let down her 
 hair , and seat herself before the fire , that she might think of 
 it all in her solitude . be she or be she not glad,--glad in sober 
 earnest , glad now the moment of her mirth have pass by , the mirth 
 which have make her return to Stalham so easy for her,--wa she or be 
 she not glad that this change have come upon the Colonel , this return 
 to his old way ? she have get her friend again , but she have lose she 
 lover . she do not want the lover . she be sure of that . she be 
 still sure that if a lover would come to she who would be in truth 
 acceptable,--such a lover as would enable she to give herself up to 
 he altogether , and submit herself to he as her lord and master,--he 
 must be something different from Jonathan Stubbs . that have be the 
 theory of her life for many month past , a theory on which she have 
 resolve to rely with all her might from the moment in which this 
 man have speak to she of his love . would she give way and render 
 up herself and all her dream simply because the man be one to be 
 like ? she have declare to herself again and again that it should not 
 be so . there should come the Angel of Light or there should come no 
 lover for she . on that very morning as she be pack up her box 
 at Kingsbury Crescent she have arrange the word in which , should 
 he speak to she on the subject in the railway train , she would make 
 he understand that it could never be . surely he would understand 
 if she tell he so simply , with a little prayer that his suit might 
 not be repeat . his suit have not be repeat . nothing apparently 
 have be far from his intention . he have be droll , pleasant , 
 friendly,--just like his old dear self . for in truth the pleasantness 
 and the novelty of his friendship have make he dear to she . he have 
 go back of his own accord to the old way , without any little 
 prayer from she . now be she content ? as the question would thrust 
 itself upon she in opposition to her own will , drive out the 
 thought which she would fain have welcome , she gaze listlessly at 
 the fire . if it be so , then for what purpose , then for what reason , 
 have Lady Albury procure for her the pale grey pearl - colour dress ? 
 and why be all these grand people at Stalham so good to her,--to 
 she , a poor little girl , whose ordinary life be devoted to the 
 mending of linen and to the furtherance of economy in the use of 
 pound of butter and leg of mutton ? why be she take out of her own 
 sphere and pet in this new luxurious world ? she have a knowledge 
 belong to her,--if not quite what we may call common sense,--which 
 tell she that there must be some cause . of some intellectual 
 capacity , some appreciation of thing and word which be divine in 
 their beauty , she be half conscious . it could not be , she feel , that 
 without some such capacity she should have image to herself that 
 Angel of Light . but not for such capacity as that have she be make 
 welcome at Stalham . as for her prettiness , her beauty of face and 
 form , she think about they not at all,--almost not at all . in 
 appear in that pale - pearl silk , with that gauzy scarf upon her 
 shoulder , she would take pride . not to be sham among other girl 
 by the poorness of her apparel be a pride to she . perhaps to excel 
 some other by the prettiness of her apparel might be a pride to 
 she . but of feminine beauty , as a great gift bestow upon she , she 
 think not at all . she would look in the mirror for the effect of 
 the scarf , but not for the effect of the neck and shoulder beneath 
 it . could she have look in any mirror for the effect of the dream 
 she have thus dreamed,--ah ! that would have be the mirror in which 
 she would have love yet fear to look ! 
 why be Lady Albury so kind to she ? perhaps Lady Albury do not know 
 that Colonel Stubbs have change his mind . she would know it very 
 soon , and then , maybe , everything would be change . as she think of 
 this she long to put the pearl silk dress aside , and not to wear 
 it as yet,--to put it aside so that it might never be wear by she if 
 circumstance should so require . it be to be hop that the man have 
 change his mind,--and to be hop that Lady Albury would know that 
 he have do so . then she would soon see whether there be a change . 
 could she not give a reason why she should not wear the dress this 
 night ? as she sit gaze at the fire a tear run down her cheek . be 
 it for the dress she would not wear , or for the lover whom she would 
 not love ? 
 the question as to the dress be settle for she very soon . Lady 
 Albury 's maid come into the room,--not a chit of a girl without a 
 thought of her own except as to her own grandness in be two step 
 high than the kitchen - maid,--but a well - grow , buxom , powerful 
 woman , who have no idea of let such a young lady as Ayala do 
 anything in the matter of dress but what she tell she . when Ayala 
 suggest something as to the next evening in reference to the 
 pale - pearl silk the buxom powerful woman pooh - poohe she down in 
 a moment . What;--after Sir Harry have take so much trouble about 
 have it make ; have actually inquire about it with his own mouth . 
 " to - night , Miss ; you must wear it to - night ! my lady would be quite 
 angry ! " " my lady not know what you wear ! my lady know what all the 
 lady wear,--morne , noon , and night . " that little plan of let 
 the dress lie by till she should know how she should be receive 
 after Colonel Stubbs 's change of mind have be declare , fall to the 
 ground altogether under the hand of the buxom powerful woman . 
 when she go into the drawing - room some of the guest be 
 assemble . Sir Harry and Lady Albury be there , and so be Colonel 
 Stubbs . as she walk in Sir Harry be stand well in front of the 
 fire , in advance of the rug , so as to be almost in the middle of the 
 room . Captain Glomax be there also , and the discussion about the 
 fox be go on . it have occur to Ayala that as the dress be a 
 present from Sir Harry she must thank he . so she walk up to he 
 and make a little curtsey just before he . " be I nice , Sir Harry ? " 
 she say . 
 " upon my word , " say Sir Harry , " that be the well spend 
 ten - pound - note I ever lay out in my life . " then he take she by the 
 hand and gently turn she round , so as to look at she and her dress . 
 " I do not know whether I be nice , but you be , " she say , curtsey 
 again . everybody feel that she have have quite a little triumph as she 
 subside into a seat close by Lady Albury , who call she . as she 
 seat herself she catch the Colonel 's eye , who be look at she . 
 she fancy that there be a tear in it . then he turn himself and 
 look away into the fire . 
 " you have win his heart for ever , " say Lady Albury . 
 " whose heart ? " ask Ayala , in her confusion . 
 " Sir Harry 's heart . as for the other , cela va sans dire . you must go 
 on wear it every night for a week or Sir Harry will want to know 
 why you have leave it off . if the woman have make it on you it could not 
 have fit well . Baker,-- " Baker be the buxom female,--"said that 
 she know it be right . you do that very prettily to Sir Harry . now 
 go up and ask Colonel Stubbs what he think of it . " 
 " indeed , I will not , " say Ayala . Lady Albury , a few minute afterwards , 
 when she see Ayala walk away towards the drawing - room lean 
 on the Colonel 's arm , acknowledge to herself that she do at last 
 understand it . the Colonel have be able to see it all , even without 
 the dress , and she confess in her mind that the Colonel have eye 
 with which to see , and ear with which to hear , and a judgment with 
 which to appreciate . " do not you think that girl very lovely ? " she 
 say to Lord Rufford , on whose arm she be lean . 
 " something almost more than lovely , " say Lord Rufford , with unwonted 
 enthusiasm . 
 it be acknowledge now by everybody . " be it true about Colonel 
 Stubbs and Miss Dormer ? " whisper Lady Rufford to her hostess in the 
 drawing - room . 
 " upon my word , I never inquire into those thing , " say Lady Albury . 
 " I suppose he do admire she . everybody must admire she . " 
 " oh yes ; " say Lady Rufford . " she be certainly very pretty . who be 
 she , Lady Albury ? " Lady Rufford have be a Miss Penge , and the Penges 
 be suppose to be direct descendant from Boadicea . 
 " she be Miss Ayala Dormer . her father be an artist , and her mother 
 be a very handsome woman . when a girl be as beautiful as Miss 
 Dormer , and as clever , it do not much signify who she be . " then the 
 direct descendant from Boadicea withdraw , hold an opinion much at 
 variance with that express by her hostess . 
 " who be that young lady who sit next to you ? " ask Captain Glomax of 
 Colonel Stubbs , after the lady have go . 
 " she be a Miss Ayala Dormer . " 
 " do I not see she out hunt with you once or twice early in the 
 season ? " 
 " you see she out hunting , no doubt , and I be there . I do not 
 specially bring she . she be stay here , and ride one of Albury 's 
 horse . " 
 " take her top and bottom , and all round , " say Captain Glomax , " she 
 be the prettiest little thing I have see for many a day . when she 
 curtsy to Sir Harry in the drawing - room I almost think that I 
 should like to be a marry man myself . " Stubbs do not carry on the 
 conversation , have feel displeased rather than otherwise by the 
 admiration express . 
 " I do not quite understand before , " say Sir Harry to his wife that 
 night , " what it be that make Jonathan so furious about that girl ; 
 but I think I see it now . " 
 " fine feather make fine bird , " say his wife , laugh . 
 " feather ever so fine , " say Sir Harry , " do not make well - breed 
 bird . " 
 " to tell the truth , " say Lady Albury , " I think we shall all have to 
 own that Jonathan have be right . " 
 this take place upstairs , but before they leave the drawing - room Lady 
 Albury whisper a few word to her young friend . " we have have a 
 terrible trouble about you , Ayala . " 
 " a trouble about I , Lady Albury ? I should be so sorry . " 
 " it be not exactly your fault;--but we have not at all know what to 
 do with that unfortunate man . " 
 " what man ? " ask Ayala , forgetful at the moment of all man except 
 Colonel Stubbs . 
 " you naughty girl ! do not you know that my brother - in - law be 
 break - hearted about you ? " 
 " Captain Batsby ! " whisper Ayala , in her faint voice . 
 " yes ; Captain Batsby . a Captain have as much right to be consider 
 as a Colonel in such a matter as this . " here Ayala frown , but say 
 nothing . " of course , I can not help it , who may break his heart , but 
 poor Ben be always suppose to be at Stalham just at this time of the 
 year , and now I have be oblige to tell he one fib upon another to 
 keep he away . when he come to know it all , what on earth will he 
 say to I ? " 
 " I be sure it have not be my fault , " say Ayala . 
 " that be what young lady always say when gentleman break their 
 heart . " 
 when Ayala be again in her room , and have get rid of the buxom 
 female who come to assist she in take off her new finery , she be 
 aware of have pass the evening triumphantly . she be conscious 
 of admiration . she know that Sir Harry have be please by her 
 appearance . she be sure that Lady Albury be satisfied with she , and 
 she have see something in the Colonel 's glance that make her feel 
 that he have not be indifferent . but in their conversation at the 
 dinner table he have say nothing which any other man might not have 
 say , if any other man could have make himself as agreeable . those 
 hunting day be all again describe with their various incident , 
 with the great triumph over the brook , and Twentyman 's wife and baby , 
 and fat Lord Rufford , who be at the moment sit there opposite to 
 they ; and the ball in London , with the lady who be throw out of the 
 window ; and the old gentleman and the old lady of to - day who have be 
 so peculiar in their remark . there have be nothing else in their 
 conversation , and it surely be not possible that a man who intend 
 to put himself forward as a lover should have talk in such fashion 
 as that ! but then there be other thing which occur to she . why 
 have there be that tear in his eye ? and that " cela va sans dire " 
 which have come from Lady Albury in she railing mood;--what have that 
 mean ? Lady Albury , when she say that , could not have know that the 
 Colonel have change his purpose . 
 but , after all , what be a dress , let it be ever so pretty ? the Angel 
 of Light would not care for her dress , let she wear what she might . 
 be he to seek she because of her dress , he would not be the Angel 
 of Light of whom she have dream . it be not by any dress that 
 she could prevail over he . she do rejoice because of her little 
 triumph;--but she know that she rejoice because she be not an Angel 
 of Light herself . her only chance lie in this , that the angel of 
 yore do come down from heaven to ask for love and worship from the 
 daughter of man . 
 as she go to bed , she determine that she would still be true to 
 her dream . not because folk admire a new frock would she be ready to 
 give herself to a man who be only a man,--a man of the earth really ; 
 who have about he no more than a few of the real attribute of an 
 Angel of Light . 
 CHAPTER L. 
 GOBBLEGOOSE wood on SUNDAY . 
 the next two day be not quite so triumphant to Ayala as have be 
 the evening of her arrival . there be hunt on both of those day , 
 the gentleman have go on the Friday away out of Sir Harry 's 
 country to the Brake hound . Ayala and the Colonel have arrive on the 
 Thursday . Ayala have not expect to be ask to hunt again,--had not 
 even think about it . it have be arrange before on Nina 's account , 
 and Nina now be not to hunt any more . Lord George do not altogether 
 approve of it , and Nina be quite in accord with Lord George,--though 
 she have hold up her whip and shake it in triumph when she jump 
 over the Cranbury Brook . and the horse which Alaya have ride be no 
 long in the stable . " my dear , I be so sorry ; but I be afraid we 
 can not mount you , " Lady Albury say . in answer to this Ayala declare 
 that she have not think of it for a moment . but yet the day seem 
 to be dull with she . Lady Rufford was,--well,--perhaps a little 
 patronising to she , and patronage such as that be not at all to 
 Ayala 's taste . " Lady Albury seem to be quite a kind friend to you , " 
 Lady Rufford say . nothing could be more true . the idea imply be 
 true also,--the idea that such a one as Ayala be much in luck 's 
 way to find such a friend as Lady Albury . it be true no doubt ; but , 
 nevertheless , it be ungracious , and have to be resent . " a very kind 
 friend , indeed . some people only make friend of those who be as 
 grand as themselves . " 
 " I be sure we should be very glad to see you at Rufford if you remain 
 long in the country , " say Lady Rufford , a little time afterwards . 
 but even in this there be not a touch of that cordiality which might 
 have win Ayala 's heart . " I be not at all likely to stay , " say Ayala . 
 " I live with my uncle and aunt at Notting Hill , and I very rarely go 
 away from home . " Lady Rufford , however , do not quite understand it . 
 it have be whisper to she that morning that Ayala be certainly 
 go to marry Colonel Stubbs ; and , if so , why should she not come to 
 Rufford ? 
 on that day , the Friday , she be take out to dinner by Captain 
 Glomax . " I remember quite as if it be yesterday , " say the Captain . 
 " it be the day we ride the Cranbury Brook . " 
 Ayala look up into his face , also remember everything as well 
 as it be yesterday . " Mr. Twentyman ride over it , " she say , " and 
 Colonel Stubbs ride into it . " 
 " oh , yes ; Stubbs get a ducking ; so he do . " the Captain have not get a 
 ducking , but then he have go round by the road . " it be a good run 
 that . " 
 " I think so . " 
 " we have not be lucky since Sir Harry have have the hound somehow . 
 there do not seem to be the dash about them there use to be when I 
 be here . I have they before Sir Harry , you know . " all this be nearly 
 in a whisper . 
 " be you Master ? " ask Ayala , with a tone of surprise which be not 
 altogether pleasing to the Captain . 
 " indeed I be , but the fag of it be too great , and the thank too 
 small , so I give it up . they use to get four day a week out of I . " 
 during the two year that the Captain have have the hound , there have 
 be , no doubt , two or three week in which he have hunt four day . 
 Ayala like hunting , but she do not care much for Captain Glomax , 
 who , have see she once or twice on horseback , would talk to she 
 about nothing else . a little away on the other side of the table Nina 
 be sit next to Colonel Stubbs , and she could hear their voice 
 and almost their word . Nina and Jonathan be first cousin , and , 
 of course , could be happy together without give she any cause for 
 jealousy;--but she almost envy Nina . yet she have hop that it 
 might not fall to her lot to be take out again that evening by the 
 Colonel . Hitherto she have not even speak to he during the day . they 
 have start to the meet very early , and the gentleman have almost 
 finish their breakfast before she have come down . if there have be 
 any fault it be her fault , but yet she almost feel that there be 
 something of a disruption between they . it be so evident to she that 
 he be perfectly happy whilst he be talk to Nina . 
 after dinner it seem to be very late before the man come into the 
 drawing - room , and then they be still engage upon that weary talk 
 about hunting , till Lady Rufford , in order to put a stop to it , 
 offer to sing . " I always do , " she say , " if Rufford venture to 
 name a fox in the drawing - room after dinner . " she do sing , and Ayala 
 think that the singing be more weary than the talk about hunting . 
 while this be go on , the Colonel have get himself shut up in 
 a corner of the room . Lady Albury have first take he there , and 
 afterwards he have be hem in when Lady Rufford sit down to the 
 piano . Ayala have hardly venture even to glance at he , but yet she 
 know all that he do , and hear almost every word that he speak . 
 the word be not many , but still when he do speak his voice be 
 cheerful . Nina now and again have run up to he , and Lady Rufford have 
 ask he some question about the music . but why do not he come out 
 and speak to she ? think Ayala . though all that nonsense about love 
 be over , still he ought not to have allow a day to pass at Stalham 
 without speak to she . he be the old friend there in that 
 house except Nina . it be indeed no more than nine month since she 
 have first see he , but still it seem to she that he be an old 
 friend . she do feel , as she endeavour to answer the question that 
 Lord Rufford be ask she , that Jonathan Stubbs be treat she 
 unkindly . 
 then come the moment in which Lady Albury marshal her guest out 
 of the room towards their chamber . " have you find yourself dull 
 without the hunting ? " the Colonel say to Ayala . 
 " oh dear no ; I must have a dull time if I do , see that I have 
 only hunt three day in my life . " there be something in the tone 
 of her voice which , as she herself be aware , almost express 
 dissatisfaction . and yet not for world would she have show herself 
 to be dissatisfied with he , could she have help it . 
 " I think that perhaps you might have regret the little pony , " he 
 say . 
 " because a thing have be very pleasant , it should not be regret 
 because it can not be have always . " 
 " to I a thing may become so pleasant , that unless I can have it 
 always my life must be one long regret . " 
 " the pony be not quite like that , " say Ayala , smile , as she 
 follow the other lady out of the room . 
 on the next morning the meet be near , and some of the lady be 
 take there in an open carriage . Lady Rufford go , and Mrs. Gosling , 
 and Nina and Ayala . " of course there be a place for you , " Lady Albury 
 have say to she . " have I want to go I would have make Sir Harry send 
 the drag ; but I have get to stop at home and see that the buttered 
 toast be ready by the time the gentleman all come back . " the morning 
 be almost warm , so that the sportsman be say evil thing of 
 violet and primrose , as be the will not of sportsman on such occasion , 
 and at the meet the lady get out of the carriage and walk about 
 among the hound , make civil speech to old Tony . " no , my lady , " 
 say Tony , " I do not like these sunshiny morning at all ; there be not 
 no kind of scent , and I go rid about these big wood , up and 
 down , till my shirt be as wet on my back with the sweat as though I would 
 be pull through the river . " then Lady Rufford walk away and do 
 not ask Tony any more question . 
 Ayala be pat one of the hound when the Colonel , who have give 
 his horse to a groom , come and join she . " if you do not regret that 
 pony , " say he , " somebody else do . " 
 " I do regret he in one way , of course . I do like it very much ; but 
 I do not think it nice , when much have be do for I , to say that I 
 want to have more do . " 
 " of course I know what you mean . " 
 " perhaps you would go and tell Sir Harry , and then he would think I 
 very ungrateful . " 
 " Ayala , " he say , " I will never say anything of you that will make 
 anybody think evil of you . but , between ourselves , as Sir Harry be 
 not here , I suppose I may confess that I regret the pony . " 
 " I should like it , of course , " whisper Ayala . 
 " and so should i,--so much ! I suppose all these man here would 
 think I an ass if they know how little I care about the day 's 
 work,--whether we find , or whether we run , or whether we kill,--just 
 because the pony be not here . if the pony be here I should have 
 that feeling of expectation of joy , which be so common to girl when 
 some much - think - of ball or promise pleasure be just before they . " 
 then Tony go off with his hound , and Jonathan , mount his horse , 
 follow with the ruck . 
 Ayala know very well what the pony meant , as speak of by the 
 Colonel . when he declare that he regret the pony , it be because 
 the pony might have carry herself . he have mean she to understand 
 that the much - think - of ball or promise pleasure would have be 
 the delight of again rid with herself . and then he have again 
 call her Ayala . she could remember well every occasion on which 
 he have address she by her christian name . it have be but seldom . 
 once , however , it have occur in the full flow of their early 
 intimacy , before that love - making have be begin . it have strike she 
 as be almost wrong , but still as very pleasant . if it might be 
 make right by some feeling of brotherly friendship , how pleasant 
 would it be ! and now she would like it again , if only it might be 
 take as a sign of friendship rather than of love . it never occur 
 to she to be angry as she would have be angry with any other 
 man . how she would have look at Captain Batsby have he dare to 
 call her Ayala ! Colonel Stubbs should call her Ayala as long as he 
 pleased,--if it be do only in friendship . 
 after that they be drive about for a while , see what Tony do 
 with the hound , as tiding come to they now and again that one 
 fox have break this way and another have go the other . but Ayala , 
 through it all , could not interest herself about the fox . she be 
 think only of Jonathan Stubbs . she know that she be pleased 
 because he have speak to she , and have say kind , pleasant word to 
 she . she know that she have be displease while he have sit apart 
 from she , talk to other . but yet she could not explain to herself 
 why she have be either pleased or displeased . she fear that there 
 be more than friendship,--than mere friendship , in that declaration 
 of his that he do in truth regret the pony . his voice have be , oh , 
 so sweet as he have say it ! something tell she that man do not speak 
 in mere friendship after that fashion . not even in the softness of 
 friendship between a man and a woman will the man 's voice become 
 as musical as that ! young as she be , child as she be , there be 
 an instinct in her breast which declare to she that it be so . but 
 then , if it be so , be not everything again wrong with she ? if it 
 be so , then must that condition of thing be come back which it 
 have be , and still be her firm resolve to avoid . and yet , as the 
 carriage be be drive about , and as the frequent exclamation 
 come that the fox have traverse this way or that , her pride be 
 gratified and she be happy . 
 " what be Colonel Stubbs say to you ? " ask Nina , when they be 
 at home at the house after lunch . 
 " he be talk about the dear pony which I use to ride . " 
 " about nothing else ? " 
 " no;--about nothing else . " this Ayala say with a short , dry manner 
 of utterance which she would assume when she be determined not to 
 have a subject carry on . 
 " Ayala , why do you not tell I everything ? I tell you everything as 
 soon as it happen . " 
 " nothing have happen . " 
 " I know he ask you , " say Nina . 
 " and I answer he . " 
 " be that to be everything ? " 
 " yes;--that be to be everything , " say Ayala , with a short , dry 
 manner of utterance . it be so plain , that even Nina could not pursue 
 the subject . 
 there be nothing do on that day in the way of sport . Glomax 
 think that Tony have be idle , and have make a holiday of the day 
 from the first . but Sir Harry declare that there have not be a yard 
 of scent . the buttered toast , however , be eat , and the regular 
 sporting conversation be carry on . Ayala , however , be not there 
 to hear it . Ayala be in her own room dream . 
 she be take in to dinner by a curate in the neighbourhood,--to whom 
 she endeavour to make herself very pleasant , while the Colonel 
 sit at her other side . the curate have a good deal to say as to lawn 
 tennis . if the weather remain as it be , it be think that 
 they could all play lawn tennis on the tuesday,--when there would 
 be no hunting . the curate be a pleasant young fellow , and Ayala 
 devote herself to he and to their joint hope for next Tuesday . 
 Colonel Stubbs never once attempt to interfere with the curate 's 
 opportunity . there be Lady Rufford on the other side of he , and 
 to Lady Rufford he say all that he do say during dinner . at one 
 period of the repast she be more than generally lively , because she 
 feel herself call upon to warn her husband that an attack of the 
 gout be imminent , and would be certainly produce instantaneously 
 if he could not deny himself the delight of a certain diet which 
 be go the round of the table . his lordship smile and deny 
 himself,--thinking , as he do so , whether another wife , plus 
 the gout , would or would not have be well for he . all this 
 either amuse Colonel Stubbs so sufficiently , or else make he so 
 thoughtful , that he make no attempt to interfere with the curate . in 
 the evening there be again music,--which result in a declaration 
 make upstairs by Sir Harry to his wife that that wife of Rufford 's 
 be a confounded bore . " we all know that , my dear , as soon as he 
 marry she , " say Lady Albury . 
 " why do he marry a bore ? " 
 " because he want a wife to look after himself , and not to amuse his 
 friend . the wonder use to be that he have do so well . " 
 not a word have there been,--not a word , since that sound of " Ayala " 
 have fall upon her ear . no;--he be not handsome , and his name be 
 Jonathan Stubbs;--but surely no voice so sweet have ever fall from a 
 man 's lip ! so she sit and dream far into the night . he , the Angel 
 of Light , would certainly have a sweet voice ! that be an attribute 
 without which no angel could be angelic ! as to the face and the name , 
 that would not perhaps signify . but he must have an intellect high 
 soaring , a soul tune to music , and a mind verse in nothing but 
 great matter . he might be an artist , or more probably a poet;--or 
 perhaps a musician . yet she have read of poet , artist , and 
 musician , who have misuse their wife , be fond of money , and have 
 perhaps be drunkard . the Angel of Light must have the gift , and 
 must certainly be without the vice . 
 the next day be Sunday and they all go to church . in the afternoon 
 they , as many of they as please , be to walk as far as Gobblegoose 
 Wood , which be only three mile from the house . they could not hunt 
 and therefore they must go to the very scene of the late contest and 
 again discuss it there . Sir Harry and the Captain would walk and 
 so would Ayala and Nina and some other . Lord Rufford do not like 
 walk , and Lady Rufford would stay at home to console he . Ayala 
 use her little wile to keep herself in close company with Nina ; but 
 the Colonel 's wile be more effective;--and then , perhaps , Nina 
 assist the Colonel rather than Ayala . it come to pass that before 
 they have leave Gobblegoose Wood Ayala and the Colonel be together . 
 when it be so he do not beat about the bush for a moment long . he 
 have fix his opportunity for himself and he put it to use at once . 
 " Ayala , " he say , " be I to have any other answer ? " 
 " what answer ? " 
 " Nay , my dearest,--my own , own dearest as I fain would have you,--who 
 shall say what answer but you ? Ayala , you know that I love you ! " 
 " I think you have give it up . " 
 " give it up . never,--never ! do a man give up his joy,--the pride 
 of his life,--the one only delight on which his heart have set itself ! 
 no , my darling , I have not give it up . because you would not have it 
 as I wish when I first speak to you , I have not go on troubling 
 you . I think I would wait till you be use again to the look of 
 I , and to my voice . I shall never give it up , Ayala . when you come 
 into the room that night with your new frock on-- " then he pause , 
 and she glance round upon he , and see that a tear again be in his 
 eye . " when you come in and curtsey to Sir Harry I could hardly keep 
 within myself because I think you be so beautiful . " 
 " it be the new gown which he have give I . " 
 " no , my pet;--no ! you may add a grace to a dress , but it can do but 
 little for you . it be the little motion , the little word , the light 
 in your eye ! it twinkle at I sometimes when you glance about , so 
 that I do not know whether it be mean for I or not . I fear that it 
 be never mean for I . " 
 " it be mean for nothing , " say Ayala . 
 " and yet it go into my very bosom . when you be talk to that 
 clergyman at dinner I could see every sparkle that come from it . then 
 I wonder to myself whether you can ever be think of I as I be 
 always think of you . " she know that she have be think of he 
 every wake moment since she have be at Albury and through many of 
 she sleep moment also . " Ayala , one little word , one other glance 
 from your eye , one slight touch from your hand upon my arm , shall 
 tell me,--shall tell me,--shall tell I that I be the happy , the 
 proud man in all the world . " she walk on steadfastly , close 
 her very tooth against a word , with her eye fix before she so that 
 no slight glance should wander . her two hand be in her little 
 muff , and she keep they with her finger clasp together , as though 
 afraid lest one might rebel , and fly away , and touch the sleeve of 
 his coat . " Ayala , how be it to be with I ? " 
 " I can not , " she say sternly . and her eye be still fix before 
 she , and her finger be still bind in one with another . and yet 
 she love he . yet she know that she love he . she could have hang 
 upon his arm and smile up into his face , and frown her refusal 
 only with mock anger as he press she to his bosom,--only that those 
 dream be so palpable to she and so dear , have be to she so vast a 
 portion of her young life ! " I can not , " she say again . " I can not . " 
 " be that to be your answer for ever ? " to this she make no immediate 
 reply . " must it be so , Ayala ? " 
 " I can not , " she say . but the last little word be so impede by the 
 sob which she could not restrain as almost to be inaudible . 
 " I will not make you unhappy , Ayala . " yes , she be unhappy . she be 
 unhappy because she know that she could not rule herself to her own 
 happiness ; because , even at this moment , she be aware that she be 
 wrong . if she could only release part of herself from the other , then 
 could she fly into his arm and tell he that that spirit which have 
 trouble she have fly . but the spirit be too strong for she , and 
 would not fly . " shall we go and join they ? " he ask she in a voice 
 alter , but still so sweet to her ear . 
 " if you think so , " she reply . 
 " perhaps it will be good , Ayala . do not be angry with I now . I will 
 not call you so again . " angry ! oh , no ! she be not angry with he ! 
 but it be very bitter to she to be tell that she should never hear 
 the word again from his lip . 
 " the hunted fox never go up Buddlecombe Hill;--never . if he do 
 I will eat every fox in the Rufford and Ufford country . " this be 
 hear , speak in most angry tone by Captain Glomax , as the Colonel 
 and Ayala join the rest of the party . 
 CHAPTER LI . 
 " no ! " 
 Ayala , on her return from the walk to the wood , spend the remainder 
 of the afternoon in tear . during the walk she keep close to Sir 
 Harry , pretend to listen to the argument about the fox , but she 
 say nothing . her ear be really intent on endeavour to catch 
 the tone of her lover 's voice as he go on in front of they talk 
 to Nina . nothing could be more pleasant than the sound as he say a 
 word or two now and again , encourage Nina in her rhapsody as to 
 Lord George and all Lord George 's family . but Ayala learn nothing 
 from that . she have come to know the man well enough to be aware that 
 he could tune his voice to the occasion , and could hide his feeling 
 let they be ever so strong . she do not doubt his love now . she do 
 not doubt but that at this moment his heart be heavy with reject 
 love . she quite believe in he . but nevertheless his word be 
 pleasant and kind as he encourage Nina . 
 nor do she doubt her own love . she be alone in her room that 
 afternoon till she tell herself at last the truth . oh , yes ; she love 
 he . she be sure of that . but now he be go ! why have she be 
 so foolish ? then it seem as though at that moment the separation 
 take place between herself and the spirit which have haunt she . she 
 seem to know now,--now at this very moment,--that the man be too 
 good for she . the knowledge have be come to she . it have almost 
 come when he have speak to she in the wood . if it could only have 
 be that he should have delay his appeal to she yet for another 
 day or two ! she think now that if he could have delay it but 
 for a few hour the cure would have be complete . if he have talk 
 to she as he so well know how to talk while they be in the wood 
 together , while they be walk home,--so as to have exorcise the 
 spirit from she by the sweetness of his words,--and then have tell 
 she that there be his love to have if she choose to have it , then she 
 think she would have take it . but he have come to she while those 
 word which she have prepare under the guidance of the spirit be 
 yet upon her tongue . " I can not , " she have say . " I can not . " but she 
 have not tell he that she do not love he . 
 " I do love he , " she say to herself , almost acknowledge that 
 the spirit have be wholly exorcise . the fashion of her mind be 
 altogether different from that which have so strongly prevail 
 with she . he be an honest , noble man , high in the world 's repute , 
 clever , a gentleman , a man of taste , and possess of that gentle 
 ever - present humour which be so inexpressibly delightful to she . she 
 never again speak to herself even in her thought of that Angel of 
 light,--never comfort herself again with the vision of that which 
 be to come ! there have appear to she a man well than all other 
 man , and when he have ask she for her hand she have simply said,--"i 
 can not . " and yet she have love he all the time . how foolish , how 
 false , how wicked she have be ! it be thus that she think of it 
 all as she sit there alone in her bedroom through the long hour of 
 the afternoon . when they send up for she ask she to come down , she 
 beg that she might be allow to remain there till dinner - time , 
 because she be tired with her walk . 
 he would not come again now . oh , no,--he be too proud , too firm , 
 too manly for that . it be not for such a one as he to come whine 
 after a girl,--like her cousin Tom . would it be possible that she 
 should even yet tell he ? could she say to he one little word , 
 contradict that which she have so often utter in the wood ? 
 " now I can , " once whisper in his ear , would do it all . but as to 
 this she be aware that there be no room for hope . to speak such 
 a word , low as it might be speak , simple and little as it might 
 be , be altogether impossible . she have have her chance and have lose 
 it,--because of those idle dream . that the dream have be all idle 
 she declare to herself,--not aware that the Ayala whom her lover have 
 love would not have be an Ayala to be love by he , but for the 
 dream . now she must go back to her uncle and aunt and to Kingsbury 
 Crescent , with the add sorrow that the world of dream be close 
 to she for ever . when the maid come to she she consent to have 
 the frock put on , the frock which Sir Harry have give she , boldly 
 resolve to struggle through her sorrow till Lady Albury should have 
 dismiss she to her home . nobody would want she now at Stalham , and 
 the dismissal would soon come . 
 while she have be alone in her room the Colonel have be closet 
 with Lady Albury . they have at least be thus shut up together for 
 some half - hour during which he have tell his tale . " I have to own , " 
 say he , half - laugh as he begin his tale , " that I thoroughly 
 respect Miss Dormer . " 
 " why be she to be call Miss Dormer ? " 
 " because she have show herself worthy of my respect . " 
 " what be it that you mean , Jonathan ? " 
 " she know her own mind when she tell I at first that she could not 
 accept the offer which I do myself the honour of make she , and now 
 she stick to her purpose . I think that a young lady who will do that 
 should be respect . " 
 " she have refuse you again ? " 
 " altogether . " 
 " as how ? " 
 " well , I hardly know that I be prepared to explain the ' as how ' even 
 to you . I be about as thick - skinned a man in such matter as you may 
 find anywhere , but I do not know that even I can bring myself to tell 
 the ' as how . ' the ' as how ' be very clear in one respect . it be 
 manifest that she know her own mind , which be a knowledge not in the 
 possession of all young lady . she tell I that she could not marry 
 I . " 
 " I do not believe it . " 
 " not that she tell I so ? " 
 " not that she know her own mind . she be a little simple fool , who 
 with some vagary in her brain be throw away utterly her own 
 happiness , while she be vex you . " 
 " as to the vexation you be right . " 
 " cross - grain little idiot ! " 
 " an idiot she certainly be not ; and as to be cross - grained I have 
 never find it . a human being with the grain run more directly 
 all in the same way I have never come across . " 
 " do not talk to I , Jonathan , like that , " she say . " when I call 
 her cross - grained I mean that she be run counter to her own 
 happiness . " 
 " I can not tell anything about that . I should have endeavour , 
 I think , to make she happy . she have certainly run counter to my 
 happiness . " 
 " and now ? " 
 " What;--as to this very moment ! I shall leave Stalham to - morrow . " 
 " why should you do that ? let she go if one must go . " 
 " that be just what I want to prevent . why should she lose her little 
 pleasure ? " 
 " you do not suppose that we can make the house happy to she now ! why 
 should we care to do so when she will have drive you away ? " he sit 
 silent for a minute or two look at the fire , with his hand on his 
 two knee . " you must acknowledge , Jonathan , " continue she , " that I 
 have take kindly to this Ayala of your . " 
 " I do acknowledge it . " 
 " but it can not be that she should be the same to we simply as a young 
 lady , stay here as it be on her own behalf , as she be when we 
 regard she as your possible wife . then every little trick and grace 
 belong to she endear itself to we because we regard she as one 
 who be about to become one of ourselves . but what be her trick and 
 grace to we now ? " 
 " they be all the world to I , " say the Colonel . 
 " but you must wipe they out of your memory,--unless , indeed , you mean 
 to ask she again . " 
 " ah!--that be it . " 
 " you will ask she again ? " 
 " I do not say so ; but I do not wish to rob myself of the chance . it 
 may be that I shall . of course I should to - morrow if I think there 
 be a hope . to - morrow there would be none,--but I should like to 
 know , that I could find she again in hand so friendly as your , 
 if at the end of a month I should think myself strong enough to 
 encounter the risk of another refusal . would Sir Harry allow she to 
 remain here for another month ? " 
 " he would say , probably , nothing about it . " 
 " my plan be this , " he continue ; " let she remain here , say , for three 
 week or a month . do you continue all your kindness to her,--if not 
 for her sake then for mine . let she feel that she be make one of 
 yourself , as you say . " 
 " that will be hard , " say Lady Albury . 
 " it would not be hard if you think that she be go to become so 
 at last . try it , for my sake . say not a word to she about me,--though 
 not shun my name . be to she as though I have tell you nothing of 
 this . then when the period be over I will come again,--if I find 
 that I can do so . if my love be still strong than my sense of 
 self - respect , I shall do so . " all this Lady Albury promise to do , 
 and then the interview between they be over . 
 " Colonel Stubbs be go to Aldershot to - morrow , " say she to Ayala 
 in the drawing - room after dinner . " he find now that he can not very 
 well remain away . " there be no hesitation in her voice as she say 
 this , and no look in her eye which teach Ayala to suppose that she 
 have hear anything of what have occur in the wood . 
 " be he indeed ? " say Ayala , try , but in vain , to be equally 
 undemonstrative . 
 " it be a great trouble to we , but we be quite unable to prevent 
 it,--unless you indeed can control he . " 
 " I can not control he , " say Ayala , with that fix look of 
 resolution with which Lady Albury have already become familiar . 
 that evening before they go to bed the Colonel bid they all 
 good - bye , as he intend to start early in the morning . " I never see 
 such a fellow as you be for sudden change , " say Sir Harry . 
 " what be the good of stay here for hunting when the ground and 
 Tony 's temper be both as hard as brick - bat . if I go now I can get 
 another week far on in March if the rain should come . " with this 
 Sir Harry seem to be satisfy ; but Ayala feel sure that Tony 's 
 temper and the rain have have nothing to do with it . 
 " good - bye , Miss Dormer , " he say , with his pleasantest smile , and his 
 pleasantest voice . 
 " good - bye , " she repeat . what would she not have give that her 
 voice should be as pleasant as his , and her smile ! but she fail so 
 utterly that the little word be inaudible,--almost obliterate by 
 the choking of a sob . how bitterly severe have that word , Miss Dormer , 
 sound from his mouth ! could he not have call her Ayala for the 
 last time,--even though all the world should have hear it ? she be 
 wide awake in the morning and hear the wheel of his cart as he be 
 drive off . as the sound die away upon her ear she feel that he 
 be go from she for ever . how have it be that she have say , " I 
 can not , " so often , when all her heart be set upon " I can ? " 
 and now it remain to she to take herself away from Stalham as fast 
 as she might . she understand perfectly all those idea which Lady 
 Albury have express to her well - love friend . she be nothing to 
 anybody at Stalham , simply a young lady stay in the house;--as 
 might be some young lady connect with they by blood , or some 
 young lady whose father and mother have be their friend . she have 
 be bring there to Stalham , now this second time , in order that 
 Jonathan Stubbs might take she as his wife . drive by some madness 
 she have refuse her destiny , and now nobody would want she at Stalham 
 any long . she have well begin to pack up at once,--and go . the 
 coldness of the people , now that she have refuse to do as she have 
 be ask , would be unbearable to she . and yet she must not let it 
 appear that Stalham be no long dear to she merely because Colonel 
 Stubbs have leave it . she would let a day go by , and then say with all 
 the ease she could muster that she would take her departure on the 
 next . after that her life before she would be a blank . she have know 
 up to this,--so at least she tell herself,--that Jonathan Stubbs 
 would afford she at any rate another chance . now there could be no 
 other chance . 
 the first blank day pass away , and it seem to she almost as 
 though she have no right to speak to any one . she be sure that Lady 
 Rufford know what have occur , because nothing more be say as 
 to the propose visit . Mrs. Colonel Stubbs would have be welcome 
 anywhere , but who be Ayala Dormer ? even though Lady Albury bid she 
 come out in the carriage , it seem to she to be do as a final 
 effort of kindness . of course they would be anxious to be rid of she . 
 that evening the buxom woman do not come to help she dress herself . 
 it be an accident . the buxom woman be want here and there till it 
 be too late , and Ayala have leave her room . Ayala , in truth , require 
 no assistance in dressing . when the first agonizing moment of the new 
 frock have be pass over , she would soon have array herself 
 without assistance . but now it seem as though the buxom woman be 
 run away , because she , Ayala , be think to be no long worthy 
 of her service . 
 on the next morning she begin her little speech to Lady Albury . 
 " go away to - morrow ? " say Lady Albury . 
 " or perhaps the next day , " suggest Ayala . 
 " my dear , it have be arrange that you should stay here for another 
 three week . " 
 " no . " 
 " I say it be arrange . everybody understand it . I be sure your aunt 
 understand it . because one person go , everybody else be not to 
 follow so as to break up a party . honour among thief ! " 
 " thief ! " 
 " well;--anythe else you like to call we all . the party have be 
 make up . and to tell the truth I do not think that young lady have 
 the same right of change their mind and rush about as man 
 assume . young lady ought to be more steady . where be I to get 
 another young lady at a moment 's notice to play lawn tennis with Mr. 
 Greene ? compose yourself and stay where you be like a good girl . " 
 " what will Sir Harry say ? " 
 " Sir Harry will probably go on talk about the stillborough fox and 
 quarrel with that odious Captain Glomax . that be , if you remain 
 here . if you go all of a sudden , he will perhaps hint-- " 
 " hint what , Lady Albury ? " 
 " never mind . he shall make no hint if you be a good girl . " nothing 
 be say at the moment about the colonel,--nothing far than the 
 little allusion make above . then there come the lawn tennis , and 
 Ayala regain something of her spirit as she contrive with the 
 assistance of Sir Harry to beat Nina and the curate . but on the 
 follow day Lady Albury speak out more plainly , " it be because of 
 Colonel Stubbs that you say that you would go away . " 
 Ayala pause a moment , and then answer stoutly , " yes , it be 
 because of Colonel Stubbs . " 
 " and why ? " 
 Ayala pause again and the stoutness almost desert she . " because-- " 
 " well , my dear ? " 
 " I do not think I ought to be ask , " say Ayala . 
 " well , you shall not be ask . I will not be cruel to you . but do you 
 not know that if I ask anything it be with a view to your own good ? " 
 " oh , yes , " say Ayala . 
 " but though I may not ask I suppose I may speak . " to this Ayala make 
 no reply , either assent or dissenting . " you know , do you not , that 
 I and Colonel Stubbs love each other like brother and sister,--more 
 dearly than many brother and sister ? " 
 " I suppose so . " 
 " and that therefore he tell I everything . he tell I what take 
 place in the wood,--and because of that he have go away . " 
 " of course you be angry with me;--because he have go away . " 
 " I be sorry that he have gone,--because of the cause of it . I always 
 wish that he should have everything that he desire ; and now I wish 
 that he should have this thing because he desire it above all other 
 thing . " do he desire it above all other things?--thought Ayala to 
 herself . and , if it be really so , can not I now tell she that he shall 
 have it ? can not I say that I too long to get it quite as eagerly 
 as he long to have it ? the suggestion rush quickly to her mind ; 
 but the answer to it come as quickly . No;--she would not do so . no 
 offer of the kind would come from she . by what she have say must she 
 abide,--unless , indeed , he should come to she again . " but why should 
 you go , Ayala , because he have go ? why should you say aloud that you 
 have come here to listen to his offer , and that you have go away as 
 soon as you have resolve that , for this reason or that , it be not 
 satisfactory to you ? " 
 " oh , Lady Albury . " 
 " that would be the conclusion draw . remain here with we , and see if 
 you can like we well enough to be one of we . " 
 " Dear Lady Albury , I do love you dearly . " 
 " what he may do I can not say . whether he may bring himself to try 
 once again I do not know,--nor will I ask you whether there might 
 possibly be any other answer be he to do so . " 
 " no ! " say Ayala , drive by a sudden fit of obstinacy which she could 
 not control . 
 " I ask no question about it , but I be sure it will be well for you 
 to remain here for a few week . we will make you happy if we can , and 
 you can learn to think over what have pass without emotion . " thus it 
 be decide that Ayala should prolong her visit into the middle of 
 March . she could not understand her own conduct when she again find 
 herself alone . why have she ejaculate that sudden " no , " when Lady 
 Albury have suggest to she the possibility of change her purpose ? 
 she know that she would fain change it if it be possible ; and yet 
 when the idea be present to she she reply with a sudden denial 
 of its possibility . but still there be hope , even though the hope 
 be faint . " whether he may bring himself to try again I do not know . " 
 so it be that Lady Albury have speak of he , and of what Lady Albury 
 say to she she now believe every word . " whether he could bring 
 himself ! " surely such a one as he would not condescend so far as 
 that . but if he do one word should be sufficient . by no one else 
 would she allow it to be think , for an instant , that she would wish 
 to reverse her decision . it must still be no to any other person from 
 whom such suggestion might come . but should he give she the chance 
 she would tell he instantly the truth of everything . " can I love 
 you ! oh , my love , it be impossible that I should not love you ! " it 
 would be thus that the answer should be give to he , should he allow 
 she the chance of make it . 
 CHAPTER LII . 
 " I call it FOLLY . " 
 three week pass by , and Ayala be still at Stalham . Colonel Stubbs 
 have not as yet appear , and very little have be say about he . 
 Sir Henry would sometimes suggest that if he mean to see any more 
 hunting he have well come at once , but this be not address to 
 Ayala . she make up her mind that he would not come , and be sure 
 that she be keep he away by her presence . he could not--"bring 
 himself to try over again , " as Lady Albury have put it ! why should 
 he--"bre himself"--to do anything on behalf of one who have treat 
 he so badly ? it have be settle that she should remain to the 25th 
 of March , when the month should be up from the time in which Lady 
 Albury have decide upon that as the period of her visit . of her 
 secret she have give no slight hint . if he ever do come again it 
 should not be because she have ask for his coming . as far as she 
 know how to carry out such a purpose , she conceal from Lady Albury 
 anything like a feeling of regret . and she be so far successful that 
 Lady Albury think it expedient to bring in other assistance to help 
 her cause,--as will be see by a letter which Ayala receive when the 
 three week have pass by . 
 in the meantime there have be at first dismay , then wonder , and 
 lastly , some amusement , at the condition of Captain Batsby . when 
 Captain Batsby have first learn at Merle Park that Ayala and 
 Jonathan Stubbs be both at Stalham , he write very angrily to Lady 
 Albury . in answer to this his sister - in - law have plead guilty,--but 
 still defend herself . how could she make herself responsible 
 for the young lady,--who do not indeed seem ready to bestow her 
 affection on any of her suitor ? but still she acknowledge that a 
 little favour be be show to Colonel stubbs,--wishe to train 
 the man to the idea that , in this special matter , Colonel Stubbs must 
 be recognise as the Stalham favourite . then no further letter be 
 receive from the Captain , but there come tiding that he be stay 
 at Merle Park . Ayala hear continually from her sister , and Lucy send 
 some revelation as to the Captain . he seem to be very much at home 
 at Merle Park , say Lucy ; and then , at last , she express her own 
 opinion that Captain Batsby and Gertrude be become very fond of 
 each other . and yet the whole story of Gertrude and Mr. Houston be 
 know , of course , to Lucy , and through Lucy to Ayala . to Ayala these 
 sudden change be very amusing , as she certainly do not wish to 
 retain her own hold on the Captain , and be not specially attach to 
 her cousin Gertrude . from Ayala the tiding go to Lady Albury , and 
 in this way the fear which have be entertain as to the Captain 's 
 displeasure be turn to wonder and amusement . but up to this 
 period nothing have be hear of the project trip to Ostend . 
 then come the letter to Ayala , to which allusion have be make , a 
 letter from her old friend the Marchesa , who be now at Rome . it be 
 ostensibly in answer to a letter from Ayala herself , but be write 
 in great part in compliance with instruction receive from Lady 
 Albury . it be as follows;-- 
    DEAR AYALA,-- 
    I be glad to get your letter about Nina . she be very 
    happy , and Lord George be here . indeed , to tell the truth , 
    they arrive together,--which be not at all proper ; but 
    everything will be make proper on Tuesday , 8th April , 
    which be the day at last fix for the wedding . I wish you 
    could have be here to be one of the bridesmaid . Nina 
    say that you will have it that the Pope be to marry she . 
    instead of that it be go to be do by Lord George 's 
    uncle , the Dean of Dorchester , who be come for this 
    purpose . then they be go up to a villa they have 
    take on Como , where we shall join they some time before 
    the spring be over . after that they seem to have no 
    plans,--except plan of connubial bliss , which be never to 
    know any interruption . 
    now that I have come to connubial bliss , and feel so 
    satisfied as to Nina 's prospect , I have a word or two 
    to say about the bliss of somebody else . Nina be my own 
    child , and of course come first . but one Jonathan Stubbs 
    be my nephew , and be also very near to my heart . from all 
    that I hear , I fancy that he have set his mind also on 
    connubial bliss . have you not hear that it be so ? 
    a bird have whisper to I that you have not be kind 
    to he . why should it be so ? nobody know well than I 
    do that a young lady be entitle to the custody of her 
    own heart , and that she should not be compel , or even 
    persuade , to give her hand in opposition to her own 
    feeling . if your feeling and your heart be altogether 
    oppose to the poor fellow , of course there must be an end 
    of it . but I have think that from the time you first meet 
    he he have be a favourite of yours;--so much so that 
    there be a moment in which I fear that you might think 
    too much of the attention of a man who have ever be a 
    favourite with all who have know he . but I have find 
    that in this I be altogether mistaken . when he come that 
    evening to see the last of you at the theatre , taking , as 
    I know he do , considerable trouble to release himself 
    from other engagement , I be pretty sure how it be go 
    to be . he be not a man to be in love with a girl for a 
    month and then to be in love with another the next month . 
    when once he allow himself to think that he be in 
    love , the thing be do and fix either for his great 
    delight,--or else to his great trouble . 
    I know how it be to be , and so it have be . be I not 
    right in say that on two occasion , at considerable 
    interval , he have come to you and make distinct offer of 
    his hand ? I fear , though I do not actually know it , that 
    you have just as distinctly reject those offer . I do 
    not know it , because none but you and he can know the 
    exact word with which you receive from he the tender 
    of all that he have to give you . I can easily believe that 
    he , with all his intelligence , might be deceive by the 
    feminine reserve and coyness of such a girl as you . if it 
    be so , I do pray that no folly may be allow to interfere 
    with his happiness and with your . 
    I call it folly , not because I be adverse to feminine 
    reserve , not because I be prone to quarrel even with what 
    I call coyness ; but because I know his nature so well , and 
    feel that he would not bear rebuff of which many another 
    man would think nothing ; that he would not bring himself 
    to ask again , perhaps even for a seventh time , as they 
    might do . and , if it be that by some frequent ask his 
    happiness and yours could be insure , would it not be 
    folly that such happiness should be mar by childish 
    disinclination on your part to tell the truth ? 
    as I say before , if your heart be set against he , there 
    must be an end of it . I can understand that a girl so 
    young as you should fail to see the great merit of such a 
    man . I therefore write as I do , think it possible that 
    in this respect you may be willing to accept from my mouth 
    something as to the man which shall be regard as truth . 
    it be on the inner man , on his nature and disposition , 
    that the happiness of a wife must depend . a more noble 
    nature , a more truthful spirit than his , I have never 
    meet . he be one on whom in every phase of life you may 
    depend,--or I may depend,--as on a rock . he be one without 
    vacillation , always steady to his purpose , require from 
    himself in the way of duty and conduct infinitely more 
    than he demand from those around he . if ever there be 
    a man altogether manly , he be one . and yet no woman , no 
    angel , ever hold a heart more tender within his bosom . see 
    he with child ! think of his word when he have speak 
    to yourself ! remember the estimation in which those 
    friend hold he who know he best,--such as I and your 
    friend , Lady Albury , and Sir Harry , and his cousin Nina . 
    I could name many other , but these be those with whom 
    you have see he most frequently . if you can love such a 
    man , do you not think that he would make you happy ? and 
    if you can not , must there not be something wrong in your 
    heart,--unless indeed it be already predispose to some 
    one else ? think of all this , dear Ayala , and remember that 
    I be always 
    your affectionate friend , 
    JULIA baldoni . 
 Ayala 's first feeling as she read the letter be a conviction that 
 her friend have altogether waste her labour in write it . of what 
 use be it to tell she of the man 's virtues,--to tell she that the 
 man 's heart be as tender as an angel 's , his truth as assure as a 
 god 's , his courage that of a hero,--that he be possess of all 
 those attribute which should by right belong to an Angel of Light ? 
 she know all that without require the evidence of a lady from 
 rome,--have no need of any evidence on that matter from any other 
 human being . of what use could any evidence be on such a subject from 
 the most truthful lip that ever speak ! have she not find it all out 
 herself would any word from other have prevail with she ? but she 
 have find it out herself . it be already her gospel . that he be 
 tender and true , manly , heroic,--as brightly angelic as could be 
 any Angel of Light,--was already an absolute fact to she . No!--her 
 heart have never be predispose to any one else . it be of he she 
 have always dream even long before she have see he . he be the 
 man , perfect in all good thing , who be to come and take she with 
 him;--if ever man should come and take she . she want no Marchesa 
 Baldoni now to tell she that the angel have in truth come and realise 
 himself before she in all his glory . 
 but she have show herself to be utterly unfit for the angel . though 
 she recognise he now , she have not recognise he in time:--and even 
 when she have recognise he she have be drive by her madness to 
 reject he . Feminine reserve and coyness ! Folly ! yes , indeed ; she 
 know all that , too , without need of tell from her elder . the kind 
 of coyness which she have display have be the very infatuation of 
 feminine imbecility . it be because nature have make she utterly unfit 
 for such a destiny that she have be drive by coyness and feminine 
 reserve to destroy herself ! it be thus that Ayala converse with 
 herself . 
 " I know his nature so well , and feel that he would not bear rebuff 
 of which many another man would think nothing . " thus , she do not 
 doubt , the Marchesa have speak very truly . but of what value be 
 all that now ? she could not recall the rebuff . she could not now 
 eradicate the cowardice which have make she repeat those wicked fatal 
 words,--"i can not . " " I can not . " " I can not . " the letter have come too 
 late , for there be nothing she could do to amend her doom . she must 
 send some answer to her friend in Italy , but there could be nothing 
 in her answer to she to assist she . the feminine reserve and coyness 
 have become odious to her,--as it have be display by herself to 
 he . but it still remain in full force as to any assistance from 
 other . she could not tell another to send he back to she . she could 
 not implore help in her trouble . if he would come himself,--himself 
 of his own accord,--himself impel once more by his great 
 tenderness of heart,--himself once more from his real , real love ; 
 then there should be no more coyness . " if you will still have me,--oh 
 yes ! " 
 but there be the letter to be write . she so write it that by far 
 the great part of it,--the large part at least,--had reference to 
 Nina and her wedding . " I will think of she on the 8th of April , " she 
 say . " I shall then be at home at Kingsbury Crescent , and I shall 
 have nothing else to think of . " in that be her first allusion to 
 her own condition with her lover . but on the last side of the sheet 
 it be necessary that she should say more than that . something must 
 be say thoughtfully , carefully , and gratefully in reply to so much 
 thought , and care , and friendship , as have be show to she . but it 
 must be so write that nothing of her secret should be read in it . 
 the task be so troublesome that she be compel to recopy the 
 whole of her long letter , because the sentence as first write do 
 not please she . " I be so much oblige to you , " she say , " by your 
 kindness about Colonel Stubbs . he do do I the honour of ask I 
 to be his wife . and I feel it so . you be not to suppose that I do 
 not understand that . it be all over now , and I can not explain to 
 you why I feel that it would not do . it be all over , and therefore 
 write about it be no good . only I want you to be sure of two 
 things,--that there be no one else , and that I do love you so 
 much for all your kindness . and you may be sure of a third thing , 
 too,--that it be all over . I do hope that he will still let I be his 
 friend . as a friend I have always like he so much . " it be brave 
 and bold , she think , in answer to such word as the Marchesa 's ; but 
 she do not know how to do it any well . 
 on Tuesday , the 25th of March , she be to return to Kingsbury 
 Crescent . various little word be say at Stalham indicate an 
 intend break in the arrangement . " the Captain certainly will not come 
 now , " say Lady Albury , allude to the arrangement as though it have 
 be make solely with the view of save Ayala from an encounter with 
 her objectionable lover . " Croppy have come back , " say Sir Harry one 
 day;--Croppy be the pony which Ayala have ride . " Miss Dormer can 
 have he now for what little there be leave of the hunting . " this be 
 say on the Saturday before she be to go . how could she ride Croppy 
 for the rest of the hunting when she would be at Kingsbury Crescent ? 
 on neither of these occasion do she say a word , but she assume 
 that little look of contradiction which her friend at Stalham 
 already know how to read . then , on the Sunday morning , there come 
 a letter for Lady Albury . " what do he say ? " ask Sir Harry , at 
 breakfast . " I will show it you before you go to church , " answer his 
 wife . then Ayala know that the letter be from Colonel Stubbs . 
 but she do not expect that the letter should be show her,--which , 
 however , come to be the case . when she be in the library , wait 
 to start to church , Lady Albury come in and throw the letter to she 
 across the table . " that concern you , " she say , " you have well read 
 it . " there be another lady in the room , also wait to start on 
 their walk across the park , and therefore it be natural that nothing 
 else should be say at the moment . Ayala read the letter , return 
 it to the envelope , and then hand it back to Lady Albury,--so that 
 there be no word speak about it before church . the letter , which 
 be very short , be as follows;-- 
 " I shall be at Stalham by the afternoon train on Sunday , 30th,--in 
 time for dinner , if you will send the dog - cart . I could not leave 
 this most exigeant of all place this week . I suppose Albury will 
 go on in the woodland for a week or ten day in April , and I must 
 put up with that . I hear that Batsby be altogether fix by the 
 fascination of Merle Park . I hope that you and Albury will receive 
 consolation in the money . " then there be a postscript . " if Croppy 
 can be get back again , Miss Dormer might see I tumble into another 
 river . " 
 it be evident that Lady Albury do not expect anything to be say 
 at present . she put the letter into her pocket , and there , for the 
 moment , be the end of it . it may be fear that Ayala 's attention 
 be not fix that morning so closely as it should have be on the 
 service of the Church . there be so much in that little letter which 
 insist upon have all her attention ! have there be no postscript , 
 the letter would have be very different . in that case the body 
 of the letter itself would have intend to have no reference to 
 her,--or rather it would have have a reference altogether opposite to 
 that which the postscript give it . in that case it would have be 
 manifest to she that he have intentionally postpone his come till 
 she have leave Stalham . then his suggestion about the hunting would 
 have have no interest for she . everything would have be over . she 
 would have be at Kingsbury Crescent , and he would have be at 
 Stalham . but the postscript declare his intention of find she 
 still in the old quarter . she would not be there,--as she declare 
 to herself . after this there would be but one other day , and then she 
 would be go . but even this allusion to she and to the pony make the 
 letter something to she of intense interest . have it not be so Lady 
 Albury would not have show it to she . as it be , why have Lady Albury 
 show it to she in that quiet , placid , friendly way,--as though it 
 be natural that any letter from Colonel Stubbs to Stalham should be 
 show to she ? 
 at lunch Sir Harry begin about the pony at once . " Miss Dormer , " he 
 say , " the pony will hardly be fit to - morrow , and the distance 
 during the rest of the week be all too great for you ; you have well 
 wait till Monday week , when Stubbs will be here to look after you . " 
 " but I be go home on Tuesday , " say Ayala . 
 " I have have the pony bring on purpose for you , " say Sir Harry . 
 " you be not go at all , " say Lady Albury . " all that have to be 
 alter . I will write to Mrs. Dosett . " 
 " I do not think-- " begin Ayala . 
 " I shall take it very much amiss , " say Sir Harry , " if you go now . 
 Stubbs be come on purpose . " 
 " I do not think-- " begin Ayala again . 
 " my dear Ayala , it be not a case for thinking , " say Lady Albury . " you 
 most positively will not leave this house till some day in April , 
 which will have to be settle hereafter . do not let we have a word 
 more about it . " then , on that immediate occasion , no further word 
 about it be speak . Ayala be quite unable to speak as she sit 
 attempt to eat her lunch . 
 CHAPTER LIII . 
 how LUCY 's AFFAIRS ARRANGED themselves . 
 we must go again to Merle Park , where the Tringle family be still 
 living,--and from which Gertrude have not as yet be violently 
 abduct at the period to which the reader have be bring in the 
 relation which have be give of the affair at Stalham . Jonathan 
 Stubbs 's little note to Lady Albury be receive on Sunday , 23rd 
 March , and Gertrude be not abduct till the 29th . on Sunday , the 
 30th , she be bring back,--not in great triumph . at that time the 
 house be considerably perturb . Sir Thomas be very angry with 
 his daughter Augusta , have be lead to believe that she have be 
 privy to Gertrude 's escapade,--so angry that very violent word have 
 be speak as to her expulsion from the house . Tom also be ill , 
 absolutely ill in bed , with a doctor to see him,--and all from love , 
 declare that he would throw himself over the ship 's side and drown 
 himself while there be yet a chance leave to he for Ayala . and in 
 the midst of this Lady Tringle herself be by no mean exempt from 
 the paternal wrath . she be tell that she must have know what be 
 go on between her daughter and that idiot captain,--that she 
 encourage the Trafficks to remain,--that she coddle up her son 
 till he be sick from sheer lackadaisical idleness . the only one 
 in the house who seem to be exempt from the wrath of Sir Thomas 
 be lucy,--and therefore it be upon Lucy 's head that fall the 
 concentrated energy of Aunt Emmeline 's revenge . when Captain Batsby 
 be speak of with contumely in the light of a husband,--this being 
 always do by Sir Thomas,--Lady Tringle would make her rejoinder to 
 this , when Sir Thomas have turn his back , by say that a captain 
 in her Majesty 's army , with good blood in his vein and a competent 
 fortune , be at any rate well than a poor artist , who have , so to 
 say , no blood , and be unable to earn his bread ; and when Tom be 
 ridicule for his love for Ayala she would go on to explain,--alway 
 after Sir Thomas 's back have be turned,--that poor Tom have be 
 encourage by his father , whereas Lucy have take upon herself to 
 engage herself in opposition to her pastor and master . and then 
 come the climax . it be all very well to say that Augusta be 
 intruding,--but there be people who intrude much bad than 
 Augusta , without half so much right . when this be say the poor 
 sore - hearted woman feel her own cruelty , and endeavour to withdraw 
 the harsh word ; but the wound have be give , and the venom rankle 
 so bitterly that Lucy could no long bear her existence among the 
 Tringles . " I ought not to remain after that , " she write to her lover . 
 " though I go into the poor - house I ought not to remain . " 
 " I write to Mr. Hamel , " she say to her aunt , " and tell he that as 
 you do not like my be here I have better,--better go away . " 
 " but where be you to go ? and I do not say that I do not like you 
 be here . you ought not to take I up in that way . " 
 " I do feel that I be in the way , aunt , and I think that I have well 
 go . " 
 " but where be you to go ? I declare that everybody say everything to 
 break my heart . of course you be to remain here till he have get a 
 house to keep you in . " but the letter have go and a reply have come 
 tell Lucy that whatever might be the poor - house to which she would 
 be destine he would be there to share it with she . 
 Hamel write this with high heart . he have already resolve , previous 
 to this , that he would at once prepare a home for his come bride , 
 though he be sore distressed by the emergency of his position . his 
 father have become more and more bitter with he as he learn that 
 his son would in no respect be guide by he . there be a sum of 
 money which he now declare to be due to he , and which Isadore 
 acknowledge to have be lend to he . of this the father demand 
 repayment . " if , " say he , " you acknowledge anything of the obedience 
 of a son , that money be at your disposal,--and any other that you may 
 want . but , if you determine to be as free from my control and as deaf 
 to my advice as might be any other young man , then you must be to I 
 as might be any other young man . " he have write to his father say 
 that the money should be repay as soon as possible . the misfortune 
 have come to he at a try time . it be , however , before he have 
 receive Lucy 's last account of her own misery at Merle Park , so that 
 when that be receive he be in part prepare . 
 our Colonel , in write to Lady Albury , have declare Aldershot to be 
 a most exigeant place,--by which he have intend to imply that his 
 professional care be too heavy to allow his frequent absence ; but 
 nevertheless he would contrive occasionally to fly up to London for 
 a little relief . once when do so he have find himself sit 
 in the sculptor 's studio , and there listen to Hamel 's account 
 of Lucy 's trouble at Merle Park . Hamel say nothing as to his own 
 difficulty , but be very eager in explain the necessity of 
 remove Lucy from the tyranny to which she be subject . it will 
 perhaps be remember that Hamel down in Scotland have declare to his 
 friend his purpose of ask Lucy Dormer to be his wife , and also 
 the success of his enterprise after he have go across the lake to 
 Glenbogie . it will be bear in mind also that should the Colonel 
 succeed in win Ayala to his way of think the two man would 
 become the husband of the two sister . each fully sympathise with 
 the other , and in this way they have become sincere and intimate 
 friend . 
 " be she like her sister ? " ask the Colonel , who be not as yet 
 acquaint with Lucy . 
 " hardly like she , although in truth there be a family likeness . Lucy 
 be tall , with perhaps more regular feature , and certainly more 
 quiet in her manner . " 
 " Ayala can be very quiet too , " say the lover . 
 " oh , yes,--because she vary in her mood . I remember she almost as 
 a child , when she would remain perfectly still for a quarter of an 
 hour , and then would be up and about the house everywhere , glance 
 about like a ray of the sun reflect from a mirror as you move it in 
 your hand . " 
 " she have grow steady since that , " say the Colonel . 
 " I can not imagine she to be steady,--not as Lucy be steady . Lucy , if 
 it be necessary , can sit and fill herself with her own thought for 
 the hour together . " 
 " which of they be most like their father ? " 
 " they be both of they like he in their thorough love for thing 
 beautiful;--but they be both of they unlike he in this , that he 
 be self - indulgent , while they , like woman in general , be always 
 devote themselves to other . " she will not devote herself to I , 
 think Jonathan Stubbs to himself , but that may be because , like she 
 father , she love thing beautiful . " my poor Lucy , " continue Hamel , 
 " would fain devote herself to those around she if they would only 
 permit it . " 
 " she would probably prefer devote herself to you , " say the 
 Colonel . 
 " no doubt she would,--if it be expedient . if I may presume that she 
 love I , I may presume also that she would wish to live with I . " 
 " be it not expedient ? " ask the other . 
 " it will be so , I trust , before long . " 
 " but it seem to be so necessary just at present . " to this the 
 sculptor at the moment make no reply . " if , " continue Stubbs , " they 
 treat she among they as you say , she ought at any rate to be relieve 
 from her misery . " 
 " she ought to be relieve certainly . she shall be relieve . " 
 " but you say that it be not expedient . " 
 " I only mean that there be difficulties;--difficultie which will 
 have to be get over . I think that all difficulty be get over when 
 a man look at they steadily . " 
 " this , I suppose , be an affair of money . " 
 " well , yes . all difficulty seem to I to be an affair of money . 
 a man , of course , would wish to earn enough before he marry to 
 make his wife comfortable . I would struggle on as I be , and not be 
 impatient , be it not that I fear she be more uncomfortable as she 
 be now than she would be here in the midst of my poverty . " 
 " after all , Hamel , what be the extent of the poverty ? what be the 
 real circumstance ? as you have go so far you might as well tell 
 I everything . " then after considerable pressure the sculptor do 
 tell he everything . there be an income of less than three hundred 
 a year,--which would probably become about four within the next 
 twelvemonth . there be no fund prepare with which to buy the 
 necessary furniture for the incoming of a wife , and there be that 
 debt demand by his father . 
 " must that be pay ? " ask the Colonel . 
 " I would starve rather than not pay it , " say Hamel , " if I alone be 
 to be consider . it would certainly be pay within the next six 
 month if I be alone , even though I should starve . " 
 then his friend tell he that the debt should be pay at once . it 
 amount to but little more than a hundred pound . and then , of 
 course , the conversation be carry far . when a friend inquire 
 as to the pecuniary distress of a friend he feel himself as a 
 matter of course bind to relieve he . he would supply also the mean 
 necessary for the incoming of the young wife . with much energy , and 
 for a long time , Hamel refuse to accept the assistance offer 
 to he ; but the Colonel insist in the first place on what he 
 consider to be due from himself to Ayala 's sister , and then on 
 the fact that he doubt not in the least the ultimate success 
 which would attend the professional industry of his friend . and so 
 before the day be over it be settle among they . the money be 
 to be forthcoming at once , so that the debt might be pay and the 
 preparation make , and Hamel be to write to Lucy and declare that he 
 should be ready to receive she as soon as arrangement should be make 
 for their immediate marriage . then come the further outrage,--that 
 cruel speech as to intruder , and Lucy write to her lover , own 
 that it would be well for she that she should be relieve . 
 the news be , of course , declare to the family at Merle Park . " I 
 never know anything so hard , " say Aunt Emmeline . " of course you have 
 tell he that it be all my fault . " when Lucy make no answer to this , 
 she go on with her complaint . " I know that you have tell he that I 
 have turn you out,--which be not true . " 
 " I tell he it be well I should go , as you do not like my being 
 here . " 
 " I suppose Lucy be in a little hurry to have the marriage come off , " 
 say Augusta,--who would surely have spar her cousin if at the 
 moment she have remember the haste which have be display by her 
 sister . 
 " I think it well , " say Lucy . 
 " I be sure I do not know how it be to be do , " say Aunt Emmeline . 
 " you must tell your uncle yourself . I do not know how you be to be 
 marry from here , see the trouble we be in . " 
 " we shall be up in London before that , " say Gertrude . 
 " or from Queen 's Gate either , " continue Aunt Emmeline . 
 " I do not suppose that will much signify . I shall just go to the 
 church . " 
 " like a servant - maid ? " ask Gertrude . 
 " Yes;--like a servant - maid , " say Lucy . " that be to say , a 
 servant - maid would , I suppose , simply walk in and be marry ; and I 
 shall do the same . " 
 " I think you have well tell your uncle , " say Aunt Emmeline . " but I 
 be sure I do not mean that you be to go away like this . it will be 
 your own doing , and I can not help it if you will do it . " 
 then Lucy do tell her uncle . " and you mean to live upon three 
 hundred a year ! " exclaim Sir Thomas . " you do not know what you be 
 talk about . " 
 " I think Mr. Hamel know . " 
 " he be as ignorant as a babe unborn;--i mean about that kind of 
 thing . I do not doubt he can make thing in stone as well as anybody . " 
 " in marble , Uncle Tom . " 
 " marble be stone , I suppose;--or in iron . " 
 " Bronze , Uncle Tom . " 
 " very well . there be iron in bronze , I suppose . but he do not know 
 what a wife will cost . have he buy any furniture ? " 
 " he be go to buy it,--just a little;--what will do ? " 
 " why should you want to bring he into this ? " Lucy look wistfully 
 up into his face . he himself have be personally kind to she , and she 
 find it to be impossible to complain to he of her aunt . " you be 
 not happy here ? " 
 " my aunt and cousin think that I be wrong ; but I must be married to 
 he now , Uncle Tom . " 
 " why do he kick up his heel when I want to help he ? " 
 nevertheless , he give his order on the subject very much in Lucy 's 
 favour . she be to be marry from Queen 's Gate , and Gertrude must 
 be she bridesmaid . Ayala no doubt would be the other . when his wife 
 expostulate , he consent that the marriage should be very quiet , 
 but still he would have it as he have say . then he bestow a cheque 
 upon lucy,--larger in amount than Stubbs 's loan,--saying that after 
 what have pass in Lombard Street he would not venture to send money 
 to so independent a person as Mr. Isadore Hamel ; but add that 
 Lucy , perhaps , would condescend to accept it . there be a smile in 
 his eye as he say the otherwise ill - natured word , so that Lucy , 
 without any wound to her feeling , could kiss he and accept his 
 bounty . 
 " I suppose I be to have nothing to do in settle the day , " say Aunt 
 Emmeline . it be , however , settle between they that the marriage 
 should take place on a certain day in May . upon this Lucy be of 
 course overjoy , and write to her lover in a full flow of spirit . 
 and she send he the cheque , have write her name with great pride 
 on the back of it . there be a little trouble about this as a part of 
 it have to come back as her trousseau , but still the arrangement be 
 pleasantly make . then Sir Thomas again become more kind to she , in 
 his rough manner,--even when his trouble be at the bad after 
 the return of Gertrude . " if it will not be altogether oppressive to 
 his pride you may tell he that I shall make you an allowance of a 
 hundred a year as my niece,--just for your personal expense . " 
 " I do not know that he be so proud , Uncle Tom . " 
 " he seem so to I . but if you say nothing to he about it , and just 
 buy a few gown now and again , he will perhaps be so wrapt up in the 
 high affair of his art as not to take any notice . " 
 " I be sure he will notice what I wear , " say Lucy . however she 
 communicate her uncle 's intention to her lover , and he send back 
 his grateful thank to Sir Thomas . as one effect of all this the 
 Colonel 's money be send back to he , with an assurance that as 
 thing be now settle themselves such pecuniary assistance be not 
 need . but this be not do till Ayala have hear what the Angel of 
 Light have do on her sister 's behalf . but as to Ayala 's feeling 
 in that respect we must be silent here , as otherwise we should make 
 premature allusion to the condition in which Ayala find herself 
 before she have at last manage to escape from Stalham Park . 
 " Papa , " say Gertrude , to her father one evening , " do not you think 
 you could do something for I too now ? " just at this time Sir Thomas , 
 greatly to his own annoyance , be come down to Merle Park every 
 evening . accord to their plan as at present arrange , they be 
 to stay in the country till after Easter , and then they be to go up 
 to town in time to despatch poor Tom upon his long journey round the 
 world . but poor Tom be now in bed , apparently ill , and there seem 
 to be great doubt whether he could be make to go on the appoint 
 day in spite of the taking of his berth and the preparation of his 
 outfit . Tom , if well enough , be to sail on the nineteenth of April , 
 and there now want not above ten day to that time . " do not you 
 think you could do something for I now ? " ask Gertrude . Hitherto 
 Sir Thomas have extend no sign of pardon to his young daughter , 
 and never fail to allude to she and to Captain Batsby as " those two 
 idiot " whenever their name be mention before he . 
 " yes , my dear ; I will endeavour to do a good deal for you if you will 
 behave yourself . " 
 " what do you call behave myself , papa ? " 
 " in the first place tell I that you be very sorry for your 
 misbehaviour with that idiot . " 
 " of course I be sorry if I have offend you . " 
 " well , that shall go for something . but how about the idiot ? " 
 " Papa ! " she exclaim . 
 " be he not an idiot ? would any one but an idiot have go on such an 
 errand as that ? " 
 " gentleman and lady have do it before , papa . " 
 " I doubt it , " he say . " gentleman have run away with young lady 
 before , and generally have behave very badly when they have do so . 
 he behave very badly indeed , because he have come to my house , with 
 my sanction , with the express purpose of express his affection 
 for another young lady . but I think that his folly in this special 
 run away be bad even than his conduct . how do he come 
 to think that he could get himself marry merely by cross 
 over the sea to Ostend ? I should be utterly ashamed of he as a 
 son - in - law,--chiefly because he have show himself to be an idiot . " 
 " but , papa , you will accept he , will not you ? " 
 " no , my dear , I will not . " 
 " not though I love he ? " 
 " if I be to give you a choice which you would take , he or Mr. 
 Houston ? " 
 " Houston be a scoundrel . " 
 " very likely ; but then he be not an idiot . my choice would be 
 altogether in favour of Mr. Houston . shall I tell you what I will do , 
 my dear ? I will consent to accept Captain Batsby as my son - in - law if 
 he will consent to become your husband without have a shilling with 
 you . " 
 " would that be kind , papa ? " 
 " I do not think that I can show you any great kindness than to 
 protect you from a man who I be quite sure do not care a farthing 
 about you . he have , you tell I , an ample income of his own . " 
 " oh yes , papa . " 
 " then he can afford to marry you without a fortune . poor Mr. Houston 
 could not have do so , because he have nothing of his own . I declare , 
 as I think of it all , I be become very tender - hearted towards Mr. 
 Houston . do not you think we have well have Mr. Houston back again ? 
 I suppose he would come if you be to send for he . " then she burst 
 into tear and go away and hide herself . 
 CHAPTER LIV . 
 TOM 's last attempt . 
 while Gertrude be still away on her ill - omen voyage in quest of a 
 parson , Lady Tringle be stir up to a great enterprise on behalf 
 of her unhappy son . there want now little more than a fortnight 
 before the starting of the ship which his father still declare 
 should carry he out across the world , and he have progress so far 
 in contemplate the matter as to own to himself that it would be 
 good for he to obey his father if there be no hope . but his mind 
 be still sway by a theory of love and constancy . he have hear of 
 man who have succeed after a dozen time of asking . if Stubbs , the 
 hated but generous Stubbs , be in truth a successful rival , then 
 indeed the thing would be over;--then he would go , the soon the 
 well ; and , as he tell his mother half - a - dozen time a day , it would 
 matter nothing to he whether he be send to Japan , or the Rocky 
 Mountains , or the North Pole . in such case he would be quite content 
 to go , if only for the sake of go . but how be he to be sure ? he 
 be , indeed , nearly sure in the other direction . if Ayala be in 
 truth engage to Colonel Stubbs it would certainly be know through 
 Lucy . then he have hear , through Lucy , that , though Ayala be stay 
 at Stalham , the Colonel be not there . he have go , and Ayala have 
 remain week after week without he . then , towards the end of March , 
 he write a letter to his Uncle Reginald , which be very piteous in 
 its tone;-- 
 " DEAR UNCLE REGINALD , " the letter say , 
    I do not know whether you have hear of it , but I have 
    be very ill -- and unhappy . I be now in bed , and nobody 
    here know that I be send this letter to you . it be 
    all about Ayala , and I be not such a fool as to suppose 
    that you can do anything for I . if you could I think 
    you would,--but of course you can not . she must choose for 
    herself,--only I do so wish that she should choose I . 
    nobody would ever be more kind to she . but you can tell 
    I really how it be . be she engage to marry Colonel 
    Stubbs ? I know that she refuse he , because he tell I 
    so himself . if she be not engage to he I think that 
    I would have another shy at it . you know what the poet 
    says,--"faint heart never win fair lady . " do tell I if 
    she be or be not engage . I know that she be with those 
    Alburys , and that Colonel Stubbs be their friend . but 
    they can not make she marry Colonel Stubbs any more than my 
    friend can make she marry I . I wish they could . I mean 
    my friend , not his . 
    if she be really engaged I would go away and hide myself 
    in the furthermost corner of the world . Siberia or Central 
    Africa would be the same to I . they would have little 
    trouble in get rid of I if I know that it be all 
    over with I . but I will never stir from these REALMS TILL 
    I know MY FATE!--Therefore , wait your reply , I be your 
    affectionate nephew , 
    THOMAS TRINGLE , junior . 
 Mr. Dosett , when he receive this letter , consult his wife before 
 he reply to it , and then do so very shortly;-- 
    MY dear TOM , 
    as far as I know , or her aunt , your cousin Ayala be not 
    engage to marry any one . but I should deceive you if I 
    do not add my belief that she be resolve not to accept 
    the offer you have do she the honour to make she . 
    your affectionate uncle , 
    REGINALD DOSETT . 
 the latter portion of this paragraph have no influence whatsoever 
 on Tom . do he not know all that before ? have he ever attempt to 
 conceal from his relation the fact that Ayala have refuse he again 
 and again ? be not that as notorious to the world at large as a 
 minister 's promise that the income - tax should be abolish ? but the 
 income - tax be not abolished,--and , as yet , Ayala be not married to 
 any one else . Ayala be not even engage to any other suitor . why 
 should she not change her mind as well as the minister ? certainly he 
 would not go either to the North Pole or to New York as long as there 
 should be a hope of bliss for he in England . then he call his 
 mother to his bedside . 
 " go to Stalham , my dear ! " say his mother . 
 " why not ? they can not eat you . Lady Albury be no more than a Baronet 's 
 wife,--just the same as you . " 
 " it be not about eat I , Tom . I should not know what to say to 
 they . " 
 " you need not tell they anything . say that you have come to call upon 
 your niece . " 
 " but it would be such an odd thing to do . I never do call on 
 ayala,--even when I be in London . " 
 " what do it matter be odd ? you could learn the truth at any 
 rate . if she do not care for any one else why should not she have 
 I ? I could make she a baronet 's wife,--that be , some day when the 
 governor-- " 
 " do not , tom;--don't talk in that way . " 
 " I only mean in the course of nature . son do come after their 
 father , you know . and as for money , I suppose the governor be quite 
 as rich as those Alburys . " 
 " I do not think that would matter . " 
 " it do count , mother . I suppose Ayala be the same as other girl in 
 that respect . I be sure I do not know why it be that she should have 
 take such an aversion to I . I suppose it be that she do not think 
 I so much,--quite such a swell as some other man . " 
 " one can not account for such thing , Tom . " 
 " no;--that be just it . and therefore she might come round without 
 account for it . at any rate , you might try . you might tell she 
 that it be ruin me;--that I shall have to go about wander over 
 all the world because she be so hard - hearted . " 
 " I do not think I could , my dear , " say Lady Tringle , after 
 consider the matter for a while . 
 " why not ? be it because of the trouble ? " 
 " no , my dear ; a mother do not think what trouble she may take for 
 her child , if any good may be do . it be not the trouble . I would 
 walk all round England to get she for you if that would do it . " 
 " why not , then ? at any rate you might get an answer from she . she 
 would tell you something of her intention . mother , I shall never 
 go away till I know more about it than I do now . the governor say 
 that he will turn I out . let he turn I out . that will not make I go 
 away . " 
 " oh , Tom , he do not mean it . " 
 " but he say it . if I know that it be all over,--that every chance 
 be go , then I would go away . " 
 " it be not the Alburys that I be afraid of , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " what then ? " 
 " it be your father . I can not go if he will not let I . " nevertheless 
 she promise before she leave his bedside that she would ask Sir 
 Thomas when he come home whether he would permit she to make the 
 journey . all this occur while Sir Thomas be away in quest of his 
 daughter . and it may be imagine that immediately after his return he 
 be hardly in a humour to yield to any such request as that which have 
 be suggest . he be for the moment almost sick of his child , 
 sick of Merle Park , sick of his wife , and incline to think that 
 the only comfort to be find in the world be to be have among his 
 million , in that little back parlour in Lombard Street . 
 it be on a Sunday that he return , and on that day he do not see 
 his son . on the Monday morning he go into the room , and Tom be 
 about to press upon he the prayer which he have address to his 
 mother when his lip be close by his father 's harshness . " Tom , " 
 he say , " you will be pleased to remember that you start on the 
 nineteenth . " 
 " but , father-- " 
 " you start on the nineteenth , " say Sir Thomas . then he leave the 
 room , close the door behind he with none of the tenderness 
 generally accord to an invalid . 
 " you have not ask he ? " Tom say to his mother shortly afterwards . 
 " not yet , my dear . his mind be so disturb by this unfortunate 
 affair . " 
 " and be not my mind disturb ? you may tell he that I will not go , 
 though he should turn I out a dozen time , unless I know more about 
 it than I do now . " 
 Sir Thomas come home again that evening , very sour in temper , and 
 nothing could be say to he . he be angry with everybody , and Lady 
 Tringle hardly dare to go near he , either then or on the following 
 morning . on the Tuesday evening , however , he return somewhat 
 soften in his demeanour . the million have perhaps go right , 
 though his child would go so wrong . when he speak either to his 
 young daughter or of she he do so in that jeer tone which he 
 afterwards always assume when allusion be make to Captain Batsby , 
 and which , disagreeable as it be , seem to imply something of 
 forgiveness . and he eat his dinner , and drink his glass of wine , 
 without make any allusion to the parsimonious habit of his 
 son - in - law , Mr. Traffick . Lady Tringle , therefore , consider that 
 she might approach he with Tom 's request . 
 " you go to Stalham ! " he exclaim . 
 " well , my dear , I suppose I could see she ? " 
 " and what could you learn from she ? " 
 " I do not suppose I could learn much . she be always a pig - head , 
 stiff - neck creature . I be sure it would not be any pleasure to I to 
 see she . " 
 " what good would it do ? " demand Sir Thomas . 
 " well , my dear ; he say that he will not go unless he can get a message 
 from she . I be sure I do not want to go to Stalham . nothing on earth 
 could be so disagreeable . but perhaps I could bring back a word or 
 two which would make he go upon his journey . " 
 " what sort of word ? " 
 " why;--if I be to say that she be engage to this Colonel Stubbs , 
 then he would go . he say that he would start at once if he know that 
 his cousin be really engage to somebody else . " 
 " but if she be not ? " 
 " perhaps I could just colour it a little . it would be such a grand 
 thing to get he away , and he in this miserable condition ! if he be 
 once on his travel , I do think he would soon begin to forget it 
 all . " 
 " of course he would , " say Sir Thomas . 
 " then I might as well try . he have set his heart upon it , and if he 
 think that I have do his bidding then he will obey you . as for 
 turn he out , Tom , of course you do not really mean that ! " 
 in answer to this Sir Thomas say nothing . he know well enough that 
 Tom could not be turn out . that turn out of a son be a difficult 
 task to accomplish , and one altogether beyond the power of Sir 
 Thomas . the chief cause of his sorrow lie in the fact that he , as the 
 head of Travers and Treason , be debar from the assistance and 
 companionship of his son . all Travers and Treason be nothing to he , 
 because his son would run so far away from the right path . there be 
 nothing he would not do to bring he back . if Ayala could have be 
 buy by any reasonable , or even unreasonable , amount of thousand , 
 he would have buy she willingly for his boy 's delight . it be a 
 thing wonderful to he that Tom should have be upset so absolutely 
 by his love . he do appreciate the feeling so far that he be willing 
 to condone all those folly already commit if Tom would only put 
 himself in the way of recovery . that massacreing of the policeman , 
 those ill - spend night at the Mountaineers and at Bolivia 's , that 
 foolish challenge , and the almost more foolish blow under the portico 
 at the haymarket , should all be forgive if Tom would only consent 
 to go through some slight purgation which would again fit he for 
 Travers and Treason . and the purgation should be make as pleasant as 
 possible . he should travel about the world with his pocket full of 
 money and with every arrangement for luxurious comfort . only he must 
 go . there be no other way in which he could be so purge as to be 
 again fit for Travers and Treason . he do not at all believe that 
 Ayala could now be purchase . whether pig - headed or not , Ayala be 
 certainly self - willed . no good such as Tom expect would come from 
 this project visit to Stalham . but if he would allow it to be make 
 in obedience to Tom 's request,--then perhaps some tiding might be 
 bring back which , whether strictly true or not , might induce Tom to 
 allow himself to be put on board the ship . argue thus with himself , 
 Sir Thomas at last give his consent . 
 it be a most disagreeable task which the mother thus undertake . 
 she could not go from Merle Park to Stalham and back in one day . it 
 be necessary that she should sleep two night in London . it be 
 arrange , therefore , that she should go up to London on the Thursday ; 
 then make her journey down to Stalham and back on the Friday , and 
 get home on the Saturday . there would then still remain nearly a 
 fortnight before Tom would have to leave Merle Park . after much 
 consideration it be decide that a note should be write to Ayala 
 apprise she of her aunt 's come . " I hope Lady Albury will not be 
 surprised at my visit , " say the note , " but I be so anxious to see 
 you , just for half - an - hour , upon a matter of great importance , that I 
 shall run my chance . " she would prefer to have see the girl without 
 any notice ; but then , have no notice be give , the girl would 
 perhaps have be out of the way . as it be a telegram be receive 
 back in reply . " I shall be at home . Lady Albury will be very glad to 
 see you at lunch . she say there shall be a room all ready if you 
 will sleep . " 
 " I certainly shall not stay there , " Lady Tringle say to Mrs. 
 Traffick , " but it be as well to know that they will be civil to I . " 
 " they be stick - up sort of people I believe , " say Augusta ; " just 
 like that Marchesa Baldoni , who be one of they . but , as to their 
 be civil , that be a matter of course . they would hardly be uncivil 
 to any one connect with Lord Boardotrade ! " 
 then come the Thursday on which the journey be to be commence . as 
 the moment come near Lady Tringle be very much afraid of the task 
 before she . she be afraid even of her niece Ayala , who have assume 
 increase proportion in her eye since she have persistently refuse 
 not only Tom but also Colonel Stubbs and Captain Batsby , and then in 
 spite of her own connexion with Lord Boardotrade,--of whom since her 
 daughter 's marriage she have learn to think less than she have do 
 before,--she do feel that the Alburys be fashionable people , and 
 that Ayala as their guest have achieve something for herself . Stalham 
 be , no doubt , superior in general estimation to Merle Park , and with 
 she there have be always a certain awe of Ayala , which she have not 
 feel in reference to Lucy . Ayala 's demand that Augusta should go 
 upstairs and fetch the scrap - book have have its effect,--as have also 
 her success in go up St. Peter 's and to the Marchesa 's dance ; and 
 then there would be Lady Albury herself,--and all the Alburys ! only 
 that Tom be very anxious , she would even now have abandon the 
 undertaking . 
 " Mother , " say Tom , on the last morning , " you will do the good you 
 can for I . " 
 " oh yes , my dear . " 
 " I do think that , if you would make she understand the real truth , 
 she might have I yet . she would not like that a fellow should die . " 
 " I be afraid that she be hard - hearted , Tom . " 
 " I do not believe it , mother . I have see she when she would not kill 
 even a fly . if she could only be make to see all the good she could 
 do . " 
 " I be afraid she will not care for that unless she can bring herself 
 really to love you . " 
 " why should not she love I ? " 
 " ah , my boy ; how be I to tell you ? perhaps if you have not love she so 
 well it might have be different . if you have scorn her-- " 
 " scorn she ! I could not scorn she . I have hear of that kind of thing 
 before , but how be one to help oneself ? you can not scorn a friend 
 just because you choose to say so to yourself . when I see she she be 
 something so precious to I that I could not be rough to she to save 
 my life . when she first come it be not so . I could laugh at she then . 
 but now-- ! they talk about goddess , but I be sure she be a goddess 
 to I . " 
 " if you have make no more than a woman of she it might have be 
 well , Tom . " all that be too late now . the doctrine which Lady 
 Tringle be enunciate to her son , and which he repudiate , be one 
 that have be often preach and never practise . a man when he be 
 conscious of the presence of a mere woman , to whom he feel that no 
 worship be due , may for his own purpose be able to tell a lie to she , 
 and make she believe that he acknowledge a divinity in her presence . 
 but , when he feel the goddess , he can not carry himself before she as 
 though she be a mere woman , and , as such , inferior to himself in 
 her attribute . Poor Tom have feel the touch of something divine , and 
 have fall immediately prostrate before the shrine with his face to 
 the ground . his chance with Ayala could in no circumstance have be 
 great ; but she be certainly not one to have yield to a prostrate 
 worshipper . 
 " Mother ! " say Tom , recall Lady Tringle as she be leave the 
 room . 
 " what be it , my dear ? I must really go now or I shall be too late for 
 the train . " 
 " Mother , tell she , tell her,--tell she that I love she . " his mother 
 run back , kiss his brow , and then leave the room . 
 Lady Tringle spend that evening in Queen 's Gate , where Sir Thomas 
 remain with she . the hour pass heavily , as they have not much 
 present to their mind with which to console each other . Sir Thomas 
 have no belief whatever in the journey except in so far as it might 
 help to induce his son to proceed upon his travels;--but his wife have 
 be so far soften by poor Tom 's sorrow as to hope a little , in 
 spite of her judgment , that Ayala might yet relent . her heart be 
 soft towards her son , so that she feel that the girl would deserve 
 all manner of punishment unless she would at last yield to Tom 's 
 wish . she be all but sure that it could not be so , and yet , in 
 spite of her conviction , she hop . 
 on the next morning the train take she safely to the Stalham Road 
 Station , and as she approach the end of her journey her heart 
 become heavy within she . she feel that she could not but fail to 
 give any excuse to the Alburys for such a journey,--unless , indeed , 
 Ayala should do as she would have she . at the station she find the 
 Albury carriage , with the Albury coachman , and the Albury footman , 
 and the Albury livery , wait for she . it be a closed carriage , 
 and for a moment she think that Ayala might be there . in that case 
 she could have perform her commission in the carriage , and then 
 have return to London without go to the house at all . but Ayala 
 be not there . Lady Tringle be drive up to the house , and then 
 take through the hall into a small sitting - room , where for a moment 
 she be alone . then the door open , and Ayala , radiant with beauty , 
 in all the prettiness of her good morning costume , be in a moment 
 in her arm . she seem in her brightness to be different from that 
 Ayala who have be know before at Glenbogie and in Rome . " dear 
 aunt , " say Ayala , " I be so delighted to see you at Stalham ! " 
 CHAPTER LV . 
 in the CASTLE there live a KNIGHT . 
 Ayala be compel to consent to remain at Stalham . the " I do not 
 think " which she repeat so often be , of course , of no avail to 
 she . Sir Harry would be angry , and Lady Albury would be disgust , 
 be she to go,--and so she remain . there be to be a week before 
 Colonel Stubbs would come , and she be to remain not only for the 
 week but also for some short time afterwards,--so that there might 
 be yet a few day leave of hunt under the Colonel . it could 
 not , surely , have be doubtful to she after she have read that 
 letter,--with the postscript,--that if she remain her happiness 
 would be insure ! he would not have come again and insist on 
 she be there to receive he if nothing be to come of it . and 
 yet she have fight for permission to return to Kingsbury Crescent 
 after her little fashion , and have at last yield , as she tell Lady 
 albury,--because Sir Harry seem to wish it . " of course he wish 
 it , " say Lady Albury . " he have get the pony on purpose , and nobody 
 like be disappoint when he have do a thing so much as Sir 
 Harry . " Ayala , delight as she be , do not make her secret know . 
 she be flutter , and apparently uneasy,--so that her friend do 
 not know what to make of it , or which way to take it . Ayala 's secret 
 be to herself a secret still to be maintain with holy reticence . 
 it might still be possible that Jonathan Stubbs should never say 
 another word to she of his love . if he did,--why then all the world 
 might know . then there would be no secret . then she could sit and 
 discuss her love , and his love , all night long with Lady Albury , 
 if Lady Albury would listen to she . in the meantime the secret 
 must be a secret . to confess her love , and then to have her love 
 disappointed,--that would be death to she ! 
 and thus it go on through the whole week , Lady Albury not quite 
 know what to make of it . once she do say a word , think that 
 she would thus extract the truth , not as yet understand how potent 
 Ayala could be to keep her secret . " that man have , at any rate , be 
 very true to you , " she say . Ayala frown , and shake her head , 
 and would not say a word upon the subject . " if she do not mean to 
 take he now , surely she would have go , " Lady Albury say to her 
 husband . 
 " she be a pretty little girl enough , " say Sir Harry , " but I doubt 
 whether she be worth all the trouble . " 
 " of course she be not . what pretty little girl ever be ? but as long 
 as he think her worth it the trouble have to be take . " 
 " of course she will accept he ? " 
 " I be not at all so sure of it . she have be make to believe that you 
 want she to stay , and therefore she have stay . she be quite master 
 enough of herself to ride out hunting with he again and then to 
 refuse he . " and so Lady Albury doubt up to the Sunday , and all 
 through the Sunday,--up to the very moment when the last preparation 
 be to be make for the man 's arrival . 
 the train reach the Stalham Road Station at 7 P.M. , and the 
 distance be five mile . on sunday they usually din at Stalham at 
 7.30 . the hour fix be to be 8 on this occasion,--and even with 
 this there would be some bustling . the house be now nearly empty , 
 there be no visitor there except Mr. and Mrs. Gosling and Ayala . 
 Lady Albury give many thought to the manner of the man 's reception , 
 and determine at last that Jonathan should have an opportunity of 
 say a word to Ayala immediately on his arrival if he so please . 
 " mind you be down at half - past seven , " she say to Ayala , come to 
 she in her bedroom . 
 " I think we should not dine till eight . " 
 " there be no knowing . Sir Harry be so fussy . I shall be down , and I 
 should like you to be with I . " then Ayala promise . " and mind you 
 have his frock on . " 
 " you will make I wear it out before any one else see it , " she say , 
 laugh . but again she promise . she get a glimmer of light from it 
 all , nearly understand what Lady Albury intend . but against such 
 intention as these she have no reason to fight . why should she not be 
 ready to see he ? why should she not have on her prettiest dress when 
 he come ? if he mean to say the word,--then her prettiest dress would 
 all be too poor , and her readiest ear not quick enough to meet so 
 great a joy . if he be not to say the other word,--then should she 
 shun he by stay behind , or be afraid of the encounter ? should she 
 be less gaily attire because it would be unnecessary to please his 
 eye ? 
 oh , no ! " I will be there at half - past seven , " she say . " but I know the 
 train will be late , and Sir Harry will not get his dinner till nine . " 
 " then , my dear , great as the Colonel be , he may come in and get what 
 be leave for he in the middle . Sir Harry will not wait a minute after 
 eight . " 
 the buxom woman come and dress she . the buxom woman probably know 
 what be go to happen;--was perhaps more keenly alive to the truth 
 than Lady Albury herself . " we have take great care of it , have not 
 we , Miss ? " she say , as she fasten the dress behind . " it be just as 
 new still . " 
 " New ! " say Ayala . " it have get to be new with I for the next two 
 year . " 
 " I do not know much about that , Miss. somebody will have to pay for 
 a good many more new dress before two year be over , I take it . " 
 to this Ayala make no answer , but she be quite sure that the buxom 
 woman intend to imply that Colonel Stubbs would have to pay for the 
 new dress . 
 punctually at half - past seven she be in the drawing - room , and there 
 she remain alone for a few minute . she endeavour to sit down 
 and be quiet , but she find it impossible to compose herself . almost 
 immediately he would be there , and then,--as she be quite sure,--her 
 fate would be know to she instantly . she know that the first moment 
 of his presence in the room with she would tell she everything . 
 if that be tell to she which she desire to hear , everything 
 should be re - tell to he as quickly . but , if it be otherwise , 
 then she think that when the moment come she would still have 
 strength enough to hide her sorrow . if he have come simply for the 
 hunting,--simply that they two might ride a - hunting together so that 
 he might show to she that all trace of his disappointment be 
 gone,--then she would know how to teach he to think that her heart 
 towards he be as it have ever be . the thing to be do would be so 
 sad as to call from her tear almost of blood in her solitude ; but 
 it should be so do that no one should know that any sorrow such as 
 this have touch her bosom . not even to Lucy should this secret be 
 tell . 
 there be a clock on the mantelpiece to which her eye be continually 
 turn . it now want twenty minute to eight , and she be aware that 
 if the train be punctual he might now be at the hall - door . at this 
 moment Lady Albury enter the room . " your knight have come at last , " 
 she say ; " I hear his wheel on the gravel . " 
 " he be no knight of mine , " say Ayala , with that peculiar frown of 
 her . 
 " whose ever knight he be , there he be . Knight or not , I must go and 
 welcome he . " then Lady Albury hurry out of the room and Ayala 
 be again alone . the door have be leave partly open , so that she 
 could hear the sound of voice and step across the inner hall or 
 billiard - room . there be the servant wait upon he , and Sir 
 Harry bid he to go up and dress at once so as not to keep 
 the whole house wait , and Lady Albury declare that there be 
 yet ample time as the dinner certainly would not be on the table 
 for half - an - hour . she hear it all , and hear he to whom all her 
 thought be now give laugh as he declare that he have never 
 be so cold in his life , and that he certainly would not dress 
 himself till he have warm his finger . she be far away from the 
 door , not have stir from the spot on which she be stand 
 when Lady Albury leave she ; but she fancy that she hear the murmur 
 of some slight whisper , and she tell herself that Lady Albury be 
 tell he where to seek she . then she hear the sound of the man 's 
 step across the billiard - room , she hear his hand upon the door , and 
 there he be in her presence ! 
 when she think of it all afterwards , as she do so many score of 
 time , she never could tell how it have occur . when she accuse he 
 in her playfulness , tell he that he have take for grant that 
 of which he have have no sign , she never know whether there have be 
 aught of truth in her accusation . but she do know that he have hardly 
 close the door behind he when she be in his arm , and feel the 
 burn love of his kiss upon her cheek . there have be no more 
 ask whether he be to have any other answer . of that she be quite 
 sure . have there be such further question she would have answer 
 he , and some remembrance of her own word would have remain with 
 she . she be quite sure that she have answer no question . some 
 memory of mingle grant and deny , of repulse and assent all 
 quickly huddle upon one another , of attempt to escape while she be 
 so happy to remain , and then of a deluge of love term which fall 
 upon her ears,--"his own one , his wife , his darling , his Ayala , at 
 last his own sweet ayala,"--this be what remain to she of that 
 little interview . she have not speak a word . she think she be sure 
 of that . her breath have leave her,--so that she could not speak . and 
 yet it have be take for granted,--though on former occasion he have 
 plead with slow piteous word ! how have it be that he have come to 
 know the truth so suddenly ? then she become aware that Lady Albury 
 be speak to Mrs. Gosling in the billiard - room outside , detain 
 her other guest till the scene within should be over . at that moment 
 she do speak a word which she remember afterwards . " go;--go ; you 
 must go now . " then there have be one other soft repulse , one other 
 sweet assent , and the man have go . there be just a moment for she , 
 in which to tell herself that the Angel of Light have come for she , 
 and have take she to himself . 
 Mrs. Gosling , who be a pretty little woman , creep softly into the 
 room , hide her suspicion if she have any . Lady Albury put out her 
 hand to Ayala behind the other woman 's back , not raise it high , but 
 just so that her young friend might touch it if she please . Ayala 
 do touch it , slide her little finger into the offer grasp . " I 
 think it would be so , " whisper Lady Albury . " I think it would 
 be so . " 
 " what the deuce be you all up to , " say Sir Harry , burst into 
 the room . " it be eight now , and that man have only just go up to his 
 room . " 
 " he have not be in the house above five minute yet , " say Lady 
 Albury , " and I think he have be very quick . " Ayala think so too . 
 during dinner and afterwards they be very full of hunt for the 
 next day . it be wonderful to Ayala that there should be think for 
 such a trifle when there be such a thing as love in the world . while 
 there be so much to fill her heart , how could there be thought 
 of anything else ? but Jonathan,--he be Jonathan to she now , her 
 Jonathan , her Angel of Light,--was very keen upon the subject . there 
 be but one week leave . he think that Croppy might manage three day 
 as there be to be but one week . croppy would have leisure and rest 
 enough afterwards . " it be a little sharp , " say Sir Harry . 
 " oh , pray do not , " say Ayala . 
 but Lady Albury and Jonathan together silence Sir Harry , and Mrs. 
 Gosling prove the absurdity of the objection by tell the story of 
 a pony who have carry a lady three day run . " I should not have 
 like to be either the pony , or the owner , or the lady , " say Sir 
 Harry . but he be silence . what do it matter though the heaven 
 fall , so that Ayala be pleased ? what be too much to be do for a 
 girl who prove herself to be an angel by accept the right man at 
 the right time ? 
 she have but one moment alone with her lover that night . " I always 
 love you , " she whisper to he as she flee away . the Colonel do 
 not quite understand the assertion , but he be content with it as 
 he sit smoke his cigar with Sir Harry and Mr. Gosling . 
 but , though she could have but one word that night with her lover , 
 there be many word between she and Lady Albury before they go to 
 bed . " and so , like wise people , you have settle it all between you 
 at last , " say Lady Albury . 
 " I do not know whether he be wise . " 
 " we will take that for grant . at any rate he have be very true . " 
 " oh , yes . " 
 " and you,--you know all about it . " 
 " No;--I know nothing . I do not think he would ever ask again . I only 
 hop . " 
 " but why on earth do you give he so much trouble ? " 
 " I can not tell you , " say Ayala , shake her head . 
 " do you mean that there be still a secret ? " 
 " no , not that . I would tell you anything that I could tell , because 
 you have be so very , very good to I . but I can not tell . I can not 
 explain even to myself . oh , Lady Albury , why have you be so good to 
 I ? " 
 " shall I say because I have love you ? " 
 " yes;--if it be true . " 
 " but it be not true . " 
 " oh , Lady Albury ! " 
 " I do love you dearly . I shall always love you now . I do hope I shall 
 love you now , because you will be his wife . but I have not be kind 
 to you as you call it because I love you . " 
 " then why ? " 
 " because I love he . can not you understand that ? because I be 
 anxious that he should have all that he want . be it not necessary 
 that there should be some house in which he might meet you ? could 
 there have be much of a pleasant time for wooing between you in 
 your aunt 's drawing - room in Kingsbury Crescent ? " 
 " oh , no , " say Ayala . 
 " could he have take you out hunting unless you have be here ? how 
 could he and you have know each other at all unless I have be kind 
 to you ? now you will understand . " 
 " yes , " say Ayala , " I understand now . do he ask you ? " 
 " Well,--he consult I . we talk you all over , and make up our 
 mind , between we , that if we pet you down here that would be the 
 good way to win you . be we not right ? " 
 " it be a very nice way . I do so like to be pet . " 
 " Sir Harry be in the secret , and he do his petting by buy the 
 frock . that be a success too , I think . " 
 " do he care about that , Lady Albury ? " 
 " what he ? " 
 " Jonathan , " say Ayala , almost stumble over the word , as she 
 pronounce it aloud for the first time . 
 " I think he like it . but whether he would have persevere without it 
 you must ask yourself . if he tell you that he would never have say 
 another word to you only for this frock , then I think you ought to 
 thank Sir Harry , and give he a kiss . " 
 " I be sure he will not tell I that , " say Ayala , with mock 
 indignation . 
 " and now , my dear , as I have tell you all my secret , and have 
 explain to you how we lay our head together , and plot against 
 you , I think you ought to tell I your secret . why be it that you 
 refuse he so pertinaciously on that Sunday when you be out 
 walking , and yet you know your mind about it so clearly as soon as he 
 arrive to - day ? " 
 " I can not explain it , " say Ayala . 
 " you must know that you like he . " 
 " I always like he . " 
 " you must have more than like on that Sunday . " 
 " I adore he . " 
 " then I do not understand you . " 
 " Lady Albury , I think I fall in love with he the first moment I see 
 he . the Marchesa take I to a party in London , and there he be . " 
 " do he say anything to you then ? " 
 " no . he be very funny,--as he often be . do not you know his way ? 
 I remember every word he say to I . he come up without any 
 introduction and order I to dance with he . " 
 " and you do ? " 
 " oh yes . whatever he tell I I should have do . then he scold I 
 because I do not stand up quick enough . and he invent some story 
 about a woman who be engage to he and would not marry he because 
 he have red hair and his name be Jonathan . I know it be all a joke , 
 and yet I hat the woman . " 
 " that must have be love at first sight . " 
 " I think it be . from that day to this I have always be think 
 about he . " 
 " and yet you refuse he twice over ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " at ever so long an interval ? " Ayala bob her head at her 
 companion . " and why ? " 
 " ah;--that I can not tell . I shall try to tell he some day , but I know 
 that I never shall . it be because-- . but , Lady Albury , I can not tell 
 it . do you ever picture anything to yourself in a wake dream ? " 
 " build castle in the air ? " suggest Lady Albury . 
 " that be just it . " 
 " very often . but they never come true . " 
 " never have come true,--exactly . I have a castle in the air , and in 
 the castle live a knight . " she be still ashamed to say that the 
 inhabitant of the castle be an Angel of Light . " I want to find out 
 whether he be the knight who live there . he be . " 
 " and you be not quite sure till to - day ? " 
 " I have be sure a long time . but when we walk out on that Sunday 
 I be such an idiot that I do not know how to tell he . oh , Lady 
 Albury , I be such a fool ! what should I have do if he have not come 
 back ? " 
 " send for he . " 
 " Never;--never ! I should have be miserable always ! but now I be so 
 happy . " 
 " he be the real knight ? " 
 " oh , yes ; indeed . he be the real,--real knight , that have always be 
 live in my castle . " 
 Ayala 's promotion be now so firmly fix that the buxom female come 
 to assist she off with her clothe when Lady Albury have leave she . 
 from this time forth it be suppose that such assistance would be 
 necessary . " I take it , Miss , " say the buxom female , " there will be a 
 many new dress before the end of this time two year . " from which 
 Ayala be quite sure that everybody in the house know all about it . 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 but it be now , now when she be quite alone , that the great sense 
 of her happiness come to she . in the fulness of her dream there 
 have never be more than the conviction that such a being , and none 
 other , could be worthy of her love . there have never be faith in the 
 hope that such a one would come to her,--never even though she would 
 tell herself that angel have come down from heaven and have seek in 
 marriage the hand of the daughter of man . her dream have be to 
 she a barrier against love rather than an encouragement . but now he 
 that she have in truth dream of have come for she . then she bring 
 out the Marchesa 's letter and read that description of her lover . 
 yes ; he be all that ; true , brave , tender,--a very hero . but then 
 he be more than all that,--for he be in truth the very " Angel of 
 Light . " 
 CHAPTER LVI . 
 GOBBLEGOOSE WOOD again . 
 the Monday be devote to hunting . I be not at all sure that rid 
 about the country with a pack of hound be an amusement specially 
 compatible with that assured love entertainment which be now within 
 the reach of Ayala and her Angel . for the rudiment of love - making , 
 for little endearing attention , for a few sweet word to be 
 whisper with shorten breath as one horse gallop beside another , 
 perhaps for a lengthened half - hour together , amidst the maze of 
 a large wood when opportunity be no doubt give for private 
 conversation , hunting may be very well . but for two person who be 
 engage , with the mutual consent of all their friend , a comfortable 
 sofa be perhaps preferable . Ayala have hear as yet but very little 
 of her lover 's intentions;--wa acquaint only with that one single 
 intention which he have declare in ask she to be his wife . there 
 be a thousand thing to be told,--the how , the where , and the when . 
 she know hitherto the why , and that be all . nothing could be tell 
 she while she be gallop about a big wood on Croppy 's back . " I 
 be delighted to see you again in these part , Miss , " say Larry 
 Twentyman , suddenly . 
 " oh , Mr. Twentyman ; how be the baby ? " 
 " the baby be quite well , Miss. his mamma have be out ever so many 
 time . " 
 " I ought to have ask for her first . do baby come out too ? " 
 " not quite . but when the hound be near mamma come for an hour or 
 so . we have have a wonderful season,--quite wonderful . you have hear , 
 perhaps , of our great run from Dillsborough Wood . we find he there , 
 close to my place , you know , and run he down in the Brake country 
 after an hour and forty minute . there be only five or six of they . 
 you would have be one , Miss , to a moral , if you would have be here on the 
 pony . I say we never change our fox . " 
 Ayala be well disposed towards Larry Twentyman , and be quite aware 
 that , accord to the record and establish usage of that hunt , 
 he be a man with whom she might talk safely . but she do not care 
 about the fox so much as she have do before . there be nothing 
 now for which she care much , except Jonathan Stubbs . he be always 
 rid near she throughout the day , so that he might be with she 
 should there arise anything special to be do ; but he be not always 
 close to her,--as she would have have he . he have gain his purpose , 
 and he be satisfied . she have enter in upon the fruition of 
 positive bliss , but enjoy it in perfection only when she hear the 
 sound of his voice , or could look into his eye as she speak to he . 
 she do not care much about the great run from Dillsborough , or even 
 for the compliment with which Mr. Twentyman finish his narrative . 
 they be rid about the big wood all day , not without kill 
 a fox , but with none of the excitement of a real run . " after that 
 Croppy will be quite fit to come again on Wednesday , " suggest the 
 Colonel on their way home . to which Sir Harry assent . 
 " what do you folk mean to do to - day ? " ask Lady Albury at breakfast 
 on the following morning . Ayala have her own little plan in her head , 
 but do not dare to propose it publicly . " will you choose to be 
 drive , or will you choose to walk ? " say Lady Albury , address 
 herself to Ayala . Ayala , in her present position , be consider to 
 be entitle to special consideration . Ayala think she would prefer 
 to walk . at last there come a moment in which she could make she 
 request to the person chiefly concerned . " walk with I to the wood 
 with that absurd name , " suggest Ayala . 
 " Gobblegoose Wood , " suggest the Colonel . then that be arrange 
 accord to Ayala 's wish . 
 a walk in a wood be perhaps almost as good as a comfortable seat in a 
 drawing - room , and be , perhaps , less liable to intrusion . they start 
 and walk the way which Ayala remember so well when she have 
 trudge along , pretend to listen to Sir Harry and Captain Glomax 
 as they carry on their discussion about the hunted fox , but give 
 all her ear to the Colonel , and wonder whether he would say 
 anything to she before the day be over . then her mind have be in a 
 perturb state which she herself have fail to understand . she be 
 sure that she would say " no " to he , should he speak , and yet she 
 desire that it should be " yes . " what a fool she have be , she tell 
 herself as she walk along now , and how little she have deserve all 
 the good that have come to she ! 
 the conversation be chiefly with he as they go . he tell she much 
 now of the how , and the when , and the where . he hop there might be 
 no long delay . he would live , he say , for the next year or two at 
 Aldershot , and would be able to get a house fit for she on condition 
 that they should be marry at once . he do not explain why the house 
 could not be take even though their marriage be delay two or 
 three months,--but as to this she ask no question . of course they 
 must be marry in London if Mrs. Dosett wish it ; but if not it 
 might be arrange that the wedding should take place at Stalham . 
 upon all this and many other thing he have much to propose , and 
 all that he say Ayala accept as gospel . as the Angel of Light 
 have appeared,--as the knight who be lord of the castle have come 
 forth,--of course he must be obey in everything . he could hardly 
 have make a suggestion to which she would not have accede . when they 
 have enter the wood Ayala in her own quiet way lead he to the very 
 spot in which on that former day he have ask she his question . " do 
 you remember this path ? " she ask . 
 " I remember that you and I be walk here together , " he say . 
 " ay , but this very turn ? do you remember this branch ? " 
 " well , no ; not the branch . " 
 " you put your hand on it when you say that ' never -- never , ' to I . " 
 " do I say ' never,--never ' ? " 
 " yes , you did;--when I be so untrue to you . " 
 " be you untrue ? " he ask . 
 " Jonathan , you remember nothing about it . it have all pass away from 
 you just as though you be talk to Captain Glomax about the fox . " 
 " have it , dear ? " 
 " I remember every word of it . I remember how you stand and how you 
 look , even to the hat you wear and the little switch you hold in 
 your hand,--when you ask for one little word , one glance , one 
 slight touch . there , now;--you shall have all my weight to bear . " 
 then she leant upon he with both her hand , turn round her arm , 
 glance up into his face , and open her lip as though speak that 
 little word . " do you remember that I say I think you have give it 
 all up ? " 
 " I remember that , certainly . " 
 " and be not that untrue ? oh , Jonathan , that be such a story . have I 
 think so I should have be miserable . " 
 " then why do you swear to I so often that you could not love I ? " 
 " I never say so , " reply Ayala ; " never . " 
 " do you not ? " he ask . 
 " I never say so . I never tell you such a story as that . I do love 
 you then , almost as well as I do now . oh , I have love you for so long 
 a time ! " 
 " then why do you refuse I ? " 
 " ah ; that be what I would explain to you now,--here on this very 
 spot,--if I could . do it not seem odd that a girl should have all 
 that she want offer to she , and yet not be able to take it ? " 
 " be it all that you want ? " 
 " indeed it be . when I be in church that morning I tell myself that 
 I never , never , could be happy unless you come to I again . " 
 " but when I do come you would not have I . " 
 " I know how to love you , " she say , " but I do not know how to tell 
 you that I love you . I can tell you now ; can not I ? " and then she 
 look up at he and smile . " yes , I think I shall never be tired of 
 tell you now . it be sweet to hear you say that you love I , but it 
 be sweet still to be always tell you . and yet I could not tell 
 you then . suppose you have take I at my word ? " 
 " I tell you that I should never give you up . " 
 " it be only that that keep I from be altogether wretched . 
 I think that I be ashamed to tell you the truth when I have once 
 refuse to do as you would have I . I have give you so much trouble 
 all for nothing . I think that if you have ask I on that first day 
 at the ball in London I should have say yes , if I have tell the 
 truth . " 
 " that would have be very sudden . I have never see you before that . " 
 " nevertheless it be so . I do not mind own it to you now , though 
 I never , never , would own it to any one else . when you come to we at 
 the theatre I be sure that no one else could ever have be so good . 
 I certainly do love you then . " 
 " hardly that , Ayala . " 
 " I do , " she say . " now I have tell you everything , and if you choose 
 to think I have be bad,--why you must think so , and I must put up 
 with it . " 
 " bad , my darling ? " 
 " I suppose it be bad to fall in love with a man like that ; and 
 very bad to give he the trouble of come so often . but now I 
 have make a clean breast of it , and if you want to scold I you 
 must scold I now . you may do it now , but you must never scold I 
 afterwards,--because of that . " it may be leave to the reader to 
 imagine the nature of the scolding which she receive . 
 then on their way home she thank he for all the good that he 
 have do to all those belong to she . " I have hear it all from 
 lucy;--how generous you have be to Isadore . " 
 " that have all come to nothing , " he say . 
 " how come to nothing ? I know that you send he the money . " 
 " I do offer to lend he something , and , indeed , I send he a cheque ; 
 but two day afterwards he return it . that tremendous uncle of 
 yours-- " 
 " Uncle Tom ? " 
 " yes , your Uncle Tom ; the man of million ! he come forward and cut 
 I out altogether . I do not know what go on down there in Sussex , 
 but when he hear that they intend to be marry shortly he put 
 his hand into his pocket , as a magnificent uncle , overflow with 
 million , ought to do . " 
 " I do not hear that . " 
 " Hamel send my money back at once . " 
 " and poor Tom ! you be so good to poor Tom . " 
 " I like Tom . " 
 " but he do behave badly . " 
 " well ; yes . one gentleman should not strike another , even though he be 
 ever so much in love . it be an uncomfortable proceeding , and never have 
 good result . but then , poor fellow , he have be so much in earnest . " 
 " why could not he take a no when he get it ? " 
 " why do not I take a no when I get it ? " 
 " that be very different . he ought to have take it . if you have take 
 it you would have be very wrong , and have break a poor girl 's 
 heart . I be sure you know that all through . " 
 " do I ? " 
 " and then you be too good - natured . that be it . I do not think you 
 really love me;--not as I love you . oh , Jonathan , if you be to 
 change your mind now ! suppose you be to tell I that it be a 
 mistake ! suppose I be to awake and find myself in bed at Kingsbury 
 Crescent ? " 
 " I hope there may be no such wake as that ! " 
 " I should go mad,--stark mad . shake I till I find out whether it be 
 real wake , downright , earnest . but , Jonathan , why do you call I 
 Miss Dormer when you go away ? that be the bad of all . I remember 
 when you call I Ayala first . it go through and through I like 
 an electric shock . but you never see it;--did you ? " 
 on that afternoon when she return home she write to her sister 
 Lucy , give a sister 's account to her sister of all her happiness . 
 " I be sure Isadore be second good , but Jonathan be good . I do not want 
 you to say so ; but if you contradict I I shall stick to it . you 
 remember my tell you that the old woman in the railway say that 
 I be perverse . she be a clever old woman , and know all about it , 
 for I be perverse . however , it have come all right now , and Jonathan 
 be good of all . oh , my man,--my man ! be it not sweet to have a man 
 of one 's own to love ? " if this letter have be write on the day 
 before,--as would have be the case have not Ayala be take out 
 hunting,--it would have reach Merle Park on the Wednesday , the news 
 would have be make known to Aunt Emmeline , and so convey to poor 
 Tom , and that disagreeable journey from Merle Park to Stalham would 
 have be save . but there be no time for write on the Monday . the 
 letter be send away in the Stalham post - bag on the Tuesday evening , 
 and do not reach Merle Park till the Thursday , after Lady Tringle 
 have leave the house . have it be know on that morning that Ayala be 
 engage to Colonel Stubbs that would have suffice to send Tom away 
 upon his travel without any more direct messenger from Stalham . 
 on the Wednesday there be more hunting , and on this day Ayala , 
 have liberate her mind to her lover in Gobblegoose Wood , be able 
 to devote herself more satisfactorily to the amusement in hand . she 
 engagement be now an old affair . it have already become matter for 
 joke to Sir Harry , and have be discuss even with Mrs. Gosling . 
 it be , of course , " a joy for ever,"--but still she be begin to 
 descend from the cloud and to walk the earth,--no more than a simple 
 queen . when , therefore , the hound go away and Larry tell she that 
 he know the good way out of the wood , she collect her energy and 
 ride " like a little brick , " as Sir Harry say when they get back to 
 Stalham . on that afternoon she receive the note from her aunt and 
 reply to it by telegram . 
 on the Thursday she stay at home and write various letter . the 
 first be to the Marchesa , and then one to Nina,--in both of which 
 much have to be say about " Jonathan . " to Nina also she could repeat 
 her idea of the delight of have a man to love . then there be a 
 letter to Aunt Margaret,--which certainly be due , and another to 
 Aunt Emmeline,--which be not however receive until after Lady 
 Tringle 's visit to Stalham . there be much conversation between she 
 and Lady Albury as to the possible purpose of the visit which be to 
 be make on the morrow . Lady Albury be of opinion that Lady Tringle 
 have hear of the engagement , and be come with the intention of 
 set it on one side on Tom 's behalf . " but she can not do that , you 
 know , " say Ayala , with some manifest alarm . " she be nothing to I 
 now , Lady Albury . she get rid of I , you know . I be change away for 
 Lucy . " 
 " if there have be no change away , she could do nothing , " say Lady 
 Albury . 
 about a quarter of an hour before the time for lunch on the follow 
 day Lady Tringle be show into the small sitting - room which have be 
 mention in a previous chapter , and Ayala , radiant with happiness 
 and beauty , appear before she . there be a look about she of be 
 at home at Stalham , as though she be almost a daughter of the 
 house , that strike her aunt with surprise . there be nothing leave 
 of that submissiveness which , though Ayala herself have not be 
 submissive , belong , as of right , to girl so dependent as she and 
 her sister Lucy . " I be so delighted to see you at Stalham , " say 
 Ayala , as she embrace her aunt . 
 " I be come to you , " say Lady Tringle , " on a matter of very 
 particular business . " then she pause , and assume a look of peculiar 
 solemnity . 
 " have you get my letter ? " demand Ayala . 
 " I get your telegram , and I think it very civil of Lady Albury . but 
 I can not stay . your poor cousin Tom be in such a condition that I 
 can not leave he long than I can help . " 
 " but you have not get my letter ? " 
 " I have have no letter from you , Ayala . " 
 " I have send you such news,--oh , such news , Aunt Emmeline ! " 
 " what news , my dear ? " Lady Tringle as she ask the question seem 
 to become more solemn than ever . 
 " oh , Aunt emmeline-- ; I am-- " 
 " you be what , Ayala ? " 
 " I be engaged to be married to Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . " 
 " engage ! " 
 " yes , Aunt Emmeline;--engaged . I write to you on Tuesday to tell you 
 all about it . I hope you and Uncle Tom will approve . there can not 
 possibly be any reason against it,--except only that I have nothing 
 to give he in return ; that be in the way of money . Colonel Stubbs , 
 Aunt Emmeline , be not what Uncle Tom will call a rich man , but 
 everybody here say that he have get quite enough to be comfortable . 
 if he have nothing in the world it could not make any difference to 
 I . I do not understand how anybody be to love any one or not to love 
 he just because he be rich or poor . " 
 " but you be absolutely engaged ! " exclaim Lady Tringle . 
 " oh dear yes . perhaps you would like to ask Lady Albury about it . he 
 do want it before , you know . " 
 " but now you be engage to he ? " in answer to this Ayala think it 
 sufficient simply to nod her head . " it be all over then ? " 
 " all over ! " exclaim Ayala . " it be just go to begin . " 
 " all over for poor Tom , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " oh yes . it be always over for he , Aunt Emmeline . I tell he ever 
 so many time that it never could be so . do not you know , Aunt 
 Emmeline , that I do ? " 
 " but you say that to this man just the same . " 
 " Aunt Emmeline , " say Ayala , put on all the serious dignity which 
 she know how to assume , " I be engaged to Colonel Stubbs , and nothing 
 on earth that anybody can say can change it . if you want to hear all 
 about it , Lady Albury will tell you . she know that you be my aunt , 
 and therefore she will be quite willing to talk to you . only nothing 
 that anybody can say can change it . " 
 " Poor Tom ! " ejaculate the reject lover 's mother . 
 " I be very sorry if my cousin be displeased . " 
 " he be ill,--terribly ill . he will have to go away and travel all 
 about the world , and I do not know that ever he will come back again . 
 I be sure this Stubbs will never love you as he have do . " 
 " oh , aunt , what be the use of that ? " 
 " and then Tom will have twice as much . but , however-- " Ayala stand 
 silent , not see that any good could be do by addition to her 
 former assurance . " I will go and tell he , my dear , that be all . will 
 you not send he some message , Ayala ? " 
 " oh , yes ; any message that I can that shall go along with my sincere 
 attachment to Colonel Stubbs . you must tell he that I be engaged to 
 Colonel Stubbs . you will tell he , Aunt Emmeline ? " 
 " oh , yes ; if it must be so . " 
 " it must , " say Ayala . " then you may give he my love , and tell he 
 that I be very unhappy that I should have be a trouble to he , and 
 that I hope he will soon be well , and come back from his travel . " 
 by this time Aunt Emmeline be dissolve in tear . " I could not help 
 it , Aunt Emmeline , could I ? " her aunt have once terribly outraged her 
 feeling by tell she that she have encourage Tom . Ayala remember 
 at this moment the cruel word and the wound which they have inflict 
 on she ; but , nevertheless , she behave tenderly , and endeavour to 
 be respectful and submissive . " I could not help it,--could I , Aunt 
 Emmeline ? " 
 " I suppose not , my dear . " 
 after that Lady Tringle declare that she would return to London at 
 once . No;--she would rather not go in to lunch . she would rather go 
 back at once to the station if they would take she . she have be 
 weeping , and do not wish to show her tear . therefore , at Ayala 's 
 request , the carriage come round again,--to the great disgust , no 
 doubt , of the coachman,--and Lady Tringle be take back to the 
 station without have see any of the Albury family . 
 CHAPTER LVII . 
 CAPTAIN BATSBY in LOMBARD STREET . 
 it be not till Colonel Stubbs have be three or four day at 
 Stalham , bask in the sunshine of Ayala 's love , that any of the 
 Stalham family hear of the great event which have occur in the 
 life of Ayala 's third lover . during that walk to and from Gobblegoose 
 Wood something have be say between the lover as to Captain 
 batsby,--something , no doubt , chiefly in joke . the idea of the poor 
 Captain have fall suddenly into so melancholy a condition be 
 droll enough . " but he never speak to I , " say Ayala . " he do not 
 speak very much to any one , " say the Colonel , " but he think a great 
 deal about thing . he have have ever so many affair with ever so many 
 lady , who generally , I fancy , want to marry he because of his 
 money . how he have escape so long nobody know . " a man when he have 
 just engage himself to be marry be as prone as ever to talk of 
 other man " escape , " feel that , though other young lady be no 
 well than evil to be avoid , his young lady be to be regard as 
 almost a solitary instance of a blessing . then , two day afterwards , 
 arrive the news of the trip to Ostend . Sir Harry receive a letter 
 from a friend in which an account be give of his half - brother 's 
 adventure . " what do you think have happen ? " say Sir Harry , jump 
 up from his chair at the breakfast table . 
 " what have happen ? " ask his wife . 
 " Benjamin have run off to ostend with a young lady . " 
 " Benjamin,--with a young lady ! " exclaim Lady Albury . Ayala and 
 Stubbs be equally astonish , each of they know that the 
 Captain have be exclude from Stalham because of the ardour of his 
 unfortunate love for Ayala . " Ayala , that be your do ! " 
 " no ! " say Ayala . " but I be very glad if he be happy . " 
 " who be the young lady ? " ask Stubbs . 
 " it be that which make it so very peculiar , " say Sir Harry , look 
 at Ayala . he have learn something of the Tringle family , and be 
 aware of Ayala 's connection with they . 
 " who be it , Harry ? " demand her ladyship . 
 " Sir Thomas Tringle 's young daughter . " 
 " Gertrude ! " exclaim Ayala , who also know of the engagement with Mr. 
 Houston . 
 " but the bad of it be , " continue Sir Harry , " that he be not at 
 all happy . the young lady have come back , while nobody know what have 
 become of Benjamin . " 
 " Benjamin never will get a wife , " say Lady Albury . thus all the 
 detail of the little event become know at Stalham,--except the 
 immediate condition and whereabout of the lover . 
 of the Captain 's condition and whereabout something must be tell . 
 when the great disruption come , and he have be abuse and ridicule 
 by Sir Thomas at Ostend , he feel that he could neither remain there 
 where the very waiter know what have happen , nor could he return 
 to Dover in the same vessel with Sir Thomas and his daughter . he 
 therefore take the first train and go to Brussels . 
 but Brussels do not offer he many allurement in his present frame 
 of mind . he find nobody there whom he particularly know , and nothing 
 particular to do . solitude in a continental town with no amusement 
 beyond those offer by the table d'hôte and the theatre be 
 oppress . his time he endeavour to occupy with thinking of the 
 last promise he have make to Gertrude . should he break it or should 
 he keep it ? Sir Thomas Tringle be , no doubt , a very rich man,--and 
 then there be the fact which would become know to all the world , 
 that he have run off with a young lady . should he ultimately succeed 
 in marry the young lady the enterprise would bear less of an 
 appearance of failure than it would do otherwise . but then , should 
 the money not be forthcoming , the consolation come from the 
 possession of Gertrude herself would hardly suffice to make he a 
 happy man . Sir Thomas , when he come to consider the matter , would 
 certainly feel that his daughter have compromise herself by her 
 journey , and that it would be good for she to be married to the man 
 who have take she . it might be that Sir Thomas would yield , and 
 consent to make , at any rate , some compromise . a rumour have reach 
 his ear that Traffick have receive £ 200,000 with the eld daughter . 
 he would consent to take half that sum . after a week spend amidst 
 the charm of Brussels he return to London , without any public 
 declaration of his do so,--"sneaked back , " as a friend of his say 
 of he at the club;--and then go to work to carry out his purpose 
 as good he might . all that be know of it at Stalham be that he have 
 return to his lodging in London . 
 on Friday , the 11th of April , when Ayala be a promise bride of 
 nearly two week ' standing , and all the uncle and aunt be aware 
 that her lot in life have be fix for she , Sir Thomas be alone in 
 the back - room in Lombard Street , with his mind sorely divert from 
 the only joy of his life . the whole family be now in town , and 
 Septimus Traffick with his wife be actually occupy a room in 
 Queen 's Gate . how it have come to pass Sir Thomas hardly know . some 
 word have be extract from he signify a compliance with a 
 request that Augusta might come to the house for a night or two until 
 a fitting residence should be prepare for she . something have be 
 say of Lord Boardotrade 's house be vacate for she and her 
 husband early in April . an occurrence to which married lady be 
 liable be about to take place with Augusta , and Sir Thomas certainly 
 understand that the occurrence be to be expect under the roof of 
 the come infant 's noble grandfather . something as to ancestral 
 hall have be throw out in the chance way of conversation . then he 
 certainly have assent to some minimum of London hospitality for his 
 daughter,--as certainly not include the presence of his son - in - law ; 
 and now both of they be domicile in the big front spare bed - room 
 at Queen 's Gate ! this perplex he sorely . and then Tom have be 
 bring up from the country still as an invalid , his mother moaning 
 and groan over he as though he be sick almost past hope of 
 recovery . and yet the nineteenth of the month , now only eight day 
 distant , be still fix for his departure . Tom , on the return of his 
 mother from Stalham , have to a certain extent accept as irrevocable 
 the fact of which she bear the tiding . Ayala be engage to Stubbs , 
 and would , doubtless , with very little delay , become Mrs. Jonathan 
 Stubbs . " I know it , " he say ; " I know it . nothing could have 
 prevent it unless I have shoot he through the heart . he tell I that 
 she have refuse he ; but no man could have look like that after 
 be refuse by Ayala . " then he never express a hope again . it 
 be all over for he as regarded Ayala . but still he refuse to be 
 well , or even , for a day or two , to leave his bed . he have allow 
 his mother to understand that if the fact of her engagement be 
 indubitably bring home to he he would gird up his loin for his 
 journey and proceed at once wherever it might be think good to send 
 he . his father have sternly remind he of his promise ; but , when 
 so remind , Tom have turn himself in his bed and utter groan 
 instead of reply . now he have be bring up to London and be 
 no long actually in bed ; but even yet he have not signify his 
 intention of gird up his loin and proceed upon his journey . 
 nevertheless the preparation be go on , and , under Sir Thomas 's 
 direction , the portmanteaus be already be pack . Gertrude also 
 be a source of discomfort to her father . she consider herself 
 to have be deprive of her two lover , one after the other , in a 
 spirit of cruel parsimony . and with this heavy weight upon her breast 
 she refuse to take any part in the family conversation . everything 
 have be do for Augusta , and everything be to be do for Tom . for 
 her nothing have be do , and nothing have be promised;--and she 
 be therefore very sulky . with these trouble all around he , Sir 
 Thomas be sit oppress and dishearten in Lombard Street on 
 Friday , the 11th of April . 
 then there enter to he one of the junior clerk with a card 
 announce the name of Captain Batsby . he look at it for some 
 second before he give any notification of his intention , and then 
 desire the young man to tell the gentleman that he would not see 
 he . the message have be deliver , and Captain Batsby with a frown 
 of anger on his brow be about to shake the dust off from his foot on 
 the uncourteous threshold when there come another message say that 
 Captain Batsby could go in and see Sir Thomas if he wish it . upon 
 this he turn round and be show into the little sitting - room . 
 " well , Captain Batsby , " say Sir Thomas ; " what can I do for you now ? 
 I be glad to see that you have come back safely from foreign part . " 
 " I have call , " say the Captain , " to say something about your 
 daughter . " 
 " what more can you have to say about she ? " 
 at this the Captain be considerably puzzle . of course Sir Thomas 
 must know what he have to say . " the way in which we be separate at 
 Ostend be very distressing to my feeling . " 
 " I daresay . " 
 " and also I should think to Miss Tringle 's . " 
 " not improbably . I have always observe that when people be 
 interrupt in the performance of some egregious stupidity their 
 feeling be hurt . as I say before , what can I do for you now ? " 
 " I be very anxious to complete the alliance which I have do myself 
 the honour to propose to you . " 
 " I do not know that you have propose anything . you come down to my 
 house under a false pretence ; and then you persuade my daughter,--or 
 else she persuade you,--to go off together to ostend . be that what 
 you call an alliance ? " 
 " that , as far as it go was,--wa an elopement . " 
 " be I to understand that you now want to arrange another elopement , 
 and that you have come to ask my consent ? " 
 " oh dear no . " 
 " then what do you mean by complete an alliance ? " 
 " I want to make , " say the Captain , " an offer for the young lady 's 
 hand in a proper form . I consider myself to be in a position which 
 justify I in do so . I be possess of the young lady 's 
 affection , and have mean of my own equal to those which I presume 
 you will be dispose to give she . " 
 " very much well mean I hope , Captain Batsby . otherwise I do not 
 see what you and your wife would have to live upon . I will tell you 
 exactly what my feeling be in this matter . my daughter have go 
 off with you , forget all the duty that she owe to I and to her 
 mother , and throw aside all idea of propriety . after that I will 
 not say that you shall not marry she if both of you think fit . I do 
 not doubt your mean , and I have no reason for suppose that you 
 would be cruel to she . you be two fool , but after all fool must 
 live in the world . what I do say be , that I will not give a sixpence 
 towards support you in your folly . now , Captain Batsby , you can 
 complete the alliance or not as you please . " 
 Captain Batsby have be call a fool also at Ostend , and there , 
 amidst the distressing circumstance of his position , have be 
 constrain to bear the opprobious name , little customary as it be 
 for one gentleman to allow himself to be call a fool by another ; 
 but now he have collect his thought , have remind himself of his 
 position in the world , and have tell himself that it do not become 
 he to be too humble before this City man of business . it might have 
 be all very well at Ostend ; but he be not go to be call a 
 fool in London without resent it . " Sir Thomas , " say he , " fool and 
 folly be term which I can not allow you to use to I . " 
 " if you do not present yourself to I here , Captain Batsby , or at my 
 own house,--or , perhaps I may say , at ostend,--i will use no such 
 term to you . " 
 " I suppose you will acknowledge that I be entitle to ask for your 
 daughter 's hand . " 
 " I suppose you will acknowledge that when a man run away with my 
 daughter I be entitle to express my opinion of his conduct . " 
 " that be all over now , Sir Thomas . what I do I do for love . there 
 be no good in cry over spilt milk . the question be as to the 
 future happiness of the young lady . " 
 " that be the only wise word I have hear you say , Captain Batsby . 
 there be no good in cry after spilt milk . our journey to Ostend be 
 do and go . it be not very agreeable , but we have live through 
 it . I quite think that you show a good judgment in not intend to 
 go there again in quest of a clergyman . if you want to be marry 
 there be plenty of they in London . I will not oppose your marriage , 
 but I will not give you a shilling . no man ever have a well 
 opportunity of show the disinterestedness of his affection . now , 
 good morning . " 
 " but , Sir Thomas-- " 
 " Captain Batsby , my time be precious . I have tell you all that there 
 be to tell . " then he stand up , and the Captain with a stern demeanour 
 and angry brow leave the room and take himself in silence away from 
 Lombard Street . 
 " do you want to marry Captain Batsby ? " Sir Thomas say to his 
 daughter that evening , have invite she to come apart with he 
 after dinner . 
 " yes , I do . " 
 " you think that you prefer he on the whole to Mr. Houston ? " 
 " Mr. Houston be a scoundrel . I wish that you would not talk about 
 he , papa . " 
 " I like he so much the good of the two , " say Sir Thomas . " but of 
 course it be for you to judge . I could have bring myself to give 
 something to Houston . luckily , however , Captain Batsby have get an 
 income of his own . " 
 " he have , papa . " 
 " and you be sure that you would like to take he as your husband ? " 
 " yes , papa . " 
 " very well . he have be with I to - day . " 
 " be he in London ? " 
 " I tell you that he have be with I to - day in Lombard Street . " 
 " what do he say ? do he say anything about I ? " 
 " yes , my dear . he come to ask I for your hand . " 
 " well , papa . " 
 " I tell he that I should make no objection,--that I should leave 
 it altogether to you . I only interfere with one small detail as to 
 my own wish . I assure he that I should never give he or you 
 a single shilling . I do not suppose it will matter much to he , as 
 he have , you know , mean of his own . " it be thus that Sir Thomas 
 punish his daughter for her misconduct . 
 Captain Batsby and the Trafficks be acquaint with each other . the 
 Member of Parliament have , of course , hear of the journey to ostend 
 from his wife , and have be instigate by she to express an opinion 
 that the young people ought to be marry . " it be such a very serious 
 thing , " say Augusta to her husband , " to be four hour on the sea 
 together ! and then you know-- ! " Mr. Traffick acknowledge that it be 
 serious , and be remind by his wife that he , in the capacity of 
 brother , be bind to interfere on his sister 's behalf . " Papa , you 
 know , understand nothing about these kind of thing . you , with your 
 family interest , and your seat in Parliament , ought to be able to 
 arrange it . " Mr. Traffick probably know how far his family interest 
 and his seat in Parliament would avail . they have , at any rate , get 
 he a wife with a large fortune . they be promise for he , still 
 far , certain domiciliary advantage . he doubt whether he could 
 do much for Batsby ; but still he promise to try . if he could arrange 
 these matter it might be that he would curry fresh favour with Sir 
 Thomas by do so . he therefore make it his business to encounter 
 Captain Batsby on the Sunday afternoon at a club to which they both 
 belong . " so you have come back from your little trip ? " say the 
 Member of Parliament . 
 the Captain be not unwilling to discuss the question of their family 
 relation with Mr. Traffick . if anybody would have influence with Sir 
 Thomas it might probably be Mr. Traffick . " yes ; I have come back . " 
 " without your bride . " 
 " without my bride,--as yet . that be a kind of undertaking in which a 
 man be apt to run many danger before he can carry it through . " 
 " I dare say . I never do anything of the kind myself . of course you 
 know that I be the young lady 's brother - in - law . " 
 " oh yes . " 
 " and therefore you will not mind I speak . do not you think you ought 
 to do something far ? " 
 " something far ! by George , I should think so , " say the Captain , 
 exultingly . " I mean to do a great many thing far . you do not 
 suppose I be go to give it up ? " 
 " you ought not , you know . when a man have take a girl off with he in 
 that way , he should go on with it . it be a deuced serious thing , you 
 know . " 
 " it be his fault in come after we . " 
 " that be a matter of course . if he have not do it , I must . I have 
 make the family my own , and , of course , must look after its honour . " 
 the noble scion of the house of Traffick , as he say this , show by 
 his countenance that he perfectly understand the duty which 
 circumstance have impose upon he . 
 " he make himself very rough , you know , " say the Captain . 
 " I dare say he would . " 
 " and say things,--well,--thing which he ought not to have say . " 
 " in such a case as that a father may say pretty nearly what come 
 uppermost . " 
 " that be just it . he do say what come uppermost,--and very rough it 
 be . " 
 " what do it matter ? " 
 " not much if he would do as he ought to do now . as you be her 
 brother - in - law , I will tell you just how it stand . I have be to he 
 and make a regular proposal . " 
 " since you have be back ? " 
 " yes ; the day before yesterday . and what do you think he say ? " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " he give his consent ; only-- " 
 " only what ? " 
 " he will not give she a shilling ! such an idea , you know ! as though she 
 be to be punish after marriage for run away with the man she 
 do marry . " 
 " take your chance , Batsby , " say the Member of Parliament . 
 " what chance ? " 
 " take your chance of the money . I would have do it ; only , of course , 
 it be different with I . he be glad to catch I , and therefore the 
 money be settle . " 
 " I have get a tidy income of my own , you know , " say the Captain , 
 think that he be entitle to be make more welcome as a son - in - law 
 than the young son of a peer who have no income . 
 " take your chance , " continue Traffick . " what on earth can a man 
 like Tringle do with his money except give it to his child ? he be 
 rough , as you say , but he be not hard - hearted , nor yet stubborn . I 
 can do pretty nearly what I like with he . " 
 " can you , though ? " 
 " yes ; by smooth he down the right way . you run your chance , and 
 we will get it all put right for you . " the Captain hesitate , rub 
 his head carefully to encourage the thought which be spring up 
 within his bosom . the honourable Mr. Traffick might perhaps succeed 
 in get the affair put right , as he call it , in the interest 
 rather of the eld than of the second daughter . " I do not see how 
 you can hesitate now , as you have be off with the girl , " say Mr. 
 Traffick . 
 " I do not know about that . I should like to see the money settle . " 
 " there would have be nothing settle if you have marry she at 
 Ostend . " 
 " but I do not , " say the Captain . " I tell you what you might do . you 
 might talk he over and make he a little more reasonable . I should 
 be ready to - morrow if he would come forward . " 
 " what be the sum you want ? " 
 " the same as your , I suppose . " 
 " that be out of the question , " say Mr. Traffick , shake his head . 
 " suppose we say sixty thousand pound . " then after some chaffering on 
 the subject it be decide between they that Mr. Traffick should use 
 his powerful influence with his father - in - law to give his daughter on 
 her marriage,--say a hundred thousand pound if it be possible , or 
 sixty thousand pound at the least . 
 CHAPTER LVIII . 
 MR . TRAFFICK in LOMBARD STREET . 
 Mr. Traffick entertain some grand idea as to the house of Travers 
 and Treason . why should not he become a member , and ultimately the 
 lead member , of that firm ? Sir Thomas be not a young man , though 
 he be strong and hearty . Tom have hitherto succeed only in make 
 an ass of himself . as far as transact the affair of the firm , 
 Tom,--so think Mr. traffick,--wa altogether out of the question . 
 he might perish in those extensive travel which he be about to 
 take . Mr. Traffick do not desire any such catastrophe;--but the 
 young man might perish . there be a great opening . Mr. Traffick , with 
 his thorough knowledge of business , could not but see that there be 
 a great opening . besides Tom , there be but two daughter , one of 
 whom be his own wife . augusta , his wife , be , he think , certainly 
 the favourite at the present moment . Sir Thomas could , indeed , say 
 rough thing even to she ; but then Sir Thomas be of his nature 
 rough . now , at this time , the rough thing say to Gertrude be 
 very much the rougher . in all these circumstance the wisdom of 
 interfere in Gertrude 's little affair be very clear to Mr. 
 Traffick . Gertrude would , of course , get herself marry soon or 
 later , and almost any other husband would obtain a large portion 
 than that which would satisfy Batsby . Sir Thomas be now constantly 
 say good thing about Mr. Houston . Mr. Houston would be much more 
 objectionable than Captain batsby,--much more likely to interfere . 
 he would require more money at once , and might possibly come forward 
 himself in the guise of a partner . Mr. Traffick see his way clearly . 
 it be incumbent upon he to see that Gertrude should become Mrs. 
 Batsby with as little delay as possible . 
 but one thing he do not see . one thing he have fail to see since 
 his first introduction to the Tringle family . he have not see the 
 peculiar nature of his father - in - law 's foible . he do not understand 
 either the weakness or the strength of Sir thomas,--either the 
 softness or the hardness . Mr. Traffick himself be bless with a 
 very hard skin . in the carrying out of a purpose there be nothing 
 which his skin be not sufficiently serviceable to endure . but Sir 
 Thomas , rough as he be , have but a thin skin;--a thin skin and a 
 soft heart . have Houston and Gertrude persevere he would certainly 
 have give way . for Tom , in his misfortune , he would have make any 
 sacrifice . though he have give the broad hint which he have be 
 able to devise he have never as yet bring himself absolutely to turn 
 traffick out of his house . when Ayala be send away he still keep she 
 name in his will , and add also that of Lucy as soon as Lucy have 
 be entrust to he . have thing go a little more smoothly between 
 he and Hamel when they met,--had he not unluckily advise that all 
 the sculptor 's grand design should be sell by auction for what they 
 would fetch,--he would have put Hamel and Lucy upon their leg . he 
 be a soft - hearted man;--but there never be one less willing to 
 endure interference in his own affair . 
 at the present moment he be very sore as to the presence of Traffick 
 in Queen 's Gate . the Easter parliamentary holiday be just at 
 hand , and there be no sign of any going . Augusta have whisper 
 to her mother that the poky little house in Mayfair would be very 
 uncomfortable for the come event,--and Lady Tringle , though she have 
 not dare to say even as much as that in plain term to her husband , 
 have endeavour to introduce the subject by little hints,--which 
 Sir Thomas have clearly understand . he be hardly the man to turn a 
 daughter and an expect grandchild into the street ; but he be , 
 in his present mood , a father - in - law who would not unwillingly 
 have learn that his son - in - law be without a shelter except that 
 afford by the House of Commons . why on earth should he have give 
 up one hundred and twenty thousand pounds,--£6,000 a - year as it be 
 under his foster care,--to a man who could not even keep a house 
 over his wife 's head ? this be the humour of Sir Thomas when Mr. 
 Traffick undertake to prevail with he to give an adequate fortune to 
 his young daughter on her marriage with Captain Batsby . 
 the conversation between Traffick and Batsby take place on a Sunday . 
 on the following day the Captain go down to the House and see the 
 Member . " no ; I have not speak to he yet . " 
 " I be with he on Friday , you know , " say Batsby . " I can not well 
 go and call on the lady in Queen 's Gate till I hear that he have 
 change his mind . " 
 " I should . I do not see what difference it would make . " 
 then Captain Batsby be again very thoughtful . " it would make a 
 difference , you know . if I be to say a word to Gertrude now,--as to 
 be marry or anything of that kind,--it would seem that I mean 
 to go on whether I get anything or not . " 
 " and you should seem to want to go on , " say Traffick , with all that 
 authority which the very surrounding of the House of Commons always 
 give to the word and gait of a Member . 
 " but then I might find myself drop in a hole at last . " 
 " my dear Batsby , you make that hole for yourself when you run off 
 with the young lady . " 
 " we settle all that before . " 
 " not quite . what we do settle be that we would do our good to fill the 
 hole up . of course you ought to go and see they . you go off with 
 the young lady,--and since that have be accept as her suitor by 
 her father . you be bind to go and see she . " 
 " do you think so ? " 
 " certainly ! certainly ! it never do to talk to Tringle about 
 business at his own house . I will make an hour to see he in the City 
 to - morrow . I be so press by business that I can hardly get away from 
 the House after twelve;--but , I will do it . but , while I be in Lombard 
 Street , do you go to Queen 's Gate . " the Captain after further 
 consideration say that he would go to Queen 's Gate . 
 at three o'clock on the next day he do go to Queen 's Gate . he have 
 many misgiving , feel that by such a step he would be commit 
 himself to matrimony with or without the money . no doubt he could so 
 offer himself , even to Lady Tringle , as a son - in - law , that it should 
 be suppose that the offer would depend upon the father - in - law 's 
 goodwill . but then the father - in - law have tell he that he would be 
 welcome to the young lady,--without a farthing . should he go on 
 with his matrimonial purpose , towards which this visit would be an 
 important step , he do not see the moment in which he could stop the 
 proceeding by a demand for money . nevertheless he go , not be 
 strong enough to oppose Mr. Traffick . 
 yes;--the lady be at home , and he find himself at once in Lady 
 Tringle 's presence . there be at the time no one with she , and the 
 Captain acknowledge to himself that a try moment have come to he . 
 " dear I ! Captain Batsby ! " say her ladyship , who have not see he 
 since he and Gertrude have go off together . 
 " yes , Lady Tringle . as I have come back from abroad I think that I 
 might as well come and call . I do see Sir Thomas in the City . " 
 " be not that a very foolish thing you do ? " 
 " perhaps it be , Lady Tringle . perhaps it would have be well to 
 ask permission to address your daughter in the regular course of 
 thing . there be , perhaps,--perhaps a little romance in go off in 
 that way . " 
 " it give Sir Thomas a deal of trouble . " 
 " well , yes ; he be so quick upon we you know . may I be allow to see 
 Gertrude now ? " 
 " upon my word I hardly know , " say Lady Tringle , hesitate . 
 " I do see Sir Thomas in the City . " 
 " but do he say you be to come and call ? " 
 " he give his consent to the marriage . " 
 " but I be afraid there be to be no money , " whisper Lady Tringle . 
 " if money be no matter I suppose you may see she . " but before 
 the Captain have resolve how he might well answer this difficult 
 suggestion the door open , and the young lady herself enter the 
 room , together with her sister . 
 " Benjamin , " say Gertrude , " be this really you ? " and then she fly 
 into his arm . 
 " my dear , " say Augusta , " do control your emotion . " 
 " yes , indeed , Gertrude , " say the mother . " as the thing be at 
 present you should control yourself . nobody as yet know what may 
 come of it . " 
 " oh , Benjamin ! " again exclaim Gertrude , tear herself from his 
 arm , throw herself on the sofa , and cover her face with both 
 her hand . " oh , Benjamin,--so you have come at last . " 
 " I be afraid he have come too soon , " say Augusta , who however have 
 receive her lesson from her husband , and have communicate some 
 portion of her husband 's tiding to her sister . 
 " why too soon ? " exclaim Gertrude . " it can never be too soon . oh , 
 mamma , tell he that you make he welcome to your bosom as your 
 second son - in - law . " 
 " upon my word , my dear , I do not know , without consult your 
 father . " 
 " but papa have consent , " say Gertrude . 
 " but only if-- " 
 " oh , mamma , " say Mrs. Traffick , " do not talk about matter of 
 business on such an occasion as this . all that must be manage 
 between the gentleman . if he be here as Gertrude 's acknowledge 
 lover , and if papa have tell he that he shall be accept as such , I 
 do not think that we ought to say a word about money . I do hate money . 
 it do make thing so disagreeable . " 
 " nobody can be more noble in everything of that kind than Benjamin , " 
 say Gertrude . " it be only because he love I with all his heart 
 that he be here . why else be it that he take I off to ostend ? " 
 Captain Batsby as he listen to all this feel that he ought to say 
 something . and yet how dangerous might a word be ! it be apparent to 
 he , even in his perturbation , that the lady be in fact ask 
 he to renew his offer , and to declare that he renew it altogether 
 independently of any money consideration . he could not bring himself 
 quite to agree with that noble sentiment in express which Mrs. 
 Traffick have declare her hatred of money . in become the son - in - law 
 of a millionaire he would receive the honest congratulation of all 
 his friends,--on condition that he receive some comfortable fraction 
 out of the million , but he know well that he would subject himself 
 to their ridicule be he to take the girl and lose the plunder . if 
 he be to answer they now as they would have he answer he would 
 commit himself to the girl without any bargain as to the plunder . 
 and yet what else be there for he to do ? he must be a brave man 
 who can stand up before a girl and declare that he will love she for 
 ever,--on condition that she shall have so many thousand pound ; but 
 he must be more than brave , he will be heroic , who can do so in the 
 presence not only of the girl but of the girl 's mother and married 
 sister as well . Captain Batsby be no such hero . " of course , " he say 
 at last . 
 " of course what ? " ask Augusta . 
 " it be because I love she . " 
 " I know that he love I , " sob Gertrude . 
 " and you be here , because you intend to make she your wife in 
 presence of all man ? " ask Augusta . 
 " oh certainly . " 
 " then I suppose that it will be all right , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " it will be all right , " say Augusta . " and now , mamma , I think that 
 we may leave they alone together . " but to this Lady Tringle would 
 not give her assent . she have not have confide to she the depth of Mr. 
 Traffick 's wisdom , and declare herself oppose to any absolute overt 
 love - making until Sir Thomas should have give his positive consent . 
 " it be all the same thing , Benjamin , be it not ? " say Augusta , 
 assume already the familiarity of a sister in - law . 
 " oh quite , " say the Captain . 
 but Gertrude look as though she do not think it to be exactly 
 the same . such deficiency as that , however , she have to endure ; and 
 she receive from her sister after the Captain 's departure full 
 congratulation as to her lover 's return . " to tell you the truth , " 
 say Augusta , " I do not think that you would ever see he again . 
 after what papa say to he in the City he might have get off and 
 nobody could have say a word to he . now he be fix . " 
 Captain Batsby effect his escape as quickly as he could , and go 
 home a melancholy man . he , too , be aware that he be fix ; and , as 
 he think of this , a dreadful idea fall upon he that the Honourable 
 Mr. Traffick have perhaps play he false . 
 in the meantime Mr. Traffick be true to his word and go into the 
 City . in the early day of his married life his journey to Lombard 
 Street be frequent . the management and investing of his wife 's 
 money have be to he a matter of much interest , and he have feel a 
 gratification in discuss any money matter with the man who handle 
 million . in this way he have become intimate with the way of the 
 house , though latterly his presence there have not be encourage . 
 " I suppose I can go in to Sir Thomas , " he say , lay his hand upon 
 a leaf in the counter , which he have be accustom to raise for the 
 purpose of his own entrance . but here he be stop . his name should 
 be take in and Sir Thomas duly apprise . in the meantime he be 
 relegate to a dingy little waiting - room , which be odious to he , 
 and there he be keep wait for half - an - hour . this make he angry , 
 and he call to one of the clerk . " will you tell Sir Thomas that 
 I must be down at the House almost immediately , and that I be 
 particularly anxious to see he on business of importance ? " for 
 another ten minute he be still keep , and then he be show into 
 his father - in law 's presence . " I be very sorry , Traffick , " say Sir 
 Thomas , " but I really can not turn two director of the Bank of England 
 out of my room , even for you . " 
 " I only think I would just let you know that I be in a hurry . " 
 " so be I , for the matter of that . have you go to your father 's 
 house to - day , so that you would not be able to see I in Queen 's 
 Gate ? " 
 this be intend to be very severe , but Mr. Traffick bear it . it 
 be one of those rough thing which Sir Thomas be in the habit of 
 say , but which really mean nothing . " no . my father be still at 
 his house as yet , though they be think of go every day . it be 
 about another matter , and I do not want to trouble you with it at 
 home . " 
 " let we hear what it be . " 
 " Captain Batsby have be with I . " 
 " oh , he have , have he ? " 
 " I have know he ever so long . he be a foolish fellow . " 
 " so he seem . " 
 " but a gentleman . " 
 " perhaps I be not so good a judge of that . his folly I do perceive . " 
 " oh yes ; he be a gentleman . you may take my word for that . and he have 
 mean . " 
 " that be an advantage . " 
 " while that fellow Houston be hardly more than a beggar . and Batsby 
 be quite in earnest about Gertrude . " 
 " if the two of they wish it he can have she to - morrow . she have make 
 herself a conspicuous ass by run away with he , and perhaps it be 
 the good thing she can do . " 
 " that be just it . Augusta see it quite in the same light . " 
 " Augusta be never tempt . you would not have run away . " 
 " it be not necessary , Sir Thomas , be it ? there he is,--ready to 
 marry she to - morrow . but , of course , he be a little anxious about the 
 money . " 
 " I dare say he be . " 
 " I have be talk to him,--and the upshot be , that I have promise 
 to speak to you . he be not at all a bad fellow . " 
 " he would keep a house over his wife 's head , you think ? " Sir Thomas have 
 be particularly irate that morning , and before the arrival of his 
 son - in - law have swear to himself that Traffick should go . augusta 
 might remain , if she please , for the occurrence ; but the Honourable 
 Septimus should no long eat and drink as an inhabitant of his 
 house . 
 " he would do his duty by she as a man should do , " say Traffick , 
 determine to ignore the disagreeable subject . 
 " very well . there she be . " 
 " but of course he would like to hear something about money . " 
 " would he ? " 
 " that be only natural . " 
 " you find it so,--did you not ? what be the good of give a girl 
 money when her husband will not spend it . perhaps this Captain Batsby 
 would expect to live at Queen 's Gate or Merle Park . " 
 it be impossible to go on endure this without notice . Mr. 
 Traffick , however , only frown and shake his head . it be clear 
 at last that Sir Thomas intend to be more than rough , and it be 
 almost imperative upon Mr. Traffick to be rough in return . " I be 
 endeavour to do my duty by the family , " he say . 
 " oh indeed . " 
 " Gertrude have elope with this man , and the thing be talk about 
 everywhere . Augusta feel it very much . " 
 " she do , do she ? " 
 " and I have think it right to ask his intention . " 
 " he do not knock you down , or anything of that sort ? " 
 " knock I down ? " 
 " for interfere . but he have not pluck for that . Houston would have 
 do it immediately . and I should have say he be right . but if you 
 have get anything to say , you have well say it . when you have do , 
 then I shall have something to say . " 
 " I have tell he that he could not expect as much as you would have 
 give she but for this run away . " 
 " you tell he that ? " 
 " yes ; I tell he that . then some sum have to be mention . he 
 suggest a hundred thousand pound . " 
 " how very modest . why should he have put up with less than you , 
 see that he have get something of his own ? " 
 " he have not my position , Sir . you know that well enough . now to make a 
 long and short of it , I suggest sixty . " 
 " out of your own pocket ? " 
 " not exactly . " 
 " but out of mine ? " 
 " you be her father , and I suppose you intend to provide for she . " 
 " and you have come here to dictate to I the provision which I be to 
 make for my own child ! that be an amount of impudence which I do not 
 expect even from you . but suppose that I agree to the term . will he , 
 do you think , consent to have a clause put into the settlement ? " 
 " what clause ? " 
 " something that shall bind he to keep a house for his own wife 's 
 use , so that he should not take my money and then come and live upon 
 I afterwards . " 
 " Sir Thomas , " say the Member of Parliament , " that be a mode of 
 expression so uncourteous that I can not bear it even from you . " 
 " be there any mode of expression that you can not bear ? " 
 " if you want I to leave your house , say it at once . " 
 " why I have be say it for the last six month ! I have be 
 say it almost daily since you be marry . " 
 " if so you should have speak more clearly , for I have not understand 
 you . " 
 " Heavens and earth , " ejaculate Sir Thomas . 
 " be I to understand that you wish your child to leave your roof 
 during this inclement weather in her present delicate condition ? " 
 " be you in a delicate condition ? " ask Sir Thomas . to this Mr. 
 Traffick could condescend to make no reply . " because , if not , you , at 
 any rate , have well go,--unless you find the weather too inclement . " 
 " of course I shall go , " say Mr. Traffick . " no consideration on earth 
 shall induce I to eat another meal under your roof until you shall 
 have think good to have express regret for what you have say . " 
 " then it be very long before I shall have to give you another meal . " 
 " and now what shall I say to Captain Batsby ? " 
 " tell he from I , " say Sir Thomas , " that he can not possibly set 
 about his work more injudiciously than by make you his ambassador . " 
 then Mr. Traffick take his departure . 
 it may be as well to state here that Mr. Traffick keep his threat 
 religiously,--at any rate , to the end of the session . he do not eat 
 another meal during that period under his father - in - law 's roof . but 
 he sleep there for the next two or three day until he have suit 
 himself with lodging in the neighbourhood of the House . in do 
 this , however , he contrive to get in and out without encounter 
 Sir Thomas . his wife in her delicate condition,--and because of the 
 inclemency of the weather,--awaited the occurrence at Queen 's Gate . 
 CHAPTER LIX . 
 TREGOTHNAN . 
 the writer , in give a correct chronicle of the doing of the 
 Tringle family at this time , have to acknowledge that Gertrude , during 
 the prolonged absence of Captain Batsby at Brussels,--an absence 
 that be cruelly prolong for more than a week,--did make another 
 little effort in another direction . her father , in his rough way , have 
 express an opinion that she have change very much for the bad in 
 transfer her affection from Mr. Houston to Captain Batsby , and 
 have almost go so far as to declare that have she be persistent 
 with her Houston the money difficulty might have be overcome . this 
 be imprudent,--unless , indeed , he be desirous of bring back Mr. 
 Houston into the bosom of the Tringles . it instigate Gertrude to 
 another attempt,--which , however , she do not make till Captain 
 Batsby have be away from she for at least four day without write 
 a letter . then it occur to she that if she have a preference it 
 certainly be for Frank Houston . no doubt the general desirability of 
 marriage be her chief actuate motive . will the world of british 
 young lady be much scandalise if I say that such be often an 
 actuate motive ? they would be justly scandalise if I pretend 
 that many of its member be capable of the speedy transition which 
 Miss Tringle be strong enough to endure ; but transition do take 
 place , and I claim , on behalf of my young lady , that she should be 
 regard as more strong - minded and more determined than the general 
 crowd of young lady . she have think herself to be off with the old 
 love before she be on with the new . then the " new " have go away to 
 Brussels,--or heaven only know where,--and there seem to be an 
 opportunity of renew matter with the " old . " have perceive the 
 desirability of matrimony , she simply carry out her purpose with 
 a determined will . it be with a determined will , but perhaps with 
 deficient judgment , that she have write as follow : 
 " Papa have alter his mind altogether . he speak of you in the 
 high term , and say that have you persevered he would have yield 
 about the money . do try he again . when heart have be unite it be 
 terrible that they should be drag asunder . " Mr. Traffick have be 
 quite right in tell his father - in - law that " the thing have be 
 talk about everywhere . " the thing talk about have be Gertrude 's 
 elopement . the daughter of a baronet and a millionaire can not go off 
 with the half - brother of another baronet and escape that penalty . the 
 journey to Ostend be in everybody 's mouth , and have surprise Frank 
 Houston the more because of the recent termination of his own little 
 affair with the lady . that he should already have re - accommodate 
 himself with Imogene be intelligible to he , and seem to admit of 
 valid excuse before any jury of matron . it be an old affair , and 
 the love,--real , true love,--wa already exist . he , at any rate , 
 be go back to the well course,--as the jury of matron would 
 have admit . but Gertrude 's new affair have have to be arrange 
 from the beginning , and shock he by its celerity . " already ! " 
 he have say to himself,--"gone off with another man already ? " 
 he feel himself to have be wound in a tender part , and be 
 conscious of a feeling that he should like to injure the successful 
 lover,--blackball he at a club , or do he some other mortal 
 mischief . when , therefore , he receive from the young lady the little 
 billet above give , he be much surprised . could it be a hoax ? it be 
 certainly the young lady 's handwriting . be he to be entice once 
 again into Lombard Street , in order that the clerk might set upon 
 he in a body and maltreat he ? be he to be decoy into Queen 's 
 Gate , and make a sacrifice of by the united force of the housemaid ? 
 not understand the celerity of the young lady , he could hardly 
 believe the billet . 
 when he receive the note of which we have here speak two month 
 have elapse since he have see Imogene and have declare to her his 
 intention of face the difficulty of matrimony in conjunction with 
 herself as soon as she would be ready to undergo the ceremony with 
 he . the reader will remember that her brother , Mudbury Docimer , have 
 write to he with great severity , abuse both he and Imogene for 
 the folly of their intention . and Houston , as he think of their 
 intention , think to himself that perhaps they be foolish . the 
 poverty , and the cradle , and the cabbage , be in themselves evil . 
 but still he encourage himself to think that there might be an evil 
 bad even than folly . after that scene with Imogene , in which she 
 have offer to sacrifice herself altogether , and to be bind to 
 he , even though they should never be marry , on condition that he 
 should take to himself no other wife , he have quite resolve that it 
 behove he not to be exceed by she in generosity . he have stoutly 
 repudiate her offer , which he have call a damnable compact . and 
 then there have be a delightful scene between they , in which it have 
 be agree that they should face the cradle and the cabbage with 
 bold face . since that he have never allow himself to fluctuate in 
 his purpose . have Sir Thomas come to he with Gertrude in one hand and 
 the much - desire £ 120,000 in the other , he would have repudiate the 
 lot of they . he declare to himself with stern resolution that he 
 have altogether wash his hand from dirt of that kind . cabbage 
 and cradle for ever be the unpronounced cry of triumph with which 
 he buoy up his courage . he set himself to work earnestly , if not 
 altogether steadfastly , to alter the whole tenor of his life . the 
 champagne and the woodcocks,--or whatever might be the special 
 delicacy of the season,--he do avoid . for some few day he 
 absolutely din upon a cut of mutton at an eating - house , and as he 
 come forth from the unsavoury door of the establishment regard 
 himself as a hero . cabbage and cradle for ever ! he would say to 
 himself , as he go away to drink a cup of tea with an old maiden 
 aunt , who be no less surprised than gratify by his new virtue . 
 therefore , when it have at last absolutely come home to he that 
 the last little note have in truth be write by Gertrude with no 
 object of revenge , but with the intention of once more alluring 
 he into the wealth of Lombard Street , he simply put it into his 
 breastcoat - pocket , and leave it there unanswered . 
 Mudbury Docimer do not satisfy himself with write the very 
 uncourteous letter which the reader have see , but proceed to do his 
 utmost to prevent the threatened marriage . " she be old enough to look 
 after herself , " he have say , as though all her future action must be 
 govern by her own will . but within ten day of the writing of that 
 letter he have find it expedient to go down into the country , and 
 to take his sister with he . as the head of the Docimer family he 
 possess a small country - house almost in the extremity of Cornwall ; 
 and thither he go . it be a fraternal effort make altogether on his 
 sister 's behalf , and be so far successful that Imogene be oblige 
 to accompany he . it be all very well for she to feel that as 
 she be of age she could do as she please . but a young lady be 
 constrain by the exigency of society to live with somebody . she 
 can not take a lodging by herself , as her brother may do . therefore , 
 when Mudbury Docimer go down to Cornwall , Imogene be oblige to 
 accompany he . 
 " be this intend for banishment ? " she say to he , when they have 
 be about a week in the country . 
 " what do you call banishment ? you use to like the country in the 
 spring . " it be now the middle of April . 
 " so I do , and in summer also . but I like nothing under constraint . " 
 " I be sorry that circumstance should make it imperative upon I to 
 remain here just at present . " 
 " why can not you tell the truth , Mudbury ? " 
 " have I tell you any falsehood ? " 
 " why do you not say outright that I have be bring down here to be 
 out of Frank Houston 's way ? " 
 " because Frank Houston be a name which I do not wish to mention to 
 you again,--at any rate for some time . " 
 " what would you do if he be to show himself here ? " she ask . 
 " tell he at once that he be not welcome . in other word , I would 
 not have he here . it be very improbable I should think that he would 
 come without a direct invitation from I . that invitation he will 
 never have until I feel satisfied that you and he have change your 
 mind again , and that you mean to stick to it . " 
 " I do not think we shall do that . " 
 " then he shall not come down here ; nor , as far as I be able to 
 arrange it , shall you go up to London . " 
 " then I be a prisoner ? " 
 " you may put it as you please , " say her brother . " I have no power of 
 detain you . whatever influence I have I think it right to use . I 
 be altogether opposed to this marriage , believe it to be an absurd 
 infatuation . I think that he be of the same opinion . " 
 " no ! " say she , indignantly . 
 " that I believe to be his feeling , " he continue , take no notice 
 of her assertion . " he be as perfectly aware as I be that you two be 
 not adapt to live happily together on an income of a few hundred 
 a year . some time ago it be agree between you that it be so . you 
 both be quite of one mind , and I be give to understand that the 
 engagement be at an end . it be so much at an end that he make 
 an arrangement for marry another woman . but your feeling be 
 strong than his , and you allow they to get the well of you . 
 then you entice he back from the purpose on which you have both 
 decide . " 
 " entice ! " say she . " I do nothing of the kind ! " 
 " would he have change his mind if you have not entice he ? " 
 " I do nothing of the kind . I offer to remain just as we be . " 
 " that be all very well . of course he could not accept such an offer . 
 think as I do , it be my duty to keep you apart as long as I can . 
 if you contrive to marry he in opposition to my effort , the misery 
 of both of you must be on your head . I tell you fairly that I do not 
 believe he wish anything of the kind . " 
 " I be quite sure he do , " say Imogene . 
 " very well . do you leave he alone ; stay down here , and see what will 
 come of it . I quite agree that such a banishment , as you call it , 
 be not a happy prospect for you;--but it be happy than that of a 
 marriage with Frank Houston . give that up , and then you can go back 
 to London and begin the world again . " 
 begin the world again ! she know what that mean . she be to throw 
 herself into the market , and look for such other husband as 
 Providence might send she . she have try that before , and have 
 convince herself that Providence could never send she any that could 
 be acceptable . the one man have take possession of she , and there 
 never could be a second . she have not know her own strength,--or her 
 own weakness as the case might be,--when she have agree to surrender 
 the man she love because there have be an alteration in their 
 prospect of an income . she have struggle with herself , have attempt 
 to amuse herself with the world , have tell herself that somebody would 
 come who would banish that image from her thought and heart . she have 
 bade herself to submit to the separation for his welfare . then she 
 have endeavour to quiet herself by declare to herself that the 
 man be no hero,--was unworthy of so much thinking . but it have all 
 be of no avail . Gertrude Tringle have be a fester sore to she . 
 Frank , whether a hero or only a commonplace man , was,--as she own 
 to herself,--hero enough for she . then come the opening for a renewal 
 of the engagement . Frank have be candid with she , and have tell she 
 everything . the Tringle money would not be forthcoming on his behalf . 
 then,--not resolve to entice he back again,--she have do so . 
 the word be odious to she , and be reject with disdain when use 
 against she by she brother;--but , when alone , she acknowledge to 
 herself that it be true . she have entice her lover back again,--to 
 his great detriment . yes ; she certainly have entice he back . she 
 certainly be about to sacrifice he because of her love . " if I could 
 only die , and there be an end of it ! " she exclaim to herself . 
 Though Tregothnan Hall , as the Docimers ' house be call , be not 
 open to Frank Houston , there be the post run always . he have 
 write to her half - a - dozen time since she have be in Cornwall , 
 and have always speak of their engagement as an affair at last 
 irrevocably fix . she , too , have write little note , tender and 
 loving , but still ting by that tone of despondency which have become 
 common to she . " as for name a day , " she say once , " suppose we fix 
 the first of January , ten year hence . Mudbury 's opposition will be 
 wear out by old age , and you will have become thoroughly sick of the 
 pleasure of London . " but join to this there would be a few joke , 
 and then some little word of warm , most enduring , most trusting 
 love . " do not believe I if I say that I be not happy in know that 
 I be altogether your own . " then there would come a simple " I " as 
 a signature , and after that some further badinage respect she 
 " Cerberus , " as she call her brother . 
 but after that word , that odious word , " entice , " there go another 
 letter up to London of altogether another nature . 
 " I have change my mind again , " she say , 
    and have become aware that , though I should die in do 
    it,--though we should both die if it be possible,--there 
    should be an end of everything between you and I . yes , 
    Frank ; there ! I send you back my troth , and demand my own 
    in return . after all why should not one die;--hang oneself 
    if it be necessary ? to be self - deny be all that be 
    necessary,--at any rate to a woman . hang or lie down 
    and die , or linger on and say one 's prayer and 
    knitting stocking , be altogether immaterial . I have 
    sometimes think Mudbury to be brutal to I , but I have 
    never know he to be untrue,--or even , as I believe , 
    mistaken . he see clearly and know what will happen . he 
    tell I that I have entice you back . I be not true as 
    he be . so I throw he back the word in his teeth,--though 
    its truth at the moment be go like a dagger through 
    my heart . I know myself to have be selfish , unfeele , 
    unfeminine , when I induce you to surrender yourself to 
    a mode of life which will make you miserable . I have 
    sometimes be proud of myself because I have love you so 
    truly ; but now I hate myself and despise myself because I 
    have be incapable of the first effort which love should 
    make . love should at any rate be unselfish . 
    he tell I that you will be miserable and that the misery 
    will be on my head,--and I believe he . there shall be an 
    end of it . I want no promise from you . there may , perhaps , 
    be a time in which Imogene Docimer as a sturdy old maid 
    shall be respect and serene of mind . as a wife who have 
    entice her husband to his misery she would be respect 
    neither by he nor by herself,--and as for serenity 
    it would be quite out of the question . I have be 
    unfortunate . that be all;--but not half so unfortunate as 
    other that I see around I . 
    _ pray _ , _ pray _ , PRAY , take this as final , and thus save 
    I from renew trouble and renewed agony . 
    now I be yours truly,-- 
    never again will I be affectionate to any one 
    with true feminine love , 
    imogene DOCIMER . 
 Houston when he receive the above letter of course have no 
 alternative but to declare that it could not possibly be regard 
 as have any avail . and indeed he have heart enough in his bosom to 
 be warm to something like true heat by such word as these . the 
 cabbage and cradle run up in his estimation . the small house at 
 Pau , which in some of his more despondent moment have assume an 
 unqualified appearance of domestic discomfort , be now ornament and 
 accoutre till it seem to be a little paradise . the very cabbage 
 blossom into rose , and the little baby in the cradle produce 
 a throb of paternal triumph in his heart . if she be woman enough 
 to propose to herself such an agony of devotion , could he not be 
 man enough to demand from she a devotion of a different kind ? as to 
 Mudbury Docimer 's truth , he believe in it not at all , but be quite 
 convinced of the man 's brutality . yes ; she should hang herself -- but 
 it should be round his neck . the serenity should be display by she 
 not as an aunt but as a wife and mother . as for entice , do he 
 not now,--just in this moment of his manly triumph,--acknowledge to 
 himself that she have entice he to his happiness , to his glory , to 
 his welfare ? in this frame of mind he write his answer as follows;-- 
    MY dearest , 
    you have no power of change your mind again . there must 
    be some limit to vacillation , and that have be reach . 
    something must be fix at last . something have be fix 
    at last , and I most certainly shall not consent to any 
    further unfixing . what right have Mudbury to pretend to 
    know my feeling ? or , for the matter of that , what right 
    have you to accept his description of they ? I tell you now 
    that I place my entire happiness in the hope of make 
    you my wife . I call upon you to ignore all the selfish 
    declaration as to my own idea which I have make in time 
    past . the only right which you could now possibly have 
    to separate yourself from I would come from your have 
    cease to love I . you do not pretend to say that such be 
    the case ; and therefore , with considerable indignation , 
    but still very civilly , I desire that Mudbury with his 
    hard - hearted counsel may go to the ---- 
    entice ! of course you have entice I . I suppose that 
    woman do as a rule entice man , either to their advantage 
    or disadvantage . I will leave it to you to say whether 
    you believe that such enticement , if it be allow its 
    full scope , will lead to one or the other as far as I be 
    concerned . I never be so happy as when I feel that you 
    have entice I back to the hope of former day . 
    now I be your , as always , and most affectionately , 
    FRANK HOUSTON . 
    I shall expect the same word back from you by return of 
    post score under as eagerly as those futile " pray . " 
 Imogene when she receive this be greatly disturbed,--not know 
 how to carry herself in her great resolve,--or whether indeed that 
 resolve must not be again abandon . she have determine , should she 
 lover 's answer be as she have certainly intend it to be when she 
 write her letter , to go at once to her brother and to declare to he 
 that the danger be at an end , and that he might return to London 
 without any fear of a relapse on her part . but she could not do so 
 with such a reply as that she now hold in her pocket . if that reply 
 could , in very truth , be true , then there must be another revulsion , 
 another change of purpose , another yield to absolute joy . if it 
 could be the case that Frank Houston no long fear the danger 
 that he have fear before , if he have in truth reconcile himself to 
 a state of thing which he have once describe as simple poverty , 
 if he really place his happiness on the continuation of his love , 
 then,--then , why should she make the sacrifice ? why should she place 
 such implicit confidence in her brother 's infallibility against 
 error , see that by do so she would certainly shipwreck her own 
 happiness,--and his too , if his word be to be trust ? 
 he call upon she to write to he again by return of post . she be 
 to write to he and unsay those prayer , and comfort he with a 
 repetition of that dear word which she have declare that she would 
 never use again with all its true meaning . that be his express order 
 to she . should she obey it , or should she not obey it ? should she 
 vacillate again , or should she leave his last letter unanswered 
 with stern obduracy ? she acknowledge to herself that it be a dear 
 letter , deserve the good treatment at her hand , give her lover 
 credit , probably , for more true honesty than he deserve . what be 
 the good treatment ? her brother have plainly show his conviction that 
 the good treatment would be to leave he without meddle with he 
 any far . her sister - in - law , though milder in her language , be , 
 she fear , of the same opinion . would it not be well for he not 
 to be meddle with ? ought not that to be her judgment , look at the 
 matter all round ? 
 she do not at any rate obey he at all point , for she leave his 
 letter in her pocket for three or four day , while she consider the 
 matter backwards and forwards . 
 CHAPTER LX . 
 AUNT ROSINA . 
 during this period of heroism it have be necessary to Houston to 
 have some confidential friend to whom from time to time he could 
 speak of his purpose . he could not go on eat slice of boil 
 mutton at eating - house , and drink dribblet of bad wine out 
 of little decanter no big than the bottle in a cruet stand , 
 without have some one to encourage he in his effort . it be a 
 hard apprenticeship , and , come as it do rather late in life for 
 such a beginning , and after much luxurious indulgence , require some 
 sympathy and consolation . there be Tom Shuttlecock and Lord John 
 Battledore at the club . Lord John be the man as to whose expulsion 
 because of his contumacious language so much have be say , but who 
 live through that and various other danger . these have be his 
 special friend , and to they he have confide everything in regard 
 to the Tringle marriage . shuttlecock have ridicule the very idea of 
 love , and have tell he that everything else be to be throw to the 
 dog in pursuit of a good income . Battledore have remind he that 
 there be " a deuced deal of cut - and - come - again in a hundred and 
 twenty thousand pound . " they have be friend , not always altogether 
 after his own heart , but friend who have serve his purpose when he 
 be make his raid upon Lombard Street . but they be not man to 
 whom he could descant on the wholesomeness of cabbage as an article 
 of daily food , or who would sympathise with the struggle joy of 
 an embryo father . to their thinking , woman be occasionally very 
 convenient as be the depositary of some of the accruing wealth 
 of the world . Frank have be quite worthy of their friendship as 
 have " spot " and nearly " run down " for himself a well - laden 
 city heiress . but now Tom Shuttlecock and Lord John Battledore 
 be distasteful to him,--as would he be to they . but he find the 
 confidential friend in his maiden aunt . 
 Miss Houston be an old lady,--older than her time , as be some 
 people,--who live alone in a small house in Green Street . she be 
 particular in call it Green Street , Hyde Park . she be very 
 anxious to have it know that she never occupy it during the month 
 of August , September , and october,--though it be often the case with 
 she that she do not in truth expatriate herself for more than six 
 week . she be careful to have a fashionable seat in a fashionable 
 church . she dearly love to see her name in the paper when she be 
 happy enough to be invite to a house whose entertainment be 
 chronicle . there be a thousand little tricks,--i will not be harsh 
 enough to call they unworthy,--by which she serve Mammon . but she 
 do not limit her service to the evil spirit . when in her place in 
 church she sincerely say her prayer . when in London , or out of it , 
 she give a modicum of her slender income to the poor . and , though she 
 like to see her name in the paper as one of the fashionable world , 
 she be a great deal too proud of the blood of the Houstons to toady 
 any one or to ask for any favour . she be a neat , clean , nice - look 
 old lady , who understand that if economy be to be make in eating 
 and drink they should be effect at her own table and not at that 
 of the servant who wait upon she . this be the confidential friend 
 whom Frank trust in his new career . 
 it must be explain that Aunt Rosina , as Miss Houston be call , 
 have be well acquainted with her nephew 's early engagement , 
 and have approve of Imogene as his future wife . then have come the 
 unexpected collapse in the uncle 's affair , by which Aunt Rosina as 
 well as other in the family have suffered,--and Frank , much to his 
 aunt 's displeasure , have allow himself to be separate from the lady 
 of his love on account of his comparative poverty . she have hear 
 of Gertrude Tringle and all her money , but from a high standing of 
 birth and social belonging have despise all the Tringles and all 
 their money . to she , as a maiden lady , truth in love be everything . 
 to she , as a well - bear lady , good blood be everything . therefore , 
 though there have be no quarrel between she and Frank , there have 
 be a cessation of sympathetic interest , and he have be throw into 
 the hand of the Battledores and Shuttlecocks . now again the old 
 sympathy be revive , and Frank find it convenient to drink tea 
 with his aunt when other engagement allow it . 
 " I call that an infernal interference , " he say to his aunt , show 
 her Imogene 's letter . 
 " my dear Frank , you need not curse and swear , " say the old lady . 
 " Infernal be not curse nor yet swear . " then Miss Houston , have 
 liberate her mind by her remonstrance , proceed to read the letter . 
 " I call that abominable , " say Frank , allude of course to the 
 allusion make in the letter to Mudbury Docimer . 
 " it be a beautiful letter;--just what I should have expect from 
 Imogene . my dear , I will tell you what I propose . remain as you be 
 both of you for five year . " 
 " five year . that be sheer nonsense . " 
 " five year , my dear , will run by like a dream . five year to look 
 back upon be as nothing . " 
 " but these five year be five year to be look forward to . it be 
 out of the question . " 
 " but you say that you could not live as a married man . " 
 " live ! I suppose we could live . " then he think of the cabbage and 
 the cottage at Pau . " there would be seven hundred a - year I suppose . " 
 " could not you do something , Frank ? " 
 " what , to earn money ? no ; I do not think I could . if I attempt to 
 break stone I should not break enough to pay for the hammer . " 
 " could not you write a book ? " 
 " that would be bad than the stone . I sometimes think I could 
 paint a picture,--but , if I do , nobody would buy it . as to make 
 money that be hopeless . I could save some , by leave off glove and 
 allow myself only three clean shirt a - week . " 
 " that would be dreadful , Frank . " 
 " it would be dreadful , but it be quite clear that I must do 
 something . an effort have to be make . " this he say with a voice the 
 tone of which be almost heroic . then they discuss the matter at 
 great length , in do which Aunt Rosina thoroughly encourage he 
 in his heroism . that idea of remain unmarried for another short 
 period of five year be allow to go by the board , and when they 
 part on that night it be understand that step be to be take to 
 bring about a marriage as speedily as possible . 
 " perhaps I can do a little to help , " say Aunt Rosina , in a faint 
 whisper as Frank leave the room . 
 Frank Houston , when he show Imogene 's letter to his aunt , have 
 already answer it . then he wait a day or two , not very patiently , 
 for a further rejoinder from imogene,--in which she of course be 
 to unsay all that she have say before . but when , after four or five 
 day , no rejoinder have come , and his fervour have be increase by 
 his expectation , then he tell his aunt that he should immediately 
 take some serious step . the more ardent he be the well his aunt 
 love he . could he have go down and carry off his bride , and 
 marry she at once , in total disregard of the usual wedding - cake and 
 St.-George's - Hanover - Square ceremony to which the Houston family 
 have always be accustom , she could have find it in her heart to 
 forgive he . " do not be rash , Frank , " she say . he merely shake his 
 head , and as he again leave she declare that he be not go to be 
 drive this way or that by such a fellow as Mudbury Docimer . 
 " as I live , there be Frank come through the gate . " this be say by 
 Imogene to her sister - in - law , as they be walk up and down the 
 road which lead from the lodge to the Tregothnan house . the two lady 
 be at that moment discuss Imogene 's affair . no rejoinder have 
 as yet be make to Frank 's last letter , which , to Imogene 's feeling , 
 be the most charming epistle which have ever come from the hand of 
 a true lover . there have be passion and sincerity in every word of 
 it;--even when he have be a little too strong in his language as he 
 denounce the hard - hearted counsel of her brother . but yet she have 
 not respond to all this sincerity , nor have she as yet withdraw 
 the resolution which she have herself declare . Mrs. Docimer be of 
 opinion that that resolution should not be withdraw , and have strive 
 to explain that the circumstance be now the same as when , after 
 full consideration , they have determine that the engagement should 
 come to an end . at this very moment she be speak word of wisdom 
 to this effect , and as she do so Frank appear , walk up from the 
 gate . 
 " what will Mudbury say ? " be Mrs. Docimer 's first ejaculation . 
 but Imogene , before she have consider how this danger might be 
 encounter , rush forward and give herself up,--I fear we must 
 confess,--into the arm of her lover . after that it be feel at once 
 that she have withdraw all her last resolution and have vacillate 
 again . there be no ground leave even for an argument now that she have 
 submit herself to be embrace . Frank 's word of affection need not 
 here be repeat , but they be of a nature to leave no doubt on the 
 mind of either of the lady . 
 Mudbury have declare that he would not receive Houston in his 
 house as his sister 's lover , and have express his opinion that 
 even Houston would not have the face to show his face there . but 
 Houston have come , and something must be do with he . it be soon 
 ascertain that he have walk over from Penzance , which be but 
 two mile off , and have leave his portmanteau behind he . " I would not 
 bring anything , " say he . " Mudbury would find it easy to maltreat 
 my thing than myself . it would look so foolish to tell the man with 
 a fly to carry they back at once . be he in the house ? " 
 " he be about the place , " say Mrs. Docimer , almost tremble . 
 " be he very fierce against I ? " 
 " he think it have well be all over . " 
 " I be of a different way of thinking , you see . I can not acknowledge 
 that he have any right to dictate to Imogene . " 
 " nor can I , " say Imogene . 
 " of course he can turn I out . " 
 " if he do I shall go with you , " say Imogene . 
 " we have make up our mind to it , " say Frank , " and he have well let 
 we do as we please . he can make himself disagreeable , of course ; but 
 he have get no power to prevent we . " now they have reach the house , 
 and Frank be of course allow to enter . have he not enter neither 
 would Imogene , who be so much take by this further instance of 
 her lover 's ardour that she be determine now to be lead by he 
 in everything . his explanation of that word " entice " have be so 
 thoroughly satisfactory to she that she be no long in the least 
 angry with herself because she have entice he . she have quite come to 
 see that it be the duty of a young woman to entice a young man . 
 Frank and Imogene be soon leave alone , not from any kindness of 
 feel on the part of Mrs. Docimer , but because the wife feel it 
 necessary to find her husband . " oh , Mudbury , who do you think have 
 come ? he be here ! " 
 " Houston ! " 
 " yes ; Frank Houston ! " 
 " in the house ? " 
 " he be in the house . but he have not bring anything . he do not mean 
 to stay . " 
 " what do that matter ? he shall not be ask even to dine here . " 
 " if he be turn out she will go with he ! if she say so she will do 
 it . you can not prevent she . that be what would come of it if she be 
 to insist on go up to London with he . " 
 " he be a scoundrel ! " 
 " no ; mudbury;--not a scoundrel . you can not call he a scoundrel . 
 there be something firm about he ; be not there ? " 
 " to come to my house when I tell he not ? " 
 " but he do really love she . " 
 " Bother ! " 
 " at any rate there they be in the breakfast - parlour , and something 
 must be do . I could not tell he not to come in . and she would not 
 have come without he . there will be enough for they to live upon . 
 do not you think you would well ? " Docimer , as he return to the house , 
 declare that he " do not think he would well . " but he have to confess 
 to himself that , whether it be well or whether it be bad , he 
 could do very little to prevent it . 
 the greeting of the two man be anything but pleasant . " what I have 
 get to say I would rather say outside , " say Docimer . 
 " certainly , " say Frank . " I suppose I be to be allow to return ? " 
 " if he do not,"--said Imogene , who at her brother 's request have 
 leave the room , but still stand at the open door,--"if he do not 
 I shall go to he in Penzance . you will hardly attempt to keep I a 
 prisoner . " 
 " who say that he be not to return ? I think that you be two idiot , 
 but I be quite aware that I can not prevent you from be married if 
 you be both determine . " then he lead the way out through the hall , 
 and Frank follow he . " I can not understand that any man should be 
 so fickle , " he say , when they be both out on the walk together . 
 " Constant , I should suppose you mean . " 
 " I say fickle , and I mean it . it be at your own suggestion that 
 you and Imogene be to be separate . " 
 " no doubt ; it be at my suggestion , and with her consent . but you see 
 that we have change our mind . " 
 " and will change they again . " 
 " we be steady enough in our purpose , now , at any rate . you hear 
 what she say . if I come down here to persuade she to alter she 
 purpose,--to talk she into do something of which you disapprove , 
 and as to which she agree with you,--then you might do something by 
 quarrel with I . but what be the use of it , when she and I be of 
 one mind ? you know that you can not talk she over . " 
 " where do you mean to live ? " 
 " I will tell you all about that if you will allow I to send into 
 Penzance for my thing . I can not discuss matter with you if you 
 proclaim yourself to be my enemy . you say we be both idiot . " 
 " I do . " 
 " very well . then you have well put up with two idiot . you can not 
 cure their idiocy . nor have you any authority to prevent they from 
 exhibit it . " the argument be efficacious though the idiocy be 
 acknowledge . the portmanteau be send for , and before the evening 
 be over Frank have again be receive at Tregothnan as Imogene 's 
 accept lover . 
 then Frank have his story to tell and his new proposition to make . 
 Aunt Rosina have offer to join she mean with his . the house in 
 Green Street , no doubt , be small , but room it be think could be 
 make , at any rate till the necessity have come for various crib and 
 various cradle . " I can not imagine that you will endure to live with 
 Aunt Rosina , " say the brother . 
 " why on earth should I object to Aunt Rosina ? " say Imogene . " she and 
 I have always be friend . " in her present mood she would hardly 
 have object to live with any old woman , however objectionable . " and 
 we shall be able to have a small cottage somewhere , " say Frank . " she 
 will keep the house in London , and we shall keep the cottage . " 
 " and what on earth will you do with yourself ? " 
 " I have think of that too , " say Frank . " I shall take to painting 
 picture in earnest;--portrait probably . I do not see why I should not 
 do as well as anybody else . " 
 " that head of your of old Mrs. Jones , " say Imogene , " be a great 
 deal well than dozen of thing one see every year in the 
 Academy . " 
 " Bother ! " exclaim Docimer . 
 " I do not see why he should not succeed , if he really will work hard , " 
 say Mrs. Docimer . 
 " Bother ! " 
 " why should it be bother ? " say Frank , put upon his mettle . " ever so 
 many fellow have begin and have get on , old than I be . and , even 
 if I do not earn anything , I have get an employment . " 
 " and be the painting - room to be in Green Street also ? " ask Docimer . 
 " just at present I shall begin by copy thing at the National 
 Gallery , " explain Houston , who be not as yet prepare with his 
 answer to that difficulty as to a studio in the little house in Green 
 Street . 
 when the matter have be carry as far as this it be manifest 
 enough that anything like opposition to Imogene 's marriage be to be 
 withdraw . Houston remain at Tregothnan for a couple of day and 
 then return to London . a week afterwards the Docimers follow 
 he , and early in the following June the two lover , after all their 
 trouble and many vacillation , be make one at St. George 's church , 
 to the great delight of Aunt Rosina . it can not be say that the 
 affair give equal satisfaction to all the bridegroom 's friend , as 
 may be learn from the follow narration of two conversation which 
 take place in London very shortly after the wedding . 
 " Fancy after all that fellow Houston go and marry such a 
 girl as Imogene Docimer , without a single blessed shilling to keep 
 themselves alive . " this be say in the smoking - room of Houston 's 
 club by Lord John Battledore to Tom Shuttlecock ; but it be say 
 quite aloud , so that Houston 's various acquaintance might be enable 
 to offer their remark on so interesting a subject ; and to express 
 their pity for the poor object of their commiseration . 
 " it be the most infernal piece of folly I ever hear in my life , " say 
 Shuttlecock . " there be that Tringle girl with two hundred thousand 
 pound to be have just for the taking;--Traffick 's wife 's sister , you 
 know . " 
 " there be something wrong about that , " say another . " Benjamin 
 Batsby , that stupid fellow who use to be in the twentieth , run off 
 with she just when everything have be settle between Houston and 
 old Tringle . " 
 " not a bit of it , " say Battledore . " Tringle have quarrel with 
 Houston before that . Batsby do go with she , but the governor 
 would not come down with the money . then the girl be bring back 
 and there be no marriage . " upon that the condition of poor Gertrude 
 in reference to her lover and her fortune be discuss by those 
 present with great warmth ; but they all agree that Houston have 
 prove himself to be a big fool than any of they have expect . 
 " by George , he be go to set up for paint portrait , " say Lord 
 John , with great disgust . 
 in Queen 's Gate the matter be discuss by the lady there very 
 much in the same spirit . at this time Gertrude be engage to Captain 
 Batsby , if not with the full approbation at any rate with the consent 
 both of her father and mother , and therefore she could speak of 
 Frank Houston and his bride , if with disdain , still without wounded 
 feeling . " here it be in the paper , Francis Houston and Imogene 
 Docimer , " say Mrs. Traffick . 
 " so she have really catch he at last ! " say Gertrude . 
 " there be not much to catch , " rejoin Mrs. Traffick . " I doubt 
 whether they have get £ 500 a year between they . " 
 " it do seem so very sudden , " say Lady Tringle . 
 " Sudden ! " say Gertrude . " they have be about it for the last five 
 year . of course he have try to wriggle out of it all through . I be 
 glad that she have succeed at last , if only because he deserve it . " 
 " I wonder where they will find a place to live in , " say Augusta . this 
 take place in the bedroom which Mrs. Traffick still occupy in 
 Queen 's Gate , when she have be just a month a mother . 
 thus , with the kind assistance of Aunt Rosina , Frank Houston and 
 Imogene Docimer be marry at last , and the chronicler hereby 
 express a hope that it may not be long before Frank may see a 
 picture of his own hanging on the wall of the Academy , and that he 
 may live to be afraid of the coming of no baby . 
 CHAPTER LXI . 
 TOM TRINGLE go upon his travel . 
 we must again go back and pick up our thread to April , have rush 
 forward to be present at the wedding of Frank Houston and Imogene 
 Docimer , which do not take place till near Midsummer . this we must 
 do at once in regard to Tom Tringle , who , if the matter be look at 
 aright , should be regard as the hero of this little history . Ayala 
 indeed , who be no doubt the real heroine among so many young lady 
 who have be more or less heroic , do not find in he the angel of 
 whom she have dream , and whose personal appearance on earth be 
 necessary to her happiness . but he have be able very clearly to pick 
 out an angel for himself , and , though he have fail in his attempt 
 to take the angel home with he , have be constant in his endeavour 
 as long as there remain to he a chance of success . he have show 
 himself to be foolish , vulgar , and ignorant . he have give way to 
 bolivian champagne and faddle intimacy . he have be silly enough 
 to think that he could bribe his Ayala with diamond for herself , 
 and charm she with cheap jewelry on his own person . he have think 
 to soar high by challenge his rival to a duel , and have then be 
 tempt by pot courage to strike he in the street . a very vulgar 
 and foolish young man ! but a young man capable of a persistent 
 passion ! young man not foolish and not vulgar be , perhaps , common 
 enough . but the young man of constant heart and capable of such 
 persistency as Tom 's be not to be find every day walk about the 
 street of the metropolis . Jonathan Stubbs be constant , too ; but it 
 may be doubt whether the Colonel ever really despair . the merit 
 be to despair and yet to be constant . when a man have reason to be 
 assure that a young lady be very fond of he , he may always hope 
 that love will follow,--unless indeed the love which he seek 
 have be already give away elsewhere . moreover , Stubbs have many 
 substantial support at his back ; the relationship of the Marchesa , 
 the friendship of Lady Albury , the comfort of Stalham,--and not 
 least , if last , the capability and prowess of Croppy . then , too , 
 he be neither vulgar nor foolish nor ignorant . Tom Tringle have 
 everything against him,--everything that would weigh with Ayala ; and 
 yet he fight his battle out to the last gasp . therefore , I desire my 
 hearer to regard Tom Tringle as the hero of the transaction with 
 which they have be concern , and to throw their old shoe after 
 he as he start away upon his grand tour . 
 " Tom , my boy , you have to go , you know , in four day , " say his 
 father to he . at this time Tom have as yet give no positive consent 
 as to his departure . he have sink into a low state of moaning and 
 groaning , in which he refuse even to accede to the doctrine of the 
 expediency of a manly bearing . " what be the good of tell a lie 
 about it ? " he would say to his mother . " what be the good of manliness 
 when a fellow would rather be drown ? " he have leave his bed indeed , 
 and have once or twice saunter out of the house . he have be 
 instigate by his sister to go down to his club , under the idea 
 that by such an effort he would shake off the despondency which 
 overwhelm he . but he have fail in the attempt , and have walk by 
 the door of the Mountaineers , find himself unable to face the 
 hall - porter . but still the preparation for his departure be go 
 on . it be presume that he be to leave London for Liverpool on the 
 Friday , and his father have now visit he in his own room on the 
 Tuesday evening with the intention of extort from he his final 
 consent . Sir Thomas have on that morning express himself very freely 
 to his son - in - law Mr. Traffick , and on return home have be glad 
 to find that his word have be of avail , at any rate as regard the 
 dinner - hour . he be tender - hearted towards his son , and dispose to 
 tempt he rather than threaten he into obedience . 
 " I have not ever say I would go , " reply Tom . 
 " but you must , you know . everything have be pack up , and I want to 
 make arrangement with you about money . I have get a cabin for you to 
 yourself , and Captain Merry say that you will have a very pleasant 
 passage . the equinox be over . " 
 " I do not care about the equinox , " say Tom . " I should like bad 
 weather if I be to go . " 
 " perhaps you may have a touch of that , too . " 
 " if the ship could be dash against a rock I should prefer it ! " 
 exclaim Tom . 
 " that be nonsense . the Cunard ship never be dash against rock . 
 by the time you have be three day at sea you will be as hungry as a 
 hunter . now , Tom , how about money ? " 
 " I do not care about money , " say Tom . 
 " do not you ? then you be very unlike anybody else that I meet . I think 
 I have well give you power to draw at New York , San Francisco , 
 Yokohama , Pekin , and Calcutta . " 
 " be I to go to Pekin ? " ask Tom , with renew melancholy . 
 " well , yes;--I think so . you have well see what the various house 
 be do in China . and then from Calcutta you can go up the country . 
 by that time I dare say we shall have possession of Cabul . with such 
 a government as we have now , thank God ! the Russians will have be 
 turn pretty nearly out of Asia by this time next year . " * 
    [ * it have to be state that this story be write in 1878 . ] 
 " be I to be away more than a year ? " 
 " if I be you , " say the father , glad to catch the glimmer of assent 
 which be hereby implied,--"if I be you I would do it thoroughly 
 whilst I be about it . have I see so much when I be young I should 
 have be a well man of business . " 
 " it be all the same to I , " say Tom . " say ten year , if you like it ! 
 say twenty ! I shall not ever want to come back again . where be I to go 
 after Cabul ? " 
 " I do not exactly fix it that you should go to Cabul . of course you 
 will write home and give I your own opinion as you travel on . you 
 will stay two or three month probably in the States . " 
 " be I to go to Niagara ? " he ask . 
 " of course you will , if you wish it . the Falls of Niagara , I be tell , 
 be very wonderful . " 
 " if a man be to drown himself , " say Tom , " it be the sort of place to 
 do it effectually . " 
 " oh , Tom ! " exclaim his father . " do you speak to I in that way when 
 I be do everything in my power to help you in your trouble ? " 
 " you can not help I , " say Tom . 
 " circumstance will . time will do it . employment will do it . a sense 
 of your dignity as a man will do it , when you find yourself amongst 
 other who know nothing of what you have suffer . you revel in your 
 grief now because those around you know that you have fail . all 
 that will be change when you be with stranger . you should not talk 
 to your father of drown yourself ! " 
 " that be wrong . I know it be wrong , " say Tom , humbly . " I will not do 
 it if I can help it,--but perhaps I have well not go there . and how 
 long ought I to stay at Yokohama ? perhaps you have well put it all 
 down on a bit of paper . " then Sir Thomas endeavour to explain to 
 he that all that he say now be in the way of advice . that it would 
 be in truth leave to himself to go almost where he like , and to stay 
 at each place almost as long as he liked;--that he would be his own 
 master , and that within some broad and undefined limit he would have 
 as much money as he please to spend . surely no preparation for a 
 young man 's tour be ever make with more alluring circumstance ! but 
 Tom could not be tempt into any expression of satisfaction . 
 this , however , Sir Thomas do gain,--that before he leave his son 's 
 room it be definitely settled,--that Tom should take his departure 
 on the Friday , go down to Liverpool by an afternoon train on that 
 day . " I tell you what , " say Sir Thomas ; " I will go down with you , see 
 you on board the ship , and introduce you to Captain Merry . I shall be 
 glad of an opportunity of pay a visit to Liverpool . " and so the 
 question of Tom 's departure be settle . 
 on the Wednesday and Thursday he seem to take some interest in 
 his bag and portmanteau , and begin himself to look after those 
 assuagement of the toil of travel which be generally dear to young 
 man . he interest himself in a fur coat , in a well - arrange despatch 
 box , and in a very neat leathern case which be intend to hold two 
 brandy flask . he consent to be tell of the number of his shirt , 
 and absolutely express an opinion that he should want another pair 
 of dress - boot . when this occur every female bosom in the house , 
 from Lady Tringle 's down to the kitchenmaid 's , rejoice at the sign 
 of recovery which evince themselves . but neither Lady Tringle nor 
 the kitchenmaid , nor do any of the intermediate female bosom , know 
 how he employ himself when he leave the house on that Thursday 
 afternoon . he walk across the Park , and , call at Kingsbury 
 Crescent , leave a note address to his aunt . it be as follows:--"i 
 start to - morrow afternoon,--i hardly know whither . it may be for 
 year or it may be for ever . I should wish to say a word to Ayala 
 before I go . will she see I if I come at twelve o'clock exactly 
 to - morrow morning ? I will call for an answer in half - an - hour . T. T. , 
 junior . of course I be aware that Ayala be to become the bride of 
 Colonel Jonathan Stubbs . " in half - an - hour he return , and get his 
 answer . " Ayala will be glad to have an opportunity of say good - bye 
 to you to - morrow morning . " 
 from this it will be see that Ayala have at that time return from 
 Stalham to Kingsbury Crescent . she have come back joyful in heart , 
 thoroughly triumphant as to her angel , with everything in the world 
 sweet and happy before her,--desirous if possible to work her finger 
 off in mend the family linen , if only she could do something for 
 somebody in return for all the joy that the world be give she . 
 when she be tell that Tom wish to see she for the last time,--for 
 the last time at any rate before her marriage,--she assent at once . 
 " I think you should see he as he ask it , " say her aunt . 
 " Poor Tom ! of course I will see he . " and so the note be write 
 which Tom receive when he call the second time at the door . 
 at half - past eleven he skulk out of the house in Queen 's Gate , 
 anxious to avoid his mother and sister , who be on their side 
 anxious to devote every remaining minute of the time to his comfort 
 and welfare . I be afraid it must be acknowledge that he go with 
 all his jewelry . it could do no good . at last he be aware of that . 
 but still he think that she would like he well with his jewelry 
 than without it . Stubbs wear no gem , not even a ring , and Ayala when 
 she see her cousin enter the room could only assure herself that the 
 male angel certainly be never be - jewel . she be alone in the 
 drawing - room , Mrs. Dosett have arrange that at the expiration of 
 ten minute , which be to be allow to Tom for his private adieux , 
 she would come down to say good - bye to her nephew . " Ayala ! " say Tom . 
 " so you be go away,--for a very long journey , Tom . " 
 " yes , Ayala ; for a very long journey ; to Pekin and Cabul , if I live 
 through , to get to those sort of place . " 
 " I hope you will live through , Tom . " 
 " thank you , Ayala . thank you . I daresay I shall . they tell I I shall 
 get over it . I do not feel like get over it now . " 
 " you will find some beautiful young lady at Pekin , perhaps . " 
 " beauty will never have any effect upon I again , Ayala . beauty 
 indeed ! think what I have suffer from beauty ! from the first moment 
 in which you come down to Glenbogie I have be a victim to it . it 
 have destroy me,--destroye I ! " 
 " I be sure you will come back quite well , " say Ayala , hardly know 
 how to answer the last appeal . 
 " perhaps I may . if I can only get my heart to turn to stone , then I 
 shall . I do not know why I should have be make to care so much about 
 it . other people do not . " 
 " and now we must say , good - bye , I suppose . " 
 " oh , yes;--good - bye ! I do want to say one or two word if you be not 
 in a hurry . of course you will be his bride now . " 
 " I hope so , " say Ayala . 
 " I take that for grant . of course I hate he . " 
 " oh , Tom ; you shall not say that . " 
 " it be human nature ! I can tell a lie if you want it . I would do anything 
 for you . but you may tell he this : I be very sorry I strike he . " 
 " he know that , Tom . he have say so to I . " 
 " he behave well to me,--very well,--as he always do to everybody . " 
 " now , Tom , that be good of you . I do like you so much for say 
 that . " 
 " but I hate he ! " 
 " no ! " 
 " the evil spirit always hate the good one . I be conscious of an 
 evil spirit within my bosom . it be because my spirit be evil that you 
 would not love I . he be good , and you love he . " 
 " yes ; I do , " say Ayala . 
 " and now we will change the conversation . Ayala , I have get a little 
 present which you must take from I . " 
 " oh , no ! " say Ayala , think of the diamond necklace . 
 " it be only a little thing,--and I hope you will . " then he bring out 
 from his pocket a small brooch which he have select from his own 
 stock of jewelry for the occasion . " we be cousin , you know . " 
 " yes , we be cousin , " say Ayala , accept the brooch , but still 
 accept it unwillingly . 
 " he must be very disdainful if he would object to such a little thing 
 as this , " say Tom , refer to the Colonel . 
 " he be not at all disdainful . he will not object in the least . I be 
 sure of that , Tom . I will take it then , and I will wear it sometimes 
 as a memento that we have part like friends,--as cousin should 
 do . " 
 " yes , as friend , " say Tom , who think that even that word be 
 soft to his ear than cousin . then he take she by the hand and 
 look into her face wistfully , think what might be the effect 
 if for the last and for the first time he should snatch a kiss . have 
 he do so I think she would have let it pass without rebuke under 
 the guise of cousinship . it would have be very disagreeable;--but 
 then he be go away for so long a time , for so many mile ! but at 
 the moment Mrs. Dosett come in , and Ayala be save . " good - bye , " he 
 say ; " good - bye , " and without wait to take the hand which his aunt 
 offer he he hurry out of the room , out of the house , and back 
 across the Gardens to Queen 's Gate . 
 at Queen 's Gate there be an early dinner , at three o'clock , at which 
 Sir Thomas do not appear , as he have arrange to come out of the 
 city and meet his son at the railway station . there be , therefore , 
 sit at the board for the last time the mother and the two sister 
 with the intend traveller . " oh , Tom , " say Lady Tringle , as 
 soon as the servant have leave they together , " I do so hope you will 
 recover . " 
 " of course he will recover , " say Augusta . 
 " why should not he recover ? " ask Gertrude . " it be all in a person 's 
 mind . if he would only make up his mind not to think about she the thing 
 would be do , and there would be nothing the matter with he . " 
 " there be twenty other , ever so much well than Ayala , would have 
 he to - morrow , " say his mother . 
 " and be glad to catch he , " say Gertrude . " he be not like one of 
 those who have not get anything to make a wife comfortable with . " 
 " as for Ayala , " say Augusta , " she do not deserve such good luck . 
 I be tell that that Colonel Stubbs can not afford to keep any kind of 
 carriage for she . but then , to be sure , she have never be use to a 
 carriage . " 
 " oh , Tom , do look up , " say his mother , " and say that you will try to 
 be happy . " 
 " he will be all right in New York , " say Gertrude . " there be no place in 
 the world , they say , where the girl put themselves forward so much , 
 and make thing so pleasant for the young man . " 
 " he will soon find some one there , " say Augusta , " with a deal more 
 to say for herself than Ayala , and a great deal well - look . " 
 " I hope he will find some one who will really love he , " say his 
 mother . 
 Tom sit silent while he listen to all this encouragement , turn 
 his face from one speaker to the other . it be continue , with many 
 other similar promise of come happiness , and assurance that 
 he have be a gainer in lose all that he lose , when he suddenly 
 turn sharply upon they , and strongly express his feeling to his 
 sister . " I do not believe that either of you know anything about it , " 
 he say . 
 " do not know anything about what ? " say Augusta , who as a lady who 
 have be marry over twelve month , and be soon about to become a 
 mother , feel that she certainly do know all about it . 
 " why do not we know as well as you ? " ask Gertrude , who have also have 
 her experience . 
 " I do not believe you do know anything about it;--that be all , " say 
 Tom . " and now there be the cab . good - bye , mother ! good - bye , Augusta . 
 I hope you will be all right . " this allude to the baby . " good - bye , 
 Gertrude . I hope you will get all right too some day . " this allude to 
 Gertrude 's two lover . then he leave they , and as he get into his cab 
 declare to himself that neither of they have ever , or would ever , 
 know anything of that special trouble which have so nearly overwhelmed 
 himself . 
 " upon my word , Tom , " say his father , walk about the vessel with 
 he , " I wish I be go to New York myself with you;--it all look 
 so comfortable . " 
 " yes , " say Tom , " it be very nice . " 
 " you will enjoy yourself amazingly . there be that Mrs. Thompson have two 
 as pretty daughter with she as ever a man wish to see . " Tom shake 
 his head . " and you be fond of smoking . do you see the smoking - room ? 
 they have get everything on board these ship now . upon my word I envy 
 you the voyage . " 
 " it be as good as anything else , I daresay , " say Tom . " perhaps it be 
 well than London . " 
 then his father , who have be speak aloud to he , whisper a word 
 in his ear . " shake yourself , tom;--shake yourself , and get over it . " 
 " I be try , " say Tom . 
 " love be a very good thing , Tom , when a man can enjoy it , and make 
 himself warm with it , and protect himself by it from selfishness and 
 hardness of heart . but when it knock a man 's courage out of he , and 
 make he unfit for work , and leave he to bemoan himself , there be 
 nothing good in it . it be as bad as drink . do not you know that I be 
 do the good I can for you , to make a man of you ? " 
 " I suppose so . " 
 " then shake yourself , as I call it . it be to be do , if you set 
 about it in earnest . now , God bless you , my boy . " then Sir Thomas 
 get into his boat , and leave his son to go upon his travel and get 
 himself cure by a change of scene . 
 I have no doubt that Tom be cure , if not before he reach New 
 York , at any rate before he leave that interesting city;--so that when 
 he reach Niagara , which he do do in company with Mrs. Thompson and 
 her charming daughter , he entertain no idea of throw himself 
 down the Falls . we can not follow he on that prolong tour to Japan 
 and China , and thence to Calcutta and Bombay . I fancy that he do 
 not go on to Cabul , as before that time the Ministry in England be 
 unfortunately change , and the Russians have not as yet be expel 
 from Asia;--but I have little doubt that he obtain a great deal of 
 very useful mercantile information , and that he will live to have 
 a comfortable wife and a large family , and become in the course of 
 year the senior partner in the great house of Travers and Treason . 
 let we , who have soft heart , now throw our old shoe after he . 
 CHAPTER LXII . 
 how very much he love she . 
 we have see how Mr. Traffick be finally turn out of his 
 father - in - law 's house;--or , rather , not quite finally when we last 
 see he , as he continue to sleep at Queen 's Gate for two or three 
 night after that , until he have find shelter for his head . this he 
 do without encounter Sir Thomas , Sir Thomas pretend the while 
 to believe that he be go ; and then in very truth his last pair 
 of boot be remove . but his wife remain , await the great 
 occurrence with all the paternal comfort around she , Mr. Traffick 
 have be quite right in surmise that the father would not expose 
 his daughter in her delicate condition to the inclemency of the 
 weather . 
 but this no more than natural attention on the part of the father and 
 grandfather to the need of his own daughter and grandchild do not 
 in the least mitigate in the bosom of the Member of Parliament the 
 wrath which he feel at his own expulsion . it be not , as he say to 
 himself , the fact that he be expel , but the coarseness of the 
 language use . " the truth be , " he say to a friend in the House , 
 " that , though it be arrange I should remain there till after my 
 wife 's confinement , I could not bear his language . " it will probably 
 be acknowledge that the language be of a nature not to be bear . 
 when , therefore , Captain Batsby go down to the House on the day 
 of Tom 's departure to see his counsellor he find Mr. Traffick full 
 rather of anger than of counsel . " oh , yes , " say the Member , walk 
 with the Captain up and down some of the lobby , " I speak to he , 
 and tell he my mind very freely . when I say I will do a thing , I 
 always do it . and as for Tringle , nobody know he well than I. it 
 do not do to be afraid of he . there be a little bit of the cur 
 about he . " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " he do not like it . the truth is-- . you know I do not mind speak to 
 you openly . " 
 " oh , no , " say Batsby . 
 " he think he ought to do as well with the second girl as he have 
 do with the first . " Captain Batsby at this open his eye , but 
 he say nothing . have a good income of his own , he think much 
 of it . not be the young son of a lord , and not be a member 
 of Parliament , he think less of the advantage of those high 
 privilege . it do not suit he , however , to argue the question at 
 the present moment . " he be proud of his connection with our family , 
 and look perhaps even more than he ought to do to a seat in the 
 House . " 
 " I could get in myself if I care for it , " say Batsby . 
 " very likely . it be more difficult than ever to find a seat just now . 
 a family connection of course do help one . I have to trust to that a 
 good deal before I be know myself . " 
 " but what do Sir Thomas say ? " 
 " he make himself uncommonly disagreeable;--I can tell you that . he 
 could not very well abuse I , but he be not very particular in what he 
 say about you . of course he be cut up about the elopement . we all 
 feel it . Augusta be very much hurt . in her precarious state it be 
 so likely to do a mischief . " 
 " it can not be undo now . " 
 " No;--it can not be undo . but it make one feel that you can not make 
 a demand for money as though you set about it in the other way . when 
 I make up my mind to marry I state what I think I have a right 
 to demand , and I get it . he know very well that I should not take a 
 shilling less . it do make a difference when he know very well that 
 you have get to marry the girl whether with or without money . " 
 " I have not get to marry the girl at all . " 
 " have not you ? I rather think you have , old fellow . it be generally 
 consider that when a gentleman have go off with a girl he mean to 
 marry she . " 
 " not if the father come after she and bring she back . " 
 " and when he have go afterwards to the family house and propose 
 himself again in the mother 's presence . " in all this Mr. Traffick 
 receive an unfair advantage from the communication which be make 
 to he by his wife . " of course you must marry she . Sir Thomas know 
 that , and , know it , why should he be flush with his money ? I never 
 allow myself to say a single word they could use against I till 
 the ready - money - down have be all settle . " 
 " what be it he do say ? " Batsby be thoroughly sick of hear his 
 counsellor tell so many thing as to his own prudence and his own 
 success , and ask the question in an angry tone . 
 " he say that he would not consider the question of money at all till 
 the marriage have be solemnise . of course he stand on his right . 
 why should not he ? but , rough as he be , he be not stingy . give he his 
 due . he be not stingy . the money be there all right ; and the girl be 
 his own child . you will have to wait his time;--that be all . " 
 " and have nothing to begin with ? " 
 " that will be about it , I think . but what do it matter , Batsby ? you 
 be always talk about your income . " 
 " no , I be not ; not half so much as you do of your seat in 
 parliament,--which everybody say you be likely to lose at the next 
 election . " then , of course , there be a quarrel . Mr. Traffick take 
 his offended dignity back to the house,--almost doubt whether it 
 might not be his duty to bring Captain Batsby to the bar for contempt 
 of privilege ; and the Captain take himself off in thorough disgust . 
 nevertheless there be the fact that he have engage himself to the 
 young lady a second time . he have run away with she with the object 
 of marry she , and have then , accord to his own theory in such 
 matters,--been relieve from his responsibility by the appearance of 
 the father and the re - abduction of the young lady . as the young lady 
 have be take away from he it be to be suppose that the intended 
 marriage be negative by a proper authority . when start for 
 Brussels he be a free man ; and have he be wise he would have 
 remain there , or at some equally safe distance from the lady 's 
 charm . then , from a distance , he might have make his demand for 
 money , and the elopement would have operate in his favour rather 
 than otherwise . but he have come back , and have foolishly allow 
 himself to be persuade to show himself at Queen 's Gate . he have 
 obey Traffick 's advice , and now Traffick have simply throw he over 
 and quarrel with he . he have too promise , in the presence both of 
 the mother and the married sister , that he would marry the young lady 
 without any regard to money . he feel it all and be very angry with 
 himself , console himself as good he might with the reflection that 
 Sir Thomas 's money be certainly safe , and that Sir Thomas himself 
 be a liberal man . in his present condition it would be well for he , 
 he think , to remain inactive and see what circumstance would do 
 for he . 
 but circumstance very quickly become active . on his return to his 
 lodging , after leave Mr. Traffick , he find a note from Queen 's 
 Gate . " Dearest ben,--mamma want you to come and lunch to - morrow . 
 Papa have take poor Tom down to Liverpool , and will not be back till 
 dinner - time.--g. " he do not do as he be bid , allege some 
 engagement of business . but the persecution be continue in such 
 a manner as to show he that all opposition on his part would be 
 hopeless unless he be to proceed on some tour as prolong as that 
 of his future brother - in - law . " come and walk at three o'clock in 
 Kensington Gardens to - morrow . " this be write on the Saturday after 
 his note have be receive . what use would there be in continue a 
 vain fight ? he be in their hand , and the more gracefully he yield 
 the more probable it would be that the father would evince his 
 generosity at an early date . he therefore meet his lady - love on the 
 step of the Albert Memorial , whither she have manage to take herself 
 all alone from the door of the family mansion . 
 " Ben , " she say , as she greet he , " why do you not come for I to 
 the house ? " 
 " I think you would like it well . " 
 " why should I like it well ? of course mamma know all about it . 
 Augusta would have come with I just to see I here , only that she 
 can not walk out just at present . " then he say something to she about 
 the Monument , express his admiration of the Prince 's back , abuse 
 the east wind , remark that the bud be come on some of the 
 tree , and suggest that the broad road along by the Round Pond 
 would be dry than the little path . it be not interesting , as 
 Gertrude feel ; but she have not expect he to be interesting . the 
 interest she know must be contribute by herself . " Ben , " she say , 
 " I be so happy to hear what you say to mamma the other day . " 
 " what do I say ? " 
 " why , of course , that , as papa have give his consent , our engagement 
 be to go on just as if-- " 
 " just as if what ? " 
 " as if we have find the clergyman at Ostend . " 
 " if we have do that we should have be marry now , " suggest 
 Batsby . 
 " exactly . and it be almost as good as be married;--isn't it ? " 
 " I suppose it come to the same thing . " 
 " had not you well go to papa again and have it all finish ? " 
 " he make himself so very unpleasant . " 
 " that be only because he want to punish we for run away . I 
 suppose it be wrong . I shall never be sorry , because it make I know 
 how very , very much you love I . do not it make you feel how very , 
 very dearly I love you,--to trust myself all alone with you in that 
 way ? " 
 " oh , yes ; of course . " 
 " and papa can not bite you , you know . you go to he , and tell he that 
 you hope to be receive in the house as my,--my future husband , you 
 know . " 
 " shall I say nothing else ? " 
 " you mean about the day ? " 
 " I be mean about money . " 
 " I do not think I would . he be very generous , but he do not like to 
 be ask . when Augusta be to be marry he arrange all that himself 
 after they be engage . " 
 " but Traffick demand a certain sum ? " this question Captain Batsby 
 ask with considerable surprise , remember what Mr. Traffick have 
 say to he in reference to Augusta 's fortune . 
 " not at all . Septimus know nothing about it till after the 
 engagement . he be only too glad to get papa 's consent . you must not 
 believe all that Septimus say , you know . you may be sure of 
 this,--that you can trust papa 's generosity . " then , before he land 
 she at the door in Queen 's Gate , he have promise that he would make 
 another journey to Lombard Street , with the express purpose of 
 obtain Sir Thomas 's sanction to the marriage,--either with or 
 without money . 
 " how be you again ? " say Sir Thomas , when the Captain be for the 
 third time show into the little back parlour . " have you have another 
 trip to the continent since I see you ? " Sir Thomas be in a good 
 humour . Tom have go upon his travel ; Mr. Traffick have absolutely 
 take himself out of the house ; and the million be accommodate 
 themselves comfortably . 
 " no , Sir Thomas ; I have not be abroad since then . I do not keep on 
 go abroad constantly in that way . " 
 " and what can I do for you now ? " 
 " of course it be about your daughter . I want to have your permission 
 to consider ourselves engage . " 
 " I explain to you before that if you and Gertrude choose to marry 
 each other I shall not stand in your way . " 
 " thank you , Sir . " 
 " I do not know that it be much to thank I for . only that she make a 
 fool of herself by run away with you I should have prefer to 
 wait till some more sensible candidate have propose himself for her 
 hand . I do not suppose you will ever set the Thames on fire . " 
 " I do very well in the army . " 
 " it be a pity you do not remain there , and then , perhaps , you would 
 not have go to Ostend with my daughter . as it be , there she be . I 
 think she might have do well with herself ; but that be her fault . 
 she have make her bed and she must lie upon it . " 
 " if we be to be marry I hope you will not go on abuse I always , 
 Sir Thomas . " 
 " that be as you behave . you do not suppose that I should allow such a 
 piece of tomfoolery as that to be pass over without say anything 
 about it ! if you marry she and behave well to she I will-- " then he 
 pause . 
 " what will you do , Sir Thomas ? " 
 " I will say as little as possible about the Ostend journey . " 
 " and as to money , Sir Thomas ? " 
 " I think I have promise quite enough for you . you be not in a 
 position , Captain Batsby , to ask I as to money;--nor be she . you 
 shall marry she without a shilling,--or you shall not marry she at 
 all . which be it to be ? I must have an end put to all this . I will not 
 have you hang about my house unless I know the reason why . be you 
 two engage to each other ? " 
 " I suppose we be , " say Batsby , lugubriously . 
 " suppose be not enough . " 
 " we be , " say Batsby , courageously . 
 " very well . then , from this moment , Ostend shall be as though there 
 be not such a seaport anywhere in Europe . I will never allude to the 
 place again,--unless , perhaps , you should come and stay with I too 
 long when I be particularly anxious to get rid of you . now you have 
 well go and settle about the time and all that with Lady Tringle , 
 and tell she that you mean to come and dine to - morrow or next day , 
 or whenever it suit . come and dine as often as you please , only do 
 not bring your wife to live with I pertinaciously when you be not 
 ask . " all this Captain Batsby do not understand , but , as he leave 
 Lombard Street , he make up his mind that of all the man he have ever 
 meet , Sir Thomas Tringle , his future father - in - law , be the most 
 singular . " he be a well fellow than Traffick , " say Sir Thomas to 
 himself when he be alone , " and as he have trust I so far I will not 
 throw he over . " 
 the Captain now have no hesitation in take himself to Queen 's Gate . 
 as he be to be marry he might as well make the good of such 
 delight as be to be find in the happy state of mutual affection . 
 " my dear , dear Benjamin , I be so happy , " say Lady Tringle , 
 dissolve in tear as she embrace her son - in - law that be to be . 
 " you will always be so dear to I ! " in this she be quite true . 
 Traffick be not dear to she . she have at first think much of Mr. 
 Traffick 's position and noble blood , but , of late , she too have 
 become very tired of Mr. Traffick . Augusta take almost too much upon 
 herself , and Mr. Traffick 's prolonged presence have be an eyesore . 
 Captain Batsby be soft , and would be much more pleasant as a 
 son - in - law . even the journey to Ostend have have a good effect in 
 produce a certain humility . 
 " my dear Benjamin , " say Augusta , " we shall always be so happy to 
 entertain you as a brother . Mr. Traffick have a great regard for 
 you , and say from the first that if you behave as you ought to do 
 after that little journey he would arrange that everything should go 
 straight between you and papa . I be quite sure that you would come 
 forward at once as a man . " 
 but Gertrude 's delight be , of course , the strong , and Gertrude 's 
 welcome the warmest,--as be proper . " when I think of it , " she say 
 to he , " I do not know how I should ever have look anybody in the 
 face again,--after our go away with our thing mix up in that 
 way . " 
 " I be glad rather now that we do not find the clergyman . " 
 " oh , certainly , " say Gertrude . " I do not suppose anybody would have 
 give I anything . now there will be a regular wedding , and , of course , 
 there will be the present . " 
 " and , though nothing be to be settle , I suppose he will do 
 something . " 
 " and it would have be very dreadful , not have a regular 
 trousseau , " say Gertrude . " Mamma will , of course , do now just as she 
 do about Augusta . he allow she £ 300 ! only think;--if we have be 
 marry at Ostend you would have have to buy thing for I before 
 the first month be out . I have not more than half - a - dozen pair of 
 stocking with I . " 
 " he can not but say now that we have do as he would have we , " add 
 the Captain . " I do suppose that he will not be so unnatural as not to 
 give something when Augusta have £ 200,000 . " 
 " indeed , she have not . but you will see that soon or later papa will 
 do for I quite as well as for Augusta . " in this way they be happy 
 together , console each other for any little trouble which seem 
 for a while to cloud their joy , and bask in the full sunshine of 
 their permit engagement . 
 the day be soon fix , but fix not entirely in reference to the 
 want of Gertrude and her wedding . Lucy have also to be marry 
 from the same house , and the day for her marriage have already be 
 arrange . Sir Thomas have order that everything should be do for 
 Lucy as though she be a daughter of the house , and her wedding have 
 be arrange for the last week in May . when he hear that Ayala and 
 Colonel Stubbs be also engage he be anxious that the two sister 
 should be " buckle , " as he call it , on the same occasion,--and he 
 magnanimously offer to take upon himself the entire expense of the 
 double arrangement , intimate that the people in Kingsbury Crescent 
 have hardly room enough for a wedding . but Ayala , act probably 
 under Stalham influence , would not consent to this . Lady Albury , who 
 be now in London , be determined that Ayala 's marriage should take 
 place from her own house ; and , as Aunt Margaret and Uncle Reginald 
 have consent , that matter be consider as settle . but Sir Thomas , 
 have fix his mind upon a double wedding , resolve that Gertrude 
 and Lucy should be the joint bride . Gertrude , who still suffer 
 perhaps a little in public estimation from the Ostend journey , be 
 glad enough to wipe out that stain as quickly as possible , and do 
 not therefore object to the arrangement . but to the Captain there be 
 something in it by which his more delicate feeling be revolt . 
 it be a matter of course that Ayala should be present at her 
 sister 's wedding , and would naturally appear there in the guise 
 of a bridesmaid . she would also , now , act as a bridesmaid to 
 Gertrude,--her future position as Mrs. Colonel Stubbs give she , as 
 be suppose , sufficient dignity for that honourable employment . but 
 Captain Batsby , not so very long ago , have appear among the suitor 
 for Ayala 's hand ; and therefore , as he say to Gertrude , he feel a 
 little shamefaced about it . " what do that signify ? " say Gertrude . 
 " if you say nothing to she about it , I will be bind she will say nothing 
 to you . " and so it be on the day of the wedding . Ayala do not say 
 a word to Captain Batsby , nor do Captain Batsby say very much to 
 Ayala . 
 on the day before his marriage Captain Batsby pay a fourth visit to 
 Lombard Street in obedience to direction from Sir Thomas . " there , 
 my boy , " say he , " though you and Gertrude do take a little journey 
 on the sly to a place which we will not mention , you shall not take she 
 altogether empty - handed . " then he explain certain arrangement 
 which he have make for endow Gertrude with an allowance , which 
 under the circumstance the bridegroom could not but feel to be 
 liberal . it must be add , that , consider the shortness of time 
 allow for get they together , the amount of wedding present 
 bestow be consider by Gertrude to be satisfactory . as Lucy 's 
 be exhibit at the same time the show be not altogether mean . 
 " no doubt I have twice as much as the two put together , " say Mrs. 
 Traffick to Ayala up in her bedroom , " but then of course Lord 
 Boardotrade 's rank would make people give . " 
 CHAPTER LXIII . 
 AYALA again in LONDON . 
 after that last walk in Gobblegoose Wood , after Lady Tringle 's 
 unnecessary journey to Stalham on the Friday , and the last 
 day 's hunting with Sir Harry 's hounds,--which take place on the 
 Saturday,--Ayala again become anxious to go home . her anxiety be in 
 its nature very different from that which have prompt she to leave 
 Stalham on an appoint day lest she should seem to be wait for 
 the coming of Colonel Stubbs . " no ; I do not want to run away from he 
 any more , " she say to Lady Albury . " I want to be with he always , 
 and I hope he will not run away from I . but I have get to be somewhere 
 where I can think about it all for a little time . " 
 " can not you think about it here ? " 
 " no;--one can never think about a thing where it have all take place . 
 I must be up in my own little room in Kingsbury Crescent , and must 
 have Aunt Margaret 's work around me,--so that I may realise what 
 be go to come . not but what I mean to do a great deal of work 
 always . " 
 " mend his stocking ? " 
 " yes,--if he wear stocking . I know he do not . he always wear 
 sock . he tell I so . whatever he have , I will mend,--or make if he 
 want I . 
    ' I can bake and I can brew , 
     and I can make an irish stew;-- 
     wash a shirt , and iron it too . ' " 
 then , as she sing her little song , she clap her hand together . 
 " where do you get all your poetry ? " 
 " he teach I that . we be not go to be fine people,--except 
 sometimes when we may be invite to Stalham . but I must go on 
 Thursday , Lady Albury . I come for a week , and I have be here ever 
 since the middle of February . it seem year since the old woman tell 
 I I be perverse , and he say that she be right . " 
 " think how much you have do since that time . " 
 " yes , indeed . I very nearly destroy myself;--didn't I ? " 
 " not very nearly . " 
 " I think I have . it be only when you show I his letter on that 
 Sunday morning that I begin to have any hope . I wonder what Mr. 
 Greene preach about that morning . I do not hear a word . I keep on 
 repeat what he say in the postscript . " 
 " be there a postscript ? " 
 " of course there be . do not you remember ? " 
 " no , indeed ; not I. " 
 " the letter would have be nothing without the postscript . he say 
 that Croppy be to come back for I . I know he would not say that 
 unless he mean to be good to I . and yet I be not quite sure of 
 it . I know it now ; do not I ? but I must go , Lady Albury . I ought to 
 let Aunt Margaret know all about it . " then it be settle that she 
 should go on the Thursday,--and on the Thursday she go . as it be 
 now consider quite wrong that she should travel by the railway 
 alone,--in dread , probably , lest the old lady should tell she again 
 how perverse she have been,--Colonel Stubbs accompany she . it have 
 then be decide that the wedding must take place at Stalham , and 
 many message be send to Mr. and Mrs. Dosett assure they that 
 they would be make very welcome on the occasion . " my own darling Lucy 
 will be away at that time with her own young man , " say Ayala , in 
 answer to further invitation from Lady Albury . 
 " and so you have take Colonel Stubbs at last , " say her Aunt Margaret . 
 " he have take I , aunt . I do not take he . " 
 " but you refuse he ever so often . " 
 " well;--ye . I do not think I quite refuse he . " 
 " I think you do . " 
 " it be a dreadful muddle , Aunt Margaret;--but it have come right at 
 last , and we have well not talk about that part of it . " 
 " I be so sure you do not like he . " 
 " not like he ? I always like he well than anybody else in the 
 world that I ever see . " 
 " dear I ! " 
 " of course I should not say so if it have not come right at last . I may 
 say whatever I please about it now , and I declare that I always love 
 he . a girl can be such a fool ! I be , I know . I hope you be glad , 
 aunt . " 
 " of course I be . I be glad of anything that make you happy . it 
 seem such a pity that , when so many gentleman be fall in love 
 with you all round , you could not like anybody . " 
 " but I do like somebody , Aunt Margaret . and I do like the 
 best,--didn't I ? " in answer to this Mrs. Dosett make no reply , have 
 always have an aunt 's partiality for poor Tom , in spite of all his 
 chain . 
 her uncle 's congratulation be warm even than her aunt 's . 
 " my dear girl , " he say , " I be rejoice indeed that you should have 
 before you such a prospect of happiness . I always feel how sad for 
 you be your residence here , with two such homely person as your 
 aunt and myself . " 
 " I have always be happy with you , " say ayala,--perhap strain 
 the truth a little in her anxiety to be courteous . " and I know , " she 
 add , " how much Lucy and I have always owe you since poor papa 's 
 death . " 
 " nevertheless , it have be dull for a young girl like you . now you 
 will have your own duty , and if you endeavour to do they properly 
 the world will never be dull to you . " and then there be some few 
 word about the wedding . " we have no feeling , my dear , " say she 
 uncle , " except to do the good we can for you . we should have be 
 glad to see you married from here if that have suit . but , as this 
 lover of yours have grand friend of his own , I dare say their place 
 may be the well . " Ayala could hardly explain to her uncle that she 
 have accede to Lady Albury 's proposal because , by do so , she would 
 spare he the necessary expense of the wedding . 
 but Ayala 's great delight be in meet her sister . the two girl 
 have not see each other since the engagement of either of they have 
 be ratify by their friend . the winter and spring , as pass by 
 Lucy at Merle Park , have be very unhappy for she . thing at Merle 
 Park have not be pleasant to any of the resident there , and Lucy 
 have certainly have her share of the unpleasantness . her letter to 
 Ayala have not be triumphant when Aunt Emmeline have more than once 
 express her wish to be rid of she , and when the news reach she 
 that Uncle Tom and Hamel have fail to be gracious to each other . 
 nor have Ayala write in a spirit of joy before she have be able to 
 recognise the Angel of Light in Jonathan Stubbs . but now they be to 
 meet after all their misery , and each could be triumphant . 
 it be hard for they to know exactly how to begin . to Lucy , Isadore 
 Hamel be , at the present moment , the one hero walk the face of 
 this sublunary globe ; and to Ayala , as we all know , Jonathan Stubbs 
 be an Angel of Light , and , therefore , more even than a hero . as each 
 speak , the " he be " intend take a different personification ; so that 
 to any one less interested than the young lady themselves there 
 might be some confusion as to which " he " might at that moment be 
 under discussion . " it be bad , " say Lucy , " when Uncle Tom tell he 
 to sell those magnificent conception of his brain by auction ! " 
 " I do feel for he certainly , " say Ayala . 
 " and then when he be constrain to say that he would take I at 
 once without any preparation because Aunt Emmeline want I to go , 
 I do not suppose any man ever behave more beautifully than he do . " 
 " yes indeed , " say Ayala . and then she feel herself constrain to 
 change the subject by the introduction of an exaggerated superlative 
 in her sister 's narrative . Hamel , no doubt , have act beautifully , 
 but she be not disposed to agree that nothing could be more 
 beautiful . " oh , Lucy , " she say , " I be so miserable when he go 
 away after that walk in the wood . I think he never would come back 
 again when I have behave so badly . but he do . be not that grand in 
 he ? " 
 " I suppose he be very fond of you . " 
 " I hope he be . I hope he be . but what should I have do if he have 
 not come back ? no other man would have come back after that . you 
 never behave unkindly to Isadore ? " 
 " I think he would have come back a thousand time , " say Lucy ; " only 
 I can not imagine that I should ever have give he the necessity of 
 come back even a second . but then I have know he so much long . " 
 " it be not that I have not know he long enough , " say Ayala . " I 
 seem to know all about he almost all at once . I know how good he 
 be , and how grand he be , long before I have leave the Marchesa up in 
 London . but I think it astound I that such a one as he should care 
 for I . " and so it go on through an entire morning , each of the 
 sister feel that she be bind to listen with rapt attention to 
 the praise of the other 's " he " if she wish to have an opportunity 
 of sing those of her own . 
 but Lucy 's marriage be to come first by more than two month , and 
 therefore in that matter she be allow precedence . and at her 
 marriage Ayala would be present , whereas with Ayala 's Lucy would 
 have no personal concern . though she do think that Uncle Tom have 
 be bad than any Vandal in that matter of sell her lover 's 
 magnificent work , still she be ready to tell of his generosity . in 
 a manner of his own he have send the money which Hamel have so greatly 
 need , and have now come forward to provide , with a generous hand , 
 for the immediate necessity , and more than the necessity , of the 
 wedding . it be not only that she be to share the honour of the 
 two wedding - cake with Gertrude , and that she be to be take as a 
 bride from the gorgeous mansion in Queen 's Gate , but that he have 
 provide for her bridal need almost as fully as for those of his own 
 daughter . " never mind what she will be able to do afterwards , " he say 
 to his wife , who venture on some slight remonstrance with he as 
 to the unnecessary luxury he be prepare for the wife of a poor 
 man . " she will not be the bad for have a dozen new petticoat in 
 her trunk , and , if she do not want to blow her nose with as many 
 handkerchief this year as Gertrude do , she will be able to keep they 
 for next year . " then Aunt Emmeline obey without further hesitation 
 the order which be give she . 
 nor be his generosity confine to the niece who for the last twelve 
 month have be his property . Lucy be still live in Queen 's Gate , 
 though at this time she spend much of each day in Kingsbury Crescent , 
 and on one occasion she bring with she a little note from Uncle 
 Tom . " Dear Ayala , " say the little note , 
    as you be go to be marry too , you , I suppose , will 
    want some new finery . I therefore send a cheque . write 
    your name on the back of it , and give it to your uncle . he 
    will let you have the money as you want it . 
    your affectionately , 
    T. TRINGLE . 
    I hope your Colonel Stubbs will come and see I some day . 
 " you must go and see he , " she say to her Colonel Stubbs , when he 
 call one day in Kingsbury Crescent . " only for he I should not have 
 any clothe to speak of at all , and I should have to be marry in my 
 old brown morning frock . " 
 " it would be just as good as any other for my purpose , " say the 
 Colonel . 
 " but it would not for mine , Sir . fine feather make fine bird , and 
 I mean to be as fine as Lady Albury 's big peacock . so if you please 
 you will go to Queen 's Gate , and Lombard Street too , and show yourself . 
 oh , Jonathan , I shall be so proud that everybody who know I should 
 see what sort of a man have choose to love I . " 
 then there be a joint visit pay by the two sister to Mr. Hamel 's 
 studio,--an expedition which be make somewhat on the sly . Aunt 
 Margaret in Kingsbury Crescent know all about it , but Aunt 
 Emmeline be keep in the dark . even now , though the marriage be 
 sanction and be so nearly at hand , Aunt Emmeline would not 
 have approve of such a visit . she still regard the sculptor as 
 improper,--at any rate not sufficiently proper to be treat with 
 full familiarity,--partly on account of his father 's manif 
 impropriety , and partly because of his own relative poverty and 
 unauthorised position in the world . but Aunt Margaret be more 
 tolerant , and think that the sister - in - law be entitle to visit 
 the workshop in which her sister 's future bread be to be earn . 
 and then , start from Kingsbury Crescent , they could go in a cab ; 
 whereas any such proceed emanating from Queen 's Gate would have 
 require the carriage . there be a wickedness in this start off in 
 a Hansom cab to call on an unmarried young man , do it in a manner 
 successfully conceal from Aunt Emmeline , on which Ayala expatiate 
 with delight when she next see Colonel Stubbs . 
 " you do not come and call on I , " say the Colonel . 
 " what!--all the way down to Aldershot ? I should like , but I do not 
 quite dare to do that . " 
 the visit be very successful . though it be expect , Hamel be 
 find in his artist 's costume , with a blouse or loose linen tunic 
 fit close round his throat , and fasten with a belt round his 
 waist . Lucy think that in this apparel he be certainly as handsome 
 as could ever have be any apollo,--and , so thinking , have contrive 
 her little plan in such a way that he should certainly be see at 
 his good . to her think Colonel Stubbs be not a handsome man . 
 Hamel 's hair be nearly black , and she prefer dark hair . Hamel 's 
 feature be regular , whereas the Colonel 's hair be red , and he be 
 know for a large mouth and broad nose , which be not obliterate 
 though they be enlighten by the brightness of his eye . " yes , " 
 say Ayala to herself , as she look at Hamel ; " he be very good 
 looking , but nobody would take he for an Angel of Light . " 
 " Ayala have come to see you at your work , " say Lucy , as they enter 
 the studio . 
 " I be delighted to see she . do you remember where we last meet , Miss 
 Dormer ? " 
 " Miss Dormer , indeed , " say Ayala . " I be not go to call you Mr. 
 Hamel . yes ; it be high up among the seat of the coliseum . there have 
 a great deal happen to we all since then . " 
 " and I remember you at the bijou . " 
 " I should think so . I know then so well what be go to happen , " 
 say Ayala . 
 " what do you know ? " 
 " that you and Lucy be to fall in love with each other . " 
 " I have do my part of it already , " say he . 
 " hardly that , Isadore , " say Lucy , " or you would not have pass I 
 in Kensington Gardens without speak to I . " 
 " but I do speak to you . it be then I learn where to find you . " 
 " that be the second time . if I have remain away , as I ought to have 
 do , I suppose you never would have find I . " 
 Ayala be then take round to see all those magnificent group and 
 figure which Sir Thomas would have dispose of at so many shilling 
 apiece under the auctioneer 's hammer . " it be cruel,--wa it not ? " 
 say Lucy . 
 " he never see they , you know , " say Ayala , put in a goodnatured 
 word for her uncle . 
 " if he have , " say the sculptor , " he would have doubt the 
 auctioneer 's get anything . I have turn it all in my mind very 
 often since , and I think that Sir Thomas be right . " 
 " I be sure he be wrong , " say Lucy . " he be very goodnatured , and 
 nobody can be more grateful to another person than I be to him;--but 
 I will not agree that he be right about that . " 
 " he never would have say it if he have see they , " again plead 
 Ayala . 
 " they will never fetch anything as they be , " continue the sculptor , 
 " and I do not suppose that when I make they I think they would . they 
 have serve their purpose , and I sometimes feel inclined to break 
 they up and have they cart away . " 
 " Isadore ! " exclaim Lucy . 
 " for what purpose ? " ask Ayala . 
 " they be the lesson which I have to teach myself , and the play 
 which I give to my imagination . who want a great figure of Beelzebub 
 like that in his house ? " 
 " I call it magnificent , " say Ayala . 
 " his name be Lucifer,--not Beelzebub , " say Lucy . " you call he 
 Beelzebub merely to make little of he . " 
 " it be difficult to do that , because he be nearly ten foot high . and 
 who want a figure of Bacchus ? the thing be , whether , have do 
 a figure of Bacchus , I may not be well able to do a likeness of 
 Mr. Jones , when he come to sit for his bust at the request of his 
 admire friend . for any further purpose that it will answer , 
 Bacchus might just as well be break up and cart away in the 
 dust - cart . " to this , however , the two girl express their vehement 
 opposition , and be of opinion that the time would come when 
 Beelzebub and Bacchus , transfer to marble , would occupy place 
 of honour in some well - proportion hall build for the purpose of 
 receive they . " I shall be quite content , " say Hamel , " if the whole 
 family of the Jones 's will have their bust do about the size 
 of life , and stand they up over their bookshelf . my period for 
 Beelzebubs have go by . " the visit , on the whole , be delightful . 
 Lucy be content with the almost more than divine beauty of her 
 lover , and the two sister , as they make their return journey to 
 Kingsbury Crescent in another Hansom , discuss question of art in 
 a spirit that would have be delightful to any aspire artist who 
 might have hear they . 
 then come the wedding , of which some detail be give at the close 
 of the last chapter , at which two bride who be very unlike to each 
 other be join in matrimony to two bridegroom as dissimilar . but 
 the Captain make himself gracious to the sculptor who be now to be 
 connect with he , and declare that he would always look upon Lucy 
 as a second sister to his dear Gertrude . and Gertrude be equally 
 gracious , protest , when she be marshal to walk up to the altar 
 first , that she do not like to go before her darling Lucy . but the 
 dimension of the church admit but of one couple at a time , and 
 Gertrude be compel to go in advance . Colonel Stubbs be there 
 act as good man to Hamel , while Lord John Battledore perform the 
 same service for Captain Batsby . Lord John be nearly break - hearte 
 by the apostacy of a second chum , have hear that the girl whom 
 Frank Houston have not succeed in marry be now be take by 
 Batsby without a shilling . " somebody have to bottle - hold for he , " 
 say Lord John , defend himself at the club afterwards , " and I 
 do not like to throw the fellow over , though he be such a fool ! 
 and there be Stubbs , too , " continue his Lordship , " go to take 
 the other girl without a shilling ! there be Stubbs , and Houston , 
 and Batsby , all go and drown themselves . it be just the same as 
 though they would drown themselves ! " Lord John be horrified,--nay , 
 disgusted,--by the folly of the world . nevertheless , before the end 
 of the year , he be engage to marry a very pretty girl as devoid of 
 fortune as our Ayala . 
 CHAPTER LXIV . 
 AYALA 's marriage . 
 now we have come to our last chapter , and it may be doubt whether 
 any reader,--unless he be some one specially gifted with a genius 
 for statistics,--will have perceive how very many people have be 
 make happy by matrimony . if marriage be the proper ending for a 
 novel,--the only ending , as this writer take it to be , which be not 
 discordant,--surely no tale be ever so properly end , or with so 
 full a concord , as this one . infinite trouble have be take not only 
 in arrange these marriage but in join like to like,--so that , 
 if not happiness , at any rate sympathetic unhappiness , might be 
 produce . our two sister will , it be trust , be happy . they have 
 choose man from their heart , and have be choose after the same 
 fashion . those two other sister have be so wed that the one 
 will follow the idiosyncrasy of her husband , and the other bring 
 her husband to follow her idiosyncrasy , without much danger of 
 mutiny or revolt . as to Miss Docimer there must be room for fear . it 
 may be question whether she be not worthy of a well lot than 
 have be achieve for she by join her fortune to those of Frank 
 Houston . but I , speak for myself , have my hope of Frank Houston . 
 it be hard to rescue a man from the slough of luxury and idleness 
 combine . if anything can do it , it be a cradle fill annually . it 
 may be that he will yet learn that a broad back with a heavy weight 
 upon it give the good chance of happiness here below . of Lord John 's 
 married prospect I could not say much as he come so very lately on 
 the scene ; but even he may perhaps do something in the world when 
 he find that his nursery be fill , for our special friend Tom 
 Tringle , no wife have be find . in make his effort,--which he 
 do manfully,--he certainly have not choose the consort who would be 
 fit for he . he have not see clearly , as have do his sister and 
 cousin . he have fall in love too young,--it be the nature of 
 young man to be much young than young lady , and , not know 
 himself , have be as might be a barn - door cock who have set his heart 
 upon some azure - plumage , high - soar lady of the wood . the lady 
 with the azure plume have , too , her high - soar tendency , but she 
 be enable by true insight to find the male who would be fit for 
 she . the barn - door cock , when we leave he on board the steam go 
 to New York , have not yet learn the nature of his own requirement . 
 the knowledge will come to he . there may be doubt as to Frank 
 Houston , but we think that there need be none as to Tom Tringle . the 
 proper wife will be forthcoming ; and in future year , when he will 
 probably have a Glenbogie and a Merle Park of his own , he will own 
 that Fortune do well for he in make his cousin Ayala so stern to 
 his prayer . 
 but Ayala herself,--ayala our pet heroine,--had not be yet marry 
 when the last chapter be write , and now there remain a page or 
 two in which the reader must bid adieu to she as she stand at the 
 altar with her Angel of Light . she be at Stalham for a fortnight 
 before her marriage , in order , as Lady Albury say , that the buxom 
 ladysmaid might see that everything have be do rightly in 
 reference to the trousseau . " my dear , " say Lady Albury , " it be 
 important , you know . I dare say you can bake and brew , because you 
 say so ; but you do not know anything about clothe . " Ayala , who by 
 this time be very intimate with her friend , pout her lip , and 
 say that if " Jonathan do not like her thing as she choose to have 
 they he might do the other thing . " but Lady Albury have her way , 
 induce Sir Harry to add something even to Uncle Tom 's liberality , 
 and the buxom woman go about her task in such a fashion that 
 if Colonel Stubbs be not satisfied he must have be a very 
 unconscionable Colonel . he probably would know nothing about 
 it,--except that his bride in her bridal array have not look so 
 well as in any other garment , which , I take it , be invariably the 
 case,--till at the end of the first year a glimmer of the truth as to 
 a lady 's wardrobe would come upon he . " I tell you there would be a 
 many new dress before two year be over , Miss , " say the buxom 
 female , as she spread all the frock and all the work petticoat 
 and all the collar and all the silk stocking and all the lace 
 handkerchief about the bedroom to be inspect by Lady Albury , Mrs. 
 Gosling , and one or two other friend , before they be finally 
 pack up . 
 then come the day on which the Colonel be to reach Stalham , that day 
 be a Monday , whereas the wedding be to take place on Wednesday . 
 it be consider to be within the bound of propriety that the 
 Colonel should sleep at Stalham on the Monday , under the same roof 
 with his bride ; but on the Tuesday it be arrange that he should 
 satisfy the decorous feeling of the neighbourhood by remove himself 
 to the parsonage , which be distant about half - a - mile across the 
 park , and be contiguous to the church . here live Mr. Greene , the 
 bachelor curate , the rector of the parish be an invalid and absent 
 in Italy . 
 " I do not see why he be to be send away after dinner to walk across 
 the park in the dark , " say Ayala , when the matter be discuss 
 before the Colonel 's come . 
 " it be a law , my dear , " say Lady Albury , " and have to be obey 
 whether you understand it or not , like other law . Mr. Greene will be 
 with he , so that no one shall run away with he in the dark . then he 
 will be able to go into church without dirty his dress boot . " 
 " but I think there would be half - a - dozen carriage at least . " 
 " but there will not be room in one of they for he . he be to be nobody 
 until he come forth from the church as your husband . then he be to 
 be everybody . that be the very theory of marriage . " 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 " I think we manage it all very well between we , " say Lady Albury 
 afterwards , " but you really can not guess the trouble we take . " 
 " why should there have be trouble ? " 
 " because you be such a perverse creature , as the old lady say . 
 I be not sure that you be not right , because a girl do so often 
 raise herself in her lover 's estimation by refuse he half - a - dozen 
 time . but you be not up to that . " 
 " indeed I be not . I be sure I do not intend to give any trouble to 
 anybody . " 
 " but you do . only think of my go up to London to meet he , and of 
 he come from Aldershot to meet I , simply that we might put our 
 head together how to overcome the perversity of such a young woman 
 as you ! " there then come a look almost of pain on Ayala 's brow . " but 
 I do believe it be for the good . in this way he come to understand 
 how absolutely necessary you be to he . " 
 " be I necessary to he ? " 
 " he think so . " 
 " oh , if I can only be necessary to he always ! but there should have 
 be no go up to London . I should have rush into his arm at 
 once . " 
 " that would have be unusual . " 
 " but so be he unusual , " say Ayala . 
 it be probable that the Colonel do not enjoy his day at Stalham 
 before his marriage , except during the hour or two in which he be 
 allow to take Ayala out for a last walk . such day can hardly be 
 agreeable to the man of whom it be know by all around he that he 
 be on the eve of commit matrimony . there be always , on such 
 occasion , a feeling of weakness , as though the man have be subdue , 
 bring at length into a cage and tame , so as to be make fit for 
 domestic purpose , and deprive of his ancient freedom amongst 
 the woods;--wherea the girl feel herself to be the triumphant 
 conqueror , who have successfully perform this great act of taming . 
 such be the case , the man have perhaps well keep away till he be 
 force to appear at the church - door . 
 nevertheless our Colonel do enjoy his last walk . " oh , yes , " she 
 say , " of course we will go to the old wood . where else ? I be so glad 
 that poor fox go through Gobblegoose;--otherwise we should never 
 have go there , and then who know whether you and I would ever have 
 be friend again any more ? " 
 " if one wood have not be there , I think another would have be 
 find . " 
 " ah , that be just it . you can know that you have a purpose , and perhaps 
 be determined to carry it out . " 
 " well , rather . " 
 " but I could not be sure of that . I could not carry out my purpose , 
 even if I have one . I have to doubt , and to be unhappy , and to hate 
 myself , because I have be perverse . I declare , I do think you man 
 have so much the good of it . how glorious would it have be to be 
 able to walk straight up and say , Jonathan Stubbs , I love you well 
 than all the world . will you be my husband ? " 
 " but suppose the Jonathan Stubbs of the occasion be to decline the 
 honour . where would you be then ? " 
 " that would be disagreeable , " say Ayala . 
 " it be disagreeable,--as you make I feel twice over . " 
 " oh , Jonathan , I be so sorry . " 
 " therefore it be possible that you may have the good of it . " 
       *       *       *       *       *       * 
 " and so you never will take another walk with Ayala Dormer ? " she 
 say , as they be return home . 
 " never another , " he reply . 
 " you can not think how I regret it . of course I be glad to become 
 your wife . I do not at all want to have it postpone . but there be 
 something so sweet in have a lover;--and you know that though I 
 shall have a husband I shall never have a lover again,--and I never 
 have one before , Jonathan . there have be very little of it . when a 
 thing have be so sweet it be sad to think that it must be go for 
 ever ! " then she lean upon he with both her hand , and look up 
 at he and smile , with her lip a little open,--as she know that he 
 like she to lean upon he and to look,--for she have catch by her 
 instinct the very nature of the man , and know how to witch he with 
 her little charm . " ah I ! I wonder whether you will like I to lean 
 upon you when a dozen year have go by . " 
 " that depend on how heavy you may be . " 
 " I shall be a fat old woman , perhaps . but I shall lean upon 
 you,--alway , always . what else shall I ever have to lean upon now ? " 
 " what else should you want ? " 
 " nothing,--nothing,--nothe ! I want nothing else . I wonder whether 
 there be anybody in all the world who have get so completely 
 everything that she ever dream of want as I have . but if you 
 could have be only my lover for a little longer-- ! " then he assure 
 she that he would be her lover just the same , even though they be 
 husband and wife . alas , no ! there he have promise more than it be 
 give to a man to perform . faith , honesty , steadiness of purpose , 
 join to the warm love and the true heart , will not enable a 
 husband to maintain the sweetness of that aroma which have fill with 
 delight the sens of the girl who have lean upon his arm as she 
 permit lover . 
 " what a happy fellow you be ! " say Mr. Greene , as , in the intimacy 
 of the moment , they walk across the park together . 
 " why do not you get a wife for yourself ? " 
 " yes ; with £ 120 a - year ! " 
 " with a little money you might . " 
 " I do not want to have to look for the money ; and if I do I should not 
 get it . I often think how very unfairly thing be divide in this 
 world . " 
 " that will all be make up in the next . " 
 " not if one covet one 's neighbour 's wife,--or even his ass , " say 
 Mr. Greene . 
 on the return of the two lover to the house from their walk there 
 be Mr. and Mrs. Dosett , who would much rather have stay away have 
 they not be unwilling not to show their mark of affection to their 
 niece . I doubt whether they be very happy , but they be at any 
 rate receive with every distinction . Sir Thomas and Aunt Emmeline 
 be ask , but they make some excuse . Sir Thomas know very well that 
 he have nothing in common with Sir Harry Albury ; and , as for Aunt 
 Emmeline , her one journey to Stalham have be enough for she . but Sir 
 Thomas be again very liberal , and send down as his contribution to 
 the wedding present the very necklace which Ayala have refuse from 
 her cousin Tom . " upon my word , your uncle be magnificent , " say Lady 
 Albury , upon which the whole story be tell to she . Lucy and her 
 husband be away on their tour , as be Gertrude and her on theirs . 
 this be rather a comfort , as Captain Batsby 's presence at the house 
 would have be a nuisance . but there be quite enough of guest to 
 make the wedding , as be a country wedding , very brilliant . among 
 other , old Tony Tappett be there , mindful of the manner in which 
 Cranbury Brook have be ride , and of Croppy 's presence when the 
 hound run their fox into Dillsborough Wood . " I hope she be to ride 
 with we , off and on , Colonel , " say Tony , when the ceremony have be 
 complete . 
 " now and then , Tony , when we can get hold of Croppy . " 
 " because , when they come out like that , Colonel , it be a pity to lose 
 them , just because they be get their husband to attend to . " 
 and Lord Rufford be there , with his wife , who on this occasion be 
 very press with her invitation . she have hear that Colonel Stubbs 
 be likely to rise high in his profession , and there be symptom , 
 of which she be an excellent judge , that Mrs. Colonel Stubbs would 
 become know as a professional beauty . and Larry Twentyman be there , 
 who , be in the neighbourhood , be , to his great delight , invite 
 to the breakfast . 
 thus , to her own intense satisfaction , Ayala be hand over to her 
    ANGEL of LIGHT . 
